BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
SANTA  CRUZ  CITY  SCHOOLS  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Termination  of  Services 
of: 

OAH  No.  2008030615 

Erin  Asamoto 
Constance  “Connie”  Bertuca 
Chris  Carey-Stronck 
Luke  Dahlen 
Marissa  Ferejohn-Swett 
Katharine  Garkey 
Michelle  Hubbard 
Bob  Hudson 
Matthew  Mohulski 
Diana  Nieves 
Damian  Pawlowski 
Karen  Quinn 
Lisa  Storer 
Miguel  Valladolid 
Holly  Woolbright 
Anne  Zachan 
Portia  Zavitsanos 

Respondents. 

      

the  Santa  Cruz  City  Schools  District. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  M.  Amanda  Behe,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  in  Soquel,  California,  on  April  24,  2008. 

Sarah  Levitan  Kaatz,  Attorney  at  Law,  Lozano  Smith,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented 

Respondent  Constance  “Connie”  Bertuca  represented  herself.  Respondents  Erin 

Asamoto,  Chris  Carey-Stronck,  Luke  Dahlen,  Marissa  Ferejohn-Swett,  Katharine Garkey, 
Michelle  Hubbard,  Bob  Hudson,  Matthew  Mohulski,  Diana  Nieves,  Damian  Pawlowski, 
Karen  Quinn,  Lisa  Storer,  Miguel  Valladolid,  Holly  Woolbright,  Anne  Zachan,  and  Portia 
Zavitsanos  withdrew  their  Notices  of  Defense  and  Requests  for  Hearing. 

 

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Alan  Pagano  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Santa  Cruz  City  Schools  District. 

2, 
District. 

Respondent  Constance  “Connie”  Bertuca  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the 

3. 

On  August  26,  2005,  State  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction  Jack 

O'Connell  wrote  to  the  state’s  school  districts  regarding  the  settlement  of  Williams,  et  al.;  vs. 
State  of  California,  et  al.,  a  class  action  lawsuit  concerning  equal  access  to  instructional 
materials  and  qualified  teachers.  The  letter  noted  legislation  enacted  to  implement  the 
settlement,  including  statutory  requirements  that  County  Offices  of  Education  annually  audit 
school  districts  for  misassignments,  i.e.,  assignments  of  certificated  staff  to  positions  where 
they  do  not  hold  a  proper  authorization  to  teach.  Superintendent  O’Connell  wrote  that: 

There  is  no  numerical  trigger  and  no  percentage  of  students 
needing  particular  English  learner  services  that  determines  a 
misassignment.  If  one  or  more  of  the  students  in  the  class  needs 
English  learner  services  or  requires  instruction  in  a  subject  area, 
the  teacher  providing  the  English  learner  services  must  hold  an 
appropriate  English  learner  credential  or  authorization. 

Since  2005  the  District  has  worked  to  comply  with  the  demands  of  the  Williams 

settlement  and  related  legislation  through  a  Plan  To  Remedy’  and  efforts,  described  more 
fully  hereinbelow,  to  avoid  misassignments  by  bringing  teachers  into  compliance  with  the 
CLAD  requirements.  The  District  has  experienced  declining  enrollment  while  the  number  of 
English  Learners  has  grown  significantly  over  the  past  few  years,  particularly  at  Harbor  High 
School. 

4, 

Tanya  Krause,  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources,  described  that 
in  January  2008  the  District  knew  about  the  anticipated  reduction  in  funding  proposed  in  the 
Governor’s  budget  and  that  reductions  in  teaching  staff  would  be  required.  At  that  time  the 
content  areas  to  be  reduced,  and  the  number  of  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  involved, 
were  not  known.  Ms.  Krause  surveyed  school  principals  and  special  projects  and  confirmed 
the  percentage  of  English  Learners.  The  current  student  demographics  indicate  that  at  least 
one  English  Learner  would  be  present  in  every  secondary  class  in  2008-2009,  with  a  higher 
percentage  at  Harbor  High  School. 

Typically  in  January  the  District  accelerates  planning  for  the  upcoming  school  year, 
including  establishing  the  master  schedule  from  which  students  sign  up  for  classes.  In  the 
first  quarter  of  the  calendar  year  there  is  no  way  for  the  District  to  know  the  number  of 

'  The  Plan  To  Remedy  is  a  compliance  program  through  the  State  Department  of  Education 

which,  among  other  matters,  allows  individuals  working  to  earn  a  CLAD  or  BCLAD  certificate  to  teach 
English  Learners. 

 

signups  for  each  class  or  in  which  classrooms  students  will  end  up  in  the  fall  of  2008.  Ms. 
Krause  persuasively  testified  that  because  it  is  not  yet  known  what  the  composition  of  classes 
will  be,  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  there  will  be  classes  without  at  least  one  English  Learner 
in  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Nonetheless,  based  on  the  graduation  required  sections  and 
current  enrollment  and  demographics,  Human  Resources  identified  potential  reductions  in 
teaching  staff  which  would  accommodate  the  anticipated  budget  reductions. 

5. 

On  February  27,  2008,  Superintendent  Pagano  and  Ms.  Krause  recommended 
to  the  Governing  Board,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that 
14.77  FTE  certificated  employees  be  notified  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year.  The  recommendation  was  prompted  by  declining  enrollment,  financial 
difficulties,  and  data  regarding  the  number of  graduation  required  sections  and  student 
demographics. 

6. 

On  February  27,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  18-07-08,  captioned 
“RESOLUTION  OF  INTENTION  TO  DISMISS  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES,”  which 
stated  that  it  had  determined  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 
service.  Specifically,  the  Board  Resolution  provided  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the 
following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

. 

  

  

  

  

  
  
    

  

  

  

Full-Time  Equivalent  Position 
4.4 
3.0 
2.4 
1.0 
77 
77 
57 
40 
33 
.20 
.20 
20 
.20 
33 
14,77  FTE 

English 
Multiple  Subjects 
Social  Science 
Home  School 
Math 
Spanish 
French 
Independent  Studies 
TAM  Program 
Health 
Music 
Applied  Arts  /  Wood  Shop 
Continuation 
Biological  Science 
TOTAL 

The  Board  also  directed  Superintendent  Pagano  or  his  designee  to  send  appropriate 

notices  to  all  affected  employees. 

7. 

On  February  27,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  198-07-08, 

captioned  “DETERMINATION  OF  DISTRICT  NEEDS  FOR  2008-2009,”  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  which  authorized  the  Board  to  establish 
needs  in  order  to  deviate  from  seniority  in  termination  of  employees.  Specifically,  the  Board 
Resolution  identified  “hard  to  fill”  subject  areas  as  follows:

  

  

Special  Education,  K-12 
Physical  Sciences  - 
Experienced  Teachers  in  Dual  Language  Immersion 
Special  Credentials  —  Bilingual  (BCLAD)  or  equivalent 
(BLCOC),  CLAD  at  the  secondary  level 

8. 

On  February  27,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  20-07-08,  captioned 

“DETERMINATION  OF  TIE-BREAKING  CRITERIA  FOR  2008-2009,”  establishing 
criteria  for  determining  seniority  for  those  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service. 
The  Board  found  the  criteria  were  necessary  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students, 
and  established  the  following  priority  order: 

CRITERION  #1  —  SPECIAL  CREDENTIALS 

A.  Cross-cultural  Language  and  Academic  Development 
(CLAD) 
B.  AB  2913  Certificate 
C.  SB  1969  Certificate 
D.  SB  395  Certificate 
E.  BLCOC  Certificate 

CRITERION  #2  —  BREADTH  OF  CREDENTIALING 

Holds  multiple  preliminary  and/or  clear  credentials  in 
core,  graduation  requirement  subject  areas. 

CRITERION  #3  —  ADDITIONAL  YEARS  OF  SERVICE 

Years  of  temporary,  probationary  or  permanent 
certificated  service  in  the  District  prior  to  seniority  date 
in  District. 

The  resolution  further  provided  that  any  ties  remaining  after  application  of  the  criteria 

would  be  resolved  by  lottery. 

9. 

Ms.  Krause  was  responsible  for  implementing  the  Board’s  resolutions.  She 

considered  the  anticipated  enrollment  for  2008-2009,  expected  budget  reductions,  the 
number  of  graduation  required  sections,  the  number  of  subject  areas  to  be  reduced,  student 
demographics  and  the  seniority  list. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  identifies  employees’  seniority  dates 

(first  date  of  paid  probationary  service),  current  assignments  and  site,  credentials,  and 
certificates.  District  staff  took  steps  to  ensure  the  accuracy  of  the  data  on  the  seniority  list, 
and  received  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Kirschen  in  that  effort.  At  hearing  the  Seniority  List  was 

 

corrected  to  reflect  that  Margaret  Kline  has  a  CLAD  certificate.  The  District  had  that 
information  before  March  15,  2008. 

Respondent  Bertuca  is  correctly  identified  on  the  Seniority  List  as  occupying  0.60 

FTE,  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  25,  2003,  and  tenure  in  0.60  position.  She  is  currently 
assigned  to  Harbor  High  School  where  she  teaches  Intensive  English  and  English  Language 
Development.  She  does  not  hold  a  CLAD  or  a  BCLAD  certificate. 

Using  the  Seniority  List,  District  staff  began  implementation  of  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  approved  by  the  Board,  and  identified  the  incumbent  employees 
in  the  areas  to  be  reduced.  Generally,  a  senior  certificated  employee  whose  position  is 
discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated 
and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior 
employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  District  staff  determined  if  the  affected  incumbents 
had  rights  to  bump  junior  employees,  and  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  adopted  by  Board 
in  certain  content  areas,  none  of  which  affected  respondent  Bertuca. 

: 

Known  resignations  and  retirements  were  taken  into  account  before  establishing  the 

number  of  employees  to  receive  notice  to  produce  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

Ultimately  five  certificated  employees  received  layoff  notices  related  to  the  4.4  FTE 
reduction  in  English.  They  were  respondents  Bertuca  (0.6  FTE),  Anne  Zachan  (0.8  FTE), 
Holly  Woolbright  (0.8  FTE),  Erin  Asamoto  (1.0  FTE)  and  Lisa  Storer  (0.6  FTE). 

10. 

On  March  13,  2003,  by  depositing  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage 

prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  employee’s  last  known  address,  the  District  served  affected 
employees  with  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  and  setting  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  Included  with  the 
notice  each  employee  received  was  a  copy  of  Resolution  18-07-08  and  copies  of sections  of 
the  Education  Code. 

Each  notice  further  advised  the  employee  of  his/her  right  to  a  hearing,  including  that 
such  a  request  must  be  delivered  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  of  termination  on 
or  before  March  26,  2008,  and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the 
waiver of the  right  to  a  hearing. 

11. 

On  behalf  of  all  respondents  Barry  Kirschen,  President  of  the  Greater  Santa 

Cruz  Federation  of  Teachers,  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing. 

12, 

On  April  4,  2008,  pursuant  to  the  agreement  of  the  District  and  the  Greater 

Santa  Cruz  Federation  of  Teachers,  Superintendent  Pagano  filed  a  single  Accusation  packet 
on  Mr.  Kirschen  on  behalf of respondents  he  represented.  The  packet  consisted  of  the 
Accusation,  copies of sections  of  the  Education  Code,  a  blank  Notice  of  Defense  form,  and

  

  

Notice  of  Hearing.  The  Accusations  noted  that  a  Notice  of  Defense  must  be  filed  within  five 
day's.  Superintendent  Pagano’s  letter  noted  that  the  titles  of  the  documents  are  required  by 
law.  and  the  District’s  regret  that  California’s  budget  crisis  has  forced  the  layoffs. 

13. 

By  two  separate  filings  on  March  21,  2008,  Mr.  Kirschen  filed  Notices  of 

Defense  on  behalf  of  respondents,  including  respondent  Bertuca. 

14. 

.  Ms.  Krause  described  the  efforts  Human  Resources  made  in  the  last  year  and  a 

half.  working  with  the  Board  and  the  Greater  Santa  Cruz  Federation  of  Teachers,  to  bring 
teachers  into  compliance  with  the  CLAD  requirements,  Teachers  were  provided  three 
different  pathways  to  obtain  a  CLAD  certificate,  and  full  reimbursement  for  the  training  or 
classes  they  obtained.  The  District  hoped  that  with  its  concerted  effort  and  financial 
assistance  teachers  would  obtain  the  required  credentials. 

When  the  District  began  its  intensive  effort  there  were  approximately  70  non-special 
education  teachers  who  did  not  have  a  CLAD  certificate.  As  of  the  date  layoff  notices  were 
issued  all  but  three  of  those  teachers  had  obtained  a  CLAD  certificate.  Of  those,  two  have 
completed  two-thirds  of  the  CLAD  requirements  and  will  have  their  CLAD  certificates  by 
the  fall  of  2008;  they  teach  in  areas  not  affected  by  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of 
service.  The  other  employee  who  has  not  obtained  a  CLAD  certificate  is  respondent  Bertuca. 

15. 

Although  she  does  not  hold  a  CLAD  or  a  BCLAD  certificate,  respondent 

Bertuca  has  been  allowed  to  teach  English  Language  Development  in  the  current  school  year 
because  until  June  2008  school  districts  have  been  allowed  to  work  on  a  Plan  To  Remedy. 
That  option  is  not  available  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  the  Commission  on 
Teacher  Credentialing  has  determined  that,  given  the  availability  of  other  routes  to  earn  an 
authorization  to  serve  English  Learners,  it  will  no  longer  accept  enrollment  in  a  local  Plan  To 
Remedy  as  an  appropriate  alternative  to  holding  a  CLAD  or  BCLAD 

Respondent  Bertuca  testified  that:  “The  Board’s  last  minute  resolution  did  not  give 
me  sufficient  time  to  get  my  CLAD  certificate"  and  that  she  was  denied  due  process.  The 
evidence  did  not  support  her  assertion.  In  fact,  in  response  to  statutory  changes  and  the 
Williams  case  the  District’s  Human  Resources  staff  engaged  in  extensive  communications 
_  with  the  Greater  Santa  Cruz  Federation  of  Teachers  and  with  respondent  Bertuca  individually 
regarding  the  requirement  for  a  CLAD  certificate.  The  District’s  communications provided 
respondent  Bertuca  with  more  than  enough  time  to  secure  a  CLAD  or  equivalent 
authorization,  as  demonstrated  by  the  letters  and  e-mails  identified  below. 

16. 

On  March  1,  2007,  District  Program  Coordinator  Leslie  Barrow  wrote  to  all 

District  teachers,  including  respondent  Bertuca,  who  did  not  have  a  CLAD,  BCLAD  or 
CLAD  equivalent  stating  that  compliance  was  an  issue  of  immediate  importance.  Her  letter 
noted  the  requirement  of  No  Child  Left  Behind  that: 

all  teachers  with  English  learners  in  their  classes  must  have  the 
appropriate  English  Learner  Authorization.  Unlike  NCLB 

 

  

which  only  identifies  ‘core  subjects’  as  being  in  need  of 
compliance,  the  Williams  decision  does  not  exempt  any  subjects 
from  EL  compliance. 

Ms.  Barrow’s  letter  further  noted  that  “Any  class  that  has  an  English  learner  in  it, 

requires  a  teacher  that  holds  an  appropriate  EL  authorization.”  At  that  time  teachers  could 
obtain  authorization  by  taking  the  CTEL  examination  or  complete  the  approximately  45-hour 
AB  2913  training.  Ms.  Barrow  stated  the  District’s  intent  to  help  teachers  to  obtain  the 
required  authorization,  and  various  avenues  the  District  was  exploring  for  in-house  training 
and  a  five-to-seven  day  training  in  the  summer.  She  wrote  that  the  District  would  pay  for 
teachers’  time  during  the  summer  session  and/or  for  a  substitute  during  the  school  year. 

Ms.  Barrow’s  letter  included  a  survey  on  which  teachers  were  to  identify  their 

preferences  for  training  from  among  the  choices  of  summer  CLAD  training,  fall  CLAD 
training,  Weekend  training,  and  Other  [a  blank  to  be  completed  by  the  teacher].  She  also 
asked  that  the  teachers  sign  an  enclosed  letter  signifying  their  understanding  and  agreement 
to  become  CLAD  certified  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

17. 

On  March  19,  2007,  Ms.  Barrow  sent  a  follow-up  letter  to  all  District  teachers, 

including  respondent  Bertuca,  lacking  a  CLAD,  BCLAD  or  CLAD  equivalent  who  had  not 
returned  the  survey  form  and  acknowledgement  letter.  She  reiterated  the  information  in  her 
earlier  letter,  including  that  “English  Learner  Authorization  is  required  for  all  teachers  who 
have  any  English  Learners  in  their  classroom,  regardless  of  subject  matter.”  She  requested 
that  each  teacher  return  the  survey  form  and  acknowledgement  letter  as  soon  as  possible,  and 
offered  additional  copies  if  needed. 

Respondent  Bertuca  first  testified  that  she  did  not  receive  Ms.  Barrow’s  March  19, 

2007,  follow-up  letter.  She  then  testified  that  she  may  have  received  it  but  never  read  it.  Her 
testimony  that  she  never  received  the  letter  was  not  credible,  Moreover,  the  letter  was  a 
reiteration  of  information  provided  earlier  by  Ms.  Barrow  to  all  District  teachers,  including 
respondent  Bertuca,  lacking  a  CLAD,  BCLAD  or  CLAD  equivalent.  The  information  that 
English  Learner  authorization  was  required  for  all  teachers  who  have  any  English  Learners  in 
their  classroom,  regardless  of  subject  matter,  was  included  in  later  letters  and  e-mails  as  well. 

18. 

On  March  21,  2007,  respondent  Bertuca  wrote  to  Ms.  Barrow  that  she  had 

taken  Italian  1  and  2  at  Cabrillo  College,  had  taken  classes  towards  her  CLAD  at  UCSC’,  and 
had  participated  “in  the  training  for  the  CLAD  test  at  the  COE.”  She  included  her  UCSC 
transcript  and  test  results  from  Cabrillo  College.  Respondent  Bertuca  also  wrote: 

As  you  can  see,  my  attempts  to  get  the  certification  sort  of mirror  the  information 
about  the  certificate;  you  need  it,  you  don’t.  .  .  Anyhow,  I’m  hoping  you  can  take  these 
pieces  and  put  together  the  equivalent  of a CLAD  certificate. 

  

*  Respondent  Bertuca  attached  a  copy of  her  transcript  with  the  classes  highlighted.  The  nature 

and  number of classes  was  not  identified  at hearing.

  

Contrary  to  the  assertion  in  her  letter,  no  credible  evidence  established  that 

respondent  Bertuca  was  ever  advised  that  she  did  not  need  a  CLAD  certificate.  Her 
enrollment  in  the  classes  at  UCSC  and  Cabrillo  College  established  that  she  was  aware of  the 
CLAD  requirements  even  if  she  did  not  follow  through  and  complete  the  certification 
process. 

As  of  the  date  of  her  letter  respondent  Bertuca  had  been  repeatedly  and  clearly 
advised of  the  requirement  for,  and  specific  pathways  to  obtain,  a  CLAD  certificate.  None  of 
the  available  pathways  included  sending  Ms.  Barrow a  transcript  and  test  results  with  a  letter 
telling  Ms.  Barrow  to  assemble  that  information  into  the  equivalent  of a CLAD  certificate. 
Moreover,  as  the  earlier  mailings  from  the  District  clearly  stated,  a  CLAD  certificate  is 
issued  by  the  state  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  rather  than  the  District’s  Human 
Resources  department. 

19. 

On  March  28,  2007,  Ms.  Barrow  wrote  to  respondent  Bertuca  that  she  did  not 

have  the  “authority  to  decide  whether  or  not  what  you  have  completed  thus  far  will  satisfy 
the  CCTC  (California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing).”  Ms.  Barrow  noted  that  from 
her  research  respondent’s  CLAD  test  scores  were  too  old  to  apply  any  longer,  because  scores 
are  only  good  for  five  years. 

Ms.  Barrow  returned  respondent  Bertuca’s  transcripts  and  other  documentation  with 

the  direction  that  she  send  that  documentation  to  the  CCTC  for  evaluation  of  whether  the 
transcripts  could  be  considered  for  CLAD  certification.  Ms.  Barrow  included  the  website 
address  of  the  CCTC,  which  she  described  as  a  source of  a  great  deal of helpful  information. 
Ms.  Barrow  also  noted  that  she  would  be  sending  information  regarding  training  options  to 
secure  a  CLAD  within  the  next  week  or  so. 

20. 

On  April  3,  2007,  Ms.  Barrow  wrote  to  all  District  teachers,  including 

respondent  Bertuca,  lacking  a  CLAD,  BCLAD  or  CLAD  equivalent.  She  reiterated  the 
information  in  her  earlier  letters,  including  that  “the  Williams  lawsuit  decision  required  that 
all  students  be  taught  by  highly  qualified  teachers  which  means  that,  in  addition  to  being 
NCLB  compliant,  all  teachers  with  English  Learners  in  their  classes  must  have  the 
_appropriate  English  Learner  authorization.  Any  class  that  has  an  English  learner  in  it, 
requires  a  teacher  that  holds  an  appropriate  EL  authorization.” 

Ms.  Barrow’s  letter  described  that  the  District  had  been  researching  ways  for  the 
teachers  to  achieve  CLAD  compliance,  and  enclosed  information  including  the  options 
available  to  each  teacher  and  the  costs  the  District  would  reimburse.  She  wrote  that  teachers 
were  to  give  the  options  immediate  consideration  because  some  had  deadline  dates,  and  to 
commit  to  a  particular  pathway,  with  notification  to  Human  Resources,  not  later  than  April 
30,  2007. 

The  pathways  to  CLAD  compliance  described  in  Ms.  Barrow’s  April  3,  2007,  letter 

were: 

 

  

a)  Passing  all  three  sections  of  the  California  Teachers  of  English  Learners 
(CTEL)  exam,  and  submitting  test  scores  with  the  appropriate  application 
and  fee  to  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.  The  District  would 
reimburse  the  test  expenses  and  up  to  two  program  management  fees  to 
register  to  take  the  tests.  The  next  test  date  was  June  23,  2007,  and  the 
regular  registration  deadline  was  May  18,  2007.  Late  registration  was 
permitted  for  an  additional  fee  that  the  District  would  not  reimburse.  The 
District  would  also  reimburse  up  to  $675  for  the  preparation  classes 
available  through  the  County  Office  of  Education,  which  were  $165,  $300, 
and  $165  for  tests  1,  2,  3,  respectively.  Ms.  Barrow’s  letter  also  noted  the 
web  address  for  an  online  study  guide. 

b)  Independent  study  available  through  the  University  of  San  Diego 

consisting  of  four  three-unit  courses  for  which  the  teacher  would  view 
DVDs,  read  appropriate  pages  in  the  textbook  (which  covered  the  four 
courses),  and  complete  written  assignments.  The  teacher  was  required  to 
submit  transcripts  with  the  appropriate  application  and  fee  to  the 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.  The  District  would  reimburse  the 
$1,510  cost  of  the  four  courses  if  completed  by  the  January  31,  2008 
deadline  established  by  the  legislature.  Ms.  Barrow’s  letter  noted  that 
other  approved  CLAD  coursework  available  from  universities  could  be 
found  on  the  CTC  website. 

c)  AB  2913  staff  development  consisting  of  completing  45  hours  of  approved 
training  (available  June  19-27,  2007  or  August  2-10,  2007)  and  passing  a 
final  examination.  The  District  would  reimburse  the  training  cost  of  $675. 
The  District  would  also  pay  the  costs  of  substitutes  if  training  were  taken 
during  the  school  year,  or  a  stipend  of  $665  if  it  were  taken  during  the 
summer. 

Ms.  Barrow’s  letter  also  stated  that  the  teachers  were  responsible  for  submitting 

verification  of  training  and  passing  exams,  with  the  appropriate  application  and  fee,  to  the 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.  The  District  would  reimburse  the  $55  filing  fee.  Her 
letter  included  a  Notice  of  Intent  form  on  which  the  teacher  was  to  check  the  pathway  he  or 
she  would  be  using  to  obtain  a  CLAD  certificate;  the  completed  form  was  to  be  returned  to 
Human  Resources  by  April  30,  2007. 

21. 

Respondent  Bertuca  did  not  complete  and  return  the  Notice of Intent  form  or 

otherwise  respond  to  Ms.  Barrow’s  April  3,  2007,  letter  regarding  CLAD  compliance. 

22. 

On  May  7,  2007,  Ms.  Barrow  again  wrote  to  all  District  teachers,  including 
respondent  Bertuca,  who  had  failed  to  complete  and  return  the  Notice  of  Intent  form  sent 
with  her  April  3,  2007,  letter  to  teachers  lacking  a  CLAD,  BCLAD  or  CLAD  equivalent. 
She  stated  that  the  District  needed  each  teacher’s  compliance  plan  as  soon  as  possible  to

  

  

ensure  funding  for  reimbursements  of  the  necessary  tests  and  training.  She  again  noted  the 
necessity  for  ensuring  compliance  with  state  requirements. 

23. 

Respondent  Bertuca  did  not  complete  and  return  the  Notice  of  Intent  form  or 

otherwise  respond  to  Ms.  Barrow’s  May  7,  2007,  letter  regarding  CLAD  compliance. 

24. 

On  June  1,  2007,  Ms.  Barrow  again  wrote  to  all  District  teachers,  including 
respondent  Bertuca,  lacking  a  CLAD,  BCLAD  or  CLAD  equivalent.  On  the  letter  to  each 
teacher  she  noted  the  information  the  District  had  received  from  that  person’s  Notice  of 
Intent  regarding  the  route  they  had  chosen  to  obtain  an  English  Learner  authorization. 
Respondent  had  not  completed  the  form.  Ms.  Barrow  reminded  the  teachers  that  the  various 
pathways  to  compliance  outlined  in  her  April  3,  2007,  letter  had  deadlines  for registration 
and  completion.  She  noted  also  that  she  would  be  available  over  the  summer  to  process 
reimbursements  and  answer  questions. 

25. 

On  July  23,  2007,  Ms.  Barrow  wrote  to  respondent  Bertuca  and  referenced  the 
March  28,  2007,  letter’  in  which  she  advised  respondent  Bertuca  to  send  her  documentation 
to  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  for  evaluation  with  regard  to  meeting  the 
CLAD  requirement.  Respondent  Bertuca  had  not  advised  the  District  of  any  response  she 
had  received,  or  if  she  had  forwarded  the  documentation  to  the  Commission. 

To  ensure  that  respondent  Bertuca  had  as  many  options  available  as  possible  if  her 
documentation  was  rejected,  Ms.  Barrow  encouraged  her  to  contact  the  Commission.  Ms. 
Barrow  reiterated  that  the  AB  2913  training  being  offered  through  the  County  Office  of 
Education  had  a  registration  deadline  of  August  31,  2007,  and  noted  that  it  was  filling  up 
quickly.  She  also  wrote  that  the  Independent  Study  option,  which  many  teachers  had  chosen, 
would  cease  to  be  an  option  after  January  31,  2008. 

26. 

On  August  5,  2007,  respondent  Bertuca  e-mailed  Ms.  Barrow  that  she  sent  “all 
my  stuff”  to  the  Commission  the  prior  month  and  was  “waiting  to  hear.”  She  also  wrote  that: 

To  be  quite  candid,  I’m  only  probably  [sic]  going  to  work  a 
couple  more  years.  I’m  57,  and  my  husband  retired  from 
teaching  2  years  ago.  What  is  your  sense of  the  bottom  line  if I 
don’t  get  my  certification?  I’m  not  sure  if  my  time  and  the 
district's  resources  balance  out  against  a  couple  more  years.  I 
love  my part-time  job,  and  I  love  working  with  English 
language  learners.  I  guess  that,  for  me,  is  my  bottom  line! 

27. 

On  August  6,  2007,  Ms.  Barrow  replied  by  e-mail  to  respondent  Bertuca 

stating  the  following: 

>  Factual  Finding  19,  above. 

10 

 

The  district  has  not  formed  a  formal  party  line  on  what  will 
happen  with  teachers  who  don’t  receive  their  English  Learner 
authorization,  so  it  is  hard  to  say. 
It  is  considered,  by  both  the 
County  Office  of  Education  and  the  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing,  to  be  a  mis-assignment  to  have  a  teacher  without 
this  authorization  teaching  in  a  class  with  English  Learners. 
Therefore,  we  are  focusing  our  attention  on  getting  everyone 
compliant.  I  would  encourage  you  to  seek  certification, 
especially  where  the  district  has  reserved  funds  to  pay  for  it. 
Perhaps  you  could  consider  the  Fall  AB  2913  training  through 
the  COE?  Or,  the  independent  study  program  through  the 
University  of  San  Diego,  seems  to  go  fairly  quickly  for  any  of 
our  teachers  and  offers  the  most  flexibility.  Please  feel  free  to 
call  me  if  you'd  like  to  discuss  your  options  further. 

28. 

On  September  13,  2007,  Ms.  Barrow  again  wrote  to  all  District  teachers, 

including  respondent  Bertuca,  who  had  not  obtained  a  CLAD,  BCLAD  or  CLAD  equivalent. 
She  included  for  each  teacher  a  form  annotated  with  the  information  the  District  had 
regarding  his  or  her  current  progress  in  securing  an  English  Learner  authorization,  and  asked 
that  the  teachers  provide  updated  information. 

Ms.  Barrow  also  reminded  the  teachers  that  the  various  pathways  to  compliance  had 
deadlines  for  registration  and  completion,  including  that  all  independent  study  coursework 
had  to  be  completed  by  January  31,  2008  and  that  the  first  AB  2913  class  was  the  following 
day. 

29. 

On  October  1,  2007,  Ms.  Barrow  again  wrote  to  the  remaining  14  District 

teachers,  including  respondent  Bertuca,  who  had  not  obtained  a  CLAD,  BCLAD  or  CLAD 
equivalent,  with  information  regarding  online  registration  for  the  December  8,  2007,  CTEL 
test  for  authorization. 

30. 

On  November  14,  2007,  Ms.  Barrow  wrote  to  respondent  Bertuca  and 
referenced  her  previous  communications  in  which  respondent  was  asked  to  provide 
information  on  her  efforts  to  obtain  authorization.*  Ms.  Barrow  wrote  that  despite  the 
memos  sent  to  respondent  Bertuca’s  attention  no  update  on  her  status  had  been  received.  She 
requested  that  respondent  Bertuca  advise  if  she  had  made  any  progress  regarding  obtaining  a 
CLAD.  She  wrote  that:  “Deadlines  for  reaching  CLAD  compliance  are  quickly  approaching 
and  we  are  committed  to  doing  everything  we  can  to  helping  our  teachers  reach  this  goal.” 

31. 

On  November  19,  2007,  respondent  Bertuca  replied  to  Ms.  Barrow  by  e-mail 

at  3:13  p.m.  The  entirety  of  her  e-mail  was  as  follows: 

  

*  See  Factual  Findings  20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  and  25,  above. 

  

11

  

Hi  Leslie, 
And  that’s  about  where  I  am.  The  reply  is  that  the  CTC  can’t 
evaluate  all  my stuff  without  my  actually  applying  for  the 
CLAD  certificate. 
for  compliance,  and  what  exactly  does  that  mean  again? 

So  I’m  still  pondering.  What  is  the  deadline 

@ 

Thanks, 
Connie 

32. 

Ms.  Barrow  replied  by  e-mail  26  minutes  later  on  November  19,  2007,  and 

wrote  to  respondent  Bertuca  that: 

We  have  asked  all  of  our  teachers  to  meet  the  CLAD 
requirement  by  the  end  of  this  school  year.  This  means  that  the 
teachers  have  received  their  CLAD  or  equivalent  (through 
testing,  coursework  or  training).  It  is  probably  easiest  to  apply 
for  the  credential  by  doing  it  through  the  COE,  and  the  district 
will  reimburse  you  for  the  $55  application  fee. 

Given  your  ELD  assignment,  it  is  very  important  that  you 
comply  with  this  English  Learner  authorization  requirement. 

Although  she  continued  to  teach  English  Learners  respondent  Bertuca  did  not  apply 
for  the  credential  through  the  COE,  or  take  any  other  steps  to  secure  a  CLAD  or  equivalent 
authorization  necessary. 

e 

33. 

Approximately  two  months  later,  at  1:22  p.m.  on  January  14,  2008,  respondent 

Bertuca  e-mailed  Ms.  Barrow.  The  entirety  of  her  e-mail  was  as  follows: 

I’m  getting  ready  to  submit  my  crazy  quilt  of  stuff  to  the  CTC. 
In  looking  over  all  the  info  from  you,  it  appears  I  send  [sic]  you 
all  the  stuff  and  you  submit  it,  along  with  the  completed 
application? 

One  more  thing:  I  found  my  Emergency  Permit.  I’m  going  to 
pony  you  [sic]  a  copy,  because  I  think  I.can  extend  its  use  for 
four  more  years.  The  clause  in  question  is  P13.  That  would  be 
awesome. 

Thanks, 
Connie  Bertuca 

Respondent  Bertuca’s  feigned  ignorance of  the  procedure,  as  expressed  in  her  e-mail, 

was  contradicted  by  her  November  19,  2007.  e-mail  in  which  she  demonstrated  knowledge 

@ 

12 

 

  

that  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  could  not  evaluate  her  documentation  unless 
she  submitted  an  application  for  the  CLAD  certificate.  Moreover,  respondent  Bertuca  had 
been  repeatedly  informed  that  she  would  have  to  submit  the  application,  with  supporting 
documentation,  to  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  and  that  the  District  did  not 
have  that  responsibility. 

34. 
2008,  as  follows: 

Ms.  Barrow  replied  by  e-mail  13  minutes  later,  at  1:35  p.m.  on  January  14, 

I'm  glad  you  are  getting  everything  sent  out.  We  actually  can’t 
send  it  out  through  our  office,  however,  the  COE  may  be  able  to 
help  with  the  application  process.  Or,  you  can  submit  the 
application  yourself.  The  COE  would  also  be  who  you  would 
want  to  contact  regarding  the  Emergency  Permit.  I  would 
recommend  speaking  to  Sue  Corso,  though  Susie  Noess  may 
also  be  able  to  help.  Good  luck! 

Respondent  Bertuca  responded  by  e-mail  9  minutes  later,  at  1:44  p.m.  on  January  14, 

2008,  as  follows: 

Thanks  Leslie  —  but  maybe  you  know  the  answer  to  this.  On  the 
application,  it  asks  for  all  college  transcripts.  Would  that  be  for 
CLAD  as  well?  Since  I  have  a  standard  secondary  credential, 

And  yes,  I’ll  do  this  through  the  Sues. 

35. 

Respondent  Bertuca  delayed  another  twelve  days  before  sending  her 

application  for  a  CLAD  certificate  to  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.  On 
Saturday,  January  26,  2008,  she  e-mailed  to  Ms.  Barrow  the following: 

I  sent  my  CLAD stuff in  today.  Susie  at  COE  advised  against 
sending  it,  but  I  wrote  a  cover,  and  Gwen  Heskett  wrote  me  a 
very  nice  recommendation,  so  —  you  never  know.  However, 
when  I  revisited  the  CCTE  [sic]  website,  and  read  everything 
again,  I  decided  I’m  not  optimistic.  So,  my  next  question  to  you 
is  ~  the  next  CTEL  exams  are  in  June.  If 
kind of guarantee  for  keeping  my  job? 

register,  is  that  any 

In  short,  respondent  Bertuca  delayed  sending  her  application  for  a  CLAD  certificate 

to  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  more  than  ten  months  after  she  was specifically 
informed  by  Human  Resources>  that  any  class  with  an  English  learner  requires  a  teacher  that 

  

  

*  See  Factual  Finding  16,  above. 

13 

 

  

holds  an  appropriate  EL  authorization,  and  compliance  was  an  issue  of  immediate 
importance. 

36. 

On  January  28,  2008,  Ms.  Barrow  replied  by  e-mail  to  respondent  Bertuca. 

She  wrote  that: 

I'm  glad  that  you  have  taken  some  steps  toward  obtaining  your 
authorization,  though  I  agree,  I  am  not  optimistic  that  the  CTC 
will  grant  it  at  this  time. 
As of  today,  the  District  has  not  determined  a  hard  and  fast 
policy  as  to  what  to  do  about  teachers  who  do  not  have  the 
appropriate  English  Learner  Authorization.  Fortunately,  most  of 
our  teachers  have.complied  with  this  requirement.  However, 
your  ELD  assignment  does  cause  particular  concern. 
I  strongly  encourage  you  to  register  for  the  June  CTELs  and 
perhaps  look  into  some  of  the  test  prep  classes  that  were  being 
offered  through  the  Santa  Clara  County  Office  of  Education. 
Most  of  our  teachers  who  took  the  December  CTEL  performed 
quite  well,  though  all  took  a  slightly  different  path  in  terms  of 
preparation. 

. 

I’m  sorry  I  don’t  have  a  more  specific  answer  for  you  at  this 
time.  As  you  can  see,  I  am  copying  Tanya  with  this  and  will  get 
more  information  to  you  as  further  determinations  are  made. 

37. 

Later  that  day,  at  3:40  p.m.  on  January  28,  2008,  respondent  Bertuca  replied 

by  e-mail  that: 

Thanks,  Leslie.  I’ll  wait  a  bit  until  I  hear  from  you  or  I  hear 
from  Tanya  to  register.  I  can  send  you  a  copy  of proof  of 
registration,  if  that  will  serve  as  a  place  holder.  Do  I  need  to 
enroll  in  a  test  prep  something  [sic]?  I  took  the  samples  online, 
and  I  did  fine. 

In  her  testimony  at  hearing  respondent  Bertuca  did  not  explain  how  she  proposed  to 
send  a  copy  of  proof of registration  if  she  was  going  to  “wait  a  bit”  to  register.  She  also  did 
not  explain  why  she  chose  to  wait  to  register  for  the  June  2008  CTEL  test  when  she  had  been 
urged  since  March  2007  to  obtain  an  authorization  by  testing  or  some  other  pathway. 

38. 

Shortly  thereafter,  at  4:14  p.m.  on  January  28,  2008,  Ms.  Barrow  wrote  to 

respondent  Bertuca  by  e-mail  and  stated  the  following: 

You  will  not  be  able  to  teach  ELD  next  year  without  your 
English  Learner  authorization.  What  other  assignments  you 
may  be  eligible  for  will  need  to  be  determined. 

   

e@ 

Again,  I  highly  encourage  you  to  go  ahead  and  register. 
Whether  or  not  you  take  a  test  prep  class  is  entirely  up  to  you.  It 
is  not  required,  and  given  your  experience,  you  may  feel 
comfortable  taking  the  test  without  one.  Let  me  know  if I  can 
help  with  any of this. 

39. 
Ms.  Barrow  that: 

That  evening  at  6:13  p.m.  on  January  28,  2008,  respondent  Bertuca  e-mailed 

e 

40. 

On  January  30,  2008,  Ms.  Barrow  e-mailed  respondent  Bertuca  the  following: 

I  guess  what  I’m  asking  is  this:  1  was  told  by  our  administration® 
if 1  don’t  have  CLAD,  not  only  will  I  not  be  able  to  teach  ELD, 
but  if  there  are  layoffs,  I  might  not  be  rehired  because  someone 
with  CLAD  would  need  to  be  hired,  even  though  I  am  ‘highly 
qualified’  (by  NCLB  standards)  to  teach  other  English  classes. 
This  was  confusing  because  everyone  BUT  me  can  teach  ELD, 
and  there  were  2  people  after  I  was  [sic].  If  the  district,  to  be 
compliant,  requires  me  to  have  my  certificate  in  hand  before  the 
end  of  this  year,  I  may  not  be  rehired.  If  [sic]  proof  of 
registration  is  [sic]  enough  to  demonstrate,  well,  good  faith? 
Intent?  As  good  as a certificate?  Then  I’ll  register  tomorrow! 
Does  this  make  sense?  Maybe  this  is  more  a  question  for Tanya 
—I'm  glad  you’re  forwarding  these  to  her! 

1  apologize  for  the  delay  in  replying  to  you,  but  I  wanted  to  wait 
until  I  had  the  opportunity  to  confer  with  Tanya. 
What  your  administration  is  telling  you  is  essentially  correct. 
Being  Highly  Qualified  under  NCLB  is  not  the  same  as 
credential  compliance  under  Williams  (and  all  of  the English 
teachers  in  our  comprehensive  high  schools  are  Highly 
Qualified).  The  CLAD  certificate,  or  it’s  [sic]  equivalent,  is 
required  not  only  to  teach  ELD,  but  to  teach  any  subject  matter 
in  which  there  is  even  one  English  Learner  in  the  class.  This  is 
not  a  decision  handed  down  by  the  district,  but  by  the  CDE  and 
CTC.  Given  the  make  up  of  our  district,  that  would  be  almost 
any  class. 
Should  the  district  need  to  reduce  FTE  in  English,  then  yes,  your 
lack  of a CLAD  would  leave  you  vulnerable  to  layoff.  Proof  of 
registration  is  not  the  same  as  passage  of  the  three  exams  and 
issuance  of a  certificate. 

: 

e 

°  Apparently  respondent  Bertuca’s  reference  was  to  the  principal  or  other  administrator(s)  at  her 

school  site. 

15 

 

  

Should  you  be  laid  off  and  subsequently  obtain  a  CLAD  or 
equivalent,  that  would  be  helpful  if  we  are  able  to  reinstate  any 
FTE.  Again,  I  encourage  you  to  register  for  the  exams.  I  hope  I 
have  been  able  to  clarify  this  matter  for  you.  Please  call  if 1 can 
help  with  anything. 

41. 

On  March  7,  2008,  respondent  Bertuca  e-mailed  the  State  Commission  on 

Teacher  Credentialing  the  following: 

Ihave  an  application  for  CLAD  pending,  submitted  Feb  20: 
[respondent’s  address  and  SSN] 
I  would  like  to  add  Emergency  CLAD  to  the  application.  It 
could  save  my  teaching  job 

for  next  year! 

Respondent  Bertuca’s  e-mail  contradicted  her  representation  to  the  District  that  she 

submitted  her  application  on  January  26,  2008.” 

42. 

On  March  11,  2008,  Teri  Bixler,  Information  Services,  Certification, 

Assignment  and  Waivers  Division  of  the  State  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  e- 
mailed  respondent  Bertuca  with  the  following  information: 

You  cannot  add  emergency  CLAD  to  the  application  we  have 
here.  Why  would  you  do  that?  Do  you  qualify  for  the  CLAD 
with  this  application?  Or,  are  you  now  sure  you  do  not  qualify 
and  want  to  change  it  to  an  emergency  CLAD? If  this  is  the 
case,  you  will  have  to  apply  through  your  employer  for  the 
emergency  CLAD  with  a  new  application  and  fee. 

Respondent  Bertuca  forwarded  Ms.  Bixler’s  e-mail  to  Ms.  Barrow  on  March  12, 

2008,  with  her  own  e-mail  which  stated  that: 

It  occurred  to  me  that  this  might  work.  The  COE  would  not 
support  my  application  for  either  permanent  or  emergency,  so  I 
submitted  the  application  and  paid  the  $55  on  my  own.  Can  you 
help  me  resubmit  my  application  for  an  emergency  credential? 

43. 

On  January  30,  2008,  Ms.  Barrow  e-mailed  respondent  Bertuca  as  follows: 

I  am  very  sorry,  but  if  the  COE  is  unwilling  to  support  your 
application  for  an  emergency  CLAD  there  is  little  I  can  do.  The 
COE  is  your  employing  agency.  I  did  speak  with  them  and 
discovered  why  they  couldn’t  accept  your  application. 
Emergency  credentials  can  only  be  issued  once,  and  can  be 

7  See  Factual  Finding  35,  above. 

16 

 

  

renewed  only  if  certain  requirements  are  met.  It  seems  that  you 
already  had  an  emergency  CLAD  back  in  2003,  but  didn’t  take 
any  of  the  necessary  steps  to  continue  it  (coursework  or 
examination).  The  emergency  certificate  expired  in  2004. 
I  do  regret  that  it  has  come  down  to  this.  We  have  worked  very 
hard  over  the  course  of  the  last  year,  with  multiple 
communications,  to  avoid  just 
to  recommend  that  you  register  for  the  June  CTEL  exams. 
Please  do  not  hesitate  to  call  or  email  if  you  have  any  questions 
or  if I  can  be of  any  other  type  of  assistance. 

this  type  of  situation.  I  continue 

44. 

On  March  27,  2008,  Ms.  Barrow  e-mailed  Mr.  Kirschen  stating  that  a  CLAD 

is  required  of  all  teachers  regardless  of  how  many  English  learners  are  in  the  class.  She 
appended  to  her  e-mail  an  e-mail  from  the  state  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  which 
stated  that  “if  even  one  student  has  been  determined  to  be  an  English  learner,  then  the  teacher 
must  hold  the  appropriate  English  Learner  authorization.” 

45. 

In  April  2008  respondent  Bertuca  wrote  the  Board  that  in  August  2007  she 

asked  directly  what  the  District’s  “bottom  line”  was  “in  terms of  teacher’s  holding  CLAD” 
and  as  late  as  January  28,  2008,  was  told  that  the  District  did  not  have  a  “bottom  line.”  She 
claimed if anyone  had  told  her  that her  job  was  in  jeopardy  she  would  have  made  sure  she 
took  the  test  to  meet  the  January  31  deadline  for  securing  a  CLAD  by  taking  tests.  She  also 
wrote  that  her  school  has  45  sections  of  non-English  Learner  classes  she  could  teach  until  she 
obtained  a  CLAD  certificate,  and  that  other  teachers  could  teach  English  Learners  in  the 
interim.  She  concluded  her  letter  to  the  Board  with  the  statement  that:  “What  I  disagree  with 
soundly  is  the  fact  of  my  possible  termination  being  kept  from  me  until  it  was  too  late  to 
act.” 

46. 

At  hearing  respondent  Bertuca  reiterated  some  of  the  same  arguments  that 

were  stated  in  her  April  2008  letter  to  the  Board.  Her  contention  that  the  District  kept  from 
the  fact  of  her  possible  termination  was  not  supported  by  the  evidence.  As  the  lengthy  series 
of  notifications  quoted  above  demonstrates,  respondent  Bertuca  and  other  District  teachers 
were  advised  of  the  requirements  for  CLAD  authorization  and  the  impending  deadlines  for 
compliance.  Respondent  Bertuca  must  have  known  that  her  ELD  classes  contained  English 
Learners,  and  she  acknowledged  that  she  understood  from  the  Williams  decision  that  the 
District  could  require  all  teachers  to  hold  a  CLAD  authorization.  Moreover,  the  District  did 
not  have  information  about  the  Governor’s  budget  until  January,  and  cannot  be  charged  with 
not  passing  on  information  it  did  not  possess. 

Respondent  Bertuca’s  claim  that  she  would  have  taken  the  steps  to  obtain  CLAD 

certification  if  the  District  had  told  her  job  was  in  jeopardy  is  not  credible.  She  was 
repeatedly  informed  of  the  legal  requirements,  pathways  to  compliance  with  related 
deadlines,  and  financial  and  other  support  available.  She  chose  to  ignore  that  information. 
and  actively  misrepresented  her  status  to  the  District  by  claiming  that  she  had  applied  for  a 

17 

 

  

CLAD  certificate  on  January  26,  2008,  when  in  fact  she  delayed  until  February  20,  2008.8 
Her  August  5,  2007,  e-mail?  suggests  that  her  true  motivation  was  to  engage  in  a  pattern  of 
delays,  feigned  ignorance  and  misunderstanding,  and  misrepresentations  until  she  worked  “a 
couple  more  years”  and  retired. 

@ 

Respondent  testified  that  she  presently  teaches  honors  freshman  English,  which  has 
no  English  Learners.  She  questioned  Ms.  Krause  why  the  District  could  not  create  several 
classes  without  a  single  English  Learner  so  she  could  retain  her  position.  Ms.  Krause 
properly  answered  that  the  District  cannot  move  students  around  based  on  race,  ethnicity  or 
language  to  accommodate  a  teacher’s  lack  of  CLAD  qualification. 

47. 

Respondent  testified  that  the  intent  of  the  original  layoff  based  on  budget 

concerns  “is  separate  from”  layoffs  based  on  CLAD  certification,  and  the  two  issues  became 
confused.  Respondent’s  views  were  not  supported  by  competent  evidence.  No  competent 
evidence  suggested  that  the  Board  was  confused  in  its  understanding  of  the  settlement  of  the 
Williams  \awsuit  and  statutory  requirements  that  all  teachers  with  English  learners  in  their 
classes  have  a  CLAD,  BCLAD  or  CLAD  equivalent. 

48. 

Currently  every  District  high  school  classroom  has  at  least  one  English 

Learner,  and  is  therefore  required  to  have  a  teacher  with  a  CLAD  certificate.  In 
consequence,  Board  Resolution  No.  198-07-08,  which  authorized  “skipping”  to  satisfy  the 
District’s  special  needs,  and  Resolution  No.  20-07-08,  the  “tie-breaking  criteria,”  were 
reasonable  and  necessary  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students.  Respondent 
Bertuca,  who  chose  to  not  obtain  a  CLAD  certificate  or  equivalent  despite  the  repeated 
urgings of  the  District,  was  properly  identified  for  layoff. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Cause  for  the  elimination  of  14.77  full-time  equivalent  positions  exists  in 

accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Except  as  to  respondents  Erin 
Asamoto,  Chris  Carey-Stronck,  Luke  Dahlen,  Marissa  Ferejohn-Swett,  Katharine  Garkey, 
Michelle  Hubbard,  Bob  Hudson,  Matthew  Mohulski,  Diana  Nieves,  Damian  Pawlowski, 
Karen  Quinn,  Lisa  Storer,  Miguel  Valladolid,  Holly  Woolbright,  Anne  Zachan,  and  Portia 
Zavitsanos,  who  withdrew  their  Notices  of  Defense  and  Requests  for  Hearing,  cause  further 
exists  to  give  respondent  Bertuca  notice  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year.  This  cause  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

2. 

None  of  the  reductions  will  prevent  the  district  from  providing  mandated 

services.  The  reductions  are  in  the  interest  of  the  schools  and  their  students. 

®  See  Factual  Finding  41,  above. 

°  See  Factual  Finding  26,  above. 

 

e 

@   

    

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  respondent  Bertuca  is  being  retained  to 

    
3. 

   

e 

render  a  service  which  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

4. 

Respondent  Bertuca  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance of  evidence  that  she 

was  denied  due  process  or  any  right  to  which  she  is  entitled  by  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondent  Constance  Bertuca  that  her  services  will  not  be 

ORDER 

    

required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

DATED:  Mp  3  ji  eV08 

LA 

A.  BEHE 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

       

  

19

