BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
INGLEWOOD  UNIFIED  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of: 

OAH  No.  L2008020715 

The  Reduction  in  Force  of  50  Full-Time 
Equivalent  Positions  of  the  Certificated 
Employees  of  the  District, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

David  B.  Rosenman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  28  and  29,  2008,  at  the  Inglewood  Unified 
School  District,  Inglewood,  California. 

Margaret  A.  Chidester  and  Alexandria  M.  Davidson,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented 

the  Inglewood  Unified  School  District  (District). 

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION 

was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  29,  2008. 

Evidence  was  received  by  way  of  stipulation,  testimony  and  documents,  The  record 

Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  by  Lawrence  B.  Trygstad,  Attorney  at  Law, 
represented  Respondent  teachers.  A  list  of  Respondents  is  attached  as  Attachment  A.  An 
explanation  of  the  notes  on  that  list,  including  the  Respondents  who  were  present  at  the 
hearing,  is  found  in  Factual  Finding  7,  below. 

   

The  Governing  Board  of  the  District  determined  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular 
kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated  teachers  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was 
not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed 
to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

review  of  credentials  and  seniority.  The  selection  process  was  in  accordance  with  the 
requirements  of  the  Education  Code,  except  to  the  extent  that  the  District  sent  more  notices 
than  justified  under  the  circumstances.  The  affected  employees  will  have  the  Accusations 
against  them  dismissed.  Otherwise,  the  Board  may  proceed  as  indicated  herein. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 

  

Jurisdiction  and  Parties 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  The  District  provides  educational  services  for  students  in  grades  kindergarten 
through  12.  The  District  employs  approximately  766  certificated  staff  in  permanent  or 
probationary  positions. 

2.  Pamela  Short-Powell,  Ed.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  and  Robert  Mena 
is  the  Director  of  Human  Resources  of  the  District.  Their  actions  were  taken  in  those  official 
capacities.  Mr.  Mena  was  responsible  for  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the 
layoff. 

3.  Before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  served  on  221  teachers,  including 

Respondents,  by  personal  service  and/or  certified  mail,  a  written  notice  (notice)  that  it  had 
been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  them  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Each  notice  set 
forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  a  Resolution 
reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  50  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

6.  Notices  of  Defense  were  served  on  the  District  in  at  least  three  ways.  Several 

5.  The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  Respondents. 

4.  Approximately  130  certificated  employees,  referred  to  as  Respondents,  submitted 
timely  written  requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them 
for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  District’s  contention  that  Nellie  Saldana  did  not  submit  a 
timely  request  for  hearing  is  rejected.  The  weight  of  the  evidence  established  that  Ms. 
Saldana’s  request  was  filed  at  the  same  time  as  requests  by  three  other  employees  which 
were  accepted  as  timely. 

On  March  28,  2008,  the  District  served  the  Respondents  by  certified  mail  with  an  Accusation 
along  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense.  Several  of  the 
Respondents  were  also  personally  served. 

Respondents  filled  out  and  returned  the  blank  Notice  of  Defense  that  had  been  served  with 
the  Accusation  packets.  Several  Respondents  filled  out  and  served  another  form  of  a  Notice 
of  Defense.  (Both  of  these  formats  are  found  in  Exhibit  2.)  Finally,  Mr.  Trygstad  filed  a 
Notice  of  Defense  with  respect  to  all  of  the  Respondents.  (Exhibit  A.) 

   
  

numbered  are  Respondents  whom  the  District  claimed  had  submitted  timely  Notices  of 
Defense.  (See  list  at  beginning  of  Exhibit  2.)  The  evidence  established  that  the 
Respondents’  names  added  at  numbers  3a,  9a,  34a  and  99a  are  properly  treated  as 
Respondents  in  this  matter.  As  to  Bruce  Wullschleger  at  number  129a,  although  it  was  not 
established  that  he  submitted  a  Notice  of  Defense,  nevertheless  the  District  stipulated  that  the 
notice  and  Accusation  were  withdrawn  as  to  him.  The  District  also  stipulated  that  its  notices 

7.  Attachment  A  is  incorporated  by  reference.  The  130  names  originally  listed  and 

  

and  Accusations  were  withdrawn  as  to  all  names  with  the  designation  “+”.  Finally,  all 
Respondents  whose  names  have  the  designation  “*”  appeared  at  the  hearing,  although  not 
necessarily  for  the  entire  hearing. 

8.  Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  probationary  and  permanent  certificated 

employees  of  the  District. 

The  Governing  Board  and  the  Lay  Off Resolution 

9.  On  February  27,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  was  given 

notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  50  FTE  employees  be  given  notice  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons 
therefore. 

10.  Board  Resolution  number  19/2007-2008,  adopted  on  February  27,  2008, 
proposed a  layoff  of  50  FTE  certificated  employees  (Resolution).  Specifically,  the 
Resolution  provided  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of 
services: 

FTE 

Services 

40 
1 
4 
3 
2 

K-6  Classroom  teaching  positions 
Physical  Education  teaching  position 
Classroom  Language  Arts  teaching  positions! 
Classroom  Social  Studies  teaching  positions 
Classroom  Art  teaching  positions 

At  the  hearing,  the  District  withdrew  one  of  the  FTE  reductions  for  Classroom 

Art  teaching  positions. 

11.  The  Resolution  also  established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative 

It 
seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date. 
provided  that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the 
students  in  accordance  with  the  criteria  stated  therein.  More  specifically,  the  tie-breaker 
criteria  provide  for  points  to  be  awarded  for  certain  credentials,  certificates,  authorizations, 
degrees  or  salary  steps.  The  more  points  awarded  to  a  teacher,  the  higher  the  seniority  within 
the  shared  date  of  first  paid  service.  In  the  event  of  a tie  after  reference  to  all  listed  criteria,  a 
lottery  would  be  held  in  which  the  lower  the  number  drawn,  the  lower  the  seniority. 

12.  Director  of  Human  Resources  Mena  stated  that  the  Resolution  was  required  by 

the  District’s  fiscal  crisis  and  need  to  reduce  services  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of 
students,  as  well  as  a  projected  reduction  in  enrollment.  More  specifically,  the  Board 

'  By  a  typographical  error,  in  one  place  in  the  Resolution  this  was  erroneously 

referred  to  as  a3  FTE  reduction. 

 

received  information  about  the  next  state  budget  leading  the  Board  to  believe  that,  for  school 
year  2008-2009,  it  would  experience  a  budget  shortfall  of  $3.9  million,  and  reduced 
enrollment  of  approximately  760  to  770  students. 

13.  The  decision  to  reduce  services  was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication 

of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

The  Seniority  List  and  the  Lay  Offs 

14.  The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 

(first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  credentials. 

15.  The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 

senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District  then 
determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were 
entitled  to  displace,  or  “bump,”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for 
each  kind  of  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by 
the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority.  The  District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and  whether  they 
could  “bump”  other  employees. 

16a.  The  Resolution  also  included  a  determination  that  the  District  would  seek 
exemption  from  the  layoff  for  certain  employees  “because  of  special  training,  experience  or 
credential  that  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”  (Exhibit  1a.) 
Board  seeks  approval  in  this  hearing  process  to  skip  these  employees,  but  nevertheless  served 
them  with  notices  so  that,  if  approval  was  not  given,  the  employees  could  be  laid  off. 

In  essence,  the 

16b.  The  categories  of  exemptions  sought  by  the  District  are  for  personnel  currently 

in  the  following  assignments  who  will  serve  in  the  same  assignments  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year:  administrators  possessing  administrative  credentials;  special  education  teachers 
possessing  special  education  credentials  or  other  listed  permits  or  credentials;  teachers 
possessing  single  subject  credentials  or  other  listed  permits  or  credentials  in  math,  Spanish, 
French,  band  (music)  or  science;  school  psychologists  possessing  school  psychologist 
credentials;  personnel  possessing  single  subject  credentials  or  other  listed  permits  or 
credentials  in  Library  Media  Teacher  Services;  and  program  coordinators.  According  to  Mr. 
Mena,  the  exemptions  are  necessary  because  administrators  are  needed  for  governance  and 
for  safety;  special  education  is  mandated;  school  psychologists  are  not  assigned  to 
classrooms  and  are  not  affected  by  the  projected  lower  enrollment;  program  coordinators  are 
an  integral  part  of  the  instructional  program  at  each  school  site;  and  the  other  positions  are 
historically  hard  to  fill  and  are  not  affected  by  the  projected  lower  enrollment. 

17.  The  District  used  information  from  the  seniority  list  and  personnel  files  to  apply 

the  tie-breaker  criteria  of  the  Resolution.

  

  

18.  The  services  identified  in  the  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that 

could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s 
decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  were  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  were a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  decisions  were  based  on  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

19.  The  District  identified  the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  the  Board  directed  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  No  junior  certificated 
employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  which  a  more  senior  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Respondents’  Contentions 

20.  Respondents  contend  that  the  Accusations  must  be  dismissed  because  the  District 

sent  out  many  more  notices  of  lay  off  than are  justified  by  the  49  FTE  positions  being 
eliminated.  Further,  the  seniority  list  contains  numerous  errors  to  the  extent  that  it  is 
difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  determine  the  order  of  termination.  Respondents  argue  that  the 
“over  noticing”  and  the  District’s  requests  for  exemptions  are  attempts  to  avoid  the  statutory 
requirement  to  send  notices  by  March  15,  as  the  District  retains  discretion  over  a  large 
portion  of  its  certificated  personnel  to  determine  who  will  be  laid  off,  long  after  March  15. 
Further,  Respondents  contend  that  the  lottery  held  after  all  other  tie-breaking  criteria  were 
used  is  illegal,  and,  if  not,  should  have  taken  place  before  the  notices  were  sent. 

(b)  Ona  copy  of  the  seniority  list  (Exhibit  3),  Mr.  Mena  marked  the 

(a)  One  version  of  the  seniority  list  (Exhibit  3a)  shows  that  layoff  notices 

21.  In  support  of  these  contentions,  the  following  evidence  was  submitted. 

were  sent  to  all  employees  with  seniority  numbers  from  the  last  on  the  list,  Mr.  Mena, 
number  764  with  a  seniority  date  of  March  15,  2008,”  to  Lisa  Fears,  number  547  with  a 
seniority  date  of  January  29,  2004. 

employees  who  received  notices  related  to  the  specific  FTEs  reduced  by  the  Resolution. 
Exhibit  3  indicates  that  the  last  person  receiving  a  notice  correlated  to  an  FTE  reduction  is 
number  637,  Sharon  Bell. 

   

(c)  Most  of  the  errors  proven  in  the  seniority  list  related  to  the  failure  of  the 
District  to  properly  note  employees  who  had  Masters  degrees  or  credentials  that  would  be 
significant  in  applying  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid 
service.  Mr,  Mena  stated  that  the  District  intended  to  correct  this  information  and  redo  the 
tie-breaking  process,  including  new  lotteries  where  necessary,  to  correct  the  order  of 
employees  who  share  the  same  seniority  dates. 

seniority  because  he  is  assigned  to  the  District  office  and  not  to  any  school  site. 

?  Mr.  Mena  was  hired  on  August  6,  2007,  but  testified  that  he  does  not  accrue 

(d)  Nakia  Wilson-Sears  claimed  that  she  had  an  earlier  seniority  date, 

however  the  evidence  established  that  she  was  a  day-to-day  substitute  until  she  started  a  full- 
time  position  on  her  given  seniority  date.  Similarly,  Francesca  Chase  claimed  that  she  had 
an  earlier  seniority  date,  however  the  evidence  established  that  she  had  a  break  in  service. 
Their  seniority  dates  were  correct. 

(e)  Cheryl  Alexander  had  a  special  education  credential,  but  it  expired. 

Cherelle  Hartley-Brown  received  a  GATE  certificate  after  attending  a  training  program. 
Evanna  Hampton  may  have  enough  credits  to  obtain  a  science  authorization,  but  has  not 
applied  for  it.  None  of  these  three  circumstances  would  change  information  on  the  seniority 
list. 

(f)  Amber  Rae  established  that,  instead  of  a  seniority  date  of  October  3,  2007, 
it  should  be  October  1,  2007.  Allen  Fowler  is  listed  as  a  “prob  2”  (second  year  of  probation), 
but  established  that  he  is  a  permanent  employee  and  should  be  listed  as  tenured.  The  District 
agreed  to  make  these  corrections. 

(g)  Jong-Eun  Son  has a  certificate  of  eligibility  for  an  administrator 

credential,  however  it  has  not  been  filed  with  the  District.  She  has  never  served  in  an 
administrative  position  in  the  District,  and  wants  to  teach  for  another  year. 

22.  Respondents  raised  several  additional  contentions  in  their  brief  (Exhibit  B)  which 

were  not  supported  by  sufficient  evidence  or  the  law;  therefore,  the  contentions  are  rejected. 

(a)  For  example,  Respondents  rely  upon  a  Board  resolution  dated  March  7, 
2008,  to  argue  that  15  personnel  nonreelected  at  that  time  must  be  treated  as  attrition  and 
thereby  reduce  the  number  of  FTEs  herein.  The  nonreelection  process  of  the  District  under 
Education  Code  sections  44951  and  44929.21,  is  entirely  separate  from  the  rights  of 
probationary  employees  under  sections  44949  and  44955.  Further,  some  of  the  nonreelected 
teachers  did  not  teach  in  areas  targeted  for  reduction  under  the  Resolution.  Further,  Mr. 
Mena  testified  that  nonreelected  employees  in  the  subject  areas  included  in  the  Resolution 
were  considered  as  part  of  the  attrition.  Respondents’  contention  was  disproved. 

(b)  Respondents  also  contend  that  the  District  changed  the  status  of  temporary 

employees  to  probationary  employees  of  some  employees  who  were  using  emergency 
permits  or  intern  and  pre-intern  authorizations,  but  did  not  change  the  status  of  other 
temporary  employees  who  were  similarly  situated.  However,  Mr.  Mena  testified  that  the 
District  does  not  employ  any  temporary  certificated  employees.  There  was  insufficient 
evidence  to  support  this  contention  of  Respondents. 

(c)  Respondents  contend  that  there  are  probationary  employees  with  less 

seniority  who  did  not  participate  in  the  layoff  proceeding.  The  only  evidence  produced  to 
support  the  contention  was  that  some  employees  were  sent  notices  of  nonreelection  under 
Education  Code  sections  44951  and  44929.21.  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  these 
nonreelections  were  not  treated  as  attrition  (see  Factual  Finding  22(a))  or  that  there  were  any 

 

  

    

  

other  probationary  employees  with  less  seniority  who  did  not  participate  in  the  lay  off 
proceeding.  Nor  did  they  establish  that,  had  these  employees  been  included  in  the  layoff 
process,  the  outcome  would  have  been  different  for  any  Respondent. 

(d)  Respondents  contend  that  positively  assured  attrition  must  be  considered 

by  the  District  such  that  the  number  of  any  employees  who  resigned,  retired  or  otherwise 
separated  from  service  must  be  used  to  reduce  the  number  of  FTEs  at  issue  in  this 
proceeding.  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  the  District  did  not  properly  consider 
positively  assured  attrition. 

(e)  Respondents  contend  that  the  District  cannot  justify  retention  of junior 

employees  without  proving  that  the  more  senior  employees  who  were  given  notices  are  not 
competent  to  perform  an  actual,  “necessary”  assignment,  and  not  just  that  the  District  merely 
desires  to  retain  those  with  certain  training  or  experience.  This  contention  is  addressed  in  the 
Discussion  section,  below. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1.  Education  Code’  section  44944,  subdivision  (a),  states  in  pertinent  part: 

“No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the  governing 

board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons 
specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written 
notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee  . 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor.” 

.  that  it  has  been 

. 

2.  Section  44955  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

“(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes  other 

than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive, 
and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  cause  other  than  as 
specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

“(b)  Whenever  . 

. 

.  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not 

later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  .  ..  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these 
conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing 
board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the 
certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee 
may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or 
any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

3  All  citations  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

 

  

“As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 

date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of 
needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order 
of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than 
five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the 
application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the 
group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of 
reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected 
. 
employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement.  . 

. 

“(c)  ...[S]ervices  of  such  employees  shall  be  shall  be  terminated  in  the  reverse  order 
in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  Sections  44844 
and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices 
and  a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed 
reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

“The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner 

that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications 
entitle  them  to  render.  ..  . 

“(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 

certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

“(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 

course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by a  services  credential  with  a 
specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the 
certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or 
course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not 
possess.” 

3.  Sections  44949  afd  44955  establish  jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding. 
and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  sections  44944  and  44945  were  met.  (Factual 

The  notice 

Findings  3  through  9.) 

4.  A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955(b)  “either  by 
determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be  performed  at  all 
by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be 
reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils 
involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 

5.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to 
the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or

  

  

discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

6,  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

7.  Many  Respondents  who  testified  provided  evidence  that  the  seniority  list  was 

deficient  in  listing  the  information  showing  they  were  entitled  to  different  treatment  under 
the  tie-breaking  criteria,  and  the  District  agreed  to  reconfigure  the  seniority  list.  See  Factual 
Findings  20,  21  and  22.  For  the  reasons  set  forth  below,  this  will  not  have  an  affect  on  the 
order  of  layoff.  It  may  affect  possible  rehiring  rights,  which  are  not  subject  to  the 
jurisdiction  of  this  hearing  and  are  covered  in  other  statutory  provisions  such  as  sections 
44956  and  44957. 

8. 

In  the  one  instance  of  an  incorrect  seniority  date  for  Amber  Rae  (Factual  Finding 

21(f)),  the  correction  of  the  date  will  not  have  an  affect  on  the  order  of  layoff,  as  Ms.  Rae  is  a 
relatively  junior  employee  and  would  be  laid  off  under  the  corrected  date. 

9.  The  Respondents  with  breaks  in  service  are  only  entitled  to  a  seniority  date  upon 

their  reemployment,  under  section  44848. 

10.  None  of  the  errors  in  the  seniority  list  are  prejudicial  to  Respondents  in  the 

context  of  this  preceeding.  Therefore,  they  are  deemed  “nonsubstantive  procedural  errors” 
under  section  44949,  subdivision  (c),  and  are  not  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges. 

11.  The  District  only  resorted  to  the  use  of  a  lottery  after  applying  eight  tie-breaking 

criteria,  and  then  based  upon  the  reasoning  that  it  was  the  most  expeditious  means  of 
establishing  the  hierarchy  necessary  to  proceed  with  the  layoff  process.  (See  Factual 
Findings  11,  17  and  21.)  This  process  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

12a.  A  school  district  may  deviate  from  strict  seniority  in  layoffs  and  skip  employees 

if  it  can  demonstrate  a  “specific  need”  and  that  the  employees  have  “special  training  and 
experience  .  ..  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”  (Section  44955, 
subdivision  (d)(1),  set  out  in  more  detail  in  Legal  Conclusion  2.)  The  District  established  a 
specific  need  and  submitted  evidence  of  the  special  training  and  experience  of  the  teachers 
for  which  it  seeks  exemption  from  layoff,  and  Respondents  did  not  provide  any  evidence  to 
the  contrary.  (See  Factual  Findings  14,  15  and  16.)  However,  rather  than  actually  skipping 
those  employees  by  not  send  them  notices,  the  District  sent  them  notices  and  included  them 

 

  

in  these  proceedings,  as  explained  by  Mr.  Mena,  in  an  abundance  of  caution  so  that,  if  not 
skipped  correctly,  it  would  not  invalidate  related  portions  of  the  layoff  process. 

12b.  Although  this  is  an  unusual  method  and  resulted  in  more  teachers  receiving 
notices  than  if  they  were  actually  skipped,  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  they  were 
prejudiced  or  that  the  process  employed  by  the  District  was  not  in  the  best  interests  of  the 
District  and  its  students. 

13a.  The  number  of  employees  receiving  notices  does  present  an  issue  in  one  regard. 

Mr.  Mena  was  able  to  establish  that,  moving  up  the  seniority  list  from  the  most  junior 
employee  at  seniority  number  766  to  employee  number  637,  employees  either  received 
notices  because  of  the  FTEs  of  particular  kinds  of  services  being  reduced  or  eliminated,  or 
bumped  other  employees,  or  were  the  subject  of  an  exemption  (skipping)  based  upon  needs 
and  special  training  and  experience.  Sharon  Bell  at  number  637  was  the  last  employee  for 
whom  the  layoff  was  tied  to  a  particular  kind  of  service  FTE  position  to  be  reduced  or 
eliminated.  However,  for  more  senior  employees  beyond  Sharon  Bell  at  number  637,  the 
only  explanation  offered  was a  desire  to  maintain  sufficient  flexibility  to  lay  off  employees 
due  to  the  District’s  need  to  remain  solvent.  This  is  an  insufficient  basis  on  which  to  justify 
the  notices  of  employees  with  seniority  numbers  636  to  547. 

13b.  According  to  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  “the  governing  board  may 
terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated 
employees  of  the  district”  as  it  relates  to  the  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  reduced  or 
eliminated.  Admittedly,  this  statutory  limitation  applies  to  the  ultimate  decision  of  the 
District  to  send  final  layoff  notices  by  May  15.  The  District  is  allowed  a  certain  amount  of 
flexibility,  as  it  is  understood  that  the  March  15  notices  are  the  first  step  in  the  process  and 
that  details  of  the  precise  number  of  terminations  emerge  as  the  administrative  hearing 
progresses.  (Karbach  v.  Board  of Education  (1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355.)  However,  that 
flexibility  should  not  be  limitless  and  the  District’s  discretion  is  affected  by  the  statutory 
language  that  limits  the  governing  board  to  final  layoff  of  a  number  of  employees 
characterized  as  a  “corresponding  percentage.”  “(T]he  determination  of  the  amount  by 
which  a  service  is  to  be  reduced  is  the  determination  of  the  number  of  positions  to  be 
eliminated.”  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  636.) 

13c.  Here,  the  hearing  process  has  taken  place  and  determinations  are  made  herein 

concerning  the  validity  of  the  positions  slated  for  reduction  and  personnel  who  fill  those 
positions.  The  need  for  flexibility  becomes  reduced  as  the  process  moves  to  its  conclusion. 
According  to  the  seniority  lists  (Exhibits  3  and  3a),  and  Mr.  Mena’s  correlation  of  names  to 
FTEs  to  be  reduced  (see  Factual  Finding  21(b)),  there  are  12  employees  who  are  correlated  to 
particular  FTE  reductions  or  eliminations  who  did  not  request  a  hearing.’  Also,  the  Order 
below  allows  the  District  to  send  final  layoff  notices  to  45  Respondents,  if  necessary.  This  is 
sufficient  flexibility  to  serve  the  purposes  of  fiscal  responsibility  as  described  by  Mr.  Mena. 

759  and  762. 

4  Employees  with  seniority  numbers  677,  682,  688,  690,  697,  711,  722,  737,  755,  756, 

  

10

  

The  District  went  beyond  the  reasonable  need  for  flexibility  by  sending  notices  to  those 
teachers  with  more  seniority  than  Sharon  Bell  at  number  637. 

14.  Respondents  requested  that  all  of  the  Accusations  should  be  dismissed  due  to  the 
“over  notice”  by  the  District.  There  is  no  basis  to  grant  this  motion  as  stated.  However,  the 
Respondents  with  more  seniority  than  Sharon  Bell  at  number  637  will  have  the  Accusations 
dismissed  as  to  them.  Those  61  Respondents  are  identified  as  follows,  and  include  those 
Respondents  about  whom  the  District  withdrew  the  Accusations  and  notices:  Allums,  Moi; 
Anderson,  Darlene;  Armstrong-Booth,  Tara  L.;  Baker,  Beth  Anne;  Bentley,  Jimanese;  Berry, 
Christopher;  Blanco,  Victor  T.;  Bowen,  John;  Brownlee,  Christopher;  Crawford,  Tanya; 
Cueva,  Emma;  Devereaux,  Heather;  Evans,  Camille  M.;  Flowers,  Jennie;  Fowler,  Allen; 
Friedman,  Sally;  Ginsberg,  Brent;  Gonzalez,  Wendy;  Greene,  Krystal;  Hartley-Bonar, 
Cherelle;  Hashim,  Peter;  Herndon,  Jo  Ann  L.;  Igweze,  Benedict;  Laugo,  Zenaida;  Lord, 
Earlene;  Lund,  Allison;  Mace,  Jantonia;  Manning,  James;  Marasco,  David;  Marquez, 
Fabiola;  Martin,  Ariana;  Mcclay,  Mia;  Mcdonald,  Carolyn;  Mckee,  Wilson;  Mecolick, 
Bianca;  Montgomery,  Miko;  Najera,  Maria;  Nichols-Mosley,  Tammy;  Obregon,  Desiree  A.; 
Okonkwo,  Rosemary;  Orliczky,  Thomas;  Rieux-Harvey,  Regina;  Rowe,  Stephen;  Royal, 
Aisha  Bahati;  Ruben,  Jennifer  I.;  Slack,  Eddie;  Sopa,  Adele;  Sparks,  Jerane;  Tahajian, 
Samantha;  Tellez,  Mayra;  Thomas,  Stephen  D.;  Torres,  Efren;  Trotter,  Monique;  Walker, 
Johnny;  Washington,  Rudy;  Webb,  Catherine  J.;  Weintraub,  Daniel  R.;  Wilkerson,  Opal  L.; 
Witt,  La  Shawn  Denise;  Wolfe,  Darcie;  and  Woods,  Rashondra.  Further,  the  District 
withdrew  its  notice  and  accusation  as  to  Bruce  Wullschleger. 

ORDER 

1.  Notice  may  be  given  to  employees  occupying  49  full-time  equivalent  certificated 

positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Such  notices  may  be  given  to 
the  following  45  employees:  Alexander,  Cheryl;  Anderson,  Marcela;  Aquino,  Yesenia; 
Barahona,  Miguel;  Barrios,  Karla  Marivel;  Bautista  Jr.,  Noe;  Bell,  Sharon;  Bellante, 
Matthew;  Brooks,  Tasha;  Brown,  Kevin;  Brown,  Tracey;  Chase,  Francesa  D.;  Cherry, 
Deborah;  Choi,  Becky  J.;  Collins,  Ginifer;  Fujiwara,  Andres;  Grant,  Ignacia;  Gurse,  Yael; 
Gutierrez,  Jaime;  Hampton,  Evanna;  Harvey,  Brian;  Hensley,  Heather  L.;  Jernigan,  Elise  C.; 
Johnson,  Jaclyn;  Johnson,  Lashawnda;  Leyva,  Leticia;  Meekins,  Donnell  R.;  Ocampo, 
Celerina;  Oliveira,  Sandra;  Pogue,  Melody;  Rae,  Ambur;  Raschilla,  Nicholas;  Rice, 
Terrence;  Robles,  Reyna;  Saldana,  Nellie;  Smith,  Jamie;  Son,  Jung-Eun;  Udechukwu,  Peace; 
Valdivia-Garcia,  Yolanda;  Valenzuela,  Claudia;  Velarde,  Sofia;  Villanueva,  Rachel; 
Villavicencio,  Mayra;  Wilson,  Nakia;  and  Yeldell,  Constance. 

2.  Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  Each  Respondent  shall  receive 

such  a  notice. 

3.  The  Accusations  are  dismissed  as  to  the  following  Respondents,  and  no  final 

layoff  notices  may  be  sent  to  them:  Allums,  Moi;  Anderson,  Darlene;  Armstrong-Booth, 
Tara  L.;  Baker,  Beth  Anne;  Bentley,  Jimanese;  Berry,  Christopher;  Blanco,  Victor  T.; 

11 

 

  

Bowen,  John;  Brownlee,  Christopher;  Crawford,  Tanya;  Cueva,  Emma;  Devereaux,  Heather; 
Evans,  Camille  M.;  Flowers,  Jennie;  Fowler,  Allen;  Friedman,  Sally;  Ginsberg,  Brent; 
Gonzalez,  Wendy;  Greene,  Krystal;  Hartley-Bonar,  Cherelle;  Hashim,  Peter;  Herndon,  Jo 
Ann  L.;  Igweze,  Benedict;  Laugo,  Zenaida;  Lord,  Earlene;  Lund,  Allison;  Mace,  Jantonia; 
Manning,  James;  Marasco,  David;  Marquez,  Fabiola;  Martin,  Ariana;  Mcclay,  Mia; 
Mcdonald,  Carolyn;  Mckee,  Wilson;  Mecolick,  Bianca;  Montgomery,  Miko;  Najera,  Maria; 
Nichols-Mosley,  Tammy;  Obregon,  Desiree  A.;  Okonkwo,  Rosemary;  Orliczky,  Thomas; 
Rieux-Harvey,  Regina;  Rowe,  Stephen;  Royal,  Aisha  Bahati;  Ruben,  Jennifer  I.;  Slack, 
Eddie;  Sopa,  Adele;  Sparks,  Jerane;  Tahajian,  Samantha;  Tellez,  Mayra;  Thomas,  Stephen 
D.;  Torres,  Efren;  Trotter,  Monique;  Walker,  Johnny;  Washington,  Rudy;  Webb,  Catherine 
J.;  Weintraub,  Daniel  R.;  Wilkerson,  Opal  L.;  Witt,  La  Shawn  Denise;  Wolfe,  Darcie; 
Woods,  Rashondra;  and  Wullschleger,  Bruce. 

DATED:  May  6,  2008. 

DAVID  B.  ROSENMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

12

