BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
FORESTVILLE  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against 

JAMES  ANDERSON,  JOANIE  BLECHEL, 
ANNE  S.  FOX,  MARGARET  C.  PORTER, 
RAMONA  ROBERTSON, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  2008040014 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Cheryl  R.  Tompkin,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  heard  this  matter  on  April  28,  2008,  in  Windsor,  California. 

Car!  Corbin,  Esq.,  and  Margaret  Merchat,  Esq.,  represented  the  Forestville  Union 

School  District. 

James  DeMartini,  Esq.,  represented  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  28,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Don  Hack  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against  respondents  in  his  official 

capacity  as  the  Superintendent  (Superintendent)  of  the  Forestville  Union  School  District 
(District). 

2. 

Respondents  James  Anderson,  Joanie  Blechel,  Anne  S.  Fox,  Margaret  C. 

Porter  and  Ramona  Robertson  are  all  certificated  employees  of  District. 

3. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Superintendent  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board 
(Board)  of  District  that  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  be  reduced  or  discontinued 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year: 

1. 
2. 
3. 

Music  Teaching  Services 
Academic  Counselor  Services 
Home  School  Teaching  Instructional  Services 

0.4  F.T.E. 
0.04  F.T.E. 
0.2  F.T.E. 

  

 

  

4. 
5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 
9. 

10. 
11. 
12. 

1.0  F.T.E. 
2.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 

Resource  Specialist  Program 
Elementary  Instructional  Services  (grades  K-6) 
Elementary  Instructional  Services  (grades  K-6) 
(Eliminating  3rd  grade  class  size  reduction) 
Elementary  Instructional  Services  (grades  K-6) 
(Changing  6th  grade  to  middle  school  core  block  schedule) 
History  Instructional  Services  (middle  school) 
English  Instructional  Services  (middle  school) 
Science  Instructional  Services  (middle  school) 
Directed  Studies  Science  Instructional  Services 
Math  Instructional  Services  (middle  school) 

0.2  F.T.E. 
0.2  F.T-E. 
0.2  F.T.E. 
0.2  F.T.E. 
0.2  F.T.E. 

1.0  F.T.E. 

Total 

6.64  F.T.E. 

4. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  District  adopted  Resolution  No. 

9.e.03.06,08,  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year  and  directing  the  Superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all 
employees  affected  by  the  reduction. 

5. 

On  March  18,  2008,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents, 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  of  his  recommendation  that  notice  be 
given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  written 
notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

8. 

7. 

6. 

All  prehearing jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

Respondents  each  made  a  timely  request  in  writing  for  a  hearing  to  determine 

District’s  sixth  grade  students  currently  receive  instruction  in  a  self-contained 

if  cause  existed  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Prior  to  hearing, 
District  withdrew  the  Accusation  against  respondents  James  Anderson,  Margaret  C.  Porter 
and  Ramona  Robertson.  Only  respondents  Joanie  Blechel  and  Anne  S.  Fox  are  still  subject 
to  layoff. 

   

classroom.  District  plans  to  convert  the  sixth  grade  instructional  format  to  a  middle  school 
“core  block”  schedule  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Under  the  core  block  format,  sixth 
grade  students  will  be  required  to  change  teachers  for  certain  core  subjects.  For  example, 
math  and  science  will  be  a  core  block  that  is  taught  by  a  separate  teacher  with  a  single 
subject  credential  in  those  disciplines.  History  and  English  will  be  another  core  block.  Sixth 
graders  will  have  a  total  of  three  separate  teachers.  District  decided  to  adopt  this  new  format 
because  its  sixth  grade  students  were  experiencing  difficulty  transitioning  out  of  a  self- 
contained  classroom  into  the  seventh  grade  single  subject  format.  District  believes  having  a 
core  block  format  in  the  sixth  grade  will  make  the  transition  easier.  District  also  wanted  a 
core  block  format  for  science  because  its  sixth  grade  students  are  having  “performance 
issues”  and  it  believes  that  science  instruction  and  student  performance  will  improve  under  a 

teacher  who  has a single  subject  science  credential.  District  characterizes  its  format  change 
as  a  different  way  of  delivering  the  same  services. 

9. 

Respondent  Joanie  Blechel  holds  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject/Early  Childhood 
Education  credential  and  a  CLAD'  certificate.  District  currently  employs  Blechel  as  a  1.0 
F.T.E.  sixth  grade  teacher  in  a  self-contained  classroom.  Blechel  has  a  seniority  date  of 
August  23,  1999.  She  has  taught  in  District  for  almost  nine  years.  Blechel  holds  one  of  the 
Elementary  Instructional  Services  positions  that  is  being  reduced. 

John  Hayden  holds  a  Clear  Single  Subject  credential  in  math  and  science  and  a  CLAD 
certificate.  District  currently  employs  Hayden  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  seventh/eighth  grade  math  and 
science  teacher.  Hayden  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  23,  2005.  Hayden  position  is  not 
being  reduced.  Hayden  is  less  senior  than  Blechel. 

M.J.  Nelson  holds  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject  Credential  and  a  Clear  Single  Subject 

credential  in  science,  as  well  as  a  CLAD  certificate.  District  currently  employs  Nelson  as  0.4 
F.T.E.  seventh  grade  science  teacher.  Nelson  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  23,  2005. 
Nelson’s  position  is  not  being  reduced.  Nelson  is  less  senior  than  Blechel. 

10. 

Blechel  contends  that  District  is  improperly  retaining  a  less  senior  employee  to 

provide  services  she  is  credentialed  and  competent  to  perform.  Blechel  reasons  that  since 
she  is  credentialed  to  teach  all  of  the  core  subjects  in  a  self-contained  format  in  kindergarten 
through  eighth  grade,  she  is  also  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  those  subjects  in  a  sixth 
grade  core  block  or  seventh  grade  single  subject  format.  She  also  notes  that  she  has  taught 
seventh  grade  science  in  the  past. 

District  contends  Blechel  is  not  credentialed  to  teach  in  a  core  block  or  single  subject 

format,  even  though  she  is  competent  to  teach  core  subjects  in  a  self-contained  classroom, 
and  that  its  decision  to  deliver  sixth  grade  instruction  in  a  different  way  is  a  reasonable 
exercise  of  its  administrative  discretion. 

11. 

Education  Code  section  44955  prohibits  a  school  district  from  laying  off  an 

employee  while  retaining  another  employee  with  less  seniority  to  render  a  service  which  the 
more  senior  employee  is  “certificated  and  competent  to  render.”  And  it  requires  a  district  to 
“make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to 
render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.”  Generally 
speaking,  a  senior  employee  whose  position  is  eliminated  has  the  right  to  “bump”  into  a 
position  held  by  a  junior  employee  if  the  senior  employee  is  credentialed  and  competent  to 
perform  the  duties  of the  junior  employee’s  position.  (Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College 
Dist.  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555.)  Education  Code  44955  thus  protects  the  seniority  rights 
of  certificated  employees.  However,  bumping  rights  are  not  absolute.  The  senior  teacher 

  

'  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic Development 

 

  

must  be  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  service  being  rendered  by  the  junior 
employee. 

The  key  issue  in  the  subject  case  is  whether  Belchel  is  competent  to  teach  math  or 

science  in  a  single  subject  format.  The  term  competence  relates  to  the  specific  skills  or 
qualifications  required  of  the  applicant.  The  determination  of  competence  necessarily 
involves  discretionary  decisions  by  a  school  district’s  responsible  officials.  A  board’s 
definition  of  competence  is  reasonable  when  it  considers  the  skills  and  qualification  of  the 
teacher  threatened  with  layoff.  (Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  Dist.,  supra,  196 
Cal.App.3d  555.) 

Under  existing  law,  it  is  the  governing  board  that  determines  whether  the  senior 

employee  is  competent  to  perform  services  being  performed  by  a  junior  employee.  In  the 
subject  case,  District  officials  determined,  after  due  consideration  of  the  needs  of  its  students, 
that  only  teachers  holding  single  subject  credentials  in  core  subjects  were  competent  to  teach 
those  subjects  under  the  new  sixth  grade  core  block  format.  It  also  continued  to  require  a 
single  subject  credential  to  teach  core  courses  in  seventh  grade.  It  considered  these 
competency  standards  in  determining  whether  Belchel  was  competent  to  teach  a  sixth  grade 
core  course  or  seventh  grade  math  or  science  during  the  upcoming  2008-2009  school  year. 
Since  Belchel  does  not  hold  a  single  subject  credential,  District  concluded  she  was  not 
competent  to  teach  sixth  grade  core  block  classes  or  seventh  grade  math  or  science. 
District’s  competency  standard  was  reasonable,  and  there  is  no  evidence  it  was 
inappropriately  applied.  The  exercise  of  District’s  discretion  must  therefore  be  upheld. 

It  is  also  worth  noting  that  the  fact  the  same  core  sixth  grade  subjects  will  be  taught 

by  others  next  year  does  not  preclude  District  from  discontinuing  the  services  of  self- 
contained  classroom  teachers.  A  school  district  is  authorized  to  eliminate  a  particular  kind  of 
service  even  though  the  service  continues  to  be  performed  or  provided  in  a  different  manner. 
(See  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  811 
[changing  the  manner  in  which  a  service  is  to  be  performed  constitutes  a  reduction  in 
services];  Davis  v.  Berkeley  School  Dist.  (1934)  2  Cal.2d  770  [the  particular  kind  of  service 
of  the  employee  may  be  eliminated  even  though  the  service  must  continue  to  be  performed  in 
a  school  district].) 

12. 

Asaresult  of  decreasing  enrollment,  District  will  have  one  fourth  grade  class, 

one  fifth  grade  class  and  a  combined  fourth  grade/fifth  grade  class  during  the  upcoming 
2008-2009  school  year.  This  will  result  in  the  elimination  of  one  elementary  teaching 
position. 

Respondent  Anne  S.  Fox  holds  a  Professional  Clear  Multiple  Subject  credential  and  a 

CLAD  certificate.  District  currently  employs  Fox  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  fourth  grade  teacher. 
District  has  assigned  Fox  a  seniority  date  of  August  23,  2005.  Fox  holds  one  of  the 
Elementary  Instructional  Services  positions  that  is  being  reduced.  No  certificated  employee 
junior  to  Fox  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  Fox  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

 

13. 

The  evidence  established  that  District  will  be  reducing  services  for  the  ensuing 

school  year. 

and  its  pupils. 

14. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondents  is  being  retained  to  perform 

services  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

15. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  District 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Finding  3 

is  a  kind  which  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law.  (See  Ed.  Code  §  44955; 
Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott,  supra,  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v. 
Governing  Bd.  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.)  The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 
services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s 
discretion. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at  Forestville 

Union  School  District  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Joanie  Blechel  and  Ann  S.  Fox  that  their  services 

will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

CHERYL  R.  TOMPKIN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

