BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  EL  MONTE  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  LOS  ANGELES,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoff  Of: 

OAH  No.  L2008030465 

ERICA  PALMER, 

Respondent. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  case  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  Janis  S.  Rovner, 
Administrative  Law  Judge  of  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  in 
El  Monte,  California,  on  April  30,  2008. 

Miller,  Brown,  Dannis  by  Candace  Bandoian,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented 

the  El  Monte  Union  High  School  District  (District). 

Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  by  Richard  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law 
represented  Erica  Palmer  (respondent),  who  was  present  during  the  entire  hearing. 

The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and 

has  given  respondent  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  her  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 
Respondent  requested  a  hearing  for  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying 
her  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence,  and  evidence  by  way  stipulation,  was 

presented  and  received.  The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  30,  2008.  The 
Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Factual  Findings,  Legal  Conclusions  and 
Order: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Kathy  M.  Furnald,  Superintendent  of  the  El  Monte  Union  High  School 

District,  filed  the  Accusation  in  her  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

  

  

 

3. 

On  March  5,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted  a 

resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year: 

Services 

AB1802  Counselors 

Career  Guidance  Coordinators 

Career  Path  Coordinators 

Total  Full-Time  Equivalent 
Reductions  = 

Full-Time  Equivalent  (FT. 
Positions  Eliminated 

8.0 

2.0 

24 

12.4  FTE 

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  Dan  Morris,  Assistant  Superintendent  of 

Personnel  Services,  acting  on  behalf  of  the  District  Superintendent,  gave  written  notice  to  the 
Board  recommending  that  notice  be  given  to  seven  certificated  employees  of  the  District  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  or 
elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2003,  the  District  provided  notice  to  each  of  seven 

certificated  employees,  including  respondent,  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year,  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

6. 

All  seven  certificated  employees  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  cause 

exists  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  hearing  requests  were 
filed  on  a  timely  basis. 

7. 

On  March  24,  2008,  the  Superintendent  filed  and  served  an  Accusation  against 

each  of  the  seven  certificated  employees.  The  Accusation  with  required  accompanying 
documents  was  properly  and  timely  served  on  each  certificated  employees. 

8. 

The  seven  certificated  employees  who  received  the  Accusation  either  timely 

filed  a  notice  of  defense  or  the  District  treated  them  as  having  timely  filed  a  notice  of 
defense. 

 

  

  

  

9. 

As  to  six  of  the  certificated  employees,  the  District  has  withdrawn  the 
Accusation  and  rescinded  its  notice  of  recommendation  not  to  reemploy.'  Those  six 
certificated  employees  did  not  participate  in  the  hearing.  The  respondent,  Ms.  Palmer,  is  the 
remaining  certificated  employee  in  this  proceeding. 

10. 

11. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  satisfied. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services  * 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

12. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  pursuant  to  Factual 

Finding  4,  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  is  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

13. 

The  reduction  or  elimination  of  services  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  3  is  related 

to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number 
of  certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

14. 

Respondent  Palmer  is  a  career  guidance  coordinator  at  Rosemead  High  School. 

She  holds  a  pupil  personnel  services  credential.  Her  position  is  being  eliminated  pursuant  to  the 
District’s  resolution  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services.  She  is  junior  to  all  other  certificated 
employees.  She  is  a  dedicated  and  loyal  employee.  She  would  like  to  have  the  opportunity  to 
return  to  work  within  the  District. 

1. 

2. 

15. 

44949  and  44955  were  met. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

particular  kinds  of  services  under  Education  Code  section  44955. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Board’s  resolution  (Factual  Finding  3)  are 

No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  than 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

respondent  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  that  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent 
to  render. 

   

"  One  of  the  six  certificated  employees,  Ms.  Ilbea  Fidele,  was  present,  but  did  not  make  a  formal  appearance  at  the 
hearing  because  the  District  and  Ms.  Fidele  had  tentatively  resolved  her  status  and  she  would  not  be  subject  to  lay- 
off.  On  May  1,  2008,  the  District  confirmed  that  the  resolution  was  final  and  withdrew  Ms.  Fidele’s  Accusation  and 
rescinded  her  notice. 

The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44949. 

The  Board  has  cause  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

4, 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  no  certificated  employee  junior  to 

respondent  was  retained  to  render  a  service  which  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  give  notice  to  respondent  Erica  Palmer  that  her  services  will  not 

be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  sustained  as  to  respondent  Palmer.  The  District  may  notify 
respondent  Erica  Palmer  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Dated:  May  2,  2008 

Janis  S.  Rovner 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

    

