BEFORE  THE 
THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  PACHECO  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Reduction  of 
Particular  Kinds  of  Services)  Against: 

OAH  No.  N2008031033 

ANDREA  FRISBIE  AND  NANETTE 
REEVES, 

  

Respondents 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Gary  A.  Geren,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  25,  2008,  in  Redding,  California. 

Thomas  E.  Gauthier,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Lozano  and  Smith,  represented  the 

Superintendent  of  the  Pacheco  Union  School  District  (District). 

Don  Selke,  Attorney  at  Law,  appeared  on  behalf  of  respondents,  Andrea  Frisbie  and 

Nanette  Reeves  (respondents). 

This  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  was  closed  on  April  25,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondents  are  permanent  certificated  employees  (teachers)  of  the  District; 

they  received  notices  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
and  each  requested  a  hearing  to  challenge  their  intended  layoffs.  At  hearing,  respondents 
stipulated  that  the  District  properly  followed  the  procedural  and  substantive  requirements  set 
forth  in  Government  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  when  it  issued  layoff  notices  requiring 
the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  for  6.5  Full  Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  positions, 
later  reduced  to  2.0  FTE,  except  in  the  following  instances:

  

  

Issues 

2. 

Nanette  Reeves  contends  that  she  holds  a  credential  to  teach  a  course  presently 

being  taught  by  an  “assistant  teacher,”  Laurel  Besecker.  Ms.  Reeves  contends  that  Ms. 
Besecker  lacks  the  required  “full”  credential  to  teach  the  course.  Therefore,  Ms.  Reeves 
contends  that  she  should  be  assigned  to  teach  that  position. 

3. 

Andrea  Frisbie  contends  that  she  has  more  seniority  than  Ms.  Reeves,  such 

that  if  only  one  of  the  respondents  is  eventually  rehired  by  the  District,  it  should  be  her. 

4. 

The  District  and  Ms.  Reeves  contend  that  respondents  have  the  same  hiring 

date,  and  that  under  the  “tie-breaking”  criteria  developed  by  the  District,  Ms.  Reeves  should 
be  rehired  before  Ms.  Frisbie. 

Initially,  the  District  rejected  respondents’  request  to  have  the  “tie-breaking”  issue 

5. 

Ms.  Reeve’s  Contention 

Ms.  Reeves  holds  a  supplemental  credential  in  Art.  Ms.  Reeves  did  not 

resolved  as  part  of  this  matter.  The  District  asserted  that  since  both  respondents  are 
subjected  to  layoffs,  there  is  simply,  “no  tie  to  break;”  and,  the  application  of  the  “tie- 
breaking”  criteria  would  become  an  issue  only  upon  the  rehiring  of  one,  but  not  both  of  the 
respondents.  Since  no  rehiring  decisions  have  been  made  by  the  District,  the  District 
asserted  that  the  issue  is  not  properly  before  OAH,  but  rather  would  be  a  matter  to  be 
determined  by  a  Writ  of  Mandate  in  the  event  the  “tie-breaking”  scenario  plays  out  and  the 
development  or  application  of  the  criteria  is  challenged.  By  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing, 
the  District  accepted  respondents’  requests  to  have  the  “tie-breaking”  issue  resolved  by  this 
Decision,  so  as  to  provide  respondents’  with  some  greater  indication  of  their  chances  of 
being  rehired,  and  to  provide  the  parties  a  measure  of judicial  economy  by  not  having  to 
litigate  the  issue  later.  By  the  agreement  of  the  parties,  the  “tie-breaking”  issue  will  be 
addressed  herein. 

investigate  the  credentials  Ms.  Besecker  holds,  what  classes  she  is  qualified  and  competent  to 
teach,  whether  she  is  slated  to  teach  at  an  elementary  or  junior  high  school,  whether  she  is 
teaching  under  the  supervision  of  a  fully  credentialed  teacher  or  what  assignments  the 
District  intends  for  her  in  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Ms.  Reeve’s  assumptions  regarding 
Ms.  Besecker’s  credentials,  status,  and  assignments  were  based  on  speculation,  and  therefore, 
did  not  show  that  the  District  improperly  developed  its  proposed  layoff  list  that  resulted  in 
Ms.  Reeve’s  receiving  a  layoff  notice  rather  than  Ms.  Besecker. 

   

matter.  He  was  responsible  for  the  technical  aspects  implementing  the  layoff.  In 
determining  the  order  of  the  layoffs,  the  District  prepared  a  Certified  Seniority  List  which 
chronicles  its  employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  (tenured, 

Richard  Rhodes  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  and  he  testified  in  this 

Ms.  Frisbie’s  Contention 

6. 

2 

probationary  or  temporary),  and  credentials  and  authorizations.  The  seniority  list  was 
compiled  by  using  data  from  the  District’s  official  personnel  records. 

The  seniority  list  called  for  the  employees  with  less  seniority  (junior  employees)  to  be 

layed-off  before  employees  with  more  seniority  (senior  employees).  The  District  analyzed 
whether  a  senior  employee  could  “bump”  a  junior  employee,  because  the  senior  employee 
had  the  qualifications  and  competency  to  teach  a  different  position  presently  taught  by  a 
junior  employee.  The  District  also  analyzed  whether  a  senior  employee  could  be  “skipped” 
and  a  junior  employee  retained,  because  a  junior  employee  possessed  unique  qualifications 
and  competencies  that  a  senior  employee  lacked. 

The  Certified  Seniority  List  developed  by  the  District  is  accurate,  despite  Ms. 
Frisbie’s  contention  to  the  contrary.  The  District’s  determination  that  she  and  Ms.  Reeves 
share  the  same  date  of  hire  is  correct.  Both  respondents  first  date  of  paid  service  as 
probationary  employees  occurred  on  August  18,  2005. 

Prior  to  August  18,  2005,  Ms.  Frisbie  signed  an  employment  contract  with  the 

District.  Ms.  Reeves  did  not  receive  an  offer  from  the  District  until  August  17,  2005,  at  11 
p.m.  (following  a  Board  meeting  where  her  position  was  created).  Ms  Reeves  accepted  the 
offer  that  night  and  reported  for  work  at  8:00  a.m.  the  following  morning.  While  Ms.  Frisbie 
received  an  offer  of  employment  before  Ms.  Reeves,  the  date  of  the  offer  is  irrelevant  to 
determining  seniority.  The  first  date  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary  employee  determines 
an  employee’s  “hire  date,”  not  the  date  on  which a  District  offers  employment. 

While  it  is  true  that  Ms.  Reeves  was  paid  for  her  first  six  days  of  service  by 

submitting  a  form  titled,  “Substitute  Claim  Form/Additional  Hours,”  that  fact  is  irrelevant  in 
determining  her  “hire  date.”  The  form  was  merely  used  to  pay  Ms.  Reeves  because  the 
“paperwork”  needed  to  process  her  payment  through  the  District’s  payroll  program  had  not 
been  completed  because  of  her  eleventh  hour  hiring.  The  fact  that  Ms.  Reeves  used  a  form 
that  contained  the  word  “substitute”  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  she  was  retained  by  the 
District  as  a  probationary  employee  to  teach  in  a  year-long  assignment  and  her  assignment 
commenced  on  August  18,  2005.  Ms.  Reeves  did  not  work  the  first  six  days  of  her 
employment  as  a  “substitute”  teacher,  substituting  for  her  own  teaching  assignment. 

The  “Tie-Breaker”  Issue 

7. 

To  determine  the  relative  seniority  between  certificated  teachers  with  the  same 

dates  of  hire,  the  District  developed  “tie  breaking”  criteria.  The  criteria  included  the 
consideration  of  the  employee’s  education,  experience,  specialized  training,  and  other 
factors,  such  as  their  participation  in  committees,  coaching  and  clubs.  A  “point  system”  was 
assigned  to  nineteen  different  criterions,  and  a  point  total  derived.  Under  the  criteria, 
teachers  with  the  fewer  number  of  points  are  subject  to  being  laid-off  before  employees  with 
a  greater  number.  The  District  solely  relied  on  its  needs,  as  well  as  the  needs  of  the  students 
in  developing  the  “tie-breaking”  criteria.  The  criteria  are  rational  and  objective.

  

  

There  is  no  dispute  that  under  the  “tie-breaking”  criteria,  Ms.  Reeves  obtained  14 

total  points,  while  Ms.  Frisbie  received  8.5.  Accordingly,  in  the  event  the  District  rehires  but 
one  of  the  respondents,  Ms.  Reeves  shall  be  rehired. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met. 

2. 

The  Superintendent’s  decision  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  was  a 

proper  exercise  of  his  discretion. 

3. 

The  Certified  Seniority  List  prepared  by  the  District  was  accurately  prepared 

and  appropriately  applied  in  developing  the  proposed  layoff  list. 

4. 

The  District’s  “tie-breaking”  criteria  was  appropriately  determined  and 

accurately  applied  to  respondents  and  it  comports  to  the  requirements  set  forth  in  Education 
Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b). 

5. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide 

notice  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year. 

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  occupying  2.0  FTE  of  instruction  that  their 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  May  1,  2008 

G 
A.  GERE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

