BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
ACALANES  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

MICHELLE  ALESSANDRIA,  et  al, 

OAH  No.  2008030103 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Mary-Margaret  Anderson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Lafayette,  California,  on  April  21,  2008. 

Elizabeth  B.  Mori,  Attorney  at  Law,  Fagen  Friedman  &  Fulfrost  LLP,  represented  the 

Acalanes  Union  High  School  District. 

Respondent  Michelle  Alessandria  did  not  appear  and  was  not  represented  by  counsel. 

Margo  Feinberg,  Attorney  at  Law,  Schwartz,  Steinsapir,  Dohrmann  &  Sommers  LLP, 

represented  the  remaining  Respondents.! 

The  record  was  left  open  until  5:00  p.m.  on  April  22,  2008,  to  allow  Ms.  Feinberg  to 
submit  a  written  brief.  A  brief  was  timely  received  and  marked  Exhibit  K  for  identification. 

The  record  closed  on  April  16,  2003. 

SUMMARY 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  Acalanes  Union  High  School  District  decided  to  reduce 

or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated  employees  for  the 
2008/2009  school  year  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  action  was  not  related  to  the  competency 
and  dedication  of  the  teachers  whose  services  were  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 
review of credentials  and  seniority.  Except  as  to  Erica  Amundson  and  Harvey  Benstein,  the 
selection  process  complied  with  Education  Code  requirements. 

  

'  See  Appendix  A,  attached,  for  a  complete  list  of Respondents.

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

James  P.  Negri  filed  the  Accusations  in  his  official  capacity  as  Superintendent 

of  the  Acalanes  Union  High  School  District  (District). 

Allof  the  Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

On  March  5,  2008,’  the  District’s  Governing  Board  (Board)  adopted 

Resolution  No.  07-08-12,  which  sets  forth  the  Board’s  determination  that  it  will  be  necessary 
for  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds of services  for  the  2008/2009  school 
year.  The  reasons  for  the  reductions  are  solely  budgetary.  A total  of  8.8  certificated 
full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  were  targeted  for  reduction: 

Full  Time  Equivalent 

Title 

Art 
Choral  Music 
Drafting 
Drama 
English 
Instrumental  Music 
Social  Science 
Special  Education 
Work  Experience 

1.4 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
1.2 
0.6 
0.2 
2.6 
1.0 

4. 

Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-12  contains  the  general  statement  that: 

[T]he  services  of  no  permanent  employee  will  be  terminated 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with 
less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said 
permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

It  also  contained  the  Board’s  determination  that: 

[I]t  will  be  necessary  to  retain  the  services  of  certificated 
employees  in  the  2008-2009  school  year  regardless  of  seniority, 
who  possess  qualifications  needed  for  the  following  program: 

Regional  Occupational  Program:  Funded  for  the  2007-08  and 
2008-09  school  years.  (Professional  Clear,  Life,  General, 
Preliminary  Credentials,  District/University  Intern  Credential, 
and/or  authorizations.) 

>  All  dates  are  in  2008.

  

  

5. 

The  District  maintains a list  of  certificated  employees  that  includes  seniority 

dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees, 
credentials  and  authorizations.  The  list  (referred  to  as  the  Seniority  List)  was  posted  at 
school  sites  to  allow  employees  to  comment. 

6. 

On  February  20,  prior  to  the  adoption  of  Resolution  No.  07-08-12,  the  Board 

adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-10.  This  resolution  sets  forth  the  criteria  to  be  used  to 
determine  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated  employees  for  the  2008/2009  school  year 
who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date.  The  criteria  ascribe  a  point 
value  to  each  of  six  criteria.  If  application  of  the  criteria  results  in a tie,  it  is  to  be  broken  by 
use  of  a  lottery. 

7. 

By  letter  dated  March  6,  Frank  Acojido,  Director  of  Human  Resources,  gave 

written  preliminary  notice  to  13  certificated  employees  that  the  Superintendent  had 
recommended  to  the  Board  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  by  the  District  for  the 
2008/2009  school  year.  Each  notice  contained  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  a 
copy  of  Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-12. 

8. 

Each  of  the  Respondents  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if 

there  is  cause  for  terminating  his  or  her  services  for  the  2008/2009  school  year.  Accordingly, 
Accusations  were  filed  and  served.  Each  Respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense  and 
this  hearing  followed. 

9. 

No  jurisdictional  issues  were  raised.  The  Parties  stipulated  that  all  notices 

were  timely  and  properly  served. 

The  evidence  established  that  the  District  will  be  reducing  services  for  the 

2008/2009  school  year. 

10. 

11. 

The  evidence  established  that  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is 

related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

12. 

The  District  considered  attrition  in  its  initial  determination  of  the  reductions 
that  were  necessary  and  some  notices  have  been  rescinded  due  to  information  subsequently 
received. 

Proposed  deviations from  seniority: 

A.  Robert  Porter 

13. 

Robert  Porter  is  a  full-time  art  teacher  (0.8  Art  and  0.2  ROP)  at  Acalanes  High 

School.  The  District  seeks  to  retain  him  despite  the  fact  that  other  teachers  possess  more 
seniority.  Porter  was  hired  by  the  District  starting  August  27,  2007,  because  of  his  special 
experience  and  qualifications  to  teach  Digital  Web  Design/Video  Production,  a  computer- 
based  course.  An  art  or  computer  science  credential  is  sufficient  to  teach  such  course  in  the

  

  

regular  curriculum.  One  of  the  sections  of  this  course,  however,  is  funded  by  the  Contra 
Costa  County  Office  of  Education  (CCOE)  as  a  regional  occupational  program  (ROP)  class. 
For  that  section  the  instructor  must  have  a  Designated  Subjects  Vocational  Education 
Credential  or  a  Single  Subject  Credential  plus  three  years  of  industry  experience.  In 
addition,  the  CCOE  may  not  agree  to  fund  unless  it  determines  that  the  District  has  in  place  a 
teacher  it  considers  to  be  qualified.  Porter  holds  a  Clear  Credential  in  Art  and  has  over  three 
years’  industry  experience.  His  qualifications  have  been  approved  by  the  CCOE,  which  has 
made  a  verbal  commitment  to-fund  at  least  one  section  of  the  course  in  2008/2009. 

Currently,  Porter  teaches  one  period  of  ROP  web  design.  He  also  teaches  non-ROP 

web  design,  digital  photography,  and  digital  video production. 

. 

Two  teachers  credentialed  in  art  with  more  seniority  than  Porter  contend  that  they  are 

certificated  and  competent  to  teach  all  of  the  courses  taught  by  Porter. 

14. 

Erica  Amundson  took  a  course  in  digital  imaging  as  part  of  her  credential 

program.  Amundson  notes  that  she  was  originally  hired  by  the  District  to  teach  two- 
dimensional  art.  This  year  she  is  also  teaching  three-dimensional  art.  She  took  classes  last 
summer  in  metalwork  and  casting  to  prepare  for  that  assignment.  She  is  familiar  with  Adobe 
Dreamweaver  software  and  has  used  it  in  a  non-professional  capacity.  She  is  confident  that 
she  could  successfully  teach  the  classes  taught  by  Porter  if  she  had  a  summer  to  prepare. 
Amundson  has  never  worked  in  private  industry  in  the  field  of  web  design,  video  production, 
or  digital  photography.  She  clearly  lacks  the  qualifications  to  teach  an  ROP  section,  but  she 
demonstrated  that  she  is  competent  to  teach  the  other  art  courses  taught  by  Porter. 

15. 

Nancy  Ingersoll  holds  a  Vocational  Education  Credential  with  two  subjects 

designated:  Drafting  and  Commercial  Photography.  In  addition,  she  has  done  freelance 
digital  design  in  recent  years  and  has  taught  digital  photography.  Ingersoll  is  credentialed 
and  competent  to  teach  not  only  the  regular,  but  also  the  ROP  section,  of  Digital  Web 
Design/Video  Production. 

16. 

Porter  and  Ingesoll  possess  the  same  date  of  hire;  thus,  the  District  applied  the 

tie-breaking  criteria  to  determine  their  placement  on  the  Seniority  List.  Ingersoll  contends 
that  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  not  accurately  applied  to  her  because  she  was  given  credit 
for  only  one  credential  when  she  actually  has  two.  Ingersoll  is  mistaken.  In  fact,  she  was 
issued  one  credential  and  is  authorized  to  teach  in  two  subject  areas  pursuant  to  that 
credential.  Even if  this  were  not  the  case,  Porter  would  still  have  more  points  by  virtue of his 
satisfaction  of  other  criteria. 

17. 

The  District  has  not  established  written  competency  criteria  regarding  the 

Digital  Web  Design/Video  Production  course. 

 

  

B.  Sarah  Downs  and  Bruce  Lengacher 

18. 

Sarah  Downs  and  Bruce  Lengacher  teach  choral  music.  Harvey  Benstein 

teaches  instrumental  music.  All  three  teachers  hold  the  same  music  credential.  The  District 
proposes  to  skip  Downs  and  Lengacher,  who are  junior  to  Benstein,  because  it  contends  that 
choral  music  is  a  special  course  of  study  and  that  Benstein  is  not  competent  to  teach  it.  No 
evidence  was  submitted  regarding  the  qualifications  of  Downs  and  Lengacher,  other  than  that 
they  currently  teach  choral  music. 

Benstein  asserts  that  he  is  competent  to  teach  choral  music.  His  assertion  is 
corroborated  by  his  wide-ranging  and  extensive  education,  training,  and  experience  in  the 
field  of  music  education,  both  at  the  high  school  and  college  levels.  Although  the  focus  of 
Benstein’s  teaching  has  been  instrumental  music,  he  has  conducted  musical  works  for  both 
orchestra  and  voice. 

19. 

The  District  has  not  established  written  competency  criteria  regarding  choral 

or  vocal  music. 

Proposed  reductions  in  special  education 

20. 

Mr.  Acojido  credibly  testified  concerning  the  basis  for  the  proposed  reduction 

of  2.6  FTE  in  special  education.  The  decision  was  based  upon  the  numbers  of  special 
education  students  in  the  District,  the  numbers  known  to  be  coming  into  the  District  and 
those  who  are  graduating.  The  different  types  of  special  education  services,  including  mild 
to  severe  and  resource  specialists,  and  the  varied  needs  of  the  students  were  also  considered. 
Special  education  is  a  mandated  service,  but  Acojido  is  confident  that  the  District  will  be 
able  to  provide  it  as  required  with  the  proposed  reductions.  In  addition,  as  of  the  hearing 
date,  the  reduction  had  been  reduced  to  0.6  FTE  based  on  updated  attrition  information. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  District  established  jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  as  to  all  Respondents. 
All  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  have  been 
provided  or  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  reduce  the  number 

of  certificated  employees  in  8.8  FTE  positions  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

The  proposed  reductions  and/or  discontinuation  of  services  are  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44949, 
subdivision  (c)(3).

  

  

4. 

Districts  have  significant  discretion  in  the  assignment  of  teachers,  however, 

seniority  cannot  be  disregarded  unless  the  District  establishes  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 
teach  a  specific  course,  that  the  less  senior  employee  has  special  training  or  experience  that  is 
necessary  to  teach  the  course,  and  that  any  more  senior  employees  do  not  have  the  necessary 
training  or  experience.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44955,  subd.  (d).)  The  burden  of  proof  in  this  respect  is 
on  the  district.  (Davis  v.  Gray  (1938)  29  Cal.App.2d  403,  408;  Duax  v.  Kern  Community 
College  Dist.  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3rd  555,  566-567.) 

5. 

Based  upon  the  matters  set  forth  in  Findings  13  through  17,  the  District 

established  cause  to  skip  Robert  Porter  only  as  regards  his  assignment  to  teach  ROP  classes. 
Erica  Amundson,  a  teacher  with  more  seniority  than  Porter,  is  credentialed  to  teach  art.  The 
District  does  not  have  written  competency  criteria  for  the  non-ROP  art  courses.  It  is  clear 
that  the  District  hired  Porter  based  upon  his  experience  and  seeks  to  retain  him  because  of 
that  experience.  But  the  District  did  not  prove  that  Amundson  does  not  have  the  training  or 
experience  that  is  necessary  to  teach  the  non-ROP  courses.  Therefore,  to  the  extent  Porter  is 
being  retained  to  teach  non-ROP  courses,  Amundson  must  also  be  retained. 

6. 

Based  upon  the  matters  set  forth  in  Findings  18  and  19,  the  District  did  not 

establish  cause  to  skip  Sarah  Downs  and  Bruce  Lengacher.  The  District  did  establish  a 
specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  choral  music  and  that  less  senior  employees  have  the 
necessary  qualifications.  The  District  did  not  prove,  however,  that  the  senior  teacher  is  not . 
qualified.  The  District  has  no  written  competency  criteria  concerning  choral  music.  Harvey 
Benstein  is  credentialed  to  teach  music  and  the  District  did  not  prove  that  he  lacks  the 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  choral  music.  To  the  contrary,  the  evidence 
demonstrated  that  he  is  competent.  Therefore,  Benstein  must  be  retained. 

7. 

Other  than  as  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  5  and  6,  no  permanent  or 

probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  for  which  any 
Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

8. 

All  contentions  made  by  Respondents  not  specifically  addressed  herein  are 

found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  may  only  be  given  to  Erica  Amundson  that her  services  will  be  reduced 

by  0.2  FTE  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

2. 

Notice  may  not  be  given  to  Harvey  Benstein  that  his  services  will  not  be 

required  for  the  2009-2009  school  year. 

3. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  Michelle  Alessandria,  Nancy  Ingersoll,  Stacey 
Kikkawa,  Michael  Ramsay-Leavitt,  Wendy  Reeves-Hampton,  Melissa  Ridings  and  E. 

  

 

  

e 

Kimberly  Smith  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: ha 2008 

ARET  ANDERSON 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

  

  

APPENDIX  A--  LIST  OF  RESPONDENTS 

1. 

2. 

Alessandria,  Michelle 

Amundson,  Erica 

Benstein,  Harvey 

Ingersoll,  Nancy 

Kikkawa,  Stacey 

Ramsay-Leavitt,  Michael 

Reeves-Hampton, Wendy 

Ridings,  Melissa 

Smith,  E. Kimberly

  

