BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
PASADENA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations  Against: 

OAH  No.  L200803  1064 

Joy  Garratt;  Helen  Ichwan;  Marion  Lo; 
Christine  McLaughlin;  Monica  Salas; 
Jennifer  Sandoval;  and  Maria  Stemwell, 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Julie  Cabos-Owen,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  May  2,  2008,  at  the  Pasadena  Unified  School  District 
Offices  in  Pasadena,  California. 

Jeff  C.  Marderosian,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Pasadena  Unified  School  Dis- 

trict.  Emma  Leheny  of  Rothner,  Segall  &  Greenstone  represented  all  Respondents. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  heard.  The  record 

was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  May  2,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Complainant,  Edwin  Diaz,  filed  the  Accusation  while  acting  in  his  official 

capacity  as  the  Superintendent  of  the  Pasadena  Unified  School  District  (District). 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3, 

On  March  11,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  (Board)  of  the  District  adopted  a 
resolution  to  reduce  and  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by 
the  District  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year:  literacy  coaches  by  16 
full  time  equivalent  [FTE]  positions. 

4, 

The  Board  further  determined  that  the  reduction  in  services  necessitated  a  de- 
crease  in  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at  the  close  of  the  present  school  year  (2007- 
2008)  by  a  corresponding  number  of  FTE  positions,  and  directed  the  Superintendent  to  notify 
the  appropriate  employees  to  implement  the  Board's  determination. 

5. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  gave  notice  to  each  Respondent  of 

the  potential  elimination  of  his/her  position  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  On  March  27, 

2008,  the  District  served  the  Accusation  on  each  Respondent.  

  

6. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense  and  requests  for  a  hearing  to  de- 

termine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

7. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

8. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  related 

solely  to  the  needs  and  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

9. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

10. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  perform 

any  services  which  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (See 
discussion  in  Factual  Findings  11  through  15,  below.) 

ll. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates,  current  assignments,  permanency  description  and  credential  and  certificate 
information. 

12. 

The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the 

least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  services  being  reduced.  The  District 
determined  that  nobody  less  senior  than  Respondents  was  being  retained  to  render  services 
Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

13. 

In  making  this  determination,  the  District  retained  several  certificated 

employees  who  were  less  senior  than  Respondents  as  follows  and  for  the  following  reasons: 

(a) 

Lesley  Ellen  Mayne  was  retained  to  continue  her  current  assignment  as 

a  speech  and  language  pathologist.  None  of  the  Respondents  are  credentialed  or  competent 
to  perform  this  service. 

(b) 

Ruth  McLaughlin  was  retained  to  continue  her  current  assignment  as  a 
biology  teacher  at  Rose  City  High  School.  She  holds  a  single-subject  intern  permit  to  teach 
biology.  None  of  the  Respondents  are  credentialed  or  competent  to  perform  this  service. 
Additionally,  Ruth  McLaughlin  is  serving  in  an  80  percent  FTE.  The  District  maintains  that 
this  affects  layoff  order  because  if  the  District  allows  a  more  senior,  100  percent  FTE  teacher 
to  bump  a teacher  in  a  less  than  100  percent  FTE  position,  the  senior  teacher  would  not  have 
the  option  of  returning  to  a  100  percent  FTE  position  once  the  District  begins  to  rehire  laid 
off  teachers  in  order  of  seniority.  Therefore,  in  order  to  preserve  the  right  of  teacher  to  be 

 

rehired  at  a  100  percent  FTE  position,  the  District  maintains  that  senior  teachers  should  be 
laid  off  rather  than  bumping  into  an  80  percent  FTE  position. 

(c) 

|  Paul  Marsh  was  skipped  for  layoff  and  allowed  to  continue  his  current 

assignment  as  an  English  teacher  at  Elliott  Middle  School.  However,  he  is  not  being  retained 
for  reasons  separate  and  apart  from  these  layoff  proceedings. 

(d) 

|  Denise  Carrera  was  retained  to  continue  her  current  assignment  as  a 

speech  and  language  pathologist.  None  of  the  Respondents  are  credentialed  or  competent  to 
perform  this  service. 

(e) 

Brooke  Autry  was  retained  to  continue  her  current  assignment  as  a 

seventh  and  eighth  grade  mathematics  teacher  in  one  of  the  District’s  middle  schools.  She 
holds  an  intern  permit  to  teach  mathematics.  The  District  determined  that  none  of  the 
Respondents  are  credentialed  or  competent  to  perform  this  service.  The  District  maintained 
that,  in  order  to  teach  mathematics,  an  intern  permit,  single  subject  credential  or  professional 
clear  credential  in  mathematics  is  required.  The  District  noted  that  a  teacher  with  a  multiple 
subject  credential  could  teach  mathematics  at  the  middle  school  level  only  if  the  teacher  had 
a  “core  assignment.”  This  would  consist  of  teaching  two  or  more  subjects  for  two  or  more 
periods  with  the  same  group  of  students. 

(f) 

Gary  Irwin  was  retained  to  continue  his  current  assignment  as  a 

| 

mathematics  teacher  at  Marshall  Secondary  School.  The  District  determined  that  none  of  the 
Respondents  are  credentialed  or  competent  to  perform  this  service. 

(g)  |  Kevin  Wood  was  retained  to  continue  his  assignment  as  a  chemistry 

teacher  at  Pasadena  High  School.  He  holds  a  single  subject  intern  permit  to  teach  chemistry. 
None  of  the  Respondents  are  credentialed  or  competent  to  perform  this  service. 

(h) 

Scott  Simon  was  retained  to  continued  his  assignment  as  a  mathematics 
teacher  at  Marshall  Secondary  School.  The  District  determined  that  none  of  the  Respondents 
are  credentialed  or  competent  to  perform  this  service. 

(i) 

Karume  Askari  Jumal  was  retained  to  continue  his  current  assignment 

as  a  mathematics  teacher  at  Marshall  Secondary  School.  He  holds  a  limited  assignment 
permit  to  teach  mathematics.  The  District  determined  that  none  of  the  Respondents  are 
credentialed  or  competent  to  perform  this  service. 

(j) 

Marie  Crosby  was  retained  to  continue  her  current  assignment  as  a 

physical  education  (PE)  teacher  at  Webster  Elementary  School.  She  holds  a  single  subject 
credential  in  PE.  None  of  the  Respondents  are  credentialed  or  competent  to  perform  this 
service.

  

  

(k)  |  Raul  Yanez  was  retained  to  continue  his  current  assignment  as  a 

Spanish  teacher  at  Blair  High  School.  None  of  the  Respondents  are  credentialed  or 
competent  to  perform  this  service. 

(1) 

John  Ray  Ramos  was  retained  to  continue  his  current  assignment  as  a 
PE  teacher  at  Washington  Middle  School.  He  holds  a  temporary  contract  for  an  80  percent 
FTE  position  that  exipires  at  the  end  of  this  school  year  (2007-2008).  None  of  the 
Respondents  are  credentialed  or  competent  to  perform  this  service. 

(m) 

Israel  Martin  was  retained  to  continue  his  current  position  as  an  English 

teacher  at  Muir  High  School.  He  holds  a  single  subject  English  credential.  The  District 
determined  that  none  of  the  Respondents  are  credentialed  or  competent  to  perform  this 
service. 

(n) 

Darrell  Tozier  was  retained  to  continue  his  current  position  as  an 

English  teacher  at  Muir  High  School.  He  holds  a  single  subject  temporary  county  certificate 
to  teach  English.  The  District  determined  that  none  of  the  Respondents  are  credentialed  or 
competent  to  perform  this  service. 

(o) 

—  All  others  on  the  seniority  list  are  more  senior  than  Respondents. 

14. 

Respondent  Maria  Catherine  Stemwell  (Respondent  Stemwell)  currently 

teaches  kindergarten  at  Webster  Elementary  school.  She  is  the  most  senior  employee 
receiving  a  layoff  notice.  She  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  that  entitles  her  to  teach 
grades  kindergarten  through  eight.  She  asserts  that  she  is  competent  to  teach  two  core 
classes  (either  a  math/science  core  class  or  an  English/social  studies  core  class)  at  a  middle 
school  level  to  the  same  group  of  students,  rotating  mid-day.  She  believes  that  she  should 
“bump”  Brooke  Autry,  the  middle  school  mathematics  teacher  by  reason  of  seniority.  This 
argument  is  not  persuasive.  Respondent  Stemwell  admitted  that  she  does  not  have  a  single 
subject  credential  and,  therefore,  could  not  teach  an  exclusively  mathematics  class  at  the 
middle  school  level.  Since  Respondent  Stemwell  is  not  credentialed  or  competent  to  perform 
the  services  that  Brooke  Autry  currently  performs,  Respondent  Stemwell  is  not  entitled  to 
“bump”  Brooke  Autry. 

15.  |  Respondent  Christine  McLaughlin  (Respondent  McLaughlin)  holds  a  multiple 
subject  credential  and  an  authorization  to  teach  introductory  English,  which  is  English  at  the 
ninth  grade  level  or  below.  She  asserts  that  she  is  competent  to  fill  one  of  the  high  school 
English  teaching  positions  held  by  either  Darrell  Tozier  or  Israel  Martin.  She  believes  she 
should  “bump”  either  of  them  by  reason  of  her  seniority.  This  argument  is  not  persuasive. 
Darrell  Tozier  teaches  English  2  and  English  3,  which  are  at  the  tenth  grade  level  or  above. 
He  does  not  teach  English  at  the  ninth  grade  level.  Respondent  McLaughlin  is  not  creden- 
tialed  and  competent  to  perform  the  services  that  Darrell  Tozier  currently  performs.  Addi- 
tionally,  Israel  Martin  teaches  two  periods  of  English  1  and  two  periods  of  English  2.  Eng- 
lish  2  is  at  the  tenth  grade  level  or  above.  Respondent  McLaughlin  not  credentialed  and 

 

  

  

competent  to  teach  Israel  Martin’s  entire  assignment.  Therefore,  Respondent  McLaughlin  is 
not  entitled  to  bump  Darrell  Tozier  or  Israel  Martin. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met.  (Factual  Findings  1  through  6.) 

The  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  5  are  each  determined  to  be  particular 

kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  (Factual  Findings  3 
and  7.) 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District  due 
to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44955.  (Factual  Finding  8.) 

4, 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

[t]he  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated . 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  re- 
tained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated 
and  competent  to  render. 

.  while  any 

. 

5. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  As  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  10  through  15,  no  Respondent  is  entitled  to  “bump”  any  junior  employee  in  this 
case. 

6(a). 

Respondents  argued  that  the  credentials  of  the  teachers,  not  the  assignments  of 

the  retained  teachers,  that  should  control  the  layoff  order.  They  argued  that  current 
assignments  may  not  be  the  same  next  year,  and  that  the  District  has  discretion  when  making 
assignments.  Therefore,  Respondent  Stemwell  argued  that  she  should  bump  Brooke  Autry 
because  her  assignment  could  change,  and  Respondent  McLaughlin  argued  that  she  should 
bump  Darrell  Tozier  and  Israel!  Martin  because  Darrell  Tozier  and  Israel  Martin  could  be 
reassigned  to  teach  entirely  ninth  grade  level  English. 

6(b). 

The  District  maintained  that  it  is  not  required  to  speculate  regarding  what 

assignments  may  be  made  in  the  future.  Since  people  resign  and  retire  and  the  needs  of  the 
schools  and  the  students  change,  the  District  must  work  with  the  information  it  has  at  this 
time. 

6(c). 

The  District’s  argument  is  more  persuasive. 

 

7. 

8. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which 

any  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955  for 

terminating  or  reducing  Respondents’  employment  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  as  set 
forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  15. 

ORDERS 

The  Accusations  served  on  Respondents  Joy  Garratt,  Helen  Ichwan,  Marion  Lo, 

Christine  McLaughlin,  Monica  Salas,  Jennifer  Sandoval,  and  Maria  Stemwell  are  sustained. 
Notice  may  be  given  to  those  Respondents  before  May  15,  2008,  that  their  services  will  be 
reduced  or  terminated  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinua- 
tion  of  particular  kinds  of  services  as  indicated. 

Dated:  May  6,  2008 

  JULIE  CABOS-OWEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

