  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
SAN  DIEGO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force  of 
Certain  Certificated  Teachers  Employed  by 
the  San  Diego  Unified  School  District, 

OAH  No.  2008030379 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Stephen  E.  Hjelt,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  San  Diego  California,  on  April  14  and  15,  2008. 

Melanie  A.  Petersen  ,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Fagen,  Friedman  &  Fulfrost  LLP 

represented  the  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  (the  District  or  SDUSD). 

Fern  M.  Steiner,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Tosdal,  Smith,  Steiner  &  Wax  represented 

respondent  certificated  employees  of  the  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  who  received 
preliminary  layoff  notices  as  indicated  in  the  record. 

For  the  purpose  of  determining  the  issues  herein,  the  District,  by  stipulation,  agreed 

that  all  respondents  served  with  an  Accusation  were  entitled  to  a  hearing  whether  they  filed  a 
Notice  of  Defense  or  not. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  15,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  San  Diego  Unified  School  District 

1. 

The  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  (the  District  or  SDUSD)  is  the  second 

largest  district  in  California  and  the  eighth  largest  urban  district  in  the  United  States.  It 
serves  over  135,000  students  and  has  been  serving  the  city’s  educational  needs  for  over  150 
years.  It  has  more  than  221  educational  facilities  with  over  14,  500  full  time  equivalent staff 
positions  representing  more  than  15,  800  employees.  The  District’s  educational  facilities 

 

include  118  elementary  schools,  24  middle  schools,  29  high  schools,  35  charter  schools,  and 
15  atypical  or  alternative  schools. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  an  elected  five-member  Board  of  Trustees.  The 

Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  Dr.  Terry  Grier  the  Superintendent. 
supported  by  an  administrative  staff  including  Sam  Wong,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer 
and  Tim  Asfazadour,  Interim  Director  of  Certificated  Staffing. 

Dr.Grier  is 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  —-  Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  property  taxes  and  reduced  a  major 

source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since  Proposition  13, 
public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of  California  and  to  other 
governmental  entities  for  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 

state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  a  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  a  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops.  California’s  current  economic  crisis  has  made  budgeting 
problems  far  more  complicated  than  they  were  before. 

A  school  board’s  legal  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some 

teachers,  administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff 
notices,  warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year,  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  to  affected 
certificated  employees  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority.  A  public 
school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in  reverse  order  of 
seniority  only  if  it  can  demonstrate  that  identifiable  junior  employees  possess  a  credential, 
special  training  or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  to  provide  services 
which  more  senior  employees  do  not  possess. 

The  District’s  Response 

4, 

By  early  2008,  the  District’s  administration  (as  well  as  the  administrators  of 
most  other  school  districts)  was  well  aware  of  the  State  of  California’s  massive  economic 
problems.  As a  result  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  Governor’s  proposed  budget,  the  District 
projected  an  estimated  budget  deficit  of  about  $78  million  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
The  District  was  required  to  look  into  ways  to  meet  the  budget  deficit. 

Under  the  Superintendent’s  direction,  budgetary  cuts  were  considered  across  the 
board  including  the  elimination  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  the 
District’s  certificated  employees.  On  March  11,  2008,  the  District  personnel  presented  to  the 

   

2 

  

Board  a  recommendation  concerning  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of 
This 
services  in  the  approximate  amount of  919.85  FTEs  (full  time  equivalent  positions). 
number  is  slightly  misleading  since  it  includes  FTEs  attributable  to  permanent  and 
probationary  employees.  This  layoff  hearing  related  solely  to  permanent  employees  since 
probationary  employees’  rights  are  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  collective  bargaining 
agreement  between  the  District  and  the  teacher’s  union.  This  layoff  hearing  involved  477 
permanent  employees  who  received  notices. 

5. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  a  Resolution  recommending  a 

reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year,  together  with  the  adoption  of  tie-breaking  criteria.  The  Board’s  adoption  of  the 
resolution  and  tie-breaking  criteria  was  based  on  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  their  pupils. 

6. 

The  Resolution  provided: 

RESOLUTION  OF  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SAN  DIEGO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Education  of  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  (“District”)  has 
determined  that  it  shall  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  of 
the  District  listed  on  Exhibit  A  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

WHEREAS,  as  a  result  of  said  reduction  or  discontinuance  in  particular  kinds  of  services,  it  is 
necessary  to  decrease  a  corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District  at  the 
close  of  the  current  school  year  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44955;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  is  necessary  that  among  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  services  to  the 
District  on  the  same  day,  the  order  of  termination  be  based  solely  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and 
the  students  thereof  based  on  application  of  the  following  specific  criteria  and  in  the  listed 
priority  order. 

1. 
2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 

    

09-seheolyeat> 

7 

BE  IT  FURTHER  RESOLVED  that  at  the  end  of  the  2007-2008  school  year  the  number  of 
employees  serving  in  certificated  positions  in  the  District  shall  be  decreased  by  a  maximum  of 
full  time  equivalent  certificated  positions  as  a  result  of  said  reduction  or  discontinuance  in 
particular  kinds  of  services;  and

  

Number  of  teaching  and/or  special  service  credentials. 
Number  of  supplementary  authorizations  No  Child  Left  Behind  -Highly  Qualified 
Teacher  compliant. 
Earned  degrees  beyond  the  BAIBS  level. 
Multiple  language  skills  relevant  to  District  need. 
Lottery 

: 

NOW  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  of  the 
District  as  listed  in  Exhibit  A  be  reduced  or  discontinued  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008- 
2.909-seheel: 

BE  IT  FURTHER  RESOLVED  that  among  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  services  to  the 
District  on  the  same  day,  the  order of termination  will  be  based  solely  on  the  needs  of  the 
District  and  the  students  thereof  based  on  application  of  the  following  specific  criteria  in  the 
listed  priority  order: 

6. 
7. 

8. 
. 
10. 

Number  of  teaching  and/or  special  service  credentials. 
Number  of  supplementary  authorizations  No  Child  Left  Behind  -Highly  Qualified 
Teacher  compliant. 
Earned  degrees  beyond  the  BAIBS  level. 
Multiple  language  skills  relevant  to  District  need. 
Lottery 

BE  IT  FURTHER  RESOLVED  that  the  Superintendent  or  his  designated  representative 

is  directed  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  whose  services  shall  be  affected  by  this 
action.  Nothing  herein  shall  be  deemed  to  confer  any  status  or  rights  upon  temporary  certificated 
employees  or  any  other  employee  in  addition  to  those  specifically  granted  to  such  by  statute. 

7. 

Exhibit  A  to  the  resolution  set  forth  a  list  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services 

being  reduced  and  the  extent  of  the  reductions  measured  by  FTEs  as  follows: 

EXHIBIT  A 
March  11,  2008 

Reduction/Elimination  of  Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

Administrators 
Principals 
Vice  Principals 
Special  Ed  Site  Administrators 
Central  Office  Certificated  Managers 

Support  Services 
Central  Office  Resource  Teachers 
Counseling 
Vocational  Rehabilitation  Counseling/Teachers 
Library  Services 
Nursing 

    

Elementary  Education 
Elementary  Teaching  (K-6) 
Gate  Seminar 
Of  Campus  Integrated  Learning  Experience  (OCILE) 

Middle/High/Alternative  Education 
Art 

FTE  Reduction 
21.5 
54 
13 
_ 12 
100.5 

68 
61.75 
16 
15 
28 
188.75 

416 
8.6 
8 
432.6 

6 

 

English 
Music 
PE. 
Social  Science 
Spanish 

96 
9 
28 
42 
17 
198 

TOTAL  FULL  TIME  EQUIVALENT  (FTE)  REDUCTION 

919.85 

8. 

The  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  provided: 

WHEREAS,  it  is  necessary  that  among  employees  who  first  rendered  paid 
services  to  the  District  on  the  same  day,  the  order  of  termination  be  based 
solely  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof  based  on  the 
application  of  the  following  specific  criteria  and  the  listed  priority  order. 

1. 
2. 

3. 
4, 
5 

Number  of  teaching  and/or  special  service  credentials. 
Number  of  supplementary  authorizations  No  Child  Left  Behind-Highly 
Qualified  Teacher  compliant. 
Earned  degrees  beyond  the  BA/BS  level. 
Multiple  language  skills  relevant  to  District  needs. 
Lottery 

The  District’s  tie-breaking  criteria  were  to  be  applied  to  certificated  employees  with 
the  same  date  of  hire.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were  prepared  specifically  to  meet  the  needs 
of  the  District  and  the  students  and  it  was  applied  appropriately. 

9. 

Before  preliminary  layoff  notices  were  served,  the  administrative  staff 

circulated  a  certificated  seniority  list  that  contained  the  names  of  all  credentialed  employees, 
ordered  in  longevity  from  the  most  senior  employee  to  the  most  junior  employee;  the  site 
where  the  employee  provided  services;  the  subject/grade  level  in  which  services  were 
provided;  the  employee’s  full  time  employment  status  (a  “1.0  FTE”  indicated  full  time 
employment);  the  employee’s  credential(s)  information;  the  employee’s  seniority  date  (i.¢., 
the  employee’s  first  date  of  paid  service  with  District  on  a  probationary  basis);  the 
employee’s  hire  date;  and  the  employee’s  tenured  status  (i.e.,  permanent,  probationary  2  or 
probationary  1).  Employees  were  invited  to  review  the  seniority  list  and  to  respond  to  the 
administrative  staff  with  any  changes  or  corrections. 

  

  

=  There-were-some-misunderstandings regarding-requests-for-updaied 
information. A 
certain  amount  of  distrust  has  existed  between  the  District  and  the  union.  This  is  probably 
not  surprising  based  on  the  size  of  the  District  and  the  complexity  of  the  issues  it  faces  and 
the  past  history  of  turmoil.  However,  despite  how  either  side  wishes  to  characterize  the 
other,  the  difficulty  in  having  complete,  up  to  date  and  totally  accurate  information  regarding 
credentials  and  seniority  dates  relates  far  more  to  the  compressed  time-frame  that  the  District

  

  

and  the  teachers  had  to  cooperatively  put  this  information  together.  No  one  is  to  blame. 
Everyone  was  trying  to  do  their  best.  Nevertheless,  the  record  in  this  case  demonstrates  that 
what  was  presented  during  the  hearing  was  a  snap-shot  of  what  the  District  had  on  file  in  mid 
March.  During  the  hearing  more  information  was  supplied  to  the  District  and  they  made 
good  faith  efforts  to  evaluate  and  integrate  the  information  into  their  data  base.  This 
Proposed  Decision  is  based  on  the  best  information  available  at  the  time  of  the  hearing. 

10. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  each  certificated  employee  who  is  party  to  this 

proceeding  was  given a letter  and  notice  that  the  Board  had  recommended  that  his  or  her 
services  with  the  District  would  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school  year. 
The  letter  stated  the  reduction  in  the  District’s  workforce  was  due  to  California’s  serious 
budget  shortfall.  A  notice  advised  each  respondent  that  his  or  her  services  would  be 
terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year,  that  the  reasons  for  the  termination  were 
set  forth  in  the  Board’s  resolution  (which  was  enclosed),  that  the  employee  had  the  right  to 
request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for  termination,  and  specified  dates  on 
which  the  request  for  hearing  had  to  be  filed. 

The  letter  and  notice  supplied  by  the  District  was  proper  and  appropriate,  except  for 
errors  made  with  respect  to  approximately  40  teachers.  These  40  teachers  were  improperly 
served.  The  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  is  somewhat  unique  in  terms  of  its  layoff 
procedure.  For  permanent  teachers,  the  layoff  procedure  is  governed  by  the  dictates  of  the 
Education  Code.  For  probationary  teachers,  there  is  a  separate  layoff  procedure  that  was  the 
product  of  bargaining  by  the  District  and  the  teacher’s  union  that  is  referenced  in  District 
Exhibit  4  in  evidence. 

The  forty  teachers  identified  in  District’s  Exhibit  4  received  a  notice  that  they  were  to 

be  laid  off  pursuant  to  Article  19 of the  collective  bargaining  agreement  and  that  their 
recourse  was  to  file  a  grievance.  It  is  acknowledge  that  substantially  fewer  rights  and 
protections  are  available  to  teachers  under  Article  19  than  are  available  under  the  Education 
Code.  After  this  notice  was  given  to  these  40  teachers,  the  District  determined  that  such 
notice  had  been  given  in  error.  These  40  teachers  were  permanent,  not  probationary, 
teachers.  So,  on  or  about  March  26,  2008  the  District  gave  notice  to  the  teachers  of  the 
District’s  error  and  notified  the  teachers  that  they  were  entitled  to  appear  in  the  layoff 
hearings  as  permanent  teachers. 

This  error  by  the  District  did  not  legally  disadvantage  the  40  teachers.  They  were  not 

prejudiced  in  any  way.  The  defect  in  the  initial  misidentification  was  cured  by  the 
subsequent  actions  of  the  District.  These  40  teachers  were  properly  noticed  for  the  purpose 
of  the  necessary  jurisdictional  elements  under  the  Education  Code. 

  

ll. 

Most  of  the  certificated  employees  served  with  the  preliminary  layoff  notice 

requested  a  hearing.  An  accusation  packet  was  thereafter  served  on  the  certificated 
employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  District  determined  that  all  respondents  who  were 
served  with  the  Accusation  packet  were  entitled  to  a  hearing  even if a  Notice  of  Defense  was 

not  filed.  

The  Administrative  Hearing 

12. 

On  April  14,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened. 
The  District  gave  an  opening  statement.  An 

Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented. 
opening  statement  was  given  on  behalf  of  all  respondents  represented  by  counsel.  A  written 
stipulation  to  jurisdictional  facts  was  filed,  sworn  testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was 
received,  closing  arguments  were  given,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

”  Year  Round  Schools  and  Their  Issues 

13. 

There  are  two  issues  involving  the  relatively  few  year  round  schools  operated 
by  the  District.  The  first  involves  first  date  of  paid  service.  The  second  involved  the  last  two 
weeks  of  the  school  year  for  year  round  schools.  The  last  two  weeks  at  year  round  schools 
extends  two  weeks  into  July,  June  30/July  |  represents  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  fiscal 
year  for  the  District.  It is  the  District’s  intention  to  allow  the  teachers  currently  teaching  in 
these  schools  to  complete  the  school  year  by working  the  first  two  weeks in  July  whether 
they  were  to  be  laid  off  or  not. 

The  District’s  decision  to  retain  the  teachers  to  finish  the  school  year  in  the  year 
round  schools  is  reasonable  and  appropriate.  To  do  otherwise  would  not  be  in  the  best 
interest  of  the  students. 

The  first  date  of  paid  service  issues  is  more  complicated.  The  evidence  established 

The  above  named  teachers  should  be  credited  with  the  August  25  seniority  date 
because  that-was,  in  fact  and  in  law,  their  first  date.of  paid  service.  It  was  not  voluntary.  and 
they  received  pay  for  it. 

that  the  date  of  August  25,  2003  was  the  first  date  of  paid  service  for  the  following  teachers: 
Alison  Borman  (was  Dinel),  Kelly  Gelsomino,  Monique  Falcon,  Marlo  Milligan,  Judith 
Morais,  Ginny  Ostertag,  Allison  Curry,  Joy  Delgallego,  Katherine  Escalante,  Sharon 
Fargarson,  Chery]  Groeschel,  Renee  Jaeger,  David  Mace,  Jennifer  Manglicmot,  Sharon 
Martin,  Michael  McEwen,  Sydney  Nicholson  (was  Ibarra),  Kelly  O’Brien,  Laurie  Owings, 
Corrin  Parkey,  Jennifer  Ruark,  Kathy  Ryan,  Jennifer  Sandoval,  Robert  Schaeible,  Patty 
Snyder,  Kristina  Teesdale,  Margaret  Trent,  Amy  Wood,  Alison  Williams,  Courtney  Young. 

    

the  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  The  layoff  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District,  the  schools,  and  the  students.  No  services  were  reduced  below  levels  required  by 
federal  and  state  laws. 

The  services  identified  by  the  Board  for  reduction  or  elimination  in  Exhibit  A 

£-th: 
f those  services constituted  a matter  well  within 

The  Particular  Kinds  of Services 

nd the  reduction or elimi 

  

  

14. 

(Factual  Finding  7)  were  particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  properly  be  reduced  and 
spvices-was-neitherarbitrary  nor 
    

Thereduetion-and-eliminati 

    

The  Seniority  List 

15. 

|  With  a  few  exceptions  which  do  not  impact  the  layoffs  in  this  matter  but  which 
possibly  could  affect  the  order  of  rehiring  (the  order  of  rehiring  is  not  at  issue  in  this  matter), 
the  District’s  seniority  list  was  accurate.  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  establish 
that  the  certificated  employees  who  were  the  subject  of  this  layoff  proceeding  were 
improperly  classified.  Nevertheless,  the  District  should  be  available  to  make  corrections  to 
the  District’s  seniority  list  as  may  be  appropriate  following  this  hearing  upon  verification  of 
the  new  information  provided.  To  the  extent  that  the  District  may  have  retained  a  junior 
employee  due  to  miscalculating  seniority  or  failing  to  recognize  the  employee  is  subject  to 
bumping  by  a  more  senior  employee  the  remedy  should  be  to  reinstate  the  most  senior 
employee  competent  and  credentialed  to  perform  the  service  because  only  that  employee  was 
prejudiced  by  the  error.  The  so-called  Domino  Theory,  argued  by  respondents,  would  dictate 
that  if  the  District  retained  a  junior  employee  erroneously  then  all  persons  senior  to  that 
junior  employee  who  are  scheduled  to  be  laid  off  must  be  spared  because  an  employee  with 
less  seniority  is  occupying  a  position  that  they  are  entitled  to  have,  i.e.,  “domino  effect.” 
Such  an  argument  no  longer  has  a  persuasive  basis.  In  this  case,  it  is  clear  that  the  District 
made  a  good-faith  effort  and  substantially  complied  with  the  requirements  that  seniority  be 
used  to  determine  layoff  order. 

The  District’s  Layoff Procedure 

16. 

|  The  Board’s  resolution  called  for  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  about  919 

FTEs  in  particular  kinds of  services.  Using  the  Board’s  resolution  and  the  District’s  seniority 
list,  the  District’s  staff  identified  the  most  junior  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  identified  in  the  resolution.  For  those  employees  who  were  displaced,  the  District 
attempted  to  determine  if  the  displaced  employee  could  “bump”  a  more  junior  employee  by 
providing  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  the  displaced  senior  employee  was  credentialed 
and  competent  to  provide.’  The  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  established  a  method  by  which 
employees  having  the  same  seniority  date  could  be  ranked  for  layoff  purposes.  It  was  used 
only  once  and  applied  correctly.  Through  the  tedious  step-by-step  elimination  process,  the 
District  correctly  determined  which  certificated  employees  should  receive  preliminary  layoff 
notices.  No  permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  to 
render  a  service  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

The  District  “skipped”  in  high  need  areas  where  it  has  difficulty  in  recruiting  such  as 

in  math  and  science.  It  also  skipped  in  order  to  retain  the  athletic  director  at  Lincoln  High 
School.  Ron  Hamamoto,  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  29,  2007,  was  retained  and 
therefore  skipped  over  others  with  more  seniority.  Mr.  Hamamoto  was  chosen  for  this 
position  after  a  lengthy  search  due  to  the  unique  circumstances  surrounding  the  re-opening  of 
Lincoln  High  School.  There  is  sufficient  evidence  in  the  record  to  allow  for  inferences  to  be 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  which  he 

In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior 

' 
or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  who  holds  that  position. 

  

 

drawn  about  the  special  needs  of  this  position  and  the  special  qualifications  of  Mr. 
Hamamoto.  Mr.  Hamamoto  was  properly  skipped. 

In  making  determinations  regarding  the  layoff  and  reassigning  teachers  based  upon 

credentials  ahd  qualifications,  the  District  used,  as  one  factor,  No  Child  Left  Behind  (NCLB) 
compliance.  In  other  words,  if  a  teacher  was  NCLB  compliant,  that  teacher  was  advantaged 
in  rankings  of  reassignment.  The  District  appropriately  considered  NCLB  compliance  for 
the  purpose  of  potential  reassignment. 

Respondent’s  Contentions 

17. 

Respondents  contended  the  District  retained  the  services  of  several  junior 

employees  to  provide  services  more  senior  employees  who  were  laid  off  were  credentialed 
and  competent  to  provide.  The  evidence  did  not  support  this  contention.  No  junior 
employee  was  retained  over  a  more  senior  employee. 

Respondents  suggested  that  the  District  may  have  failed  to  afford  permanent  status  to 
some  employees  who  were  classified  as  probationary  employees,  or  may  not  have  provided  a 
correct  seniority  date  for  employees  who  had  worked  under  emergency  permits or  as  teacher 
interns,  or  may  not  have  afforded  employees  providing  services  in  categorically  funded 
programs  the  seniority  rights  to  which  they  were  entitled. 
mistake  in  classifying  any  certificated  employee  had  any  impact  in  this  layoff  proceeding. 

No  evidence  established  that  any 

1. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices and jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  those  respondent  certificated  employees  identified  herein. 

Respondents  argued  that  the  layoff  decisions  of  the  District  were  arbitrary  and 
capricious  because,  inter  alia,  the  budget  shortfall  is  less  than  78  million  dollars  (closer  to  40 
million)  and  that  the  reserve  fund  could  be  tapped  into.  Respondents  strongly  argued  that 
there  were  significant  numbers  of  teachers  who  were  over-noticed  unnecessarily.  Although 
each  of  these  arguments  has  legitimacy,  none  of  them,  either  in  isolation  or  collectively,  rise 
to  the  level  of  demonstrating  that  the  District  acted  in  an  arbitrary  or  capricious  fashion. 

    

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  eliminating  certain  types  of  service  or  by 
reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  providing  such  services.  The  decision  to  reduce 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical | computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
1h 
tudents  Fhe  number-of  terminations  through  PKS  reduetions-depends+  Hels  upernth: 

economic  circumstances  in  making  the  determination  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

“decision  about  how  many  services  to  reduce.  A  board  may  ‘consider the  schoo!  district's   

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

  

  

DOH: 

2. 

9

or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  not  unfair  or  improper  simply  because  a  school 
board  made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 
Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  sets  forth  a  general 

rule  requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 
must  be  based  on  statute.  For  employees  hired  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (d)  provides: 

“(d) 
Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following 
reasons: 

(1)  _  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 

specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which 
others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2) 

For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 

constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws.” 

4. 

Seniority  determines  the  order  of  dismissals;  between  employees  with  the 
same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  “basis  of  the 
needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.”  Senior  employees  are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will 
not  be  terminated  if junior  employees  are  being  retained  to  render  services  which  the  more 
senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees 
(1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.) 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position.  (Lacy 
v.  Richmond Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the 

5. 

As  a  result  of  the  District’s  lawful  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  for  the  District  to  give  notice  to  all 
respondents  who  were  previously  served  with  preliminary  layoff  notices  that  their 
employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  and  that  their  services 
will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  except  for  the  following:  Sara  Burgin,  Ann 
Doyen-Pareja  Adriana  Howe,  Gina  Maklary,  Edna  Mikulanis  and  Roger  Rosenberg. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  al]  Factual  Findings  and  on  all  Legal  Conclusions. 

  

 

DISCUSSION 

Teacher  layoff  hearings  occur  irregularly  in  California.  Often  years  pass  with  no  such 

reduction  in  force  (RIF)  ever  being  filed  by  a  school  district  or  heard  by  the  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings.  However,  due  to  the  way  education  in  California  is  presently 
funded,  school  districts  and  their  teachers  are  always  a  blip  in  the  economy  away  from  the 
draconian  measures  required  by  the  Education  Code.  The  reasons  for  the  continued 
existence  of  this  inefficient  and  wasteful  system  are  beyond  the  scope  of  this  hearing. 
However,  to  the  District  and  its  teachers,  the  dislocation,  the  anxiety  and  uncertainty,  the 
distrust  and  disgust  are  corrosive  and  cause  wounds  that  can  take  years  to  heal. 

There  are  a  number  of  unfortunate  ironies  in  this  case.  Recently,  much  column  space 

was  devoted  in  the  San  Diego  Union  Tribune  to  an  article  about  where  California  ranks  in 
terms  of  per  pupil  spending.  The  article  provocatively  asked:  “Does  the  amount  of  spending 
on  each  public  school  student  in  California,  with  the  world’s  eighth-biggest  economy,  rank 
near  the  bottom  among  states  or  near  the  middle?”  The  answer,  depending  on  who  you  ask  is 
46",  or  49",  or  29"  or  25".  Recent  press  reports  also  reveal  that  school  districts  from  other 
states  are  now  actively  advertising  and  courting  California  teachers  with  incentives  and 
bonuses  and  jobs  that  will  not  be  at  jeopardy  from  year  to  year. 

The  ultimate  irony  is  that  on  the  day  that  this  Proposed  Decision  is  signed  and  sent  to 

the  Board  for  action  (May  6,  2008)  a  page-one  article  appeared  in  the  San  Diego  Union 
Tribune  under  the  heading  “School  stands  to  lose  nearly  all  its  teachers.”  The  article 
recounts  the  story  of  Jackson  Elementary  School,  an  inner  city  school  that  was  considered  by 
some  to  be  one  of  the  least  desirable  places  for  a  teacher  to  work  at.  As  soon  as  most 
teachers  accrued  any  seniority  they  would  transfer  out. 
its  students  have  been  transformed  by  the  efforts  of  a  young  and  enthusiastic  faculty  and 
administration  into  an  award  winning  campus.  Nevertheless,  as  a  result  of  the  actions  of  the 
District,  24  of  the  26  teachers  at  the  school  are  due  to  be  laid  off.  Any  reasonable  person 
reading  this  article  might  wonder,  are  these  folks  daft? 

In  the  last  few  years  the  school  and 

The  answer  is  “No.”  No  one  in  this  picture  is  daft,  not  the  District,  not  the  teachers, 

not-their-union-  The  problems  that  result  in-this.craziness.are  structural.and  systemic.and 
reflect  how  education  is  truly  prioritized  by  those  charged  with  enacting  and  carrying  out  our 
laws. 

The  measure  by  which  a  District’s  actions  is  to  be  judged  is  set  forth  in  an  appellate 
decision  in  the  case  of  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal. 
App.  3d  796  at  page  808.  The  court  wrote: 

  

  “fy  determining  whether  the  decision of  a  schoot  board  is  reasonable  as 

distinguished  from  fraudulent,  arbitrary,  or  capricious,  its  action  is  measured 
by  the  standard  set  forth  by  reason  and  reasonable  people,  bearing  in  mind  that 
such  a  standard  may  permit  a  different  of  opinion  on  the  same  subject.  The 
record  reveals  that  the  board  resolution  of  March  13,  1975,  was  not  an 
arbitrary  decision  arrived  at  through  the  exercise  of  mere  caprice,  but  rather 

11 

 

was  a  decision  supported  by  a  fair  and  substantial  reason.  It  is  true  that  the 
governing  board  hoped  that  when  its  final  budget  was  adopted  it  would  not  be 
necessary  to  terminate  all  of  the  enumerated  services.  Although  the  governing 
board  wanted  to  keep  as  many  certificated  employees  as  possible,  the  school 
district  was  facing  financial  uncertainties,  and  the  board  acted  in  an  attempt  to 
allow  the  district  maximum  flexibility  in  determining  staffing  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  in  light  of  both  available  resources  and  needs.” 

Judging  the  District’s  actions  against  this  standard,  there  is  nothing  arbitrary  or 
capricious  about  its  actions.  They  are  reasonable  under  the  circumstances.  There  may  well 
be  other  alternatives  that  might  be  available.  These  may  result  in  fewer  layoffs.  The  District 
is  expected  to  consider  them  in  good  faith.  But,  ultimately,  the  District  must  be  accorded  the 
deference  to  make  these  “no  win”  decisions  as  long  as  they  are  made  in  good  faith  with  the 
students  and  the  District’s  needs  in  mind.  The  record  in  this  case  demonstrates  that  the 
District  has  done  so. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

1. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  all  respondents  identified  in 

Attachment  A  to  this  Proposed  Decision  previously  served  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice 
that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  and  that  their 
services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  save  and  except  for  those 
mentioned  below  in  recommendation  2. 

2. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Accusation  be  dismissed  as  to  the  following  named 

respondents:  Sara  Burgin,  Ann  Doyen-Pareja,  Adriana  Howe,  Gina  Maklary,  Edna 
Mikulanis  and  Roger  Rosenberg. 

DATED: 

_\) 

|  C  O¥ 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  

 

  

ATTACHMENT  A 

District  Seniority  List  consisting  of  26  pages  (double  sided). 

     

  

