  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
MURRIETA  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against: 

   
   
      

The  Certificated  Employees  Listed  in 
Attachment  A, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  L2008030393 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Eric  Sawyer,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  on  April  29,  2008,  in  Murrieta.  The  record  was 
closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Esq.,  and  Todd  M.  Robbins,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya, 

Rudd  &  Romo,  represented  the  Murrieta  Valley  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Jon  Y.  Vanderpool,  Esq.,  Tosdal,  Smith,  Steiner  &  Wax,  represented  Respondents 
Sandra  Alba,  Kelly  Booker,  Denise  Ciauri,  Donna  Jarvie,  Kathryn  Kring,  Kelly  McLellan, 
Laura  Schrock,  Jeremey  Walker  and  Leah  Washington,  each  of  whom  was  present  except  for 
Ms.  Washington.  No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  other  Respondents. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

1. 

Patrick  Kelley,  the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources, 

made  and  filed  the  Accusations  in  his  official  capacity  and  as  the  designee  of  the  District’s 
Superintendent,  Dr.  Stan  Scheer  (Superintendent). 

2. 

3. 

Respondents  were  at  all  times  mentioned  certificated  District  employees. 

On  February  28,  2008,  upon  recommendation  from  the  Superintendent,  the 

Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted  Resolution  No.  07/08-25,  which 
recommended a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

4, 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  served  Respondents  with  written 

notice,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44944,  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended 
to  the  Board  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2008-2009  school  year. 

 

5. 

Each  Respondent  was  thereafter  timely  served  with  an  Accusation  for  non- 

reemployment  and  other  required  materials. 

6. 

In  response  to  the  Accusations,  the  following  Respondents  timely  submitted  a 
Notice  of  Defense  and/or  Request  for  Hearing:  Alba,  Amstutz,  Booker,  Ciauri,  Cox,  Curran, 
De  La  Cruz,  Jarvie,  Jones,  Kring,  LaPierre,  Le,  Manzella,  McLain,  McLellan,  Nevarez, 
Pulatie,  Rodgers,  Schrock,  Seto,  Trease,  Walker  and Washington.! 

7. 

By  failing  to  request  a  hearing  and/or  submit  a  Notice  of  Defense, 
Respondents  Lou  Delorca,  Michelle  Fritch,  Matthew  Tweed  and  Denise  Weaver  waived  their 
right  to  a  hearing  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (b). 

8. 

On  or  about  April  21,  2008,  the  District  dismissed  the  Accusations  against  the 
following  Respondents:  Amstutz,  Cox,  Curran,  De  La  Cruz,  Le,  Manzella,  McLain,  Nevarez, 
Pulatie,  Rodgers,  Seto  and  Trease. 

The  District’s  Layoff Decision 

9. 

Resolution  No.  07/08-25  specifically  provides  for  the  reduction  or  elimination 

of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Service  (PKS) 

Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  Positions 

12 

5 

2 

2 

2 

  

Elementary  Teacher 

Middle  School  Core  Teacher 

  

  

Middle  School  Foundational  Math  Teacher 

  

Middle  School  Science  Teacher 

  

Middle  School  Language  Arts  Teacher 

  

  

Middle  School  Social  Science  Teacher 

Middle  School  Physical  Education  Teacher 

    
  

TOTAL  CERTIFICATED  POSITIONS 

Pre-School  SDC  Teacher 

  

  

26 

1 

1 

1 

  

10. 

The  services  identified  in  Resolution  No.  07/08-25  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  as  described  in  Education  Code  section  44955. 

LaPierre,  who  are  not  represented  in  this  matter  by  Mr.  Vanderpool. 

'  No  appearance  was  made  at  the  hearing  on  or  behalf  of  Respondents  Jones  or 

  

 

11. 

After  adoption  of  Resolution  No.  07/08-25,  the  District  has  continued  to 

consider  all  known  assured  attrition. 

12. 

Respondents  do  not  contend  that  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  26  FTE 

positions  will  reduce  services  below  mandated  levels. 

13. 

The  decision  to  reduce  the  above-described  particular  kinds  of  services  was 
based  on  the  District’s  desire  to  retain  financial  flexibility  to  deal  with  problems  created  by 
declining  enrollment  in  some  of  the  District’s  schools,  as  well  as  problems  indirectly  caused 
by  the  current  state  budget  crisis.  The  declining  enrollment  problem  has  been  caused  by  the 
recent  halt  in  enrollment  growth  experienced  in  prior  years,  exacerbated  by  the  recent 
mortgage  crisis  which  has  seen  a  decline  in  new  residents  to  the  area.  Graduating  high 
school  classes  are  now  larger  than  incoming  kindergarten  classes.  Also,  students  previously 
in  class  size  reduction  (CSR)  programs  are  now  transitioning  into  non-CSR  classes,  meaning 
teacher-to-student  ratios  are  tending  to  increase.  Overall,  the  elementary  and  middle  schools 
are  being  impacted  by  these  problems.  Therefore,  no  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  is  proposed  for  the  high  schools.  The  current  state  budget  crisis  is  not  directly 
impacting  this  situation,  in  that  the  District  has  decided  to  maintain  its  current  programs,  e.g. 
the  CSR  programs  for  grades  K-3  and  the  9th  grade.  However,  the  decision  to  retain  those 
programs  in  light  of  the  state  budget  crisis  means  the  District  has  essentially  decided  to 
respond  to  that  crisis  by  reducing  the  number  of  teachers  employed  to  teach  all  the  classes  it 
will  offer  next  school  year. 

14. 

(A)  The  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07/08-19,  which  established  a  seven 
step  tie-breaking  process  to  determine  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who 
first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  The  seven  steps  were  applied  in  order,  one  step 
at  a  time,  until  a  tie  was  broken  in  seniority  between  certificated  personnel. 

(B)  The  third  step  resolved  ties  in  seniority  by  the  number  of  years  of 

“credentialed  teaching  experience  outside  the  District.”  In  calculating  the  number  of  years  of 
experience  in  an  outside  district,  the  District  gave  credit  for  half  of  one  year  if  a  teacher 
taught  one  month  or  more,  and  gave  credit  for  one  year  if  a  teacher  taught  more  than  half  of  a 
school  year.  The  fourth  step  resolved  ties  by  the  number  of  years  of  credentialed  teaching 
within  the  District. 

(C)  The  District’s  first  six  steps  in  the  tie-breaking  process  were  valid,  fair 

and  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

(D)  In  the  event  of  a  tie  after  applying  the  first  six  steps,  “seniority  shall  be 

determined  based  upon  a  comparison  of  the  most  recent  employee  evaluations.”  In  applying 
this  step,  two  District  administrators  jointly  reviewed  the  subject  employees’  most  recent 
formal  evaluation,  and  compared  the  standardized  scores  given  (e.g.,  meeting  expectations, 
If  the  standardized  scores  were  too  similar,  the  tie 
needs  improvement,  unsatisfactory,  etc.). 
was  broken  by  determining  which  employee’s  supervisor  comments  were  superior.  No 
distinction  was  drawn  or  adjustment  made  for  competing  employees  who  were  reviewed  by 

  

 

  

different  supervisors,  even  though  those  supervisors  may  have  had  different  ways  of  making 
standardized  scores  or  additional  comments.  In  most  cases,  the  standardized  scores  of 
competing  employees  were  so  similar  that  the  tie  was  usually  broken  by  the  supervisors’ 
additional  comments. 

(E)  As  for  the  Respondents  involved  in  this  case,  the  seventh  step  in  the  tie- 

breaking  process  only  resolved  a  tie  between  Respondents  Alba  and  Schrock,  and a  tie 
between  Respondent  McLellan  and  another  certificated  employee  who  is  not  a  Respondent. 
As  discussed  in  greater  detail  below,  application  of  the  seventh  tie-breaking  step  does  not 
affect  the  outcome  of  this  matter  as  to  the  involved  Respondents.” 

15. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  containing  employees’  seniority  dates, 

current  assignments  and  locations,  credentials  and  authorizations.  The  information  on  the 
Seniority  List  is  accurate. 

16.  —  The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and 
“bumping”  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being 
reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  other 
credentials  entitling  them  to  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  subject 
to  layoff  for  each  kind  of  particular  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of 
reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent 
staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The  District  did  not  use  “skipping.”* 

Respondent  Laura  Schrock 

17. 

(A)  Respondent  Laura  Schrock  is  an  elementary  classroom  teacher  for  the 
District.  She  contends  that  she  was  not  given  credit  for  teaching  experience  with  another 
district,  and  for  that  reason,  the  tie-breaking  criteria  was  erroneously  applied  to  her,  which 
caused  her  to  be  lower  on  the  seniority  list  than  she  should  be. 

(B)  Respondent  Schrock  previously  worked  for  another  district  as  a  long-term 
substitute  teacher  in  a  third  grade  class  under  an  emergency  credential  from  November  2004 
through  June  2005,  filling  in  for  a  teacher  on  maternity  leave.  Her  employment  with  the 
other  district  was  not  under  a  contract. 

?  For  that  reason,  no  express  finding  is  made  whether  the  seventh  step  of  the  tie- 

breaking  process  is  valid,  fair  or  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

3  “Skipping”  is  the  process  by  which a district  deviates  from  the  order  of  seniority 
when  it  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of 
study  and  that  an  employee  who  is  retained  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to 
teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.  (Ed. 
Code,  §  44955,  subd.  (d)(1).) 

 

(C)  Respondent  Schrock  began  working  for  the  District  in  August  2005  as  a 
day-to-day  substitute  teacher.  She  was  later  assigned  to  be  a  long-term  substitute  teacher  in 
one  classroom  from  November  2005  through  the  end  of  the  school  year  in  June  2006,  filling 
in  for  a  teacher  on  leave.  When  Respondent  Schrock  came  to  work  for’  the  District,  she 
provided  information  regarding  her  outside  teaching  experience  for  purposes  of  verification. 
The  District  did  not  thereafter  inform  her  that  the  outside  experience  could  not  be  verified.“ 
She  was  thereafter  assigned  to  teach  her  own  elementary  school  classroom  for  the  2006-2007 
school  year. 

(D)  In  this  matter,  the  District  gave  Respondent  Schrock  the  correct  seniority 
date  of  August  10,  2006,  which  put  her  in  a  tie  with  54  other  teachers  with  the  same  seniority 
date.  She  was  ranked  35th  out  of  55  based  on  the  District’s  application  of  the  tie-breaking 
criteria.  However,  in  applying  the  third  tie-breaking  step,  the  District  did  not  credit 
Respondent  Schrock  with  any  years  of  experience  teaching  in  an  outside  district. 
In  applying 
the  third  step,  the  District  counted  only  outside  teaching  experience  pursuant  to  a  contract  of 
employment  with  the  other  district.  The  District  counted  contract  experience  because  such 
employment  was  usually  verifiable  with  the  outside  district.  However,  in  the  District’s 
experience,  substitute  teaching  in  another  district  is  not  verifiable,  because  other  districts 
tend  to  not  keep  sufficient  documentation  verifying  the  particulars  of  that  employment. 

(E)  The  District  erred  in  its  application  of  the  third  tie-breaking  step  to 
Respondent  Schrock.  Based  on  the  way  in  which  the  District  calculated  years  of  such 
experience,  Respondent  Schrock  should  have  been  given  credit  for  one  year  of  service 
teaching  in  an  outside  district,  based  on  her  seven  months  of  teaching  for  another  district 
during  the  2004-2005  school  year.  There  is  nothing  in  the  Board’s  Resolution  establishing 
the  tie-breaking  process  that  qualifies  outside  teaching  experience  to  count  only  when 
rendered  under  a  contract  with  the  other  district.  Respondent  Schrock’s  prior  experience 
with  the  other  district  therefore  literally  meets  the  definition  of  the  third  tie-breaking  step. 
Giving  Respondent  Schrock  credit  for  her  outside  teaching  experience  relates  to  the  welfare 
of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  in  that  her  service  as  a  long-term  substitute  assigned  to  the  same 
classroom  for  seven  months  was  similar  to  the  type  of  valuable  experience  a  teacher  within 
the  District  would  have  gained  as  a  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employee. 

(F)  The  proper  application  of  the  third  tie-breaking  step  to  Respondent 

Schrock  results  in  her  moving  up  in  rank  for  those  with  her  seniority  date  to  a  position  after 
Respondent  Carla  Trease  (number  25)  but  ahead  of  Respondent  Julie  Pulatie  (number  26). 
The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Pulatie  has  been  dismissed  because  her  credentialing 
allows  her  to  teach  a  vacant  middle  school  language  arts  class  position  next  year,  which  will 
be  her  assignment  (see  exhibit  11.)  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent  Schrock  is 
credentialed  and  competent  to  render  Respondent  Pulatie’s  assignment  next  school  year  or 
any  other  service  that  will  be  performed  next  school  year  by  a  junior  employee. 

*  In  March  2008,  Respondent  Schrock  sent  an  e-mail  to  the  District  which  again  re- 

lated  her  teaching  experience  outside  the  District.  The  District  did  not  respond. 

  

 

  

(G)  The  District’s  application  of  the  seventh  tie-breaking  step  to  resolve  the 

tie  between  Respondent  Schrock  and  Respondent  Sandra  Alba  does  not  affect  the  outcome  of 
this  matter  as  to  either  Respondent. 

Respondent  Kelly  Booker 

18. 

(A)  Respondent  Kelly  Booker  is  an  elementary  classroom  teacher  for  the 

District.  She  contends  that  she  was  given  an  erroneously  low  seniority  date. 

(B)  Respondent  Booker  began  working  for  the  District  in  January  2006  as  a 

long-term  substitute  teacher  for  a  kindergarten  classroom.  In  the  spring  of  2006,  on  a 
specific  date  not  established,  Respondent  Booker  accepted  a  temporary  contract  to  teach  an 
overflow  elementary  classroom  for  the  District.  She  was  therefore  classified  as  a  temporary 
employee.  An  overflow  classroom  (also  known  as  a  growth  classroom)  is  one  developed  to 
accommodate  new  students  who  cannot  be  placed  in  existing  classrooms.  Respondent 
Booker  taught  the  overflow  classroom  for  the  remainder  of  the  school  year.  She  was 
essentially  the  teacher  of  record  for  that  classroom,  in  that  she  interacted  with  parents,  did 
report  cards,  handled  all  aspects  of  classroom  activity  and  was  herself  allowed  to  utilize 
substitutes  when  she  had  to  be  absent  from  class. 

(C)  Respondent  Booker  was  later  assigned  to  teach  a  regular  elementary 
classroom  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  The  District  classified  her  as  a  probationary 
employee  and  has  assigned  her  a  seniority  date  of  August  10,  2006,  which  placed  her  in a tie 
with  54  other  certificated  employees. 

(D)  The  District’s  seniority  date  for  Respondent  Booker  is  in  error,  because 
she  should  have  been  classified  as  a  probationary  employee  in  the  spring  of  2006  when  she 
was  assigned  to  teach  the  overflow  classroom.° 

>  The  Education  Code  authorizes  a  school  district  to  hire  and  classify  its  employees, 
but  also  imposes  limitations  on  its  decision-making  power.  The  Education  Code  establishes 
four  possible  classifications  for  certificated  employees:  permanent;  probationary;  temporary; 
and  substitute.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  Dist.  (2003)  29 
Cal.4th  911,  916-917.)  “The  classification  of  ‘probationary’  is  the  default  classification. 
School  districts  classify  all  teachers  as  probationary  who  are  not  otherwise  required  by  the 
code  to  be  classified  as  permanent,  temporary,  or  substitute.”  (Bakersfield  Elementary 
Teachers  Assn.  y.  Bakersfield  City  School  Dist.  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1280.)  “Ifa 
certificated  employee  occupies  a  position  the  [Education]  Code  defines  as  temporary,  he  or 
she  is  a  temporary  employee;  if  it  is  not  a  position  that  requires  temporary  classification  (or 
permanent  or  substitute),  he  or  she  is  a  probationary  employee.  (§  44915.)  The  Code  grants 
school  districts  no  discretion  to  deviate  from  this  statutory  classification  scheme.”  (Vasquez 
v.  Happy  Valley  Union  School  Dist.  (2008)  159  Cal.App.4th  969,  983.)  In  this  case,  the 
various  Education  Code  sections  pertaining  to  the  classification  of  temporary  teachers 
(including  sections  44917-44920)  do  not  meet  Respondent  Booker’s  situation.  Therefore, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44915,  the  default  classification  of  probationary 

 

(E)  Although  the  specific  first  date  of  her  service  teaching  the  overflow 

classroom  was  not  established,  any  seniority  date  during  the  spring  months  of  2006  would 
give  Respondent  Booker  greater  seniority  over  the  other  54  employees  with  the  seniority  date 
of  August  10,  2006,  with  whom  she  was  tied,  including  Respondents  Amstutz,  Curran, 
Manzella  and  Trease.  Those  other  Respondents  are  being  retained  for  the  next  school  year  as 
elementary  classroom  teachers  and  have  had  the  Accusations  against  them  dismissed.° 
Therefore,  if  Respondent  Booker  is  not  retained  for  the  following  school  year,  it  cannot  be 
concluded  that  no  permanent  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  to 
render  a  service  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Respondent  Kelly  McLellan 

19. 

(A)  Respondent  Kelly  McLellan  is  a  full-time  elementary  classroom  teacher 

for  the  District.  Although  her  position  is  scheduled  to  be  eliminated,  her  credentialing  allows 
her  to  bump  into  a  50  percent  high  school  assignment  held  by  Michelle  Fritch.  Therefore, 
the  District  proposes  to  reduce  Respondent  McLellan’s  position  from a  full-time  elementary 
classroom  assignment  to  a  50  percent  high  school  assignment.  Respondent  McLellan 
contends  that  the  seventh  tie-breaking  step  is  invalid  and  was  unfairly  applied  to  her,  and  that 
she  is  qualified  and  competent  to  teach  the  position  being  assigned  next  school  year  to  the 
teacher  that  is  one  position  above  her  on  the  seniority  list. 

(B)  Respondent  McLellan  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  10,  2006,  shared 

(C)  Mr.  Mc  Connell  is  a  middle  school  mathematics  teacher,  an  assignment  he 

will  retain  next  year.  Respondent  McLellan  did  not  establish  that  she  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render  Mr.  Mc  Connell’s  position  next  school  year.  Even  accepting 
Respondent  McLellan’s  contention  that  the  seventh  tie-breaking  step  is  invalid,  and  that  such 
is  a  basis  for  ranking  her  ahead  of  Mr.  Mc  Connell,  Respondent  McLellan  would  still  rank  in 
It  was  not 
seniority  behind  number  28,  Ms.  Pulatie,  based  on  the  fourth  tie-breaking  step. 
established  that  there  is  any  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  being  retained  for  the 

with  54  others.  After  applying  all  seven  steps  of  the  tie-breaking  process,  Respondent 
McLellan  is  ranked  30th,  one  spot  below  Jaime  Mc  Connell,  who  is  ranked  29th. 
Respondent  McLellan’s  and  Mr.  Mc  Connell’s  ranks  were  determined  by  the  seventh  tie- 
breaking  step,  in  that  Mr.  Mc  Connell’s  most  recent  formal  evaluation  was  deemed  superior 
to  Respondent  McLellan’s.  Respondent  McLellan  is  ranked  lower  than  Respondent  Julie 
Pulati,  who  is  ranked  28th,  due  to  application  of  the  fourth  tie-breaking  step,  in  that  Ms. 
Pulati  had  one  more  year  of  teaching  experience  within  the  District. 

  
   

signed  to  vacant  elementary  classroom  positions  next  school  year.  Respondent  Amstutz  is 
also  an  elementary  classroom  teacher;  there  is  no  evidence  indicating  that  he  will  be  given  a 
different  assignment  next  school  year. 

employee  was  applicable  to  her  when  she  was  assigned  to  teach  the  overflow  classroom  in 
the  spring  of  2006. 

®°  Pursuant  to  exhibit  11,  Respondents  Curran,  Manzella  and  Trease  are  being  as- 

  

  

next  school  year  to  render  a  service  that  Respondent  McLellan  is  certificated  and  competent 
to  render.  Therefore,  the  District’s  application  of  the  seventh  tie-breaking  step  to  resolve  the 
tie  between  Respondent  McLellan  and  Mr.  Mc  Connell  does  not  affect  the  outcome  of  this 
matter  as  to  either  individual. 

Overall  Findings 

20. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  above-described  particular 

kinds  of  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion. 

21. 

The  cause  for  reducing  and/or  eliminating  the  above-described  particular  kinds 

of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  in  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

22. 

Considering  the  factual  findings  and  legal  conclusions  regarding  Respondent 
Booker,  no  permanent  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  to  render  a 
service  that  the  Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44944 

and  44945  were  met.  (Factual  Findings  1-8.) 

2. 

The  party  asserting  a  claim  or  making  charges  in  an  administrative  hearing 
generally  has  the  burden of proof.  (Brown  v.  City  of Los  Angeles  (2002)  102  Cal.App.4th 
155.)  For  example,  in  administrative  hearings  dealing  with  personnel  matters,  the  burden  of 
proof  is  ordinarily  on  the  agency  prosecuting  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of Fountain  Valley 
(1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113.)  In  personnel  matters  concerning  the  dismissal  of  a  teacher 
for  cause,  the  burden  of  proof  is  similarly  on  the  discharging  district.  (Gardner  v. 
Commission  on  Prof.  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035.)  As  no  other  law  or  statute 
requires  otherwise,  the  standard  of  proof  in  this  case  requires  proof  to  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence.  (Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  Thus,  in  this  case,  the  District  has  the  burden  of  establishing 
by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  given  notice  of  this  proceeding. 

3. 

In  this  case,  the  District  met  its  burden  of  establishing  by  a  preponderance  of 

the  evidence  that  its  proposed  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  is  appropriate  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction of particular  kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of 
financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section,  and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial 
circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff,  section  44955  is  the  only  statutory 
authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that  reduction.”  Such  a  decision  may  be 
overruled  if  proven  to  be  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  a  motivation  to  maintain  flexibility  in 
light  of  financial  uncertainty  is  neither.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v. 
Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  808.)  (Factual  Findings  1-13.) 

 

    

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  07/08-25  are  particular  kinds 

   

4, 

of  services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955. 
The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary 
nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Services  will  not  be  reduced 
below  mandated  levels.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  those  particular 
services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning 
of  Education  Code  section  44949.  (Factual  Findings  1-22.) 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 
to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  (Factual  Findings  1-22.) 

6. 

It  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  an  error  in  the 

seniority  date  given  to  Respondent  Booker  results  in  her  having  greater  seniority  than  that 
initially  assigned  to  her  by  the  District.  As  a  result  of  the  District  deciding  to  retain  more 
junior  certificated  employees  to  perform  services  that  Respondent  Booker  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  perform,  the  Accusation  against  Respondent  Booker  should  be  dismissed. 
(Factual  Findings  1-22.) 

7. 

Considering  Legal  Conclusion  6,  no  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled 
to  be  retained  to  perform  services  that  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent 
to  render.  (Factual  Findings  1-22,  Legal  Conclusion  6.) 

ORDER 

1. 

   

2. 

3. 

Dated:  May  5,  2008 

The  Accusations  are  dismissed  against  Respondents  Amstutz,  Cox,  Curran,  De 

La  Cruz,  Le,  Manzella,  McLain,  Nevarez,  Pulatie,  Rodgers,  Seto,  and  Trease.  These 
Respondents  shall  not  be  given  notice  that  their  services  are  not  required  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed  against  Respondent  Booker.  She  shall  not  be 

given  notice  that  her  services  are  not  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

The  Accusations  are  sustained  against  the  remaining  Respondents.  Notice 

shall  be  given  to  those  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year,  and  such  notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

ERIC  SAWYER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

  

ATTACHMENT A 

ALBA,  SANDRA 
AMSTUTZ,  RODNEY 
BOOKER,  KELLY 
CIAURI,  DENISE 
COX,  CARRIE 
CURRAN,CASEY 
DE  LA  CRUZ,  LORI 
DELORCA,  LOU 
FRITCH,  MICHELLE  (50%) 
JARVIE,  DONNA 
JONES,  CARISSA 
KRING,  KATHERINE 
LAPIERRE,  KRISTINE 
LE,  TAMARA 
MANZELLA,  LISA 
MCLAIN,  DINA  (50%) 
MCLELLAN,  KELLY 
NEVAREZ,  LESLIE 
PULATIE,  JULIE 
RODGERS,  MICHELLE 
SCHROCK,  LAURA 
SETO,  KEVIN 
TREASE,  CARLA 
TWEED,  MATTHEW 
WALKER,  JEREMY 
WASHINGTON,  LEAH 
WEAVER,  DENISE 

10 

 

