BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
GILROY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2008030553 

Billy  Aguilar 
Zvart  Alexan 
Veronica  Alfaro 
Veronica  Andrade 
Kara  Armijo 
Heather  Beard 
Christine  Blewett 
Jessica  Chessani 
Maria  Cid-Castro 
Lilia  Cisneros 
Jeff  Day 
Jennifer  Del  Bono 
Meng  Ear 
Maya  Escudero 
Lindsey  Ewing 
Joseph  Guzicki 
Debra  Hopf 
Leslie  King 
Marah  Kuwada 
Alexandra  Laks 
Jennifer  Legris 
Kyra  Lewis 
Anita  Lopez 
Peter  Madden 
Donya  Malorino 
Craig  Martin 
Francisca  Martinez-Garcia 
Julissa  Mendoza 
Fabian  Morales 
Kenneth  Mullen 
Alyson  Nowalk 
Justin  Ponzio 
Rosemary  Ramon 
Marcy  Ratliff 
David  Roberts 
Pamela  Rogers 

  

  

 

  

Timothy  Rose 
Shelley  Seibert-  Walton 
Eric  Simonsen 
Adriana  Torres 
Jackeline  Valdez 
Claudia  Valencia 
Julio  Villalobos 
Gayle  Vinyard 
Marwa  Yousofzoy 
Dessie  Zanger 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

M.  Amanda  Behe,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  14  and  15,  2008,  at  the  Gilroy  Unified  School 
District,  Gilroy,  California. 

James  Lynch,  Garcia,  Calderon  &  Ruiz,  LLP,  represented  the  Gilroy  Unified  School 

District. 

Michelle  Welch,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  members  of  the  Gilroy 

Education  Association,  California  Teachers  Association. 

Prior  to  the  hearing  the  Accusations  served  upon  respondents  Veronica  Andrade, 
Heather  Beard,  Jeff  Day,  Jennifer  Del  Bono,  Meng  Ear,  Peter  Madden,  Kenneth  Mullen, 
Shelley  Seibert-Walton  and  Marwa  Yousofzoy  were  withdrawn.  During  the  hearing  the 
District  withdrew  the  Accusations  against  respondent  counselors  Donya  Malorino,  Rosemary 
Ramon,  Marcy  Ratliff,  Jackeline  Valdez,  and  Kara  Armijo;  and  against  respondent 
psychologists  Leslie  King,  Anita  Lopez,  Pamela  Rogers,  Timothy  Rose,  Eric  Simonsen,  and 
Joseph  Guzicki.  The  District  further  stipulated  that  it  would  not  proceed  against  non- 
respondent  counselors  Veronica  Alfaro  (Galvan),  Anabel  Arreola,  Dianne  Padilla,  and  Frank 
Valadez;  and  non-respondent  psychologist  Keith  Roybal. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  16,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Deborah  Ann  Flores,  Ph.D.,  has  been  Superintendent  of  the  Gilroy  Unified 

School  District  since  July  1,  2007. 
respondents,  all  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  in  her  official  capacity. 

Superintendent  Flores  filed  the  Accusations  against 

  

 

2. 

Each  respondent  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 
cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  Accusations  were  timely 
served  on  respondents,  and  each  respondent  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense. 

3. 

Superintendent  Flores  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  the  District 

reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-09  school  year. 
The  agenda  for  a  scheduled  Governing  Board  meeting  on  March  6,  2008,  listed  proposed 
Resolution  No.  07/08028  “Reduction  of  Particular  Kind  of  Service”  as  a  matter  for  Board 
consideration.  The  agenda,  with  the  proposed  resolution,  was  distributed  to  members  of  the 
Governing  Board,  the  president  of  the  Gilroy  Education  Association,  and  others,  and  was 
also  posted.  Although  the  proposed  resolution  referred  to  and  incorporated  by  reference 
“Exhibit  A”  and  “Exhibit  B,”  none  were  posted  with  the  resolution  or  sent  with  the  resolution 
to  the  Board  members  or  others. 

4. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07/08-28 

which  provided  for  the  reduction  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-09 
school  year: 

Kind  of  Service 

Number  of  Full-Time 
Equivalent  Positions  (“FTEs”) 

General  Fund 

Academic  Coordinator 
Counselor 
School  Psychologist 
Assistant  Principal  Gilroy  High  School 

Elementary  Schools 
Elementary  Band 

Middle  Schools 

Math 

Life  Skills 
Spanish 
Art 
Computers 
Choir 
Consumer/Family  Education 

: 

12 
18 
1.25 
1.00 

1.40 

3.00 
3.67 
1.00 
1.17 
1.50 
50 
1.17 

Gilroy  High  School 
On  Campus  Suspension  Center  Teacher 
Second  prep  period  for  SDC  and  RSP  teachers 
English 

  

1.20 
1.00 
2.00

  

  

Categorical  Funds 

Social  Science 
Spanish 
Art 
Math 

Total  General  Fund  FTE 

District 

BTSA  Advisor 

Elementary  Schools 
Relief  Teacher 
Intervention  Teacher 
Literacy  Facilitator 

Middle  Schools 

AVID 

Literacy  Facilitator 
Math  Facilitator 
New  Teacher  Coach 

Gilroy  High  School 

Literacy  Facilitator 
ROP  Law  Enforcement 
Cal  Soap  Counselors 

Total  Categorical  FTE 

2.00 
1.00 
0.40 
1.00 

24.56 

2.00 

1.00 
1.50 
3.00 

34 
2.50 
84 
1.00 

1.00 
0.20 
4.00 

17.38 

  

Resolution  No.  07/08-28  further  provided,  at  paragraph  C,  that  there  was  a  specific 

need  for  personnel  to  teach  specific  courses  of  study  and  to  retain  certificated  employees 
possessing  the  special  training  and  experience  needed  to  teach  such  courses  that  other 
employees  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess,  and  that  “The  specific  needs  of  the  District  in 
this  respect  are  set  forth  in  Exhibit  A  to  this  Resolution  and  are  incorporated  as  though  fully 
set  forth  herein.”  Paragraph D  of  the  resolution  stated: 

In  accordance  with  California  Education  Code  Section 
44955(d)(1),  the  Board  has  determined  that  the  Reduction  in 
Force  shall  not  include  any  permanent  or  probationary 
certificated  employee  who,  by  his/her  training,  experience,  and 
assignment,  is  described  within  Exhibit  A  to  this  Resolution. 

 

 

Despite  the  two  specific  references  to  Exhibit  A,  and  its  incorporation  by  reference  in 
the  resolution,  Exhibit  A  was  not  attached  to  Resolution  No.  07/08-28  when  it  was  reviewed 
and  voted  on  by  the  Governing  Board. 

Resolution  No.  07/08-28  also  provided,  at  paragraph  E,  that  to  implement  the 
reduction  “it  may  be  necessary  to  apply  tie-breaking  criteria  to  distinguish  among  certificated 
employees  who  first  rendered  paid  probationary  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date. 
Paragraph E further  stated  that  the  order  of  layoff  between  such  employees  with  the  same 
date  of  first  paid  service  shall  be  established  on  the  basis  of  criteria  “set  forth  in  Exhibit  B  to 
this  Resolution,  which  are  incorporated  as  though  fully  set  forth  herein.”  Paragraph  F 
addressed  the  same  topic  and  stated: 

The  criteria  set  forth  in  Exhibit  B  to  this  Resolution  shall  also  be 
used  to  determine  the  order  of  reemployment  among  those 
certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  probationary 
service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date.  The  Superintendent,  or 
his  [sic]  designee,  has  the  discretion  to  determine  the 
appropriate  weight  of  such  criteria  and  the  order  in  which  such 
criteria  are  most  relevant  to  serve  the  needs  of  the  District  and 
students  in  each  tie-breaking  situation. 

Despite  the  specific  references  to  Exhibit  B,  and  its  incorporation  by  reference  in  the 
resolution,  Exhibit  B  was  not  attached  to  Resolution  No.  07/08-28  when  it  was  reviewed  and 
voted  on  by  the  Governing  Board. 

Superintendent  Flores  had  no  explanation  for  the  failure  to  include  Exhibits  A  and  B 
to  the  recommended  resolution  when  it  was  distributed  with  the  Board’s  agenda,  or  when  it 
was  posted,  or  when  it  was  voted  on  the  Board.  She  testified  “we  neglected  to  attach  it.”  No 
evidence  was  offered  to  suggest  the  Board  noted  or  did  not  note  the  absence  of  Exhibits  A 
and  B  when  they  voted  on  Resolution  No.  07/09-28. 

Paragraph  H  of  Resolution  No.  07/08-28  directed  the  superintendent  to  send 
appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  affected  by  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services 
in  accordance  with  the  Education  Code  and  to  take  all  necessary  action  to  implement  the 
resolution. 

5. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  identifies  employees’  seniority 

dates  (first  date  of  paid  probationary  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  credentials, 
and  authorizations.  District  staff  reviewed  credential  and  authorization  data  from  the 
personnel  records  and,  in  response  to a  letter  from  the  Gilroy  Education  Association, 
investigated  whether  some  individuals  were  improperly  classified  as  temporary  employees. 
As  a  result  of  that  reevaluation  some  employees  were  reclassified. 

Using  the  Seniority  List,  District  staff  began  implementation  of  the  reduction  of 

particular  kinds  of  services  approved  by  the  Governing  Board,  and  identified  the  incumbent 

  

  

  

employees  in  the  areas  to  be  reduced.  Generally,  a  senior  certificated  employee  whose 
position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  District  Staff  determined  if  the  affected 
incumbents  had  rights  to  bump  junior  employees.  District  staff  identified  the  certificated 
employees  to  receive  notices  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-09  school 
year. 

In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump” 

6. 

On  March  12,  2008,  Dr.  Flores  notified  respondents  of  her  recommendation  to 

the  Governing  Board  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-09  school  year. 
Her  notice  letter  advised  that  the  notice  was  given  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955,  and  included  copies  of  those  provisions. 

The  Superintendent’s  letter  further  stated  that  “the  reason  for  this  recommendation  is 

that  the  Governing  Board,  by  Resolution  No.  07/08-28,  adopted  on  March  6,  2008,  has 
determined  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  of  the  District  no  later  than  the  beginning  of 
the  2008-09  school  year.  A  copy  of  this  Resolution  is  enclosed  and  is  incorporated  in  this 
notice  as  though  fully  set  forth  herein.  Although  Resolution  No.  07/08-28  referred  to  Exhibit 
A  and  Exhibit  B,  and  incorporated  both  by  reference,  neither  was  included  in  the  notice 
letters  sent  to  respondents. 

7. 

Respondents  were  twice  served  with  Accusation  packets.  On  March  22,  2008, 

8. 

On  a  date  not  identified  on  the  record,  but  apparently  between  March  22  and 

This  Accusation  packet  is  being  sent  to  you  to  replace  a 
previous  Accusation  packet  mailed  to  you  on  March  22,  2008. 
The  previous  mailing  omitted  certain  pages  from  the  Accusation 
documents. 

March  27,  2008,  Superintendent  Flores  became  aware  of  the  failures  to  attach  Exhibit  A  and 
Exhibit  B  to  Resolution  No  07/08-28.'  On  March  27,  2008,  respondents  were  served  with  a 
“DUPLICATE  MAILING  NOTICE”  which  stated  that: 

each  respondent  was  served  with  an  Accusation,  copies  of  related  provisions  of  the 
Education  Code,  and  a  copy  of  Board  Resolution  No.  07/08-28.  Although  Resolution  No. 
07/08-28  referred  to  Exhibit  A  and  Exhibit  B,  and  incorporated  both  by  reference,  neither 
was  included  in  the  Accusation  packets  served  on  March  22,  2008. 

   

Exhibit  A  captioned  “‘SKIPPING’  CRITERIA  PURSUANT  TO  EDUCATION  CODE 
SECTION  44955(d)(1),”and  Exhibit  B  captioned  “TIEBREAKING  CRITERIA. 
PURSUANT  TO  EDUCATION  CODE  SECTION  44955(B).”  On  March  27,  2008,  the 
Governing  Board  had  not  yet  adopted  Exhibit  B. 

The  March  27,  2008,  Accusation  packet  included  Board  Resolution  No.  07/08-28, 

'  See  Factual  Findings  2,  3,  and  4,  above. 

9. 

The  Governing  Board  never  adopted  Exhibit  A,  which  in  general  allowed  for 
“skipping”  certificated  employees  with  science  or  math  credentials  who  are  teaching  those 
subjects  and  are  expected  to  do  so  in  the  2008-09  school  year,  and  certificated  employees 
with  a  Bilingual  Cross-cultural  Language  and  Development  (BCLAD)  certificate  who  are 
teaching  one  or  more  bilingual  classes  and  are  expected  to  do  so  in  the  2008-09  school  year. 
Superintendent  Flores  testified  that  adoption  of  Exhibit  A  was  unnecessary  because  by  the 
time  she  became  aware  of  the  error  decisions  regarding  who  would  be  laid  off  had  already 
been  made,  and  the  District  “had  accomplished  what  [it]  would  have  done  if  [it]  had  used 
[Exhibit  A].” 

10. 

|  A  special  board  meeting  was  scheduled  for  April  3,  2008,  to  allow  the 

Governing  Board  to  consider  adoption  of  Exhibit  B.  Superintendent  Flores  testified  that  the 
tiebreaking  criteria  listed  in  Exhibit  B  had  been  prepared  before  March  6,  2008.  Exhibit  B 
stated  that  the  criteria  for  determining  seniority  for  those  employees  with  the  same  first  date 
of  paid  service  would  be  determined  by  awarding  points  on  the  basis  of  possession  of 
credential(s)  and/or  subject  matter  authorizations;  column  placement  on  the  salary  schedule; 
service  on  school  site  committees,  as  a  BTSA  mentor  teacher,  or  member  of  a  Leadership 
Team  or  “District  Curriculum  Curriculum”  [sic];  or  possession  of  a  BCLAD  certificate. 

Exhibit  B  also  provided  that  if  application  of  the  criteria  fails  to  resolve  a  tie  the 
employee  with  the  earliest  date  of  issuance  of  a  preliminary  or  professional  clear  credential  is 
more  senior,  and  among  employees  who  remain  tied  who  have  never  obtained  a  preliminary 
or  professional  clear  credential;  the  employee  with  the  earliest  date  of  issuance  of  an  intern 
credential  is  more  senior.  Among  employees  who  have  never  obtained  an  intern, 
preliminary,  or  professional  clear  credential,  the  employee  with  the  earliest  date  of  issuance 
of  an  emergency  or  pre-intern  credential  or  short-term  staff  permit  is  more  senior. 

On  April  3,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Exhibit  B,  the  tiebreaking  criteria  to 

be  used  in  the  implementation  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

11. 

District  staff  applied  the  tiebreaking  criteria  set  forth  in  Exhibit  B  to  Board 

Resolution  No.  07/08-28  in  implementing  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
approved  by  the  Governing  Board.  In  addition  to  information  on  the  Seniority  List,  they 
used  information  from  a  profile  form  circulated  to  certificated  staff  which  requested  data 
related  to  the  Exhibit  B  criteria.  Generally,  the  tiebreaking  criteria  was  applied  to  employees 
with  multiple  subject  credential  assignments  who  share  an  August  16,  2007,  first  date  of  paid 
service,  and  to  employees  with  social  science  credential  assignments  who  share  an  August 
16,  2007,  first  date  of  paid  service. 

At  hearing  the  parties  stipulated  to  changes  in  the  District’s  original  determination  of 

tiebreaking  points  for  various  counselors.  Pursuant  to  the  stipulation  the  following 
employees  have  the  identified  tiebreaking  points:  Jennifer  Hokanson  —  4  points,  Zvart 
Alexan  —  9  points,  Julio  Villalobos  —  11  points,  Francisca  Martinez-Garcia  —  11  points, 
Dianne  Padilla  —  11  points,  Lilia  Cisneros  —  13  points,  Julissa  Mendoza  — 10  points,  and 
Marah  Kuwada  — 

9  points. 

  

 

  

Respondents  Jessica  Chessani  and  Alexandra  Laks  share  a  seniority  date  of  August 

16,  2007.  Application  of  the  criteria  in  Exhibit  B  to  Board  Resolution  No.  07/08-28  did  not 
resolve  their  tie,  which  the  parties  note  would  affect  the  order  of  reemployment.  A  coin  toss 
at  hearing  was  employed  to  resolve  the  tie,  and  pursuant  to  that  respondent  Chessani  is  senior 
to  respondent  Laks. 

12. 

The  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  identified  in  Resolution  No. 

07/08-28  called  for  laying  off  certificated  employees  occupying a  total  of  43.94  FTE 
positions.  A  total  of  16.3  FTE  reductions  without  layoffs  were  achieved  through  attrition, 
reassignment,  or  elimination  of  extra-duty  assignments.  An  additional  9  FTE  reductions 
without  layoffs  were  represented  by  transfers  and  release  of  temporary  or  substitute 
employees.  Among  others,  the  resignation  of  K-5  teacher  Tami  Morley  was  considered  in 
determining  the  total  number  of  layoffs  and,  although  not  effective  until  the  end  of  the 
current  semester,  that  resignation  does  not  create  a  vacant  FTE  for  the  2008-09  school  year. 

13. 

The  District’s  counselors  and  academic  coordinators  hold  Pupil  Personnel 

Services  credentials.  Academic  counselors  are  assigned  to  high  schools  and  provide  a  range 
of  academic  counseling.  The  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  of  the  counselors  and 
academic  coordinators  would  have  the  effect  of  reducing  each  incumbent’s  work  year  by  five 
days.  Superintendent  Flores  acknowledged  that  there  was  no  agreement  with  the  Gilroy 
Education  Association  to  modify  the  work  year,  and  although  the  District  intended  to  bargain 
about  the  matter  that  did  not  take  place. 

14. 

Respondent  Zvart  Alexan  holds  a  clear  Pupil  Personnel  Services  credential, 
and  is  currently  assigned  as  a  counselor  at  South  Valley  Middle  School.  Her  seniority  date 
per  the  Seniority  List  is  August  21,  2006,  and  she  is  identified  as  a  Probationary  two 
employee.  Respondent  Alexan  contends  that  she  should  be  credited  with  the  seniority  date 
of  August  17,  2006.  She  testified  that  her  contract  provides  that  she  was  retained  to  work 
earlier  than  August  21  and  that,  although  she  was  absent  from  August  17  to  August  21,  she 
was  paid  for  that  period.  She  claimed  that  the  period  from  August  17  to  August  21  was  “a 
paid  excused  absence”  but  then  testified  that  she  “made  up  those  days  later  on”  and  “worked 
on  days  [she]  was  not  scheduled  to  work”  to  make  up  for  those  days.  She  admitted  that  the 
first  day  she  was  present  at  the  school  site  working  was  August  21,  2006. 

In  fact,  respondent  Alexan’s  contract  does  not  state  that  her  employment  began 
August  17,  2006.  Rather,  it  specifically  stated  in  paragraph  4  that:  “The  term  of  employment 
is:  08/21/2006  to  06/15/2007.”  Her  testimony  that  she  was  paid  for  the  school  days  from 
August  17  through  August  21  because  it  was  “a  paid  excused  absence”  was  not  credible.  Her 
salary,  like  that  of  other  District  certificated  employees,  is  paid  in  ten  or  twelve  increments 
through  the  year  rather  than  in  measures  identified  with  specific  days.  Most  importantly,  if 
she  had  had  a  “paid  excused  absence”  there  would  have  been  no  requirement  that  she  make 
up  those  days  later  on,  as  she  testified.  The  District’s  payroll  records,  Exhibit  11,  reflect  no 
absences  for  respondent  Alexan  on  August  17  to  August  21,  2006. 

  

 

15. 

Respondent  Debra  Hopf  holds  a  provisional  Multiple  Subject  Intern  permit 
and  is  currently  assigned  to  Solorsano  Middle  School.  Her  seniority  date  per  the  Seniority 
List  is  January  14,  2008,  and  she  is  identified  as  a  Probationary  zero  employee.  Respondent 
Hopf  contends  that  she  was  hired  in  her  “present  job”  on  August  16,  2007,  and  is  “still  in  the 
same  position.”  She  claims  she  should  be  assigned  August  16,  2007,  as  her  seniority  date. 

Respondent  Hopf  has  worked  for  the  District  as  a  long-term  substitute  in  several 
years,  which  were  not  identified  on  the  record.  She  described  those  past  jobs  as  lasting 
“anywhere  from  three  to  seven  and  a  half  months.”  The  records  of  the  California 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  establish  that  on  September  17,  2007,  respondent 
Hopf  was  issued  an  emergency  30-day  substitute  teaching  permit  which  authorized  her  to 
serve  as  a  substitute  for  not  more  than  30  days  for  any  one  teacher  during  a  school  year.  She 
previously  held  emergency  30-day  substitute  teaching  permits  issued  on  July  1,  2006,  March 
2,  2005,  February  6,  2004,  January  21,  2003,  and  December  28,  2001. 

Respondent  Hopf  acknowledged  that  she  worked  as  a  long-term  substitute  from 

August  2007  until  January  2008,  when  she  was  offered  a  contract  and  the  Governing  Board 
authorized  her  intern  credential.  Before  she  obtained  an  intern  credential  in  January  2008 
respondent  Hopf’s  only  authorization  to  teach  was  a  substitute  permit.  She  testified  that  the 
District  illegally  employed  her  in  the  position  of  a  long-term  substitute.  Her  testimony 
regarding  her  employment  in  the  2006-07  school  year  was  tentative  and  contradictory;  she 
first  stated  that  she  taught  the  entire  school  year  and  then  said  she  did  not  know  if  she  taught 
that  period  as  a  long-term  substitute.  Superintendent  Flores  credibly  testified  that  respondent 
Hopf  did  not  work  as  a  long-term  substitute  for  that  school  year. 

16. 

Respondent  Marcy  Ratliff  holds  a  clear  Pupil  Personnel  Services  credential, 

In  2004  respondent  Ratliff  learned  of  a  job  opening  at  the  District’s  community  day 

and  a  clear  Single  Subject  credential  in  English.  She  is  currently  assigned  as  a  counselor  for 
50  percent  of  her  FTE  and  as  a  teacher  for  50  percent  of  her  FTE  at  Gilroy  Academy.  Her 
seniority  date  per  the  Seniority  List  is  August  23,  2004,  and  she  is  identified  as  a  Permanent 
employee.  Respondent  Ratliff  is  in  her  second  period  of  employment  by  the  District. 
Previously  she  worked  for  the  District  from  1999,  when  she  was  a  temporary  employee,  until 
she  was  laid  off  in  2002  when  she  was  probationary.  After  that  layoff  she  returned  to  school 
and  obtained  a  masters  degree. 

    

school.  She  understood  when  she  was  hired  in  August  2004  that  she  was a  probationary 
employee,  and  that  it  was  not  a  rehire  related  to  the  2002  layoff.  Respondent  Ratliff  is 
seeking  a  1999  seniority  date  on  the  theory  that  she  was  probationary  after  an  initial 
temporary  year  during  her  first  period  of  employment  with  the  District. 

and  is  currently  assigned  as  a  counselor  at  Gilroy  High  School.  His  seniority  date  per  the 
Seniority  List  initially  used  by  the  District  was  August  17,  2006,  and  he  is  identified  as  a 
Probationary  two  employee.  Respondent  Villalobos  testified  that  pursuant  to  his  contract  his 

Respondent  Julio  Villalobos  holds  a  clear  Pupil  Personnel  Services  credential, 

17. 

 

  

correct  seniority  date  is  August  7,  2006.  The  District  stipulated  that  Mr.  Villalobos’  seniority 
date  is  August  7,  2006. 

18. 

Respondent  Francisca  Martinez-Garcia  holds  a  clear  Pupil  Personnel  Services 

credential,  and  is  currently  assigned  as  a  counselor  at  Solorsano  School.  The  District 
stipulated  that  her  seniority  date  is  August  14,  2006. 

19. 

Respondent  Alexandra  Laks  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Intern  credential,  and  is 
currently  assigned  as  a  LA  Core  teacher  at  Eliot  School.  Her  seniority  date  per  the  Seniority 
List  is  August  16,  2007,  and  she  is  identified  as  a  probationary  zero  employee  with  3 
tiebreaker  points.  Respondent  Laks  contends  that  she  should  have  more  than  3  tiebreaker 
points  because  she  will  be  taking  a  test  in  June  to  qualify  fora  BCLAD  certificate,  and 
because  Teach  For  America,  a  non-profit  placement  agency,  considers  her a  bilingual 
teacher. 

The  first  placement  respondent  Laks  obtained  through  Teach  For  America  was  a 

bilingual  K-3  classroom.  She  presented a  letter  from  Teach  For  America  which  stated  that 
she  had  passed  a  rigorous  Spanish  proficiency  test,  and  opined  that  because  of  that  test  and 
her  placement  she  should  “get  full  credit  for  being  able  to  teach  in  a  bilingual”  setting. 
Respondent  Laks  acknowledges  that  she  does  not  have  a  BCLAD  certificate  at  present. 
Superintendent  Flores  correctly  noted  that  the  only  credentials  or  authorizations  a  school 
district  can  consider  are  those  issued  by  the  State  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing,  not 
a  placement  agency  such  as  Teach  For  America. 

20. 

Respondent  Maria  Rocio  Cid-Castro  holds  a  clear  Pupil  Personnel  Services 

credential,  and  is  currently  assigned  as  a  counselor  at  Mt.  Madonna  High  School.  Her 
seniority  date  per  the  Seniority  List  is  January  31,  2007,  and  she  is  identified  as  a 
Probationary  one  employee.  Respondent  Cid-Castro  claims  that  she  is  entitled  to  a 
tiebreaking  criteria  point  for  an  additional  authorization  because  she  expects  to  complete  a 
National  University  course  for  a  Dropout  Prevention  Specialist  certification  in  June.  She 
acknowledged  that  she  does  not  have  the  certification  at  present,  and  her  testimony 
established  that  issuance  of  the  certification  is  speculative.  Superintendent  Flores  correctly 
noted  that  the  only  credentials  or  authorizations  a  school  district  can  consider  are  those 
issued  by  the  State  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing,  and  respondent  Cid-Castro  does 
not  yet  have  Dropout  Prevention  Specialist  certificate  issued  by  that  agency. 

Respondent  Cid-Castro  wrote  the  District’s  application  for  an  Alternative  Education 
Outreach  Consultant  grant  which  funds  part  of  her  position.  While  she  correctly  notes  that 
Board  Resolution  No.  07/08-28  does  not  specifically  identify  an  eliminated  counselor 
position  by  reference  to  either  the  grant  or  the  term  “dropout  prevention,”  the  District 
established  that  any  of  its  counselors  could  fill  the  position.  As  respondent  Cid-Castro’s  own 
Exhibit  D  established,  the  grant  requires  only  that  the  counselor  supported  by  grant  funds 
enroll  in  a  dropout  prevention  specialist  course.  Respondent  Cid-Castro’s  testimony  that  the 
grant  “requires  that  the  person  have  the  certificate”  was  not  credible;  she  herself  does  not  yet 
possess  such  a  certificate.  Moreover,  the  District  has  not  applied  for  an  Alternative 

10 

 

  

Education  Outreach  Consultant  grant  for  the  2008-09  school  year.  If  it  chooses  to  do  so,  a 
decision  within  the  Governing  Board’s  discretion,  any  counselor  may  enroll  in  a  Dropout 
Prevention  Specialist  course  just  as  respondent  Cid-Castro  did. 

21. 

Respondent  Jennifer  Legris  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  preliminary  credential, 
has  a  CLAD  certification,  and  is  currently  assigned  as  a  6th  grade  Core  teacher  (language 
arts  and  social  science)  at  Brownell  School.  Her  seniority  date  per  the  Seniority  List  is 
August  23,  2007,  and  she  is  identified  as  a  Probationary  one  employee.  Respondent  Legris 
testified  that  she  received  a  “pink  slip  notice,”  and  a  “package  that  my  services  would  no 
longer  be  necessary  for  next  year  and a  sheet  to  fill  out  if  [she]  wanted  representation.”  She 
denied  that  it  was  an  Accusation  packet,  but  acknowledged  that  she  does  not  remember  what 
it  was  titled. 

On  March  22,  2008,  the  District  properly  served  respondent  Legris  with  an 

Accusation,  copies  of  related  provisions  of  the  Education  Code,  and  a  copy  of  Board 
Resolution  No.  07/08-28.  On  March  27,  2008,  she  was  properly  served  with  a 
“DUPLICATE  MAILING  NOTICE?”  which  included  an  Accusation,  copies  of  related 
provisions  of  the  Education  Code,  and  a  copy  of  Board  Resolution  No.  07/08-28  with  Exhibit 
A  and  Exhibit  B.  The  latter  item  was  presented  at  hearing  in  an  unopened  state  with  the 
properly-addressed  United  States  registered  mail  receipt  attached.  Respondent  Legris 
testified  that  she  did  not  receive  any  notice  from  her  post  office  that  there  was  an  item  to  be 
picked  up. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Cause  for  the  elimination  of  43.94  FTE  positions  exists  in  accordance  with 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Except  as  to  the  withdrawn  Accusations,  cause 
further  exists  to  give  respondents  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008- 
09  school  year.  This  cause  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

2. 

No  permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained 

to  render  a  service  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

3. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  planned  layoffs  are  null  and  void  because 
Exhibit  A  and  Exhibit  B  were  not  attached  to  Resolution  07/08-28  when  it  was  posted, 
distributed,  adopted,  and  initially  served  on  respondents. 

Respondents  claim  that  the  Governing  Board  violated  the  Brown  Act,  and  specifically 

Government  Code  section  54954.2,  which  requires  posting  of  “an  agenda  containing  a  brief 
general  description  of  each  item  of  business  to  be  transacted  or  discussed  at  the  meeting.” 
Respondent’s  brief  asserts  that  “no  one  reviewing  the  agenda  . 
action  contemplated  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  service  designated  in  that  Resolution 

.  could  possibly  discern  the 

. 

11 

  

 

  

07/08-28.”  Respondents’  argument  is  not  persuasive.  The  text  of  the  resolution  itself? 
precisely  identifies  the  services  and  related  positions  to  be  reduced,  the  exact  number  of 
FTEs  involved,  and  even  the  funding  source  of  the  positions.  Moreover,  the  listing  of  the 
caption  of  the  resolution  conforms  to  the  statutory  requirement  of  a  “brief  general 
description”  of  that  item  of  business. 

Respondents  further  claim  that  the  Governing  Board  violated  the  Brown  Act,  and 

specifically  Government  Code  section  54957.5,  subdivision  (b),  which  requires  that  all 
writings  “that  are  distributed  during  a  public  meeting  shall  be  made  available  for  public 
inspection  at  the  meeting.”  Respondent’s  citation  of  that  section  is  inapt  because  neither 
Exhibit  A  nor  Exhibit  B  was  “distributed”  during  the  March  6,  2008,  board  meeting.  It 
follows  that  since  they  were  not  distributed,  there  was  no  statutory  requirement  under  that 
section  that  they  be  available  for  public  inspection  at  the  meeting. 

Respondents  failed  to  establish  that  the  Governing  Board  violated  the  Brown  Act  in 

its  adoption  of  Resolution  07/08-28.  Moreover,  such  a  violation  would  not  invalidate  the 
proposed  layoff  because  it  would  not  have  deprived  respondents  of  a  hearing  on  the  merits  of 
the  layoff.  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified 
School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 

4. 

Respondents  claim  that  they  were  deprived  of  due  process  by  the  District’s 

failure  to  provide  adequate  notice,  and  that  the  deficiencies  in  notice  were  not  cured  by 
inclusion  of  Exhibit  B  to  Resolution  07/08-28  in  the  March  27,  2008,  “DUPLICATE 
MAILING  NOTICE”  Accusation  packet.  On  March  12,  2008,  respondents  received  the 
required  notification  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  their  services  would  not 
be  required  for  the  2008-09  school  year.?  Those  notices  were  sufficient  information  for 
respondents  to  be  apprised  of  their  prospects  with  the  District,  and  to  look  for  work 
elsewhere.  The  very  receipt  of  the  preliminary  notice  would  indicate  to  a  reasonable 
employee  that  his  or  her  services  were  not  going  to  be  required  the  following  year. 

Respondents’  argument  that  they  did  not  receive  adequate  notice  of  the  layoff  because 
the  superintendent  inadvertently  failed  to  attach  Exhibit  B  was  not  persuasive.  Moreover,  the 
Education  Code  requires  only  the  identification  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be 
reduced  or  discontinued.  It  does  not  require  that  the  preliminary  notice  include  tiebreaking 
criteria.  For  that  reason,  respondents’  additional  argument  that  the  Board’s  “retroactive 
adoption”  of  the  tiebreaking  criteria  does  not  correct  the  failure  of  due  process  is  similarly 
unpersuasive. 

5. 

Respondent  Legris  contends  that  she  was  not  properly  served  with  an 
Accusation  packet.  Her  testimony  was  vague  and  tentative,  particularly  in  that  she 
acknowledged  receiving  a  package  notifying  her  that  her  services  would  not  be  required  for 

?  See  Factual  Finding  4,  above. 

3  See  Factual  Finding  6,  above. 

12

  

  

the  upcoming  school  year.  The  preponderance  of  evidence  established  that  she  received  the 
March  22,  2008,  Accusation  packet. 

. 

. 

Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (d),  provides  that  “Any  notice . 

.  shall  be 
.  when  it  is  deposited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage 

deemed  sufficient  when  . 
prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the  employee.”  The  preponderance  of 
evidence  established  that  she  was  properly  served  with  a  “DUPLICATE  MAILING 
NOTICE”  which  included  an  Accusation,  copies  of  related  provisions  of  the  Education  Code, 
and  a  copy  of  Board  Resolution  No.  07/08-28  with  Exhibit  A  and  Exhibit  B.  Service  of  the 
preliminary  notice  is  sufficient  if  it  is  in  the  hands  of  the  post  office,  correctly  addressed,  by 
March  15.  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  y.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.  For 
unknown  reasons  the  duplicate  Accusation  packet  was  not  received  by  respondent  Legris, 
and  was  returned  unclaimed  to  the  District.  It  is  patently  clear  she  was  not  prejudiced 
because  she  appeared  and  testified  at  hearing. 

Respondent  Legris  argues  that  if  the  District  knows  that  the  teacher  did  not  receive 

the  mailed  documents  because  the  signed  registered  mail  receipt  was  not  returned,  the 
District  “has  an  obligation  to  find  out  why  and  go  assure  service.”  The  assertion  is  not 
persuasive  and  is  not  supported  by  any  statute  or  case  law. 

6. 

As  stated  in  Factual  Finding  13,  respondents  sought  to  engage  in  bargaining 

with  the  District  regarding  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  adopted  in  Board 
Resolution  07/08-28.  No  bargaining  occurred.  The  District  is  not  required  by  Education 
Code  section  44949  or  44955  to  engage  in  negotiations  or  collective  bargaining  to  reduce 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

7. 

Respondents  contend  they  were  denied  due  process  because  the  District  failed 

to  timely  respond  to  their  request  for  the  tiebreaking  criteria.  On  March  25,  2008, 
respondents’  attorney  served  a  request  for  discovery  on  the  District  seeking,  among  other 
items,  documents  or  worksheets  prepared  or  used  by  the  District  in  determining  which 
individuals  should  be  laid  off  due  to  which  service  reductions,  which  individuals  should 
receive  Notice  of  Layoff,  and  documents  relating  to  the  establishment  of  an  order  of 
employment  and  the  application  to  employees  of  any  criteria  used  to  establish  an  order  of 
employment.  As  noted  in  Factual  Finding  8,  respondents  themselves  were  served  with 
Exhibit  B  two  days  later,  March  27,  2008. 

On  April  9,  2008,  at  3:59  p.m.,  the  District’s  attorney  sent  by  facsimile  Exhibit  B  and 
worksheets  reflecting  the  application  of  the  tiebreaking  criteria  to  those  respondents  to  whom 
the  criteria  would  pertain.  The  subject  hearing  was  schedule  to  commence  on  April  14, 
2008,  at  9:30  a.m.  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  states,  in  part,  that  upon 
request  of  the  terminated  employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the 
governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the  commencement 
of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  section  44949  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used 
in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each 
employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the  group.  Respondents  argue,  without  citation 

13 

 

to  any  authority,  that  the  five  days  referred  to  in  the  statute  in  fact  means  exactly  120  hours. 
Respondents  apparently  fault  the  District’s  response  to  the  discovery  request  as  untimely  by 
approximately  6 
intended  such  exacting  demands  it  would  have  framed  the  statutory  requirements  in  hours 
rather  than  days. 

hours.  Respondents’  contentions  are  not  persuasive;  if  the  Legislature  had 

8. 

The  District  is  only  required  to  consider  credentials  an  employee  has  on  file  by 

the  March  15  notice  deadline.  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  of  Wiseburn  School  District 
(1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689;  Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  District  (1987)  196 
Cal.App.3d  555,  567-68.  The  District  need  not  consider  the  expectations  of  respondent  Laks 
and  respondent  Cid-Castro  that  they  will  receive  additional  certifications  in  the  future. 

9. 

Respondent  Ratliff’s  argument  that  her  seniority  date  should  be  1999  and 

related  to  her  first  period  of  District  employment,  is  not  persuasive.  She  is  not  in  the  position 
of  a  teacher  rehired  at  the  start  of  the  ensuing  school  year  without  a  break  in  service;  two 
years  separated  her  periods  of  District  employment.’  If  there  is  a  break  in  service,  even  of 
one  day,  then  seniority  starts  after  the  break  in  service.  Education  Code  section  44909  and 
Kamin  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  72  Cal.App.3d  1014.  Respondent  Ratliff  is  correctly 
assigned  the  seniority  date  of  August  23,  2004,  the  commencement  of  her  current  second 
period  of  employment  by  the  District. 

10. 

Respondent  Hopf  did  not  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence  that  she  is 

entitled  to  a  seniority  date  earlier  than  January  14,  2008.  Neither  California  Teachers 
Association  v.  Governing  Board  of Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4  369  nor  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  Dist. 
(2006)  145  Cal.App.4  1260  support  an  earlier  seniority  date  or  establish  that  the  District 
illegally  employed  her  in  the  position  of  a  long-term  substitute. 

ORDER 

Except  as  to  respondents  against  whom  Accusations  were  withdrawn,  notice  shall  be 

given  to  employees  occupying  43.94  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-09  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

Dated: 

M.  AMANDA  BEHE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

“  See  Factual  Finding  16,  above. 

  

14

