e 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
SAN  JACINTO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2008020534 

Respondents  listed  in  Appendix  A. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Donald  P.  Cole,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  San  Jacinto,  California  on  May  1,  2008. 

@ 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  Attorneys  at  Law, 

represented  the  San  Jacinto  Unified  School  District. 

Jesus  E.  Quitionez,  Holguin  and  Pamela  D.  Chandran,  Garfield  &  Martinez, 
represented  the  respondents  listed  in  Appendix  A,  except  for  those  listed  immediately  below. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  respondents  Ramon  Cordero,  Michael 

Leese,  Gloria  Solorio-Valenzuela,  Linda  Thiel,  and  Cynthia  Torres. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  1,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Diane  Perez,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Personnel  Services  of  the  San  Jacinto 
Unified  School  District,  made  and  filed  the  accusation  dated  March  14,  2008  in  her  official 
capacity  as  the  designee  of  Dr.  Shari  L.  Fox,  District  Superintendent. 

2. 

Respondents!  are  certificated  District  employees. 

e 

The  accusation  named  50  certificated  personnel  as  respondents,  including  five  individuals,  Christine 
' 
Thomas,  Wendy  Morphew,  Jennifer  Kepler,  Dawn  Bray,  and  Barbara  McNielly,  who,  though  timely  served  with  the 
accusation  and  with  the  notice  described  below  in  Factual  Finding  6,  did  not  file  requests  for  a  hearing,  and  thus 
waived  their  right  to  a  hearing,  and  did  not  become  and  are  not  properly  parties  to  this  proceeding.  At  the  hearing, 
one  respondent,  Konni  Chapman,  stated  that  she  had  secured  employment  in  another  state  and  was  no  longer 

  

1

3. 

On  March  7,  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Board  of Trustees  of  the  San  Jacinto  Unified  School 
District  in  writing  of  her  recommendation  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 
services  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  Superintendent  stated  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

4. 

On  March  7,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-39,  determining 
that  it  would  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  end  of 
the  current  school  year.  The  Board  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  must 
be  reduced  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  were  the  following  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
positions: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Elementary  Teacher 
Middle  School  English  Teacher 
Middle  School  Social  Studies  Teacher 
High  School  English  Teacher 
High  School  Social  Studies  Teacher 
Elementary  School  Counselor 
Secondary  Counselor 
Assistant  Principal 

Principal 

35  FTE 
4  FTE 
3  FTE 
5  FTE 
3  FTE 
4  FTE 
2  FTE 
3  FTE 
1  FTE 

The  proposed  reductions  totaled  60  FTE  positions. 

5. 

The  Board  directed  the  Superintendent  or  her  designee  to  determine  which 

employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  as  a  result  of  the 
reduction  of  the  foregoing  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Board  further  directed  the 
Superintendent  or  her  designee  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all  certificated  employees  of 
the  District  who  would  be  laid  off  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  of  these  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

6. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  timely  served  on  respondents  a 
written  notice  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation.  The  notice  advised  respondents  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  that  each 
respondent  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice 
by  the  date  specified  in  the  notice,  a  date  which  in  each  case  was  more  than  seven  days  after 

  

contesting  her  layoff.  She  is  deemed  to  have  withdrawn  her  request  for  hearing.  Prior  to  and  at  the  hearing,  the 
District  dismissed  nine  respondents:  Annette  Doyle,  Chery]  Love,  Amy  Milchman,  Luciano  Savala,  Scott  Stewart, 
Pauline  Grace,  Beatrice  Martos,  Katheryne  McGregor,  and  Gabriel  Vigil. 
All  collective  references  to  “respondents” 
in  this  Proposed  Decision  encompass  the  remaining  35  respondents,  who  are  named  in  Appendix  A  to  this  Proposed 
Decision. 

 
.

 

  

the  notice  was  served,  and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of 
the  right  to  a  hearing. 

The  recommendation  that.respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not 

related  to  their  competency  as  teachers. 

7. 

Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there 
was  cause  for  not  reemploying  that  respondent  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  accusation 
was  thereafter  timely  served  on  each  respondent.  Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  notice  of 
defense.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

8. 

The  services  the  Board  addressed  in  Resolution  No.  07-08-39  were  “particular 

kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  and  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

9. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

10. 

The  Board  considered  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and  requests  for 

transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its 
employees.  No  evidence  was  presented  that  any  known  attrition  was  not  considered. 

11. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render,  except  with  regard 
to  Jennifer  Lidar. 

12. 

Jennifer  Lidar  began  the  current  school  year  as  a  sixth  grade  language  arts 
(i.e.,  English)  teacher.  In  late  January  2008,  she  was  reassigned  to  a  sixth  grade  language 
arts/social  studies  core  position,  which  she  continued  to  hold  as  of  the  hearing?  The  District 
sent  a  layoff  notice  to  Ms.  Lidar  based  on  its  erroneous  identification of  her-as  a  middle 
school  English  teacher;  middle  school  core  positions,  on  the  other  hand,  were  not  among  the 
particular  kinds  of  positions  the  District  identified  for  reduction  or  elimination. 

Ms.  Lidar  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential,  with  a  supplemental  authorization  in 

English.  The  multiple  subject  credential  permits  the  holder  to  teach  in  either  a  standard 
elementary  school  class  position  or  in  a  middle  school  core  position.  Accordingly,  even 
though  Ms.  Lidar’s  current  position  is  not  one  the  District  is  reducing,  Ms.  Lidar  would  be 
subject  to  “bumping”  (i.e.,  displacement)  by  a  more  senior  employee  who  is  certificated  and 

Ms.  Lidar’s  uncontroverted  testimony  to  this  effect  is  credited.  The  District  provided  no  specific  evidence 

> 
of Ms.  Lidar’s  current  position,  but  instead  relied  solely  on  its  overall  employee  seniority  list,  a  compilation 
obviously  gleaned  from  other  primary  documents  pertaining  to  the  assignments  and  status  of  specific  employees. 

3

  

competent  to  serve  as  a  middle  school  core  teacher,  i.e.,  an  elementary  school  teacher  with  a 
multiple  subject  credential. 

A  review  of  the  documentation  submitted  at  the  hearing  indicates  that  a  number  of 

respondents  have  multiple  subject  credentials.  However,  pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  07-08- 
39,  holding  an  appropriate  credential  is  only  one  of  the  requirements  that  must  be  met  before 
an  employee  may  bump  another,  more  junior  employee.  The  evidence  presented  at  the 
hearing  was  insufficient  to  establish  that  any  of  the  numerous  respondents  more  senior  to  Ms. 
Lidar  who  hold  a  multiple  subject  credential  are  qualified  to  displace  her  with  regard  to  other 
criteria  set  forth  in  the  Resolution  (i.e.,  that  the  displacing  employee  possess  “any  specific 
prior  job  experience,  training,  or  certification  required  by  the applicable  job  description  for 
the  position.”)  The  District  failed  to  establish  that  Ms.  Lidar  would  have  been  laid  off 
through  the  bumping  process  had  her  current  assignment  been  correctly  identified. 
Accordingly,  Ms.  Lidar  is  not  subject  to  layoff.’ 

13. 

Melissa  Woolfrey,  a  second  grade  teacher,  commenced  her  employment  with 

the  District  in  the  summer  of  2006.  Her  seniority  date  is  August  4,  2006.* 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District 

to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation of particular  kinds of  services  related  solely  to  the  welfare of  the  schools  and 
the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the 
accusation  except  as  to  respondent  Jennifer  Lidar.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  all 
respondents  except  Jennifer  Lidar  notice  before  May  15,  2008,  that  their  services  are  no 
longer  required  by  the  District.  It  is  also  recommended  that  the  Board  give  such  notice  to 
Christine  Thomas,  Wendy  Morphew,  Jennifer  Kepler,  Dawn  Bray,  and  Barbara  McNielly, 
the  five  individuals  who  waived  their  right  to  a  hearing  in  this  matter. 

Respondents’  argument  that  another  respondent,  Denise  Gore,  was  prejudiced  by  the  District’s  error  was 

> 
based  on  (what  has  turned  out  to  be)  the  erroneous  premise  that  Ms,  Lidar  would  in  fact  be  bumped.  The  burden  to 
establish  prejudicial  error  appears  to  be  on  respondents.  (Fair  v.  Fountain  Valley  School  District  (1979)  90 
Cal.App.3d  180,  187.)  No  showing  has  been  made  that  any  respondents  have  been  prejudiced  by  the  District’s  error 
that  they  would  not  have  been  laid off but  for  the  District’s  erroneous  classification  of  Ms.  Lidar  as  an  English 
(i.e., 
teacher),  and  such  prejudice  is  not  readily  discernible  from  the  record.  Accordingly,  the  finding  and  conclusion  that 
Ms.  Lidar  is  not  subject  to  layoff  has  no  effect  on  the  outcome  of  this  proceeding  as  to  any  other  respondent. 

Ms.  Woolfrey  testified  that  her  employment  began  in  July  2006.  She  had  no  documentation  to  support  her 

‘ 
testimony,  however.  Her  employment  contract  with  the  District,  which  she  signed  on  August  1,  2006,  explicitly 
reflected  a  start  date  of  August  4,  2008.  Her  employment  contract  is  credited  over  her  memory.

However,  a  preponderance of the  evidence  did  not  sustain  the  charges  set  forth  in  the 
accusation  as  to  respondent  Jennifer  Lidar,  whose  services  could  not  be  terminated  because 
her  layoff  was  predicated  on  her  erroneous  identification  by  the  District  as  a  middle  school 
English  teacher,  when  in  fact  her  assignment  was  to  a  middle  school  English/social  studies 
core  position.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  not  give  respondent  Jennifer  Lidar  notice 
that  her  services  will  no  longer  be  required  by  the  District. 

ORDER 

1, 

The  accusations  served  on  all  respondents  except  Jennifer  Lidar  are  sustained. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  such  respondents,  and  to  Christine  Thomas,  Wendy  Morphew, 
Jennifer  Kepler,  Dawn  Bray,  and  Barbara  McNielly,  before  May  15,  2008,  that  their  services 
will  not  be  required  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  services  as 
indicated. 

2. 

The  accusation  served  on  respondent  Jennifer  Lidar  is  not  sustained  and  the 

accusation  related  to  Ms.  Lidar  is  dismissed. 

patep:  £757  °% 

L)  gee 

DONALD  P.  COLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

Appendix  A 

Raymundo  Alcala 

Brian  Bailey 

Jasmine  Emily  Banuelos 

Melissa  Brause 

Shawnery  Buren 

Melissa  Christina  Camarena 

Lynn  Carlson 

Monica  Castillo 

Kandace  Marie  Chudy-Murphy 

Deborah  Denae  Collier 

Ramon  Cordero 

Abbi  Foster 

Stephanie  Garland 

Denise  Gore 

Kristina  Hard 

Kirsten  Heizer 

Kristina  Himes 

Michael  Leese 

Jennifer  Lidar 

Stephanie  Lipes 

Nancy  Martinez 

15. 

16. 

17. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

Jennifer  Jan  Kling-Burbridge 

  

 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

Jacob  Milchman 

Lindsey  Jo  Palacios 

Jaqueline  Pedersen 

April  Phillips 

Amy  Schuyler  (McIntyre) 

Margaret  Coelle  Sibilia 

Shelly  Skaggs 

Gloria  Solorio-Valenzuela 

Juliana  Tapia 

Linda  Thiel 

Cynthia  Torres 

Courtnie  Wallace 

Melissa  Woolfrey

  

  

