  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
WILLOWS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  2008030368 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusations/ 
(Reduction  In  Force)  against: 

ERIC  HANSON,  DENNIS  HOLLEY, 
THERESA  J.  MOORE  and  ROGER 
STEINHOFF 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  7,  2008,  in  Willows,  California. 

Matthew  Juhl-Darlington,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Willows  Unified  School 

District. 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  7,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

Steven  Olmos,  Ph.D.  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Willows  Unified  School 

District  (District).  His  actions  and  the  actions  of  the  District  Governing  Board  were  taken  in 
their  official  capacities. 

2. 

Respondents  are  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the  District.  On  March 

12,  2008,  the  District  served  on  each  respondent  a  written  notice  that  it  had  been 
recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955  that  their  services  would  be  reduced  or  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that 
the  District  Governing  Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  four 

 

  

  

  

   full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions.  Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to 

determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

3. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  respondents.  The 
Accusations  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  were 
timely  served  on  respondents.  Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense  to  the 
Accusations. 

4, 

On  March  6,  2008,  at  a  regular  meeting,  the  District  Governing  Board  was 

given  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  employees  holding 
four  FTE  positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  be  reduced  or  not  required  for 
the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

5. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  District  Governing  Board  determined  that  it  was 

necessary  to  decrease  programs  and  services  and  thus  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  teaching 
services  affecting  employment  of  4.0  FTE  positions.  The  District  Governing  Board  adopted 
Resolution  No.  07-08-05  providing  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following 
particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS): 

1.00  FTE  -  Keyboarding  teaching  position  at  Willows  High  School  and 
Willows  Community  High  School 

1.00  FTE  —  Various  teaching  positions  at  Willows  High  School; 

-Creative  Woods  (two  periods) 
Weight  Training  (two  periods) 
‘Athletic  Director  (one  period) 
-Auto  I  (one  period) 

1.00  FTE  -  Grade  7/8  teaching  position  at  Willows  Intermediate  School 

1.00  FTE  —Multiple  Subject  teaching  position  at  Murdock  Elementary  School 

6. 

No  employees  were  affected  by  the  elimination  of  the  teaching  positions  at 

Willows  Intermediate  School  and  Murdock  Elementary  School. 

    

7. 

The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  these  particular 
kinds  of  services  was  made  in  order  to  reduce  costs  without  reducing  core  subject  areas. 

8. 

The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees 
seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  as  tenured,  probationary  or  temporary,  and 
credentials  and  authorizations.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from 
the  District’s  records  and  employees  are  given  the  opportunity  to  correct  errors  in  the 
seniority  list.

> 

  

9. 

The  Superintendent  and  other  District  employees  were  responsible  for 

implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to 
develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various 
services  being  reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees 
held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were  entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees. 

Theresa  Moore 

10. 

|  Theresa  Moore  has a seniority  date  of  August  23,  2000.  She  holds  a  Clear 

Single  Subject  Credential  in  Physical  Education.  She  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  1.0  FTE 
physical  education  at  Willows  High  School.  Her  services  are  reduced  by  .50  FTE  pursuant  to 
the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  two  periods  of  instruction  in  weight  training 
and  one  period  of  athletic  director.  No  employee  junior  to  Ms.  More  is  being  retained  to 
perform  services  that  Ms.  Moore  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

Ms.  Moore  maintains  that  she  should  be  permitted  to  teach  .50  FTE  of  a  1.00 

FTE  in  physical  education  currently  being  taught  by  Geraldine  Mahood  at  Murdock  High 
School.  Ms.  Mahood  is  senior  to  Ms.  Moore.  Ms.  Moore’s  novel  argument  is  that  a  junior 
employee  should  be  able  to  bump  a senior  employee,  if  the  senior  employee  can,  in  turn, 
bump  other  junior  employees  and  is  therefore  not  “affected”  by  retention  of  the  junior 
employee.  This  argument  lacks  merit.  There  is  no  statutory  authority  for  this  position  and 
implementation  of  such  a  process  is  chaotic,  unworkable  and  would  often  result  in  retention 
of junior  employees  over  senior  employees,  in  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44955, 
subdivision  (b). 

Eric  Hanson 

11. 

Eric  Hanson  holds  a  Vocational  Credential  in  the  following  subjects; 

automotive  mechanics;  automotive  brake  installation  and  repair;  automotive  electrical 
systems  and  repair.  He  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  five  automotive  classes.  Four  classes 
are  funded  through  the  ROP  program.  The  District  funds  one  class.  His  services  are  reduced 
by  .16  FTE  (the  class  funded  by  the  District)  pursuant  to  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  to 
eliminate  one  period  of  instruction  in  Auto  I.  The  evidence  is  equivocal  as  to  Mr.  Hanson’  s 
seniority  date;  it  is  sometime  in  August  2004.  There  is  no  certificated  employee  being 
retained  to  teach  automotive  mechanics  and  there  is  no  certificated  employee  Mr.  Hanson 
can  “bump”  out  of  a  position  with  his  Vocational  Credential.  No  junior  employee  is  being 
retained  to  perform  services  that  Mr.  Hanson  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

Roger  Steinhoff 

12. 

Mr.  Steinhoff  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  19,  1995.  He  holds  a  Standard 

Teaching  Credential  in  Industrial  Arts.  He  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  woods  at  1.0  FTE  at 
Willows  High  School.  His  services  are  reduced  by  .33  FTE  pursuant  to  the  Governing 
Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  two  periods  of  instruction  in  creative  woods.  Mr.  Steinhoff 
maintains  that  he  can  bump  into  .33  FTE  (one  class/.  21  FTE)  of  the  four  auto  repair  classes

  

  

being  taught  by  Mr.  Hanson,  a  junior  employee.  Mr.  Steinhoff  provided  no  evidence  to 
support  his  testimony  that  the  industrial  arts  certification  he  holds  allows  him  to  teach 
automotive  repair  classes.  Pursuant  to  California  Code  of  Regulations  (CCR)  Title  5,  section 
80004,  subdivision  (c),  holders  of  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credentials  in  specific  single 
subject  areas,  such  as  industrial  arts,  are  authorized  to  teach  trade,  technical  and  vocational 
classes,  but  only  in  the  area  designated  on  the  credential.'  There  was  no  evidence  that 
automotive  repair  is  an  “industrial  art.” 

Nor  has  Mr.  Steinhoff  provided  evidence  that  he  competent  to  teach  automotive 
classes.  He  has  been  teaching  industrial  arts  classes  at  the  district  for  the  past  14  years. 
Further,  the  classes  Mr.  Hanson  teaches  are  funded  through  ROP,  a  program  that  has  specific 
credentialing  requirements.  No  evidence  was  produced  that  Mr.  Steinhoff,  even  if  he  were 
certificated  and  competent  to  teach  automotive  classes,  satisfies  the  credentialing 
requirements  of  the  ROP  program. 

The  evidence  is  persuasive  that  Mr.  Steinhoff  is  not  credentialed  to  teach  automotive 

classes,  and  he  may  therefore  not  bump  into  any  classes  Mr.  Hanson  is  assigned  to  teach.  No 
junior  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  that  Mr.  Steinhoff  is  competent  and 
certificated  to  render. 

Dennis  Holley 

13. 

Mr.  Holley  has a  seniority  date  of  August  27,  1975.  He  holds  a  Standard 

Designated  Teaching  Credential  in  Business  Education.  He  is  currently  assigned  to  teach 
keyboarding  at  1.0  FTE  at  Willows  High  School  and  Willows  Continuation  High  School. 
His  services  are  eliminated  pursuant  to  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  1.0 
FTE  of  instruction  in  keyboarding.  Mr.  Holley  maintains  that  he  can  bump  into  1.0  FTE  of  a 
number  of  teaching  positions  held  by  junior  employees.  He  maintains  that  his  credential 
authorizes  him  to  teach,  among  other  subjects,  (ROP)  career  education,  integrated  math, 
algebra  lab,  business  English,  ROP  computer  applications,  computer  multi  —media,  reading 
and  economics  (although  no  economics  courses  are  offered). 

Mr.  Holley  asserts  that  he  is  competent  to  teach  these  classes  and  he  is  close  to 
obtaining  a  certification  of  compliance  as  a  highly  qualified  teacher  in  math  and  economics 

'  CCR,  title  5,  section  80004,  subdivision  (c)  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

“The  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  authorizes  the  holder  to  teach  the  subject  area(s)  listed  on  the  document  in 
grades  twelve  and  below,  including  preschool,  and  in  classes  organized  primarily  for  adults.  .. 
1-4 
(c)  The  holder  of  a  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  Agriculture,  Business,  Home  Economics,  Industrial  Arts, 
or  Industrial  and  Technology  Education  is  authorized  to  teach  the  subject  area  listed  on  the  document  in  classes 
designated  as  technical,  trade,  or  vocational  by  the  employing  agency.” 

 

under  “No  Child  Left  Behind.”  He  has  18  units  of  math  classes  at  Chico  State  College  and 
has  been  assigned  to  teach  math  and  economics  classes  at  Willows  High  School  multiple 
times  over  a  five  years  period.  Although  Mr.  Holley’s  competence  to  teach  math  and  the 
other  subjects  he  proposes  to  teach  may  be  an  issue,  the  threshold  issue  is  whether  he  is 
certificated  to  teach  these  subjects. 

Mr.  Holley’s  Designated  Teaching  Credential  in  Business  Education  was  issued  in 

1977.  Under  the  heading  “subjects  or  fields”  the  credential  lists  computer  science  and  data 
processing.  Under  “authorizations”  the  certificate  lists  “204  q,  j,  d.”  These  citations  are  to 
the  back  of  the  certificate.  They  reference  the  holder’s  authorization  to  “teach  business 
subjects  named  on  the  credential,  including  evaluation  of  vocational  pupil  performance  and 
relating  of  such  performance  to  classroom  instruction  and  including  classes  reimbursed  from 
vocational  education  funds  in  grades  7  through  12  and  classes  organized  for  adults  in 
elementary  and  high  school  adult  programs.”  Nowhere  does  the  credential  authorize  the 
holder  to  teach  subjects  other  than  those  named  on  the  credential;  computer  science  and  data 
processing. 

Mr.  Holley  further  maintains  that  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing 
authorizes  the  holder  of  a  Designated  Teaching  Credential  in  Business  Education  to  teach 
subjects  other  than  those  identified  on  the  credential.  He  cites  to  the  Administrator’s 
Assignment  Manual  first  edition  eighth  revision  (September  2007),  section  C-1,  as  support 
for  the  proposal  that  the  holder  of  a  Standard  Secondary  Credential  in  a  broad  subject  area 
authorizes  the  teaching  of  subjects  listed  as  majors  and  minors  in  departmentalized  classes. 
However,  the  language  of  this  section  permits  the  holder  to  teach  only  those  subjects  which 
“follow  the  colon  on  the  credential”  (here  computer  science  and  data  processing).  Further, 
this  section  does  not  apply  to  Mr.  Holley’s  credential.  He  does  not  hold  a  Standard 
Secondary  Credential  in  a  particular  subject  area.  Rather,  he  holds  a  Standard  Designated 
Teaching  Credential  which  is  classified  by  the  Administrator’s  Assignment  Manual  as  “a 
credential  which  authorizes  the  service  in  the  specific  subject  named  on  the  document  in 
classes  designated  as  technical,  trade,  or  vocational.”  (section  I-1). 

Mr.  Holley  maintains  that  he  has  the  certification  necessary  to  teach  the  one  period  of 

computer  applications  (ROP)  and  the  one  period  of  computer  multi-media  (ROP)  currently 
taught  by  Margaret  Ansel.  Ms.  Ansel  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  16,  2004,  and is  junior 
to  Mr.  Holley.  Mr.  Holley  maintains  that  computer  applications  and  computer  multimedia 
are  computer  science  courses.  The  District  maintains  that  these  courses  are  not  included  in 
Mr.  Holley’s  certification.  The  evidence  is  that  Ms.  Ansel  teaches  these  courses  under  a 
Designated  Subject  Computer  Application  Credential.  There  was  no  evidence  offered  by 
either  party  as  to  the  comparative  authorizations  of  Mr.  Holley’s  and  Ms.  Ansel’s  credentials. 

Even  if  Mr.  Holley’s  credential  authorizes  him  to  teach  these  two  courses,  he  has  not 
provided  evidence  that  he  is  competent  to  teach  these  courses.  He  holds  a  Master’s  Degree 
in  computer  science,  which  he  earned  in  1975.  Since  then,  he  has  taught  math,  economics 
and  keyboarding.  It  is  questionable  whether  he  has  the  current  competence  to  teach  these 
two  courses.  Further,  two  courses  are  funded  through  ROP,  a  program  that  has  specific

  

  

credentialing  requirements.  No  evidence  was  produced  that  Mr.  Holley,  assuming  he  is 
competent  to  teach  multi-media  and  computer  applications,  satisfies  the  credentialing 
requirements  of  the  ROP  program.  Moreover,  Mr.  Holley’s  insistence  that  he  is  certificated 
and  competent  to  teach  math,  economics,  career  education  and  several  other  subjects,  which 
he  is  clearly  not  certificated  to  teach,  undermines  his  assertions  that  he  is  competent  and 
certificated  to  teach  these  two  classes. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  District  employees  receiving  notices  that  their  services  would  not  be 

required  next  year  have  all  rendered  valuable  services  to  the  District. 

2. 

All  notice and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met.  The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for 
the  reduction  of  services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process. 
(San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation 
of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to 
be  reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular 
kinds  of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-05  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Governing 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

1-4 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  ...  whenever  a  particular  kind 
of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  ...or  whenever  the 
amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of  curriculum, 

 

and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it 
shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions 
to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district, 
the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than 
a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the 
district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the 
services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the 
provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or 
any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a 
service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

1-4 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  that  when  certificated  employees  face 

layoffs  due  to  reduction  or  elimination  of  PKS,  the  District  has  an  affirmative  obligation  to 
reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions  held  by  junior  teachers, 
if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to  occupy  such  positions.  The 
intent  of  the  Legislation  is  clearly  to  prevent  Districts  from  laying  off  senior  teachers  while 
retaining  junior  teachers.  Section  44955,  subdivision  (c)  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

Services  of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of 
the  order  in  which  they  were  employed...  The  governing  board 
shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that 
employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render... 

7. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  10,  and  the  Legal  Conclusions,  the 

District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Ms.  Moore  is  being  retained  to  perform 
services  which  Ms.  Moore  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

8. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  9  and  11,  and  the  Legal 

Conclusions,  the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Mr.  Hanson  is  being 
retained  to  perform  services  which  Mr.  Hanson  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

9. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  9,  and  12,  and  the  Legal 

Conclusions,  the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Mr.  Steinhoff  is  being 
retained  to  perform  services  which  Mr.  Steinhoff  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

10. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  |  through  9,  and  13,  and  the  Legal 

Conclusions,  no  employee  junior  to  Mr.  Holley  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which 
Mr.  Holley  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render.  The  District  has  met  its  initial  obligation, 
under  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  to  make  a  determination  whether  Mr. 
Holley’s  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  him  to  be  reassigned  to  teach  ROP  multi-media

  

  

and  computer  applications.  The  District  reasonably  decided  not  to  re-assign  Mr.  Holley, 
based  upon  the  narrowness  of  Mr.  Holley’s  certification.  Mr.  Holley  has  not  persuasively 
rebutted  the  District’s  decision  to  disallow  him  from  teaching  these  classes.” 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Theresa  J.  Moore  that  her  services  will  be  reduced  by 

.50  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Eric  Hanson  that  his  services  will  be  reduced  by  .16 

FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular 
kinds  of  services. 

3. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Roger  Steinhoff  that  his  services  will  be  reduced  by 

-33  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

4. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Dennis  Holley  that  his  services  will  be  reduced  by 

1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  April  10,  2008 

ANN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

?  The  parties  may  request  that  this  matter  be  re-opened  for  the  taking  of  evidence  (by  telephonic  hearing)  regarding 
the  issue  of  whether  Mr.  Holley’s  qualifications  entitle  him  to  teach  ROP  multi-media  and  computer  applications. 
Any  request  to  re-open  the  hearing  shall  be  made  before  April  17,  2008.  No  request  to  re-open  the  hearing  shall  be 
granted  unless  Mr.  Holley  waives  in  writing  final  notice  requirements  under  Education  Code  section  44955, 
subdivision  (c),  and  agrees  to  an  extension  of  the  date  prescribed  in  section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  under  the 
provisions  of  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (e).  In  the  event  the  hearing  is  re-opened,  it  shall  be 
scheduled  before  April  24,  2008.  Recommendation 4  shall  be  stayed  pending  the  outcome  of  any  hearing. 

 

  

