BEFORE  THEGOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
THE  IRVINE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  Case  No.  L2008030557 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Belinda  Averill,  and  Other 
Certificated  Employees  of  the 
Irvine  Unified  School  District, 

      

Respondents. 

   
    

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Michael  A.  Scarlett,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 
(OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  the  above-captioned  matter  on  April  30,  2008,  in  Irvine, 
California. 

Anthony  P.  De  Marco,  Attorney  at  Law,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo, 

represented  Gwen  Gross,  Ph.D.,  Superintendent  of  the  Irvine  Unified  School  District 
(District).  Terry  Walker,  Assistant  Superintendent,  also  appeared  on  behalf  of  District. 

Respondents  Julie  Bautista,  Jamie  Di  Francisco,  Shelley  Edgar,  Kimberly  Fenton, 

Kristiana  Jahn,  Jeanette  Kumamoto,  and  Kerri  Nishimori  did  not  appear  at  hearing  and  were 
not  represented  by  counsel. 

Carlos  R.  Perez  and  Lori  Atkinson,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan, 
represented  Belinda  Averill,  Lynette  Bain,  Kelli  Bourne,  Roberta  Chewning,  Maria  Conferti, 
Vincent  Fabella,  Dominic  Fratantero,  Jill  George,  Edward  Johnson,  Sheri  Kulungian- 
Mendoza,  Donna  Lamanno-Linzey,  Eileen  Levy,  Linda  Mirshafiee,  Estella  Salter,  Joyce 
Stenberg,  Jan  Stewart,  Tonia  Stewart,  Elizabeth  Taylor,  Michelle  Tseng,  Rebecca  Venlet, 
Andrea  Vyn,  Elizabeth  Wieske,  and  Cheryl  Yoon  (Respondents). 

   
  

The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  and  has 
chosen  to  eliminate  of  all  its  employees  it  deemed  “temporary  certificated  employees”  to 
achieve  this  reduction.  The  district  provided  “precautionary”  notices  to  Respondents  of  its 
intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Respondents  requested  a  hearing 
for  a  hearing  for  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence,  and  evidence  by  way  of  stipulation,  was  presented 

and  received,  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  30,  2008.!  The 
Administrative  Law  Judge  hereby  makes  his  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  orders, 
as  follows. 

Jurisdictional  Facts 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Gwen  Gross,  Ph.D.,  Superintendent  of  the  Irvine  Unified  School  District,  filed  the 

Accusation  in  her  official  capacity. 

2.  On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  served  written  notice  pursuant  to  the 
direction  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Irvine  Unified  School  District  (Governing  Board) 
that  the  services  of  “temporary  certificated  employees”  would  not  be  required  in  the 
upcoming  2008-2009  school  year  (notice).  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Governing  Board  had  passed a  resolution  not  to 
reemploy  “temporary  certificated  employees.”  This  notice  was  served  on  251  “temporary 
certificated  employees.” 

3.  The  notice  informed  the  certificated  employees  that  the  Governing  Board  may 

release  temporary  employees  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44954’,  without  providing 
layoff  hearings  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955.  However,  to  the  extent  that  any  of  the 
certificated  employees  believed  or  claimed  that  they  were  entitled  to  probationary  or 
permanent  status,  the  Governing  Board  advised  that  the  notices  served  as  notice  that  they 
were  entitled  to  a  hearing  under  sections  44949  and  44955,  e.g.,  a  “precautionary  notice”  to 
the  “temporary  certificated  employees.”  The  certificated  employees  were  advised  that  they 
must  complete  an  enclosed  “request  for  hearing”  form  by  March  14,  2008,  to  preserve  their 
right  to  hearing,  and  that  failure  to  do  so  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  that  right  to  a  hearing. 

4.  Prior  to  the  date  specified  in  the  District’s  notice,  30  certificated  employees  each 

timely  returned  a  request  for  hearing  form.  On  March  24,  2008,  the  District  filed  and  timely 
served  the  30  certificated  employees  who  submitted  requests  for  hearing  with  a  “Notice  of 
Accusation  and  Acknowledgement  of  Request  for  Hearing”  and  related  materials  which 

'  On  March  17,  2008,  District  requested  that  OAH  set  the  hearing  in  this  matter  on  April  7,  2008,  and  the  hearing 
was  set  on  that  date.  On  March  25,  2008,  District  and  Respondents  filed  a  motion  to  continue  the  hearing  to  April 
30,  2008,  which  was  granted  by  OAH.  Pursuant  to  section  44949,  subdivision  (e),  a  continuance  of  the  original 
hearing  date  shall  extend  the  dates  prescribed  in  sections  44949,  subdivision  (c)  and  44955,  subdivision  (c)  for  a 
period  of  time  equal  to  the  continuance.  Here,  the  applicable  dates  are  extended  for  a  period  of  23  days. 
Subsequently,  the  May  7,  2008  issuance  date  for  the  proposed  decision  in  this  case  is  extended  by  23  days,  or  until 
May  30,  2008. 

?  All  further  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  specified. 

  

  

 

  

included  a  “notice  of  defense”  form.  At  hearing,  the  parties  stipulated  that  the  District 
provided  proper  notice  and  service  to  the  certificated  employees. 

5.  Twenty-four  certificated  employees  who  filed  requests  for  hearing  filed  Notices  of 
Defense.  Three  of  these  certificated  employees,  Jamie  Di  Francisco,  Jeanette  Kumamoto  and 
Andrea  Vyn,  later  withdrew  their  requests  for  hearing  and  are  not  included  in  this 
proceeding.  Five  certificated  employees,  Julie  Bautista,  Shelly  Edgar,  Kimberly  Fenton, 
Kristiana  Jahn,  and  Kerri  Nishimori,  requested  a  hearing  but  did  not  submit  a  notice  of 
defense  or  appear  at  the  hearing.  These  five  employees  have  waived  their  rights  to  a  hearing, 
pursuant  to  section  44949,  subdivision  (b).  One  certificated  employee,  Dominic  Fratantaro, 
submitted  a  request  for  hearing,  but  failed  to  file  a  timely  notice  of  defense.  Mr.  Fratantaro, 
however,  was  represented  by  counsel  at  hearing,  who  made  a  motion  to  include  him  in  this 
proceeding  even  though  no  notice  of  defense  had  been  submitted.  The  District  opposed  this 
motion  because  he  did  not  file  a  notice  of  defense.  Respondent  Fratantaro  will  be  included  in 

the hearing  because  he  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  and  was  represented  by  counsel  at 

hearing. 

6.  On  April  30,  2008,  at  hearing,  the  District  dismissed  its  Accusation  against  two 
certificated  employees,  Lynette  Bain  and  Cheryl  Yoon.  The  District  determined  that  these 
two  employees  were  improperly  issued  notices  as  temporary  certificated  employees,  because 
in  fact,  they  should  have  been  classified  as  probationary  employees. 

7.  Accordingly,  the  District’s  Accusation  and  this  hearing  proceeded  as  to  the 
following  certificated  employees:  Belinda  Averill,  Kelli  Bourne,  Roberta  Chewning,  Maria 
Conferti,  Vincent  Fabella,  Dominic  Fratantero,  Jill  George,  Edward  Johnson,  Sheri 
Kulungian-Mendoza,  Donna  Lamanno-Linzey,  Eileen  Levy,  Linda  Mirshafiee,  Estella  Salter, 
Joyce  Stenberg,  Jan  Stewart,  Tonia  Stewart,  Elizabeth  Taylor,  Michelle  Tseng,  Rebecca 
Venlet,  and  Elizabeth  Wieske. 

8.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

Reduction  in  Services 

9.  Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

10.  On  March  4,  2008,  upon  the  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent,  the 

Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-25  (Resolution),  to  reduce  or  eliminate 

>  Section  44949,  subdivision  (b)  provides  that  an  employee  shall  file  a  request  for  hearing  prior  to  the  date  specified 
in  the  Governing  Board’s  written  notice,  here  March  14,  2008.  Failure  to  do  so  results  in  the  employee’s  waiver  of 
the  right  hearing,  Respondent  Fratantaro  timely  requested  his  hearing.  Section  44949,  subdivision  (c)(1)  provides 
that  respondent  shall  provide  a  notice  of  defense,  if any,  five  (5)  days  after  the  accusation  has  been  served  upon 
respondent.  This  provision  does  not  specify  that  respondent  waives  a right  to  hearing  if  a  notice  of  defense  is  not 
timely  filed.  Respondent  Fratantaro  was  represented  at  hearing  by  counsel,  who  filed  a  notice  of  representation  on 
April  28,  2008.  Although  Respondent  failed  to  timely  file  a  notice  of  defense,  the  District  will  not  be  unfairly 
prejudiced  if  Respondent  Fratantaro  participates  in  this  hearing. 

 

  

certain  certificated  services  by  releasing  its  temporary  certificated  employees.  The  following 
reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  were  included  in  the  Resolution  to  apply 
2008-2009  school  year: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

Full-Time  Equivalent  Positions 

Class  Size  Reduction  (Grade  9) 
Class  Size  Reduction  (Grades  K,  1,  2,  3) 
Counseling 
District  Programs  (TOSA) 
Elementary  Art 
Elementary  Intervention  (TOSA) 
Elementary  Music 
Elementary  Teaching  (K-6) 
English  Language  Arts 
Foreign  Language  (Including  Spanish) 
Humanities 
Independent  Study  /  Home  Education 

Math 
Nursing 

Physical  Education 
Resource  Specialist  Program 
Science 
Science  Resource 
Secondary  Supplemental  Services  (TOSA) 
Social  Sciences 
Special  Day  Classes 
Special  Education  (TOSA) 

Total  FTE 

17.90 
57.96 
9.00 
6.60 
7.42 
7.77 
15.33 
52.00 
1.80 
0.20 
0.10 
1.40 
0.80 
1.20 
0.71 
0.40 
0.40 
20.10 
3.17 
0.60 
0.20 
5.10 

210.16 

11.  These  services  are  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  may  be  reduced  or 
eliminated  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Governing  Board’s 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or 
capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

12.  The  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  in 

factual  finding  number  10  primarily  due  to  expected  revenue  reduction  as  a  result  of  the 
State’s  budgetary  crisis.  The  reduction  in  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  to  the 
potential  for  loss  of  funding  of  certain  categorical  or  specially-funded  programs  and  the 
possibility  of  probationary  and  permanent  employees  returning  from  leaves  of  absence, 
factors  that  relate  directly  to  the  number  of  temporary  certificated  employees  that  can  be 
retained  by  the  District.  The  District  expects  a  deficit  of  approximately  $12,500,000  for  its 
2008-2009  school  year  budget. 

 

  

13.  The  District  intends  to  achieve  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  entire  210.16 

FTE  positions  in  factual  finding  number  10  through  the  release  of  employees  that  the  District 
has  deemed  “temporary  certificated  employees,”  and  “no  probationary  or  permanent 
certificated  employee”  will  be  affected  by  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services 
specified  in  factual  finding  number  10.  The  District  did  not  issue  notice  to  any  probationary 
or  permanent  certificated  employees. 

14.  The  reduction  or  elimination  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  10  is 

related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the 
210.16  FTE  positions  will  not  reduce  services  below  the  State  mandated  levels  of  instruction 
and  services.  Further,  Respondents  do  not  contend  that  the  District’s  proposed  reduction  in 
services  reduces  services  below  the  State  mandated  levels  of  instruction  and  services. 

Categorically  Funded  Programs 

16.  The  District  has  several  programs  it  describes  as  “categorically  funded  programs” 

15.  Eleven  of  the  Respondents  remaining  in  this  proceeding  were  classified  by  the 
District  as  temporary  certificated  employees  who  occupied  categorically  funded  positions 
during  the  2007-2008  school  year:  Respondents  Chewning,  Conferti,  Kulungian-Mendoza, 
Levy,  Lamanno-Linzey,  Mirshafiee,  Stenberg,  J.  Stewart,  T.  Stewart,  Taylor,  and  Venlet.  At 
least  seven  of  these  Respondents  have  been  employed  two  or  more  consecutive  years  by  the 
District  in  categorically  funded  positions  in  which  they  worked  75  percent  of  the  calendar 
school  year  but  were  retained  in  temporary  employee  classifications.  Respondents  dispute 
the  appropriateness  of  the  District’s  temporary  employee  classification,  but  they  did  not  offer 
any  evidence  regarding  the  Respondents’  service  time  or  seniority  as  compared  to  other 
District  certificated  employees.  The  District  did  not  provide a  seniority  list  that  included 
these  certificated  employees  because  they  were  deemed  by  the  District  to  be  temporary 
employees. 

(CFP),  including  but  not  limited  to,  “Title  One”  funded  programs  (including  some  special 
education  programs),  Class  Size  Reduction  (CSR)  programs  (which  primarily  include 
teachers  in  kindergarten  through  grade  3),  School  Library  Improvement  program  (SLP),  AB 
1802  Supplemental  Counseling  program,  and  the  Economic  Impact  Aide  (EIA)  program. 
Categorically  funded  programs  are  programs  financed  outside  of  the  District’s  base  revenue 
stream  and  are  intended  to  provide  educational  services  that  are  not  mandated  by  state  and 
federal  statutory  provisions.  The  District  typically  employs  “temporary  certified  employees” 
to  fill  these  categorically  funded  positions  because  of  the  indefinite  duration  of  the  funding 
for  the  particular  kinds  of  services. 

  
   

categorically  funded  programs,  excluding  certificated  employees  employed  in  CSR 
programs.  The  District  participates  in  “option  1”  of  the  CSR  program  which  is  funded  to  the 
extent  the  District  is  able  to  show  that  it  meets  a  20  to  1  student  to  teacher  ratio  to  qualify  the 
District  for  receipt  of  CSR  funds.  The  evidence  established  that  the  District  met  its 
requirements  for  funding  for  the  CSR  program  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  but  was 

17.  During  the  2007-2008  school  year,  the  District  had  267.31  FTE  positions  in 

  

inconclusive  as  to  whether  the  District  would  be  able  to  continue  to  meet  the  20-to-1  CSR. 
level  to  receive  funding  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

18.  The  evidence  did  not  definitively  establish  that  the  District’s  funding  for  all  or 

any  of  its  categorically  and  specially-funded  programs  would  be  eliminated  or  expire  at  the 
end  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Typically,  categorically  funded  programs  are  funded  on 
an  annual  basis  by  the  state,  federal,  or  local  governments,  and  the  funding  is  said  to  “sunset” 
at  the  end  of  each  school  or  fiscal  year.  These  programs,  in  normal  budget  environments  are 
routinely  refunded  and  the  positions  filled  in  the  next  school  year.’  Thus,  it  can  not  be 
concluded  that  the  categorically  funded  positions  would  not  be  available  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year.  There  was  credible  evidence,  however,  that  the  District’s  budget  would  be  cut 
based  upon  the  projected  State  budget  crisis,  and  that  some  of  the  categorically  funded 
programs  would  be  affected  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  but  exactly  which  programs  or 
projects  would  be  cut  was  not  established  by  the  District. 

Employees  Replacing  Teachers  on  Leave  of Absence 

19,  Nine  Respondents  remaining  in  this  proceeding  were  classified  by  the  District  as 
temporary  certificated  employees  who  replaced  regular  employees  on  leave  of  absence  from 
the  District  during  the  2007-2008  school  year:  Respondents  Averill,  Bourne,  Fabella, 
Fratantero,  George,  Johnson,  Salter,  Tseng,  and  Wieske.  Respondents  dispute  the 
appropriateness  of  the  District’s  temporary  employee  classification,  but  they  did  not  offer 
any  evidence  regarding  the  Respondents’  service  time  or  seniority  as  compared  to  other 
District  certificated  employees.  The  District  did  not  provide  a  seniority  list  that  included 
these  certificated  employees  because  they  were  deemed  by  the  District  to  be  temporary 
employees. 

20.  The  District  had  49.803  FTE  certificated  employee  positions  on  leave  of  absence 

during  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

Temporary  Employment  Status 

21.  The  District  initially  hires  all  of  its  certificated  employees  as  temporary 

employees.  The  District  prefers  to  use  temporary  certificated  employees  when  filling 
categorically  funded  positions  and  to  replace  teachers  on  leave  of  absence  because  it 
considers  these  positions  to  be  tenuous  in  nature  due  to  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
funding  of  the  categorically  funded  positions,  and  the  assumed  return  of  teachers  on  leave  of 
absence. 

22.  The  actual  temporary  employment  agreement  of  each  Respondent  was  not 

offered  into  evidence.  Rather  the  District  offered  into  evidence  a  copy  of  the  temporary 
employment  notification  form,  the  temporary  employment  agreement,  and  the  continuing 
employment  letter/agreement  used  by  the  District  when  employing  temporary  certificated 

*  For  example,  the  special  education  program  funding  is  typically  not  subject  to  draconian  budget  cuts. 

 

employees.°  The  parties  stipulated  that  each  Respondent  received  and  signed a notification 
of  temporary  employment  and  signed  a  temporary  employment  agreement  prior  to  beginning 
employment  with  the  District.  The  parties  further  stipulated  that  the  District  utilized  these 
forms  and  procedures  when  employing  temporary  certificated  employees. 

23.  Prior  to  hiring  a  certificated  employee,  the  District  provides  a  “Notification  of 

Temporary  Employment  Status.”  (See  Exhibit  7.)  The  notification  provides  in  relevant  part 
that  the  offer  of  employment  is  as  a  “temporary  employee”  and  that  the  District  “reserves  the 
right  to  remove  you  summarily,  without  cause,  at  any  time.”  The  certificated  employee  must 
sign  an  acknowledgement  of  receipt  of  this  notification  which  provides  that  they  have  read 
the  notification  and  understands  that  “this  offer  is  for  temporary  employment  and  that  I  have 
only  the  rights  afforded  me  by  my  status  as  a  temporary  employee.” 

24.  Ifthe  temporary  certificated  employee  accepts  a  position  with  the  District,  they 

sign  an  “Offer  of  Temporary  Certificated  Employment”  agreement.  (See  Exhibit  8.)  The 
agreement  specifies  in  relevant  part,  the  position  offered,  e.g.,  counselor,  school  nurse, 
elementary  teacher,  reading  specialist,  etc.,  the  date  on  which  the  employment  will 
commence  and  terminate,  the  salary  to  be  paid,  the  percentage  of  (full-time)  salary  to  be 
earned,  and  the  number  of  days  to  be  worked.  The  temporary  employment  agreements 
terminate  at  the  end  of  the  school  year,  typically  in  June,  unless  the  agreement  was  for  a 
shorter  period.  The  agreement  further  provides  in  relevant  part  that  the: 

....[D]istrict....  offers  you  employment  as  a  temporary  employee. 
‘Your  employment  with  this  District  will  be  subject  to  the  statutory 
provisions  dealing  with  temporary  employees  and  will  award  you 
no  rights  which  are  not  required  by  statue  including  but  not  limited 
to  the  right  of  the  District  to  remove  you  summarily,  without 
cause,  at  any  time  the  District  determines  that  would  be  in  its  best 
interest.  The  District  may  revise  your  status  to  that  of  a 
probationary  employee  and  utilize  the  provisions  of  Education 
Code  §  44929.21  to  nonreelect  you  for  the  following  school  year. 
In  either  of  the  above  actions,  or  any  other  taken  by  the  District, 
you  have  no  right  to  a  hearing  challenging  the  action  of  the 
District. 

   

If  you  serve  more  than  seventy-five  percent  (75%)  of  the  days  of 
required  service,  you  may  have a  hiring  preference  over  new 
applicants  for  the  following  school  year.  That  hiring  preference 
does  not  prohibit  the  District  from  determining  which  temporary 
employee  shall  be  reemployed  when  two  or  more  temporaries  have 

*  Respondents’  counsel  offered  into  evidence  the  actual  notifications  and  employment  agreements  of  five 
Respondents  deemed  to  be  temporary  certificated  employees  in  categorically  funded  positions,  Elizabeth  Taylor,  Jan 
Stewart,  Sheri  Kulungian-Mendoza,  Jill  George,  and  Donna  Lamanno-Linzey.  These  notifications  and  agreements 
were  consistent  with  the  copies  of  the  agreements  provided  at  hearing  by  the  District. 

  

similar  rights.  In  the  event  that  the  District  revises  your  status  to 
probationary  during  the  year,  your  seniority  date  for  purposes  of 
the  Education  Code  §  44949  or  44955  will  be  the  first  day  of 
probationary  employment. 

The  certificated  employee  signs  an  acceptance  provision  that  states  the  employee 
understands  he/she  only  has  rights  afforded  by  statute  as  a  temporary  employee. 

25. 

If  a  temporary  certificated  employee  is  retained  for  a  subsequent  school  year,  the 

District  sends  a  letter  to  the  employee,  typically  in  May  or  June  of  the  current  school  year, 
notifying  the  employee  of  their  “continuing  employment”  with  the  District  for  the  upcoming 
school  year.  (See  Exhibit  9.)  The  letter  informs  the  employee  that  the  “position  offered  you 
is  temporary”  and  identifies  the  applicable  school  year  for  which  the  position  is  offered.  The 
District  acknowledges  in  its  letter  that  written  notice  of  contract  status  is  required  under 
section  44916,  and  informs  the  employee  that  the  letter  constitutes  the  employee’s  continuing 
contract,  and  that  no  new  contract  would  be  issued.  The  employee  is  required  to  sign  the 
letter  acknowledging  acceptance  of  the  new  contract,  and  return  it  to  the  District  before  a 
specified  date. 

26.  If  temporary  certificated  employees  are  not  retained  by  the  District,  a  letter  is 

forwarded  to  the  employee,  usually  in  May  or  June  of  the  current  school  year,  indicating  that 
the  employee  is  being  “released”  and  notifying  the  employee  of  the  effective  date  their 
employment  will  terminate  with  the  District,  usually  the  end  of  the  current  school  year.  (See 
Exhibits  A.) 

27.  At  the  time  the  certificated  employee  is  initially  hired  by  the  District,  he  or  she  is 
informed  of  the  temporary  classification  of  the  position  offered.  The  employee  is  advised  of 
the  position  offered,  duration  of  employment,  and  the  salary  to  be  paid.  They  are  not 
informed  whether  the  position  is  a  categorically  funded  position  or  whether  they  are 
replacing  a  permanent  or  probationary  teacher  out  on  a  leave  of  absence. 

28.  Asa  policy  and  practice,  the  District  releases  or  terminates  all  of  its  temporary 

certificated  employees  near  the  end  of  the  school  year,  in  May  or  June,  and  then 
simultaneously  offer  continued  employment  agreements  (Exhibit  9)  to  the  certificated 
employees  if  positions  are  available  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  District  consults  the 
principals  at  each  school  to  determine  their  needs  at  each  school  cite  before  offering  the 
continued  employment  agreements  to  “temporary  certificated  employees.”  Employees  who 
have  worked  as  temporary  employees  are  given  priority  when  filling  categorically  funded 
positions  in  the  upcoming  school  year. 

29.  In  November  of  each  school  year,  the  District  meets  with  the  principals  from 

each  of  the  32  school  cites  and  discusses  how  many  “temporary  certificated  employees”  can 
be  “turned”  into  probationary  employees.  The  District  balances  the  needs  of  each  principal 
with  the  number  of  categorically  funded  positions  available,  the  number  of  teachers  on  leave 
of  absence,  and  the  number  of  temporary  certificated  employees  it  is  employing  in  the 

  

 

  

  

current  school  year.  In  determining  whether  a  temporary  certificated  employee  is  made 
probationary,  the  District  considers  the  employee’s  performance,  principal  evaluations,  and 
the  number  of  years  the  employee  has  served  as  a  temporary  employee.  Following  this 
process,  the  principals  are  advised  of  how  many  probationary  employee  slots  it  may  fill  for 
the  upcoming  school  year. 

30.  On  November  7,  2007,  the  District  identified  111.64  FTE  of  temporary 

certificated  employee  positions  (Exhibit  11)  that  it  designated  would  be  “turned”  into 
probationary  employees  as a  result  of  the  balancing  process  outlined  in  factual  finding 
number  49.  The  classifications  of  these  employees,  whether  they  were  temporary  employees 
in  categorically  funded  programs  or  replacing  teachers  on  leave  of  absence,  were  not 
established  by  the  evidence. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  findings  1  through  8.° 

2.  The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  10  are  determined  to  be  particular 

kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  findings  number 
10  and  11. 

3.  Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or  eliminate 

the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  10,  because  the  reduction 
or  elimination  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  by  reason  of 
factual  finding  numbers  1  through  14. 

District's  Temporary  Agreements  and  Notification 

4.  Respondents  contend  that  the  District’s  temporary  employee  agreements  used  in 
hiring  temporary  certificated  employees  do  not  comply  with  the  statutory  requirements  for 
sections  44924  or  44909.  Respondents’  essentially  argue  that  the  agreements  lack  mutuality 
and  fail  to  fully  state  the  nature  of  the  employment  for  which  they  are  being  hired. 

At  the  time a  certificated  employee  is  initially  hired,  the  District  must  specify  the 

classification  of  the  certificated  employee,  provide  a  written  statement  indicating  his  or  her 
employment  status  and  the  salary  to  be  paid,  and  if  hired  as  a  temporary  employee,  clearly 

‘The  District  issued  precautionary  notice  to  251  employees  it  deemed  to  be  temporary  certificated  employees 

© 
subject  to  the  notification  provisions  under  section  44954.  This  section  provides  the  District  may  release  temporary 
employees  at  any  time  prior  to  the  employee  serving  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  for  the  regular  schools  year. 
Thereafter,  the  employee  must  be  notified  before  the  end  of  the  school  year  of  the  District’s  decision  not  to  reelect 
the  employee  for  the  next  succeeding  year.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44954.)  The  District  also  satisfied  the  jurisdictional 
requirements  under  section  44954  for  dismissing  or  terminating  temporary  employees. 

  

 

  

indicate  the  “temporary  nature  of  the  employment  and  the  length  of  time  for  which  the 
person  is  being  employed.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44916.)  The  District  may  employ  persons  with 
appropriate  credentials  as  certificated  employees  to  perform  services  conducted  under 
contract  if  the  terms  and  conditions  under  which  such  persons  are  employed  are  mutually 
agreed  upon  and  such  agreement  is  reduced  to  writing.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44909.) 

The  District  provides  notification  of  temporary  employment  status  to  each  certificated 

employee  it  hires  at  the  time  the  employee  is  initially  hired.  The  notice  specifically  advises 
the  certificated  employee  that  the  employment  offered  by  the  District  is  temporary  and  that 
their  services  may  by  terminated  at  any  time  by  the  District.  The  employee  signs  an 
acknowledgement  in  the  notification  attesting  that  they  understand  the  employment  offered  is 
for  a  temporary  position. 

The  District’s  temporary  employment  agreement  specifies  the  position  filled,  salary 

paid,  the  duration  of  the  agreement,  and  clearly  states  the  temporary  nature  of  the 
employment  offered.  Further,  the  certificated  employees  signs  an  acceptance  provision  that 
also  advises  that  the  employment  is  temporary  and  that  the  rights  afforded  by  statute  are 
those  relating  to  a  temporary  employee. 

If  the  employee  is  retained  by  the  District  at  the  end  of  the  school  year, a  letter 
offering  continuing  employment  is  forwarded  to  the  certificated  employee  in  May  or  June  of 
the  school  year.  The  letter  confirms  the  employees’  continuing  employment  for  the 
upcoming  school  year  and  advises  that  the  position  offered  is  temporary.  The  letter  does  not 
specify  the  position  offered  or  the  salary  paid,  but  indicates  that  the  agreement  constitutes  a 
“continuing  contract”  and  that  no  new  contract  will  be  issued. 

Although  Respondents  argue  that  the  agreement  and  notification  fail  to  specifically 

state  the  classification  of  the  position  offered,  all  documents  used  by  the  District  clearly  state 
that  the  positions  offered  are  temporary  positions.  It  is  not  required  as,  Respondents  contend, 
that  the  District  indicate  the  funding  source  of  the  position  offered  position,  i.e.  categorically 
funded  position  or  replacement  for  teacher  on  leave  of  absence,  etc.  The  statutes  merely 
require  that  the  contract  clearly  indicate  the  temporary  nature  of  the  employment,  and  that 
the  parties  mutually  agree  in  writing  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  employment.  (See 
Ed.  Code,  §§  44916  and  44909.)  These  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  District  in  this 
case,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  21  through  27. 

Certificated  Employees  Replacing  Employees  on  Leave  of Absence 

5.  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondents  Averill,  Bourne,  Fabella,  Fratantero,  George, 

Johnson,  Salter,  Tseng,  and  Wieske  without  the  protections  afforded  in  sections  44949  and 
44955,  as  these  Respondents  were  properly  classified  as  section  44920  temporary  employees, 
by  reason  of  factual  findings  19  through  27. 

6.  Respondents  contend  that  the  District  improperly  classified  certificated  employees 

hired  to  replace  regular  teachers  on  leave  of  absence  as  temporary  employees,  when  in  fact 

  

10 

 

  

they  were  probationary  employees,  and  entitled  to  the  protections  provided  by  sections 
44949  and  44955.  Respondents  failed  to  establish  that  the  District’s  classification  was  in 
error. 

The  District  may  employ a  certificated  teacher,  for  a  complete  school  year,  but  not 

less  than  one  semester  during  a  school  year,  with  limited  exceptions,  as  a  temporary 
employee.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44920.)  “The  employment  of  such  persons  shall  be  based  upon  the 
need  for  additional  certificated  employees  during  a  particular  semester  or  year  because  a 
certificated  employee  has  been  granted  leave  for  a  semester  or  year,  or  is  experiencing  long- 
term  illness,  and  shall  be  limited,  in  number  of  persons  so  employed,  to  that  need,  as 
determined  by  the  governing  board.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44920.)  “Any  person  employed  for  one 
complete  school  year  as  a  temporary  employee  shall,  if  reemployed  for  the  following  school 
year  in  a  vacant  position  requiring  certification  qualifications,  be  classified  by  the  governing 
board  as  a  probationary  employee  and  the  previous  year’s  employment  as  a  temporary 
employee  shall  be  deemed  one  year’s  employment  as  a  probationary  employee  for  purposes 
of  acquiring  permanent  status.”  (/d.)  “For  purposes  of  this  section  ‘vacant  position’  means  a 
position  in  which  the  employee  is  qualified  to  serve  and  which  is  not  filled  by  a  permanent  or 
probationary  employee.  It  shall  not  include  a  position  which  would  be  filled  by  a  permanent 
or  probationary  employee  except  for  the  fact  that  such  employee  is  on  leave.”  (/d.) 

“A  district  may  employ  no  more  long-term  replacement  teachers  than  it  has 
permanent  or  probationary  teachers  absent  on  leave  at  any  one  time.”  (Bakersfield 
Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  District  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th 
1260,  1283;  see  also  Welch  v.  Oakland  Unified  School  Dist.  (2001)  91  Cal.App.4th  1421, 
1431-1432.)  Moreover,  the  District  need  not  place  the  temporary  certificated  employee  in  a 
specific  position  replacing  a  particular  regular  teacher  on  leave  of  absence.  (Bakersfield 
Elementary  Teachers  Association,  supra,  145  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1283;  Santa  Barbara 
Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Santa  Barbara  High  Sch.  Dist.  (1977)  76  Cal.App.3d  223,  232- 
233;  Paulus  v.  Board of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  59,  62-63.) 

Here,  the  District  had  49.803  FTE  certificated  employee  positions  designated  as  being 

on  leave  of  absence  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  There  are  only  nine  certificated 
employees  in  this  action  classified  as  replacing  teachers  on  leave  of  absence  for  the  2007- 
2008  school  year.  Thus  the  District  had  sufficient  FTEs  of  leave  of  absence  to  so  classify 
these  nine  employees  as  temporary  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  The  nine  employees 
classified  as  section  44920  temporary  employees  produced  no  evidence  at  hearing  to  suggest 
that  they  were  hired  into  a  vacant  position  that  was  not  filled  by  a  permanent  or  probationary 
employee  on a  leave  of  absence  from  the  school  district.  Absent  such  evidence,  these 
Respondents  can  not  establish  that  they  were  improperly  classified  as  temporary  employees 
for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

MI/ 

Mi 

11 

 

  

  

Certificated  Employees  in  Section  44909  Categorically  Funded  Programs 

7.  Cause  does  not  exist  to  terminate  the  eleven  certificated  employees  who  remain  in 
this  action  that  were  classified  by  the  District  as  “temporary  certificated  employees”  working 
in  categorically  funded  positions  under  section  44909,  by  reason  of  factual  findings  15 
through  18  and  28  through  30.  These  employees  are  Respondents  Chewning,  Conferti, 
Kulungian-Mendoza,  Levy,  Lamanno-Linzey,  Mirshafiee,  Stenberg,  J.  Stewart,  T.  Stewart, 
Taylor,  and  Ventet. 

8.  Respondents  contend  that  certificated  employees  in  categorically  funded  positions 
under  section  44909  were  improperly  classified  as  temporary  employees,  when  in  fact  these 
employees  are  probationary  employees  who  are  entitled  to  protections  under  sections  44949 
and  44955,  The  District  argues  that  certificated  employees  hired  into  categorically  funded 
positions  are  temporary  employees  because  these  positions  are  temporary  in  nature  and 
subject  to  unsettled  funding  sources.  Thus,  according  to  the  District,  they  are  properly 
classified  as  temporary  employees  and  may  be  dismissed  at  the  will  of  the  District. 

Categorically  funded  programs  are  typically  funded  outside  the  base  revenue  limit  of 

the  school  district  and  address  needs  that  cannot  be,  or  are  not  being,  addressed  with  base 
revenue  limit  funds.  (Zalac  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4th  838,  847.)  Section  44909  relates  to  credentialed  certificated  employees  who  are 
employed  by  the  school  districts  in  “programs  and  projects  to  perform  services  conducted 
under  contracts  with  public  or  privates  agencies,  or  categorically  funded  projects  which  are 
not  required  by  federal  and  state  statutes.””  (Ed.  Code,  §  44909.) 

Section  44909  Certificated  Employees  are  Probationary  Employees 

Here,  the  District  correctly  argues  that  employees  hired  under  section  44909  are 
treated  like  temporary  employees  and  perform  services  that  are  temporary  in  nature  because 
of  the  uncertain  duration  of  the  funding  sources.  Employees  under  this  provision  are  “treated 
in  much  the  same  way”  as  temporary  employees  in  that  they  do  not  accrue  service  toward 
attainment  of  permanent  status,  unless  reemployed  the  following  year  as  a  probationary 
employee.  (Zalac  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist.,  supra  98  Cal.App.4th 

7  Education  Code  section  44909  provides  in  relevant  part  that:  “The  governing  board  of  any  school  district 
may  employ  persons  possessing  an  appropriate  credential  as  certificated  employees  in  programs  and  projects  to 
perform  services  conducted  under  contract  with  public  or  private  agencies,  or  categorically  funded  projects  which 
are  not  required  by  federal  or  state  statutes.  The  terms  and  conditions  under  which  such  persons  are  employed  shall 
be  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  employee  and  the  governing  board  and  such  agreement  shall  be  reduced  to  writing. 
Service  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  not  be  included  in  computing  the  service  required  as  a  prerequisite  to 
attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a  permanent  employee  unless  (1)  such  person  has  served  pursuant  to 
this  section  for  at  least  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district  by  which  he  is  employed 
are  maintained  and  (2)  such  person  is  subsequently  employed  as  a  probationary  employee  in a  position  requiring 
certification  qualifications.  Such  persons  may  be  employed  for  periods  which  are  less  than  a  full  school  year  and 
may  be  terminated  at  the  expiration  of  the  contract  or  specially  funded  project  without  regard  to  other  requirements 
of  this  code  respecting  the  termination  of  probationary  or  permanent  employees  other  than  Section  44918.” 

12

  

838,  at  pp.  843-844;  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  supra  145  Cal.App.4th  at 
p.  1286.)  Employees  hired  under  section  44909  work  in  programs  and  projects  that  are 
anticipated  to  be  temporary  in  nature  and  the  school  districts  are  afforded  the  flexibility  to 
terminate  these  employees  without  the  formalities  of  regular  teachers.  (Bakersfield 
Elementary  Teachers  Association,  supra  145  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1287.) 

District’s  ability,  however,  to  terminate  certificated  employees  without  notice  under 

this  provision  requires  that  the  specially  funded  projects  or  programs  be  expired  or 
terminated.  This  is  a  very  important  distinction  under  section  44909.  The  employee  may  be 
terminated  under  section  44909  without  regard  to  rights  and  notice  afforded  probationary  and 
permanent  employees  only  when  the  contract  or  specially  funded  project  expires.  (Zalac  v. 
Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist.,  supra,  98  Cal.App.4th  838,  at  pp.  843-844; 
Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  supra  145  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1286.) 
“Certificated  teachers  assigned  to  a  categorically  funded  program  may  be  laid  off  without  the 
procedural  formalities  due  a  permanent  and  probationary  employee  only  if  the  program  has 
expired.”  (Id.  at  p.  1287;  see  also  Hart  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  William  S.  Hart  Union 
High  Sch.  Dist.  (1977)  73  Cal.App.3d  211,  215-216.) 

The  evidence  at  hearing  did  not  establish  that  categorically  funded  programs  in  which 

To  be  sure,  the  evidence  established  that  the  District’s  budget  would  be  likely  reduced 

Respondents  worked  had  been  terminated  or  expired,  or  would  expire  before  the  2008-2009 
school  year.  Both  Terry  Walker,  Assistant  Superintendent,  and  Lisa  Howell,  Director  of 
Fiscal  Services,  could  not  definitively  state  with  any  level  of  certainty  that  the  categorically 
funded  programs  would  be  terminated  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Although  the  funding 
for  categorical  programs  such  as  CSR,  EID,  and  the  federal  Title  I  program,  and  other  state 
and  local  programs  are  funded  on  a  year-to-year  basis,  and  the  District  must  apply  and  certify 
compliance  with  program  requirements  to  receive  funding,  in  the  past  these  programs  have 
been  consistently  refunded. 

by  12.5  million  dollars,  and  categorically  funded  programs  would  be  impacted  or  affected. 
However,  mere  reduction  of  the  funding  or  the  indeterminate  duration  of  funding  for  these 
programs  is  not  determinative.  (See  Zalac  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School 
Dist.,  supra  98  Cal.App.4th  838,  at  pp.  846  (“under  section  44909  the  uncertainty  of  future 
funding  is  no  longer  explicitly  controlling-perhaps  because  there  is  an  element  of  such 
uncertainty  for  all  programs,  even  those  authorized  indefinitely.”)  Rather  under  section 
44909,  the  programs  or  contracts  supporting  the  categorically  funded  positions  must 
terminate  or  expire  for  the  District  to  avoid  providing  notice  afforded  to  permanent  and 
probationary  employees.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  the  funding  for  District’s 
categorical  funded  programs  and  projects  had  expired  or  would  terminate  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year.  Those  Respondents  in  hired  into  categorically  funded  programs  are  entitled  to 
notice  and  protections  afforded  probationary  and  permanent  employees  by  section  44949  and 
44955. 

   

  

This  conclusion  is  not  adverse  to  the  legislative  intent  expressed  in  the  Code  that 
certificated  employees  should  be  afforded  certain  rights  to  protect  against  arbitrary  dismissal. 

13 

  

“Teachers,  certificated  employees,  are  given  rights  through  a  rather  complex  system 
designed  to  give  a  degree  of  academic  tenure  in  direct  relation  to  years  of  employment. 
Additional  service  by  a  teacher  imposes  a  limitation  on  the  power  of  the  institution’s 
governing  body  to  terminate  employment.  The  Legislature  prevents  the  arbitrary  dismissal 
of  certificated  employees  who  have  obtained  positions  of  a  settled  and  continuing  nature  ... 
by  requiring  notice  and  hearing  before  termination  ....  To  fill  its  short  range  needs,  however, 
a  district  may  employ a  certificated  person  as  a  temporary  employee  ...  who  may  as  a 
general  rule  be  dismissed  at  the  pleasure  of  the  district  ....[§]  The  Legislature,  however,  has 
restricted  the  flexibility  of  a  school  district  in  the  continued  use  of  temporary  employee..., 
for  otherwise  the  benefits  resulting  from  employment  security  for  teachers  could  be 
subordinated  to  the  administrative  needs  of  the  district....  Temporary  classification,  narrowly 
defined  by  the  Legislature,  must  be  strictly  construed.”  (Zalac  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale 
Unified  School  Dist.,  supra,  98  Cal.App.4th  838,  at  pp.  843-844;  Haase  v.  San  Diego 
Community  College  Dist.  (1980)  113  Cal.App.3d  913,  917-918.) 

This  point  is  further  illustrated  by  the  Education  Code  provisions  addressing 
temporary  employment  of  certificated  employees.  Except  for  certain  specific  provisions 
authorizing  substitute,  temporary,  or  permanent  classification,  the  Legislature  does  not 
provide  for  the  expansive  use  of  the  “temporary  employee”  classification.  Unlike  other 
statutory  provisions  within  the  Education  Code  that  specifically  address  temporary 
employees  and  the  classification  of  temporary  or  substitute  employees  (sections  44917, 
44919,  44920,  44921  and  44986),  section  44909  does  not  indicate  that  certificated  employees 
may  be  classified  as  temporary  employees.  Section  44909  does  not  specifically  use  the  term 
“temporary”  or  identify  certificated  employees  working  in  categorically  funded  programs  as 
“temporary  employees.”  However,  section  44915  provides  that  “[g]overning  boards  of 
school  districts  shall  classify  as  probationary  employees,  those  persons  employed  in  positions 
requiring  certification  qualifications  for  the  school  year,  who  have  not  been  classified  as 
permanent  employees  or  as  substitute  employees.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44915.)  Thus,  where  the 
statutory  provision  does  not  specifically  provide  for  a  permanent,  substitute,  or  temporary 
classification,  the  default  classification  is  probationary. 

The  Legislature  has  made  clear  its  intent  to  narrowly  construe  the  application  of 

temporary  classifications  to  certificated  employees.  Although  section  44909  allows  some 
flexibility  for  the  District  to  terminate  certificated  employees  in  hired  in  categorically  funded 
positions,  this  flexibility  does  not  include  classifying  teachers  hired  under  this  provision  as 
temporary.  Such  an  interpretation  of  section  44909  would  establish  a  huge  loophole  in  the 
Education  Code  which  would  allow  Districts  to  retain  certificated  employees  in  temporary 
classifications  indefinitely  who  have  worked  75  percent  of  the  calendar  school  year  for 
multiple  years.  At  least  seven  of  the  Respondents  in  this  case  have  been  employed  two  or 
more  consecutive  years  by  the  District  in  categorically  funded  positions  in  which  they 
worked  75  percent  of  the  calendar  school  year  but  were  retained  in  temporary  employee 
classifications.  These  employees’  elevation  to  probationary  status  would  be  dependent  solely 
upon  the  discretion  of  the  District.  Without  clear  intent  from  the  Legislature,  the  District 
may  not  interpret  section  44909  to  authorize  this  type  of  temporary  classification. 

  

14 

  

 

  

Accordingly,  employees  hired  into  categorically  funded  positions  under  section  44909 

are  presumptively  probationary  employees.  (  Ed.  Code,  §  44915;  Hart  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  William  S.  Hart  Union  High  Sch.  Dist.,  supra,  73  Cal.App.3d  at  pp.  215-216; 
Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  supra,  145  Cal.App.4th  at  pp.  1285-1287.) 

Employees  in  Categorically  Funded  Programs  Are  Not  Temporary  as  a  Matter  Of Contract 

9.  Finally,  the  District  argues  that  because  Respondents  mutually  agreed  to  the  terms 

and  conditions  of  the  temporary  employment  agreements,  they  may  not  now  dispute  their 
classification  a  temporary  employee  in  this  proceeding.  Although  the  District’s  temporary 
agreements  and  notification  procedures  satisfy  statutory  requirements  under  section  44916, 
these  agreements  may  not  used  to  nullify  protections  afforded  employees  under  the 
Education  Code.  “Any  contract  or  agreement,  express  or  implied,  made  by  any  employee  to 
waive  the  benefits  of  this  chapter  or  any  part  thereof  is  null  and  void.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44924.) 
Respondents  in  section  44909  categorically  funded  positions  may  not  be  relegated  to 
temporary  status  by  operation  of  contract,  when  in  fact,  their  classifications  are 
presumptively  probationary  under  the  section  44915  and  the  rulings  in  Hart  Federation  of 
Teachers  and  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association. 

Effect  of  “Precautionary  Notices” 

10.  Notewithstanding  the  determination  that  Respondents  in  categorically  funded 
positions  are  deemed  probationary  employees,  the  District  contends  that  these  employees 
were  afforded  the  notice  protections  of  probationary  and  permanent  employees  by  reason  of 
the  “precautionary  notice”  given  in  this  case  and  their  participation  in  the  lay-off  hearing. 
Although  Respondents  Chewning,  Conferti,  Kulungian-Mendoza,  Levy,  Lamanno-Linzey, 
Mirshafiee,  Stenberg,  J.  Stewart,  T.  Stewart,  Taylor,  and  Venlet  were  all  properly  noticed 
pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955,  it  can  not  be  determined  on  the  evidence  whether 
Respondents  would  be  subjected  to  the  reduction  in  the  particular  kinds  of  services  included 
in  the  Governing  Board’s  Resolution  No.  07-08-25,  listed  in  factual  finding  number  10. 

Once  the  Respondents  were  determined  to  be  probationary  employees,  they  must  be 

considered  in  light  of  other  probationary  employee  employed  by  the  District  when 
considering  lay-off  reductions.  The  District  failed  to  include  Respondents  in  the  seniority  list 
provided  at  hearing,  thus,  it  can  not  be  determined  where  Respondents  would  rank  with  other 
probationary  employees  within  the  District.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association, 
supra,  145  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1301.)  Moreover,  the  District’s  Resolution  No.  07-08-25 
resolved  that  only  temporary  employees  would  be  released  in  order  to  effectuate  the 
proposed  reductions  in  particular  kinds  of  services  in  factual  finding  number  10,  and  that 
probationary  and  permanent  employees  would  not  be  affected. 

Neither  the  District  nor  Respondents  produced  any  evidence  regarding  Respondents’ 

seniority,  credentials,  service  time,  tie-breaking  criteria,  or  any  other  data  that  would  be 
relevant  to  determining  whether  Respondents  should  be  subject  to  the  reduction  in  particular 
kinds  of  services  listed  in  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution.  Absent  this  evidence, 

   

15 

  

Respondents,  who  are  deemed  probationary  employees,  in  categorically  funded  programs 
and  positions  can  not  be  dismissed  subject  to  Resolution  No.  07-08-25,  in  factual  finding 
number  10. 

WHEREFORE,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  ORDER: 

ORDER 

1.  The  Accusation  against  Respondents  Belinda  Averill,  Kelli  Bourne,  Vincent 

Fabella,  Dominic  Fratantero,  Jill  George,  Edward  Johnson,  Estella  Salter,  Michelle  Tseng, 
and  Elizabeth  Wieske  is  sustained  in  as  much  as  these  are  temporary  certificated  employees 
who  have  been  released  but  nevertheless  provided  timely  and  proper  notice  of  their 
termination  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the 
Governing  Board’s  Resolution  No.  07-08-25. 

2.  The  Accusation  is  dismissed  against  Respondents  Roberta  Chewning,  Maria 

Conferti,  Sheri  Kulungian-Mendoza,  Eileen  Levy,  Donna  Lamanno-Linzey,  Linda 
Mirshafiee,  Joyce  Stenberg,  Jan  Stewart,  Tonia  Stewart,  Elizabeth  Taylor,  and  Rebecca 
Venlet,  and  the  District  may  not  notify  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for 
the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  May  16,  2008 

MICHAEL  A.  SCARLETT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

16

  

