  

e 

BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  DIRECTORS 
OF 
HELIX  CHARTER  HIGH  SCHOOL 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  2008030969 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Anthony  Agundes,  Sara  Allsup,  Leanna 
Block,  Marc  Collins,  Rachel  Crescitelli, 
Ali  Hafemeister,  Jose  Islas,  Sean  Morris, 
Ruth  Ortiz,  Jennifer  Slusher,  Yuchaio  Wu, 
and  Lenelle  Wylie, 

Respondents. 

e 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Donald  P.  Cole,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  La  Mesa,  California  on  April  22,  2008. 

James  E.  Young,  Law  Offices  of  Spector,  Middleton,  Young  &  Minney,  LLP, 

represented  Helix  Charter  High  School. 

Richard  J.  Schwab,  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  22,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Douglas  D.  Smith,  Ed.D.,  Executive  Director  of  Helix  High  School,'  made  and 

filed  the  accusation  dated  April  4,  2008,  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  District  employees. 

e 

Helix  High  Schoo]  became  a  dependent  Charter  High  School  in  1998.  Under  that  charter,  the  Grossmont 

' 
Union  High  Schoo!  District  remained  the  employer of record  for  the  school’s  certificated  employees.  In  July  2007, 
Helix  High  School  became  an  independent  Charter  High  School,  and,  as  such,  is  now  the  employer  of  record  for  its 
certificated  employees.  Helix  High  School  agreed  to  follow  the  Education  Code  framework  for  the  layoff  of  its 
certificated  employees. 

  

 

3. 

In  early  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 

the  Executive  Director  notified  the  Charter  Governing  Board  of  Helix  High  School  of  his 
recommendation  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  upcoming 
school  year.  The  Executive  Director  stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

4. 

On  March  10,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  2008-02,  determining  that 
it  would  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  end  of  the 
current  school  year.  The  Board  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  must  be 
reduced  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  were  the  following  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
positions: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Art 
Business 
Technology 
English 
Foreign  Language 
Home  Economics 
Industrial  Tech 

Math 
Performing  Arts 
Physical  Education 
Science 
Social  Science 

Non-Departmental  Reductions 

AVID 
Literacy  Staff  Development 
Senior  Project  Coordinator 
ESL/Sheltered 
Counseling/Social  Worker 

33 
33 

33 
66 
66 

2 
1.33 
33 

1 

1 

1 
1 

1.33 
2.5 

33 
33 

2 

16.46  FTE’s 

The  proposed  reductions  total  16.46  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

5. 

The  Board  directed  the  Executive  Director  or  his  designee  to  determine  which 

employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  as  a  result  of  the 
reduction  of  the  foregoing  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Board  further  directed  the 
Executive  Director  or  his  designee  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all  certificated  employees 
of  Helix  High  School  who  would  possibly  be  laid  off  as  a  result  of  the  reduction of these 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

 

6. 

Subsequent  to  the  action  the  Board  took  on  March  10,  2008  to  reduce  or 

eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  by  16.46  FTE  positions,  Helix  High  School  continued 
to  evaluate  its  personnel  needs.  After  taking  into  consideration  upcoming  positively  assured 
attrition,  resignations,  and  retirements,  Helix  High  School  has  now  determined  it  can  meet  its 
fiscal  needs  by  reducing  services  by  a  total  of  11.16  FTE  positions  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year”  To  accomplish  this  reduction  of  services,  the  District  must  give  final  notices  of 
termination  to  the  12  certificated  employees  who  are  the  respondents  remaining  in  this 
proceeding.’ 

7. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  Helix  High  School  timely  served  on  respondents 
a  written  notice  that  the  Executive  Director  had  recommended  to  the  Board  that  their  services 
would  not  be  required  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation.  The  notice  advised  respondents  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  that  each 
respondent  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice 
of  termination  by  March  31,  2008,  which  was  more  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of 
termination  was  served,  and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of 
the  right  to  a  hearing.  The  recommendation  that  respondents  be  terminated  from 
employment  was  not  related  to  their  competency  as  teachers. 

8. 

Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there 
was  cause  for  not  reemploying  that  respondent  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  accusation 
was  thereafter  timely  served  on  each  respondent.  Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  notice  of 
defense.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

9. 

The  services  the  Board  addressed  in  Resolution  2008-02  were  “particular 

kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

10. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  Helix  High  School  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  Helix 
High  School  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

11. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

Among  the  attrition  that  has  taken  place  since  issuance  of  the  preliminary  termination  notices  are  two  math 

; 
teacher  positions.  Three  respondents  are  math  teachers,  and  respondents  argued  that  at  least  two  of  those  three 
teachers  should  have  their  terminations  rescinded  as  a  result of  the  math-related  attrition.  However,  two  more  senior 
school  employees  presently  in  other  assignments  are  likely  to  be  placed  in  math  assignments  next  year,  one  who 
would  otherwise  have  been  laid  off  due  to  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  school  counselors,  and  the  other  who  is 
expected  to  return  from  a  temporary  assignment  at  the  County  Board  of  Education.  Further,  the  Education  Code 
does  not  require a  district  or  school  to  rescind  preliminary  termination  notices  served  on  properly-identified  teachers 
pursuant  to  the  procedures  set  forth  in  section  44955,  simply  because  post-notice  attrition  has  taken  place. 

  

At  the  hearing,  Helix  High  School  withdrew  the  accusation  as  to  Catherin  O’Rourke  and  Michael  Ried. 

3

3 

12. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

13. 

Leanna  Block  and  Michael  Ried,  both  English  teachers  with  single  subject 

credentials  in  English,  were  hired  on  the  same  date.  The  school  applied  the  tiebreaking 
criteria  set  forth  in  Resolution  2008-02  to  determine  their  order  of  termination.  This 
determination  was  made  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students.  Mr. 
Ried  was  accorded  higher  seniority  than  Ms.  Block  because  he  has  a  second  credential,  in 
social  studies,  while  Ms.  Block  does  not  have  a  second  credential.  In  making  this 
determination,  the  school  properly  applied  the  tiebreaking  criteria,  properly  retained  Mr. 
Ried,  and  properly  gave  notice  to  Ms.  Block  that  her  services  would  no  longer  be  required 
for  the  upcoming  school  year. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  All  notices and jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  Helix  High 
School  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and 
the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the 
accusation.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  respondents  notice  before  May  15,  2008, 
that  their  services  are  longer  be  required  by  Helix  High  School. 

ORDER 

The  accusation  served  on  respondents  Anthony  Agundes,  Sara  Allsup,  Leanna  Block, 

Marc  Collins,  Rachel  Crescitelli,  Ali  Hafemeister,  Jose  Islas,  Sean  Morris,  Ruth  Ortiz, 
Jennifer  Slusher,  Yuchaio  Wu,  and  Lenelle  Wylie  is  sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  to 
respondents  before  May  15,  2008,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  services  as  indicated. 

DATED:  Y-%  of 

AL 

DONALD  P.  COLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

