  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
OROVILLE  CITY  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  BUTTE,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Amended  Accusation 

Against: 

OAH  No.  2008031007 

Gary  Anderson 
Elizabeth  Brackmann 
Karen  Carriere  Armstrong! 
Cheri  Daniels-Bascherini 
Kristina  Hegemier 
Leonard  Hubbard 
Karla  Johnson 
Lisa  Kitchen 
Christy  Lephart 
Dawn  Stalter 
Kristine  Theveos 
Cate  (Catherine)  Will 
Kristen  Wilson 
Victoria  Wonacott” 

  

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Karen  J.  Brandt,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  on  April  29,  2008,  in  Oroville,  California. 

Diana  D.  Halpenny,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Oroville  City  Elementary 

School  District  (District). 

Andrea  Price,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  following  respondents:  Elizabeth 
Brackmann,  Kristina  Hegemier,  Leonard  Hubbard,  Karla  Johnson,  Lisa  Kitchen,  Kristine 

At  hearing,  the  name  of  Karen  Carriere  was  amended  to  Karen  Carriere  Armstrong. 

?  Joseph  Hernandez,  Yia  Yang  Hawj,  Adrienne  Huseman,  Lori  Ann  Maturino,  and  Shelby  Vance  were  dismissed  as 
respondents  in  this  matter  and  the  Preliminary  Notices  of  Layoff  served  upon  them  were  rescinded.  Kari  Amador- 
Ludovina,  Kimberly  Dryden,  Martina  Johnson,  Lisa  Leandro,  William  Linebarger,  Gretchen  Marsh,  and  James 
Wilson  entered  into  a  settlement  agreement  with  the  District  pursuant  to  which  they  waived  their  rights  to  a  hearing 
to  contest  their  layoff. 

 

  

Theveos,  and  Kristen  Wilson.  Respondents  Karen  Carriere  Armstrong  and  Cheri  Daniels- 
Bascherini  were  present  and  represented  themselves  regarding  tie-breaking  issues;  Ms.  Price 
represented  them  regarding  common  issues.  In  addition,  Ms.  Price  represented  Kathy  Pietak, 
who  was  not  named  as  a  respondent  and  was  not  served  with  a  Preliminary  Notice  of  Layoff 
or  an  Accusation. 

Evidence  was  received  on  April  29,  2008.  The  record  was  left  open  until  May  1, 

2008,  for  counsel  to  file  letter  briefs.  On  May  1,  2008,  Ms.  Halpenny  filed  a  letter  brief  on 
behalf  of  the  District,  which  was  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  18.  On  May  1,  2008, 
Ms.  Price  filed  a  letter  brief  on  behalf  of  the  respondents  she  represented  and  Ms.  Priepak, 
which  was  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  I.  The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was 
submitted  for  decision  on  May  1,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

L. 

Dr.  Penny  Chennell-Carter  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  She  made  and 

filed  the  Accusation  and  the  Amended  Accusation  in  her  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondents  are  employed  by  the  District  as  permanent  or  probationary 

certificated  employees  and  rendered  their  first  paid  service  to  the  District  in  a  probationary 
position  on  the  dates  indicated  on  the  seniority  list  maintained  by  the  District. 

3. 

On  February  22,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  (Board) of  the  District  was  given 
written  notice  of  Dr.  Chennell-Carter’s  recommendations  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  In  recommending  reductions  in  certificated  staff, 
Dr,  Chennell-Carter  considered  the  District’s  declining  student  enrollment,  the  qualified 
condition  of  the  District’s  budget,  the  Governor’s  proposed  budget  cuts,  and  the  fact  that  the 
District  had  received  a  charter  school  petition  from  the  River  Bend  Charter  School,  which 
seeks  to  provide  services  to  160  students  beginning  in  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

4, 

On  February  27,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-03,  entitled 

“Resolution  of  Intention  to  Dismiss  Certificated  Employees”  (Layoff  Resolution),  which 
provided  that,  “due  to  the  State  budgetary  problems  and  funding  reductions  in  general  and 
specific  programs,  and  due  to  declining  enrollment,”  the  Board  had  determined  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2009-2009  school  year: 

1. 

2. 

Reduce  Administrator  II  position,  Ophir  Elementary 
School  from  a  work  year  of  225  to  212  days; 
Reduce  Administrator  II  position  (212  days)  Central 
Middle  School  and  Ishi  Hills  Middle  School  split 
assignment  by  1  FTE; 

  

 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

Reduce  Administrator  III  position,  Director  of  Pupil 
Personnel/Principal  at  Bird  Street  Elementary  School  by 
1  FTE; 
Reduce  15.0  full-time  equivalent  K-6  classroom 
teachers,  District-wide; 
Reduce  K-8  District-wide  nursing  services  by  .8  FTE; 
Reduce  In-house  suspension  services  District-wide  by 
1.0  FTE; 
Reduce  elementary  music  teacher  District-wide  by  .5 
FTE; 
Reduce  counselor  services  K-8  District-wide  by  .8  FTE; 
Reduce  independent  study  services  K-8  District-wide  by 
.2  FTE; 
Reduce  GATE  services  grades  4-8  District-wide  by  .07 
FTE; 
Reduce  work  year  from  225  to  212  days  for  school 
psychologist  services  District-wide  (assigned  to  Ophir 
Elementary  and  Sierra  del  Oro  Schools); 
Reduce  school  library  services  grades  7-8,  Central 
Middle  School  (.5),  Ishi  Hills  Middle  School  (.3),  .8  FTE 
total. 
Reduce  non-severe  pre-school  services  at  Sierra  Del  Oro 
by  1.0  FTE; 
Reduce  2  special  day  classes  K-8  District-wide  by  2.0 
FTE; 
Reduce  2  sections  of  8th  grade  math  (Central  Middle 
School),  .34  FTE; 
Reduce  5  sections  of  8th  grade  health  (Central  Middle 
School),  .83  FTE; 
Reduce  2  sections  of  8th  grade  history  (Central  Middle 
School),  .34  FTE; 
Reduce 4  sections  of  8th  grade  language  arts  (Central 
Middle  School),  .67  FTE; 
Reduce  |  section  of  PE  (Central  Middle  School),  .17 
FTE; 
Reduce  2  sections  of  7th  grade  math  (Ishi  Hills  Middle 
School),  .34  FTE; 
Reduce  |  section  of  7th  grade  history  (Ishi  Hills  Middle 
School),  .17  FTE; 
Reduce  |  section  of  7th  grade  language  arts  (Ishi  Hills 
Middle  School),  .17  FTE; 
Reduce  |  section  of  7th  grade  science  (Ishi  Hills  Middle 
School),  .17  FTE; 
Reduce  |  section  of  PE  (Ishi  Hills  Middle  School),  .17 
FTE; 

. 

14. 

16. 

15. 

19. 

17. 

18. 

   

20. 

24. 

22. 

23. 

21. 

  

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

Reduce  |  section  of  elective  study  skills  (Ishi  Hills 
Middle  School),  .17  FTE; 
Reduce  1  section  of  elective  advanced  physical  education 
(Ishi  Hills  Middle  School),  .17  FTE; 
Reduce  |  section  of  health  (Ishi  Hills  Middle  School), 
.17  FTE;  and, 
Reduce 1  section  of elective  journalism  (Ishi  Hills 
Middle  School),  .17  FTE. 

In  the  Layoff  Resolution,  the  Board  found  that  it  was  “necessary  to  terminate  at  the 

end  of  the  2007-2008  School  Year  the  employment  of  28.85  full-time  equivalent  certificated 
positions  of  the  [District]  ...”  The  Layoff  Resolution  directed  the  Superintendent  to  “take 
the  proper  steps,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  to  send  the 
appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  whose  positions  may  be  affected  by  virtue  of  this 
action.” 

5. 

In  accordance  with  the  Layoff  Resolution,  on  March  12,  2008,  Preliminary 

Notices  of  Layoff  were  sent  to  the  respondents  represented  by  Ms.  Price  and  they  duly 
requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing 
school  year.  The  Accusation  was  timely  served  upon  these  respondents  and  a  group  Notice 
of  Defense  was  duly  filed  with  the  District  on  their  behalf. 

6. 

Preliminary  Notices  of  Layoff  were  also  sent  to  respondents  Christy  Lephart, 

Dawn  Stalter,  Cate  (Catherine)  Will,  and  Victoria  Wonacott.  Although  these  respondents 
were  included  in  the  group  Notice  of  Defense  filed  by  Ms.  Price,  they  did  not  request  a 
hearing  in  response  to  the  Preliminary  Notice  of  Layoff,  were  not  present  at  the  hearing  on 
April  29,  2008,  and  were  not  represented  by  Ms.  Price  or  any  other  counsel  at  the  hearing. 
They,  therefore,  waived  any  right  they  may  have  had  to  a  hearing  to  contest  their  layoff. 

7. 

Respondent  Gary  Anderson  filed  a  request  for  hearing  in  response  to  the 

Preliminary  Notice  of  Layoff,  and  was  duly  served  with  the  Accusation.  He  did  not  file  a 
Notice  of  Defense,  was  not  present  at  the  hearing  on  April  29,  2008,  and  was  not  represented 
by  Ms.  Price  or  any  other  counsel  at  the  hearing.  Mr.  Anderson,  therefore,  waived  any  right 
he  may  have  had  to  a  hearing  to  contest  his  layoff. 

*  At  hearing,  Ms.  Chennell-Carter  estimated  that  the  actual  number  of  reductions  set  forth  in  the  Layoff  Resolution 
was  approximately  28.47  FTE,  plus  the  administrator  work  year  reduction. 

  

 

Tie-Breaking  Issues 

8. 

On  February  29,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-04,  entitled 
“Resolution  Adopting  Tie-Breaking  Criteria”  (Tie-Breaking  Resolution),  which  established 
the  following  criteria  for  breaking  ties: 

1. 

Credentialing  —  including  but  not  limited  to: 

a. 

b. 
c. 

Legal  requirements  for  each  program  v.  credentials 
held. 
Specialties  specified  within  each  credential  held. 
Variety  and  breadth  of  credentials  held. 

2. 

Experience  —  including  but  on  limited  to: 

a. 
Length  of  experience  in  [the  District]  and  elsewhere. 
b.  Nature  of  experience  in  [the  District]  and  elsewhere. 
Relation  of  experience  to  positions  to  be  filled. 
c. 

3. 

Education  —  including  but  not  limited  to: 

5. 

4. 

Attendance. 

 
s
s
e
h

measured  in  employment  screening. 

Performance  ~  including  but  not  limited  to: 

Degrees  earned  and  dates. 
Majors  and  minors  in  all  post-high  school  studies. 
Courses  completed  since  employed  in  this  office. 
Other  inservice  experiences. 

a. 
b.  Evaluation  documents  on  file. 
c.  Specific  job-related  skills  (such  as  signing)  as 

    

Service  to  the  School  —  include  [sic]  but  not  limited  to: 
At  least  one  year  of  paid  successful  district  experience  in 
an  extracurricular  or  cocurricular  activity  or  sport  within 
the  past  three  years.

Bilingual  certificates  or  credentials  demonstrating 
ability  to  communicate  and  teach  limited-English 
proficient  students. 

Certificates  —  including  but  not  limited  to: 

6. 

a.. 

  

Teachers  with  an  August  14,  2006  Seniority  Date 

a. 

9. 

Cheri  Daniels-Bascherini  and  Jody  Waddell  are  currently  Special  Day  Class 

(SDC)  teachers.  Karen  Carriere  Armstrong  and  Carol  Frink  are  currently  Resource 
Specialist  Program  (RSP)  teachers.  All  four  of  these  teachers  first  rendered  paid  service  as 
probationary  teachers  with  the  District  on  August  14,  2006. 

Pursuant  to  Item  13  on  the  Layoff  Resolution,  the  Board  has  decided  to  reduce  non- 

severe  pre-school  services  at  Sierra  Del  Oro  School  by  1.0  FTE.  Joseph  Hernandez  is 
currently  in  this  position.  Because  he  is  more  senior,  Andrea  Dunn,  the  District’s  Associate 
Superintendent,  Human  Resources  and  Administration,  determined  that  Mr.  Hernandez  could 
bump  either  Ms.  Daniels-Bascherini,  Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong,  Ms.  Waddell  or  Ms.  Frink. 

Pursuant  to  Item  14  on  the  Layoff  Resolution,  the  Board  has  decided  to  reduce  two 
special  day  classes  K-8  District-wide  by  2.0  FTE.  Ms.  Dunn  determined  that  Ms.  Daniels- 
Bascherini  and  Ms.  Waddell  were  the  least  senior  teachers  currently  teaching  special  days 
classes.  Before  February  27,  2008,  Louise  Hering,  another  SDC  teacher,  notified  the  District 
that  she  would  be  retiring. 
currently  a  part-time  regular  education  teacher,  exercised  his  right  to  return  full-time  to  his 
prior  special  education  teaching  position.  In  light  of  Ms.  Hering’s  retirement  and  Mr. 
Molina’s  return,  Ms.  Dunn  determined  that  one  SDC  teacher  would  need  to  be  laid  off. 

In  addition,  as  set  forth  in  Finding  17  below,  Sean  Molina, 

10. 

In  order  to  determine  which  teacher  Mr.  Hernandez  would  bump  and  which 
SDC  teacher  would  be  laid  off,  Ms.  Dunn  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  set  forth  in  the 
Board’s  Tie-Breaking  Resolution.  To  apply  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  Ms.  Dunn  looked  at  the 
applications  and  resumes  in  the  personnel  files  of  Ms.  Daniels-Bascherini,  Ms.  Carriere 
Armstrong,  Ms.  Waddell,  and  Ms.  Frink,  and  asked  the  Special  Education  Director  about 
each  of  these  four  teachers.  She  did  not,  however,  ask  these  four  teachers  to  update  their 
credentials,  experience,  education,  performance,  certificates  or  service  to  the  school  before 
she  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria. 

11. 

From  the  information  she  reviewed,  Ms.  Dunn  determined  the  following  about 

each  of  these  four  teachers: 

a. 

Ms  Frink  has  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  (BA)  with  a  major  in  Liberal  Studies  and 
a  minor  in  Special  Education.  She  has  a  2006-2011  Preliminary  Level  I 
Education  Specialist,  Mild/Moderate  teaching  credential,  and  a  2005-2010 
Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential  with  an  English  Supplemental 
Authorization  and  a  Crosscultural,  Language,  and  Academic  Development 
authorization  (CLAD).  From  1993  to  1995,  she  was  a  YMCA  Group 
Supervisor;  from  1996  to  1999,  she  was  a  Severely  Handicapped  (SH) 
Aide;  from  1998  to  2001,  she  was  a  Networks  Tutor  for  grades  three 
through  six;  from  1999  to  2003,  she  was  a  Parent  Intervention  Program 
(PIP)  Aide;  from  2003  to  2004,  she  was  a  paraeducator  and  tutor;  for 

 

approximately  three  months  in  the  spring  of  2004,  she  was a  substitute 
teacher;  for  one  month  in  the  summer  of  2005,  she  was  an  SDC  teacher  in 
grades  three  and  four  in  Yuba  City;  for  one  month  in  August  of  2005,  she 
was  an  SDC  teacher  in  grades  kindergarten  to  five  in  Olivehurst;  and  for 
one  month  in  the  summer  of  2006,  she  was  an  SDC  teacher  in  grades  four 
and  five  in  Yuba  City.  She  knows  some  sign  language  and  has  been 
trained  in  Guided  Language  Acquisition  and  Development  (GLAD) 
strategies. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

Ms.  Waddell  has  a  BA  with  a  major  in  Liberal  Studies.  She  has  a  2005- 
2010  Preliminary  Level  I  Education  Specialist,  Mild/Moderate  teaching 
credential,  and  a  2004-2009  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential  with  a 
CLAD.  From  1995  to  2001,  she  worked  at  the  YMCA,  and  was  the 
Director  from  1996  to  2001.  From  2001  to  the  present,  she  has  been  a 
VBS‘  teacher  on  a  one-week  summer  excursion,  teaching  fifth  and  sixth 
grade  students.  From  2001  to  the  present,  she  has  been  a  Youth  Camp 
Director  at  a  one-week  summer  camp  for  approximately  100  teenage 
youth,  counselors  and  staff.  From  2001  to  2004,  she  was  a  teacher  in 
multi-age  grades  one  to  six,  six  to  eight,  and  nine  to  twelve,  at  Magalia 
Pines  Charter  School.  For  one  and  one-half  years  in  2004  to  2006,  she  was 
a  Special  Education  Teacher  at  Oroville  Community  Day  School.  She 
knows  sign  language. 

Ms.  Daniels-Bascherini  has  a  BA  with  a  major  in  Liberal  Studies  and  a 
minor  in  Special  Education.  She  has  a  2006-2011  Preliminary  Level  I 
Education  Specialist,  Mild/Moderate  teaching  credential,  and  a  2005-2010 
Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential  with  a  CLAD.  For  one  year  in  2000, 
she  was  a  substitute  SH  paraeducator.  For  one  month  in  1999,  she  was  a 
summer  school  SH  paraeducator.  For  ten  months  from  1998  to  1999,  she 
was  an  SH  paraeducator.  For  one  year  in  2005  to  2006,  she  was  an  SDC 
teacher  in  kindergarten  though  fifth  grade  at  Linda  Elementary  School. 

Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong  has  a  BA  with  a  major  in  Liberal  Studies.  She  has 
a  2006-2011  Preliminary  Level  I  Education  Specialist,  Mild/Moderate 
teaching  credential,  and  a  2006-2011  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential 
with  a  CLAD.  For  one  month  in  2006,  she  was  a  sixth-grade  summer 
school  teacher. 

12. 

When  Ms.  Dunn  looked  at  the  personnel  files  for  each  of  these  teachers,  she 
found  that  all  four  of  them  had  excellent  evaluations  and  attendance.  She  did  not  take  into 
consideration  any  student  teaching  experience,  since  all  of  their  student  teaching  experience 
was  similar.  When  she  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to  these  four  teachers,  she  started 

“Ms.  Dunn  did  not  know  what  “VBS”  meant. 

  

 

  

with  credentialing,  the  first  criterion  listed  in  the  Tie-Breaking  Resolution.  Since  Ms.  Frink 
had  an  English  Supplemental  Authorization  on  her  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential, 
which  none  of  the  other  three  teachers  had,  Ms.  Dunn  determined  that  Ms.  Frink  should  be 
deemed  the  most  senior  of  the  four  teachers.  As  Ms.  Dunn  explained,  if  a  teacher  has  an 
English  Supplemental  Authorization,  the  District  is  given  greater  flexibility  in  assigning  that 
teacher  to  different  assignments. 

Because  the  remaining  three  teachers  had  the  same  credentials,  Ms.  Dunn  then 
reviewed  their  experience,  the  second  criterion  on  the  Tie-Breaking  Resolution.  Ms.  Dunn 
first  looked  at  the  actual  teaching  experience  that  each  of  the  three  teachers  had.  Because 
Ms.  Waddell  had  more  years  of  actual  teaching  experience,  Ms.  Dunn  determined  that  she 
should  be  deemed  the  second  most  senior  teacher. 

Ms.  Dunn  then  compared  the  experience  of  Ms.  Daniels-Bascherini  and  Ms.  Carriere 

Armstrong  and  determined  that  Ms.  Daniels-Bascherini  had  more  relevant  experience  than 
Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong.  She,  therefore,  determined  that  Ms.  Daniels-Bascherini  should  be 
deemed  the  third  most  senior  teacher  and  that  Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong  should  be  deemed  the 
fourth  most  senior  teacher.  Because  only  two of  the  four  teachers  needed  to  be  laid  off  to 
comply  with  the  Board’s  Layoff  Resolution,  the  District  decided  to  layoff  Ms.  Daniels- 
Bascherini  and  Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong,  the  teachers  deemed  to  be  the  least  senior  of  the 
four. 

13. 

Both  Ms.  Daniels-Bascherini  and  Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong  asserted  that  Ms. 

Dunn  did  not  take  into  consideration  all  of  their  relevant  experience. 

Ms.  Daniels-Bascherini  testified  that  she  had  the  following  additional  experience  not 
considered  by  Ms.  Dunn:  She  had  worked  one  year  as a  facilitator/counselor  at  a  group  home 
for  at-risk  youth.  She  had  worked  six  years  as  a  parent/helper  in  her  three  sons’  classrooms. 
She  had  spent  two  years  as  the  PTO  president  at  Central  Middle  School.  And  she  had  spent 
six  years  as  the  PTA  hospitality  chair  at  the  Stanford  Avenue  School. 

Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong  testified  that  she  had  a  minor  in  special  education  that  was 
not  noted  by  Ms.  Dunn.  She  also  testified  that  she  had  the  following  additional  experience 
not  considered  by  Ms.  Dunn:  She  had  an  additional  month  of  teaching  sixth  grade  during  the 
summer  of  2006  for  the  Chico  Unified  School  District.  She  was  a  pre-school  teacher  at  the 
A.S.  Children’s  Center  for  three  years  from  August  2002  to  June  2005.  She  was  a  summer 
camp  counselor  for  two  months  in  2004.  She  was  a  Home  Daycare  Assistant  for  one  year 
and  two  months  in  2001  to  2002.  She  was  an  elementary  school  tutor  for  two  years  in  1999 
to  2001.  She  also  had  completed  two  years  of  Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment 
(BTSA),  was  taking  Level  II  course  work  at  California  State  University  Chico,  was  certified 
in  Crisis  Prevention  Intervention  Training,  had  been  trained  in  GLAD  strategies,  and  was  a 
Response  to  Intervention  (RTI)  team  member  at  Ishi  Hills  Middle  School. 

 

  

  

Ms.  Daniels-Bascherini  and  Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong  recognized  that  the  additional 
experience  to  which  they  testified  may  not  have  been  included  in  their  personnel  files.  Ms. 
Dunn  did  not,  however,  ask  them  about  their  experience  or  offer  them  the  opportunity  to 
update  their  personnel  files  before  she  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria.  Consequently,  their 
additional  information  should  be  added  to  the  information  set  forth  in  Finding  11  above. 

14. 

Respondents  argued  that  the  tie-breaking  criteria  set  forth  in  the  Tie-Breaking 
Resolution  were  vague  and  ambiguous  and,  as  a  result,  the  application  of  those  criteria  lead 
to  arbitrary  and  capricious  results.  In  particular,  respondents  questioned  the  use  of  the  term 
“including  but  not  limited  to”  in  each  of  the  criteria.  Respondents  argument  was  not 
persuasive.  Each  of  the  criteria  designated  for  review  in  the  Tie-Breaking  Resolution  was 
reasonable  and  appropriate.  While  each  of  the  listed  criteria  permitted  consideration  of 
additional  factors  not  specifically  delineated,  it  was  clear  from  the  Tie-Breaking  Resolution 
that  any  additional  factors  that  might  be  considered  had  to  relate  to  the  criteria. 
Consequently,  the  tie-breaking  criteria  set  forth  in  the  Tie-Breaking  Resolution  were  not 
vague  and  ambiguous. 

15. 

Respondents  also  argued  that  Ms.  Dunn’s  application  of  the  tie-breaking 

criteria  was  erroneous.  They  asserted  that  she  substituted  her  judgment  for  how  the  criteria 
should  be  weighted,  which  was  not  reflected  in  the  Tie-Breaking  Resolution.  Respondent’s 
argument  was  not  persuasive.  While  the  Tie-Breaking  Resolution  did  not  explicitly  provide 
that  the  criteria  should  be  applied  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  listed,  given  the  nature  of 
each  of  the  criteria  and  their  list  order,  it  was  not  unreasonable  for  Ms.  Dunn  to  begin  with 
credentialing  and  give  it  the  greatest  weight.  It  was  also  not  unreasonable  for  her  to  apply 
the  experience  criterion  next  and  give  the  greatest  weight  to  actual  teaching  experience.  As 
she  explained,  the  criteria  were  applied  in  this  way  during  a  previous  layoff,  and  were 
applied  consistently  to  all  four  teachers  in  this  layoff.  Ms.  Dunn’s  reasons  for  applying  the 
tie-breaking  criteria  as  she  did  were  within  the  discretion  of  the  District  and  were  not 
arbitrary  and  capricious.  Even  though  Ms.  Dunn  failed  to  include  some  of  Ms.  Daniels- 
Bascherini’s  and  Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong’s  experience  when  applying  the  tie-breaking 
criteria,  the  consideration  of  this  additional  experience  would  not  have  changed  Ms.  Dunn’s 
determination  to  place  Ms.  Frink  first  due  to  her  English  Supplemental  Authorization,  and  to 
place  Ms.  Waddell  second  due  to  her  greater  actual  teaching  experience.  Because  Ms. 
Daniels-Bascherini  and  Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong  are  both  scheduled  to  be  laid  off,  whether 
Ms.  Daniels-Bascherini’s  and  Ms.  Carriere  Armstrong’s  additional  experience  might  affect 
the  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  between  the  two  of  them  is  not  ripe  for 
determination  at  this  time.  That  determination  does  not  need  to  be  made  until,  if  ever,  the 
District  decides  to  retain  or  rehire  one,  and  not  the  other,  of  these  two  teachers.  In  sum,  Ms. 
Dunn’s  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to  place  Ms.  Frink  first  and  Ms.  Waddell 
second  was  not  arbitrary,  capricious  or  an  abuse  of  discretion. 

  

 

  

b. 

Teachers  with  an  August  21,  2000  Seniority  Date 

e 

16. 

Pursuant  to  Item  4  on  the  Layoff  Resolution,  the  Board  has  decided  to  reduce 

15.0  full-time  equivalent  K-6  classroom  teachers,  District-wide.  In  determining  which 
teachers  should  be  laid  off  pursuant  to  this  item,  there  were  four  teachers  who  had  the  same 
August  21,  2000  first  day  of  paid  service  as  probationary  teachers  and  Multiple  Subject 
teaching  credentials  -  Sean  Molina,  Rozemary  Sabino,  Kristine  Theveos  and  Christy 
Lephart. 

17. 

Mr.  Molina  is  currently  working  part-time  (.2  FTE)  as  a  regular  education 

teacher,  teaching  fifth  grade.  He  has  a  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential  and  an  Education 
Specialist,  Mild/Moderate,  teaching  credential.  Before  Mr.  Molina  became  a  part-time 
regular  education  teacher,  he  was  a  full-time  special  education  teacher.  Mr.  Molina  has 
exercised  his  right  to  return  full-time.  Ms.  Dunn  determined  that,  given  Mr.  Molina’s 
Education  Specialist  teaching  credential  and  seniority  date,  he  will  be  placed  as  a  special 
education  teacher  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  and  will  bump  a  more  junior  special 
education  teacher.  Consequently,  Ms.  Dunn  did  not  include  him  when  determining  which 
teachers  should  be  reduced  under  Item  4.  Ms.  Dunn’s  determination  was  within  the 
District’s  discretion. 

18.  |  Rozemary  Sabino  also  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  21,  2000.  She  has  been 
on a leave  of  absence  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  but  will  be  returning  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year.  She  has  a  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential  with  a  BCLAD  and  a  Reading 
Certificate,  and  a  Special  Instruction  teaching  credential  in  Reading  and  Language  Arts. 
Before  she  went  on  leave,  she  was  a  Reading  Specialist.  When  she  returns,  she  will  be 
placed  back  in  the  Reading  Specialist  teaching  position.  Because  Ms.  Sabino  did  not  teach  in 
a  self-contained  K-6  position  before  she  went  on  leave  and  will  not  be  placed  in  such  a 
position  when  she  returns,  Ms.  Dunn  determined  that  Ms.  Sabino  did  not  need  to  be 
considered  when  determining  which  teachers  should  be  reduced  under  Item  4.  Ms.  Dunn’s 
determination  was  within  the  District’s  discretion. 

e 

19. 

Ms.  Dunn  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to  determine  whether  Ms.  Lephart,  a 

second  grade  teacher,  or  Ms.  Theveos,  a  second  and  third  grade  teacher,  should  be  deemed 
more  senior.  Ms.  Lephart  has  a  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential  with  an  English 
Supplemental  Authorization  and  a  CLAD.  Ms.  Theveos  has  a  Multiple  Subject  teaching 
credential  with  a  CLAD.  Ms.  Dunn  determined  that,  because  Ms.  Lephart  has  an  English 
Supplemental  Authorization,  she  should  be  deemed  more  senior  than  Ms.  Theveos.  Ms. 
Theveos  asserted  that,  because  she  has  more  teaching  experience  and  greater  service  to  the 
District,  she  should  have  prevailed  over  Ms.  Lephart  in  the  tie-breaker. 

20. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Dunn  testified  that  both  Ms.  Lephart  and  Ms.  Theveos  are 

currently  slated  for  layoff.  Because  both  of  these  teachers  are  going  to  be  laid  off,  there  is  no 
need  at  this  time  to  determine  whether  Ms.  Dunn’s  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to 

@ 

 

  

10 

them  was  correct.  That  determination  does  not  need  to  be  made  until,  if  ever,  the  District 
decides  to  retain  or  rehire  one,  and  not  the  other,  of  these  two  teachers. 

Classification  of a  Teacher  in  a  Categorically-Funded  Program 

21. 

Kathy  Pietak  was  first  employed  by  the  District  on  March  1,  2006,  as  a 

temporary  teacher  in  a  categorically-funded  position.  During  the  2006-2007  school  year,  she 
was  employed  by  the  District  as  a  first-year  probationary  teacher  in  a  regular  education 
position.  Ms.  Pietak  received  a  layoff  notice  in  March  2007.  At  the  end  of  the  2006-2007 
school  year,  she  was  laid  off  and  placed  on  the  rehire  list.  For  the  2007-2008  school  year, 
the  District  employed  Ms.  Pietak  as  a  temporary  teacher  in  a  categorically-funded  position. 
By  letter  dated  March  12,  2008,  Dr.  Chennell-Carter  notified  Ms.  Pietak  that,  in  accordance 
with  Education  Code  section  44954,  subdivision  (b),  the  Board  had  determined  to  “non- 
reelect”  her  as  a  temporary  certificated  employee,  effective  June  30,  2008.  Because  the 
District  considered  Ms.  Pietak  to  be  a  temporary  teacher,  it  did  not  issue  a  Preliminary 
Notice  of  Layoff  to  her  or  advise  her  of  a  right  to  a  hearing. 

22. 

Respondents  Elizabeth  Brackmann,  Karla  Johnson,  Lisa  Kitchen,  Kristine 

Theveos,  and  Kristen  Wilson  all  have  at  least  the  same  teaching  credentials  as  Ms.  Pietak  and 
seniority  dates  that  are  earlier  than  Ms.  Pietak’s  seniority  date. 

23. 

Ms.  Pietak  argued  that  she  was  a  second-year  probationary  teacher  during  the 

2007-2008  school  year,  and  not  a  temporary  teacher,  and  that,  because  she  was  not  given  a 
Preliminary  Notice  of  Layoff  by  March  15,  2008,  as  required  by  Education  Code  section 
44944  in  order  to  layoff  a  probationary  teacher,  she  must  be  deemed  to  be  reemployed  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  Respondents  Brackmann,  Johnson,  Kitchen,  Theveos,  and  Wilson 
argued  that,  if  the  District  is  required  to  retain  Ms.  Pietak,  who  is  junior  to  them,  they  cannot 
be  laid  off. 

24,  —  Because  Ms,  Pietak  is  not  a  party  in  this  matter,  she  has  no  standing  to  raise 

the  issues  of  her  classification  and  release.  In  addition,  respondents  do  not  have  standing  to 
argue  on  Ms.  Pietak’s  behalf  that  she  was  improperly  classified  and  released  by  the  District. 
Consequently,  the  issues  argued  in  this  matter  relating  to  Ms.  Pietak’s  classification  and 
release  will  not  be  addressed  in  this  decision.° 

Positively  Assured  Attrition 

25. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Layoff  Resolution,  the  Board  “considered  all  positively- 

assured  attrition  which  has  occurred  to  date  and  additional  attrition  which  may  occur  before 
the  start  of  the  2008-2009  school  year  in  reducing  these  services  and  but  for  the  attrition 

*  At  hearing,  the  District  argued  that  the  March  1,  2006  seniority  date  for  Ms.  Pietak  reflected  on  the  District’s 
seniority  list  was  incorrect.  The  District  requested  that  Ms.  Pietak’s  seniority  date  be  corrected.  Because  Ms.  Pietak 
is  not  a  party  to  this  action,  her  seniority  date  will  not  be  addressed  in  this  decision. 

11 

  

 

  

already  assured  and  the  attrition  anticipated  would  have  found  it  necessary  to  reduce 
additional  particular  kinds  of  service.” 

26. 

After  the  Board  issued  the  Layoff  Resolution,  Janice  Nielsen  notified  Dr. 
Chennell-Carter  that  she  would  be  retiring  at  the  end  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Ms. 
Nielsen  is  currently  employed  by  the  District  as  a  Kindergarten  teacher.  Her  seniority  date  is 
February  24,  1970. 

27. 

On  March  18,  2008,  after  the  Board  issued  the  Layoff  Resolution,  Sonja  Lund 
notified  the  District  that  she  would  be  retiring  at  the  end  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Ms. 
Lund  is  currently  employed  by  the  District  as  a  first  grade  teacher.  Her  seniority  date  is 
September  1,  1970. 

28. 

Respondents  argued  that,  even  though  Ms.  Nielsen  and  Ms.  Lund  gave  notice 

after  the  Layoff  Resolution  was  issued  that  they  would  be  retiring,  the  Board  should  take 
their  retirements  into  consideration  as  positively  assured  attrition. 

29. 

At  hearing,  Dr.  Chennell-Carter  testified  that,  even  though  she  did  not  receive 

Ms.  Nielsen’s  or  Ms.  Lund’s  retirement  notices  until  after  the  Board  issued  its  Layoff 
Resolution,  she  anticipated  that  these  two  retirements  would  occur  and  took  them  into 
consideration  in  making  her  layoff  recommendations  to  the  Board.  As  set  forth  in  Finding  3, 
when  determining  whether  reductions  in  certificated  staff  were  necessary,  Dr.  Chennell- 
Carter  considered,  among  other  things,  the  charter  school  petition  then  pending  before  the 
Board.  According  to  Dr.  Chennell-Carter,  she  calculated  that  the  District  would  have  to 
reduce  its  K-6  certificated  teaching  staff  by  five  teachers  to  accommodate  the  creation  of  the 
charter  school.  Because  she  anticipated  Ms.  Nielsen’s  and  Ms.  Lund’s  retirements,  she 
included  only  three,  instead  of  five,  reductions  relating  to  the  charter  school  in  the  15 
reductions  set  forth  in  Item  4  on  the  Layoff  Resolution. 

30. 

|  Approximately  one  week  before  the  hearing,  the  Board  voted  to  deny  the 

charter  school  petition.  The  charter  school  petitioners  have  informed  Dr.  Chennell-Carter 
that  they  intend  to  ask  the  Board  to  reconsider  its  denial.  If  the  Board  continues  to  deny  that 
petition,  the  charter  school  petitioners  may  appeal  the  Board’s  denial,  first  to  the  county  and 
then  to  the  state.  The  charter  school  petitioners  still  hope  to  begin  their  charter  school  in  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  It  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  decision  to  determine  whether  or  to 
what  extent  the  charter  school  petition  should  impact  the  reduction  of  certificated  staff  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  The  Board  will  have  to  make  that  determination  itself  before  the 
final  layoff  notices  are  issued. 

31. 

Citing  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  the 

District  argued  that  it  did  not  need  to  take  Ms.  Nielsen’s  or  Ms.  Lund’s  retirements  into 
consideration  as  positively  assured  attrition  in  this  proceeding.  The  District’s  argument  was 
not  persuasive.  The  Board,  in  its  Layoff  Resolution,  explicitly  stated  that  it  considered  “all 

12 

 

  

...  additional  attrition  which  may  occur  before  the  start  of  the  2008-2009  school  year  in 
reducing  these  services.”  In  addition,  Dr.  Chennell-Carter  testified  that  she  anticipated  these 
retirements  and  took  them  into  consideration  when  making  her  reduction  recommendations 
to  the  Board.  Given  these  facts,  the  Board  must  continue  to  consider  the  retirements  of  Ms. 
Nielsen  and  Ms.  Lund  as  positively  assured  attrition  when  issuing  the  final  layoff  notices,  no 
matter  what  determination  it  may  make  as  to  the  charter  school.° 

32. 

In  sum,  the  services  identified  in  the  Layoff  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  not  arbitrary  or 
capricious,  and  was a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  Board’s  decision  was  based 
solely  on  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  District  identified  the  certificated 
employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  Board  directed  be  reduced  or 
discontinued.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 
that  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949 

and  44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  prerequisites  required  by  those  sections  were 
satisfied. 

2. 

The  services  the  District  seeks  to  eliminate  in  this  matter,  as  set  forth  in  the 

Layoff  Resolution,  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted 
a  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955,  legal  cause  exists  for  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  set  forth  in  the  Layoff  Resolution.  The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  these 
identified  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its 
pupils. 

3. 

No  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  respondent  is  being 
retained  to  render  a  service  that  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 
Legal  cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  give  respondents 
final  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  2008-2009  school  year,  subject  to 
continued  consideration  of  the  positively  assured  attrition  found  in  Finding  31. 

°  During  the  hearing,  the  District  included  evidence  with  respect  to  its  layoff  of  Lorinda  Strieby  as  an  administrator 
and  her  placement  in  a  Bilingual  Resource  teaching  position  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Because  there  were  no 
respondents  who  argued  that  they  would  be  adversely  affected  by  Ms.  Strieby’s  placement,  there  is  no  need  to 
address  the  District’s  actions  with  respect  to  Ms.  Strieby  in  this  decision. 

  

13

  

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

The  Oroville  City  Elementary  School  District’s  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate 
the  particular  kinds  of  services  identified  in  the  Layoff  Resolution  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year  is  AFFIRMED. 

2. 

The  Amended  Accusation  against  respondents  is  SUSTAINED.  Subject  to  the 

continued  consideration  of  the  positively  assured  attrition  found  in  Finding  31,  the  Oroville 
City  Elementary  School  District  may  give  final  notices  to  respondents  that  their  services  will 
not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Notices  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority. 

DATED:  May  5,  2008 

       
REN  J.B 
Administrative  La’ 
Office of Administrative 

Hearings 

  

   

14 

