BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  WILSONA  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  Case  No.:  2008030943 

   
    

MARIA  AGUILAR,  and  other  Certificated 
Employees  of  the  Wilsona  Unified  School 
District, 

      

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  hearing  in  the  above-captioned  matter  was  held  on  April  29,  2008,  at 

Palmdale,  California.  Joseph  D.  Montoya,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office 
of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  presided.  Complainant  was  represented  by  Peter 
C.  Carton,  Schools  Legal  Service.  Richard  J.  Schwab,  Trygstaad,  Schwab  & 
Trygstaad  represented  the  respondents. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing,  the  case  was 

argued,  but  the  record  was  held  open  so  that  various  documents  could  be  submitted. 
The  following  documents  were  received,  and  are  made  part  of  the  record  as  follows: 

Letter  from  Mr.  McNabb  re:  permanent  or  probationary  status  of 

teachers,  dated  April  30,  2008,  received  as  Exhibit  13; 

Transmittal  memo  and  personnel  file  of  Rachel  Jay,  received  as  Exhibit 

' 

15; 

Letter  brief  by  Mr.  Carton,  dated  May  1,  2008,  identified  as  Exhibit 

Letter  brief  by  Mr.  Schwab,  dated  May  1,  2008,  identified  as  Exhibit  L. 

The  case  was  deemed  submitted  on  May  2,  2008.  The  Administrative  Law 
Judge  hereby  makes  his  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  orders,  as  follow. 

  

'  After  Mr.  Carton  sent  Exhibit  15,  he  asked  that  it  be  disregarded,  as  it 

appeared  that  Mr.  Schwab  had  not  then  received  Exhibit  14.  However,  no  further 
briefing  was  received,  and  Mr.  Carton’s  arguments  reached  various  issues  besides  Ms. 
Jay’s  status.  Therefore,  Exhibit  15  was  considered.

  

  

 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Complainant  Ned  McNabb  filed  the  accusations?  in  this  proceeding  in  his 

official  capacity  as  Superintendent  of  the  Wilsona  School  District  (District). 

2.  The  following  persons  are  Respondents  in  this  proceeding  (Respondent3) 

and  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District: 

Maria  Aguilar,  Charae  Anderson,  Tracie  Banner,  Lorrie  Bauder, 
Lori  Bernfeld,  Diana  Bertram,  Connie  Bolton-Simpkins,  Jacob 
Briggs,  Rachelle  Briggs,  Kristin  Fall,  Keith  Faulkner,  Pam 
Lockwood,  Chad  Mantooth,  Darcel  Nilsson,  Afiong  Ntofon, 
Monica  Perez,  Danielle  Portillo,  Cecilia  Rico,  Marcia  Saldana, 
Wendee  Schoonover,  Jacqueline  Valadez,  Cecilyn  Zoubek. 

3. 

(A)  On  February  21,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  (Board)  of  the 

District  adopted  resolution  number  2007-08-05,  hereafter  the  “reduction  resolution.” 
That  resolution  noted  that  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  had  recommended  that 
certain  programs  or  services  be  reduced  or  eliminated  during  the  2008-2009  school 
year,  and  referenced  potential  cuts  to  the  state  budget  of  more  than  4.4  billion  dollars, 
and  the  potential  of  a  1.1  million  dollar  reduction  in  the  District’s  budget.  The 
reduction  resolution  authorized  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  services  and  programs 
starting  with  the  2008-2009  school  year,  in  light  of  budgetary  projections.  The 
reduction  resolution  requires  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  28  “FTE”—Full  Time 
Equivalents—by  reducing  services  in  both  the  elementary  and  middle  school  grades. 

(B)  The  FTE’s  that  the  Board  determined  to  reduce  are  described  in  the 

Reduction  Resolution,  as  follows: 

Self-contained  Classroom  instruction,  K-5,  17  FTE 
Literacy  Coach,  2  FTE 
Elementary  Administrative  Assistants,  Teacher  Positions,  2  FTE 
Departmentalized  Instruction,  Middle  School,  grades  6-8: 

Language  Arts,  [FTE 
Opportunity,  1  FTE 
Electives,  3  FTE  (one  each  in  Art,  Industrial  Technology, 
Wood  Carving-Drafting-Intro  to  Life) 

>  The  term  “accusation”  refers  to  a  type  of  pleading  utilized  under  the 

Administrative  Procedure  Act,  Government  Code  sections  11500  and  11503.  As 
noted  by  the  District  letters  to  its  teachers,  and  by  the  ALJ  during  the  hearing,  it 
should  be  made  clear  that  the  Respondents  are  not  “accused”  in  the  every-day  sense 
of  that  word;  they  have  done  nothing  wrong.  Instead,  it  might  be  said  they  are 
accused  of  not  having  enough  seniority  to  retain  their  positions  with  the  District  in  the 
face  of  a  resolution  to  reduce  positions. 

District-Wide  Programs,  2  FTE  (one  each  in  Long  Term  Independent 
Study,  grades  K-8  and  Resource  Specialist  Program). 

4. 

(A)  In  its  Reduction  Resolution  the  Board  directed  the  Superintendent 

to  give  notice  of  termination  to  certificated  employees  informing  them  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  following  school  year  (2008-2009). 

(B)  When  the  Board  adopted  the  Reduction  Resolution,  it  also  adopted 

a  separate  resolution  that  identified  tie-breaking  criteria  to  be  used  when  employees 
shared  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service.  That  resolution  is  number  2007-08-06,  and 
it  was  also  approved  on  February  21,  2008. 

5.  The  services  which  the  District  seeks  to  discontinue  or  reduce  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section 
449553 

6.  The  decision  by  the  Board  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  was  neither 
arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  was  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion 
given  uncertainty  regarding  the  state  budget  and  the  District’s  financial  resources. 

7.  The  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of 

the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

8.  Prior  to  March  15,  2008,  Respondents  were  given  a  preliminary  written 
notice,  to  the  effect  that  that  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955,  their  services 
would  not  be  required  in  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Respondents  requested  a 
hearing,  or  Complainant  has  waived  objection  to  their  participation  in  this  proceeding. 

9.  Thereafter,  on  or  about  March  28,  2008,  an  Accusation  was  served  upon 

Respondents.  That  Accusation  was  accompanied  by  a  notice  which  stated  that  failure 
to  deliver  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Board  within  five  days  of  service  of  the 
Accusation  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing,  and  that  the  Board 
might  then  proceed  against  the  Respondents  without  a  hearing.  Respondents  timely 
filed  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

10. 

In  the  course  of  the  reduction  in  force  process,  the  District  created  a 

That  seniority  list  took  into  account  a  number  of  factors,  including  first 

seniority  list. 
date  of  paid  service  and  various  tie-breaking  criteria  that  were  developed  by  the 
District  and  adopted  by  it.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were  appropriately  applied  to  the 
teachers  listed  on  the  final  seniority  list. 

  

3 

All  further  statutory  citations  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

noted.

  

  

11. 

(A)  The  District  has  withdrawn  or  rescinded  the  layoff  notices  to  the 

following  Respondents,  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing:  Michael  Aktutay, 
Ruth  Guess,  Pat  McGuire,  Deborah  Poor,  Anne  Stanley,  Glenda  Steele,  and  Raymond 
Strasser-King. 

(B)  During  the  hearing,  the  District  dismissed  the  Accusation  as  to 

Respondent  Charae  Anderson,  as  it  was  established  that  her  credential  had  a  broader 
scope  than  initially  understood,  and  because  she  was  capable  of  teaching  special 
education  courses  for  which  junior  teachers  had  been  retained. 

12.  The  District  determined  that  certain  junior  teachers  possessed  superior 

skills,  training,  or  capabilities  which  more  senior  teachers  did  not  possess,  which 
would  allow  the  more  junior  teachers  to  be  exempted  from  lay  off  or  “skipped.”  Such 
teachers  were  needed  by  the  District  to  teach  particular  courses  or  to  provide 
particular  services,  and  could  do  so  in  light  of  their  credentials  and  qualifications. 
Those  teachers  did  not  receive  lay-off  notices,  and  are  identified  as  Romayn  Jones, 
Kathryn  Kendrick-White,  Kelly  Shuey,  and  Irene  Brown. 

13,  Respondent  Rachelle  Briggs  was  listed  as  the  tenth  most  junior  teacher  on 
the  seniority  list,  with  a  first  date  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary  teacher  on  August 
25,  2006.  However,  on  September  29,  2005  she  was  hired  as  a  substitute  teacher, 
pursuant  to  a  contract  that  contained  the  following  pertinent  language: 

“1.  You  will  serve  as  a  day-to-day  substitute  teacher  for  the 
Wilsona  School  District. 

2.  The  District  will  commit  to  employing  you  every  school  day 
for  the  remainder  of  the  2005-2006  school  year,  beginning 
Monday,  October  3,  2005. 

3.  You  have  agreed  to  commit  to  substituting  exclusively  for 
the  Wilsona  School  District.  This  means  you  will  be  available 
every  school  day  beginning  October  3,  2005.... 

4.  By  making  a  commitment  to  serving  our  District  exclusively, 
your  assignment  shall  be  that  of a  long  term  substitute  teacher.  . 

. 

5.  You  will  continue  to  be  assigned  on  a  daily  basis  by  Anne 
Misicka  through  the  substitute  teacher  assignment  process. 
However,  if  for  some  reason,  Anne  were  unable  to  contact  your 
with  an  assignment,  you  would  automatically  report  to  Wilsona 
by  7:15  am  and  Anne  would  provide  you  with  your  assignment 
for  that  day.” 

(Exhibit  C,  emphasis  added.)

  

14. 

(A)  Respondent  Connie  Bolton-Simpkin  is  listed  as  the  most  junior 

employee,  with  a  seniority  date  of  December  18,  2007.  She  was  classified  as  a 
probationary  teacher  on  that  date  because  that  was  the  date  she  received  her  clear 
credential,  and  she  was  acknowledged  as  probationary  by  the  District  at  that  time. 

(B)  Prior  to  December  2007,  Respondent  Bolton-Simpkin  was 

employed  as  a  substitute  teacher.  She  worked  as  a  substitute  teacher  in  2005-2006 
and  the  2006-2007  school  years.  In  March  2006  she  was  employed  as  a  long-term 
substitute  under  a  written  contract  that  used  the  same  language  as  that  used  in 
Respondent  Briggs’  contract,  and  specifically  parts  1  and  4,  quoted  in  Factual  Finding 
13,  above. 

(C)  Respondent  attested  that  she  was  paid  whether  she  taught  or  not, 
but  estimated  that  she  taught  75  per  cent  of  the  time  while  she  was  contracted  to  the 
District  as  a  substitute  teacher.  She  was  paid  the  long-term  substitute  teacher’s  pay 
rate. 

15.  The  Superintendent,  Mr.  McNabb,  testified  that  the  contracts  used  to 

retain  Respondents  Briggs  and  Bolton-Simpkin  are  designed  to  exclusively  employ 
the  teachers  as  a  long  term  substitute,  and  that  they  were  paid  the  long-term  rates. 

16. 

In  the  seniority  list  prepared  by  the  District,  some  probationary  teachers 

have  a  seniority  date  prior  to  the  seniority  date  of  permanent  teachers,  and  those 
probationary  teachers  are  shown  as  senior  to  permanent  teachers.  Specifically, 
probationary  teachers  Tracy  Banner,  number  19  on  the  seniority  list,  Cecilyn  Zoubek, 
listed  as  number  20,  and  Cecilia  Rico,  listed  as  number  21,  are  shown  as  senior  to 
Respondents  Bertram,  Perez,  and  Schoonover,  who  are  all  permanent  teachers.  The 
list  did  not,  as  originally  drawn,  differentiate  between  the  three  probationary  teachers 
and  the  permanent  teachers.‘ 

17.  Ms.  Teri  Jay  was  not  a  respondent  in  this  case,  but  an  issue  was  raised  as 

to  her  status,  with  Respondents  asserting  she  may  be  a  probationary  teacher.  That 
teacher’s  personnel  file  was  received  in  evidence  (Exhibit  14),  and  it  establishes  she  is 
a  day-to-day  substitute  teacher  under  her  contract,  and  paid  at  that  pay  rate.  She  has 
been  employed  since  approximately  November  2007,  filling  in  for  her  mother,  who  is 
on  leave. 

18.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  by  the 
District  to  render  a  service  for  which  a  Respondent  was  certificated  and  qualified  to 
render. 

Exhibit  13.

‘  The  matter  was  clarified  by  the  District  after  the  close  of  testimony,  in 

  

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction  was  established  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  based  on  Factual  Findings  1  through  9. 

2. 

(A)  A  District  may  reduce  a  particular  kind  of  service  (PKS)  within  the 

meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type 
of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may 
‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent 
because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.” 
(Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.)  The  Court  of 
Appeal  has  made  clear  that  a  PKS  reduction  does  not  have  to  lead  to  less  classrooms 
or  classes;  laying  off  some  teachers  amounts  to  a  proper  reduction.  (Zalec  v. 
Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838,  853-854. 
See  also  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  631,  637 
[Reduction  of  classroom  teaching  can  be  a  reduction  of  a  PKS;  as  long  as  there  is  a 
change  in  the  method  of  teaching  or  in  a  particular  kind  of  service  in  teaching  a 
particular  subject  any  amount  in  excess  of  the  statutory  minimum  may  be  reduced]; 
California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32.) 

(B)  The  services  to  be  discontinued  by  the  District  in  this  case  are 

particular  kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955.  (Factual  Finding 
3(B).)  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was 
neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for 
the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 
(See  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d 
796,  808.)  This  Conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  3  through  7  and  the 
foregoing  authorities. 

3. 

(A)  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to 

transfer  to  a  continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  to  fill.  In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that 
position.  (Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  At  the 
same  time,  junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers—may 
“skip”  that  senior  employee—if  the  junior  teacher  possesses  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  not  possessed  by  their  more  senior  colleagues.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais 
Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  Dist.  (1981) 
116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

(B)  The  District  properly  skipped  a  number  of  employees  based  on 

their  qualifications.  No  Respondent  established  the  right  to  displace  a  senior 
employee.  This  Conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  12  and  18.

 

  

(C)  No  Respondent  established  at  the  hearing  that  they  had  the  right  to 

bump  a  junior  employee. 

4. 

It  was  not  established  that  Ms.  Jay  is  actually  a  probationary  employee. 

Her  contract  clearly  describes  her  as  a  substitute  teacher,  and  she  is  paid  the  day-to- 
day  rate,  to  fill  a  position  of  a  regularly  employed  person  absent  from  service.  (See  § 
44917.)  That  contact,  less  than  a  year  old,  controls  her  classification  at  this  time. 
(See  §  44916.)  While  she  might,  in  the  future,  become  a  probationary  employee 
under  operation  of  law  or  by  dint  of  another  contract  (see,  e.g.,  §  44918,  subd.  (a)),she 
has  not  yet  attained  that  status.  This  Conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Finding  17. 

5. 

(A)  Respondent  Rachelle  Brigs  is  entitled  to  a  seniority  date  of 

September  29,  2005,  as  she  was  hired  as  a  substitute  teacher  on  that  date,  paid  by  the 
District  to  the  exclusion  of  any  other  district,  and  has  served  the  district  for  more  than 
75  percent  of  the  2005-2006  school  year. 
Under  section  44918,  subdivision  (a),  that 
year-long  employment  as  a  long  term  substitute  shall  be  deemed  a  year  of 
probationary  service,  and  her  first  paid  date  of  service  should  be  September  29,  2005. 

(B)  It  is  not  clear  from  the  record  as  to  what  type  of  credential  this 

Respondent  held  in  2005-2006;  if  it  was  not  a  provisional  credential,  the  further  year 
of  probationary  status  may  in  fact  qualify  her  as  a  permanent  teacher.  In  either  event, 
she  is  junior  to  some  other  teachers  not  being  retained,  in  the  sense  that  she  if  she  is 
indeed  a  probationary  teacher,  she  is  junior  to  some  of  the  teachers  in  that 
classification  who  are  subject  to  lay  off,  or,  she  is  the  most  junior  of  the  permanent 
teachers  subject  to  lay  off.  The  District  shall  adjust  the  seniority  list  consistent  with 
this  Conclusion  in  its  final  order. 

6.  Respondent  Bolton  Simpkin  is  entitled  to  a  seniority  date  of  December  18, 

2006,  pursuant  to  section  44918,  subdivision  (a),  and  based  on  Factual  Findings  14 
(A)  through  15.  The  record  indicates  she  served  as  a  substitute  employee  for  at  least 
75  per  cent  of  the  year  prior  to  her  hire  as  a  probationary  employee  in  December  of 
2007.  As  such,  she  is  junior  to  Respondent  Aguilar  and  senior  to  Respondent 
Bernfeld. 

‘ 

7.  The  seniority  list  must  be  revised  to  separate  the  probationary  teachers  into 
one  group,  and  the  permanent  teachers  into  another,  so  that  a  separate  seniority  list  is 
established  for  each  class.  This  is  because  section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  requires 
that  no  permanent  teacher  be  laid  off  if  a  probationary  teacher  is  retained.  Within 
each  class,  lay  off  must  be  in  regards  to  seniority;  the  most  senior  probationary 

> 

Not  only  does  the  contract  imply,  at  paragraph  5,  that  she  would  work  every 

day,  Respondent  Bolton-Simpkins,  who  operated  for  at  least  one  period  under  a 
similar  contract,  recalled  working  a  substantial  part  of  the  year,  and  attested  to  being 
paid  for  every  day  of  the  school  year,  whether  she  was  taught  or  not. 

  

  

employee  must  be  the  last  one  laid  off  before  the  most  junior  permanent  teacher  may 
be  laid  off.  Respondent  Rachelle  Briggs  status  must  be  ascertained  by  the  District 
based  on  her  credentials  in  2005-2006;  she  shall  either  be  the  fourth  most  senior 
probationary  teacher  or  the  most  junior  permanent  teacher.  Thus,  the  seniority  list 
must  be  revised,  as  follows: 

Probationary  Teachers:  Jacqueline  Valadez  (the  most  junior 
probationary  teacher),  Chad  Mantooth,  A fiong  Ntofon,  Lori 
Bernfeld,  Rachelle  Briggs  (if  probationary);  Maria  Aguilar, 
Jacob  Briggs,  Kristin  Fall,  Pam  Lockwood,  Danielle  Portillo, 
Cecilyn  Zoubek,  and  Cecilia  Rico  (the  most  senior  probationary 
teacher). 

Permanent  Teachers:  Rachelle  Briggs  (the  most  junior 
permanent  teacher  if  she  is  permanent),  Diana  Bertram,  Monica 
Perez,  Wendee  Schoonover,  Tracie  Banner,  Lorrie  Bauder, 
Keith  Faulkner,  Darcel  Nilsson,  Marcia  Saldana  (the  most 
senior  permanent  teacher). 

8.  No junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 
services  which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render,  based 
on  Factual  Finding  18. 

ORDER 

1.  The  Accusations  are  sustained,  except  as  to  Respondent  Charae  Anderson; 

the  Accusation  against  her  is  dismissed  and  she  shall  retain  her  employment. 

2.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  the  Respondents  listed  in  Legal  Conclusion  number 
7  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Notice  shall  be  given  to 
Respondents  in  inverse  order  of  seniority,  first  to  the  probationary  class  of  teachers, 
and  then  to  the  permanent  teachers,  after  Respondent  Rachelle  Briggs’  classification 
is  determined. 

May  __,  2008 

Joseph  D.  Montoya 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

