BEFORE 
THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
THE  BERKELEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

OAH  No.  2008020506 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-Reemployment  of 
Certain  Certificated  Employees: 

POOJA  GOVIL,  CAROLINE  KIM, 
ROGER  A.  SMITH-TRUSS,  JAIME  L.  VINES, 
JILL  WIMMER,  KAREN  L.  CARTER, 
LILA  G.  KEENE,  RICHARD  A.  KLEINE, 
ROBERT  G.  MacCARTHY,  DAMION  L.  McNEIL, 
ZOE  KALKANIS,  JAMES  R.  PAWLAK, 
CORINA  ALEMAN  TOPPING,  RICHARD  S.  CONN, 
JAMIE  KNIGHT,  SUN  HYUNG  LEE, 
ANGELA  PRICE,  ERICA  RAINS-VARGAS, 
CORY  W.  NAKAMOTO,  BRENDA  WONG, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  16,  2008,  in  Berkeley,  California,  within  the  Berkeley  Technology  Academy 

of  the  Berkeley  Unified  School  District  at  2701  Martin  Luther  King,  Jr.,  Way,  Berkeley, 
California,  Perry  O.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

John  R.  Yeh,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Miller,  Brown,  Dannis,  Attorneys  at  Law, 

71  Stevenson  Street,  19th  Floor,  San  Francisco,  California  94105,  represented 
William  Huyett,  Superintendent,  Berkeley  Unified  School  District  (Complainant). 

Stewart  Weinberg,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Weinberg,  Roger  and  Rosenfeld,  1001  Marina 

Village  Parkway,  Suite  200,  Alameda,  California  94501-1091,  represented  respondents. 

On  April  16,  2008,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  2,  2008,  in  his  official  capacity,  Complainant  William  Huyett, 

Superintendent,  Berkeley  Unified  School  District  (the  District),  made  and  filed  the 
accusation  regarding  Respondents  Pooja  Govil,  Caroline  Kim,  Roger  A.  Smith-Truss,  Jaime 
L.  Vines,  Jill  Wimmer,  Karen  L.  Carter,  Lila  G.  Keene,  Richard  A.  Kleine,  Robert  G.

  

MacCarthy,  Damion  L.  McNeil,  Zoe  Kalkanis,  James  R.  Pawlak,  Corina  Aleman  Topping, 
Richard  S.  Conn,  Jamie  Knight,  Sun  Hyung  Lee,  Angela  Price,  Erica  Rains-Vargas,  Cory  W. 
Nakamoto  and  Brenda  Wong  (Respondents). 

2. 

The  twenty  respondents  in  this  matter  are  fully  credentialed  and  certificated 

employees of  the  District,  except  for  Respondent  Angela  Price  who  currently  works  as  a 
counselor  with  a  “waiver.”  Twelve  respondents  serve  respectively  under  a  multiple  subject 
credential,'  while  each of three  respondents  holds  a  respective  single  subject  credential  in 
art.  One  respondent?  holds  both  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  a  single  subject  credential 
in  art. 
Five  respondents  hold  a  pupil  service  credential,  or  have  acquired  a  waiver,  to  serve 
as  counselors’  in  District  schools. 

3. 

On  or  before  March  12,  2008,  the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent  for 

Human  Resources,  Dr.  Lisa  Udell,  presented  the  District’s  Governing  Board  with  a 
recommendation  that  the  District  give  notice  that  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS),  then 
offered  through  the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the  District  for  the  ensuing  school 
year  (2008-2009). 

4. 

On  March  12,  2008,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously  adopted 

Resolution  number  08-36,  which  adopted  the  Assistant  Superintendent’s  recommendation. 

The  resolution  recites  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  it  has  become 
necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to  discontinue,  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
2008-2009  school  year,  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  form  of  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
certificated  positions  as  follows: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

. 

Number  of  Full  Time  Equivalent 

Administration 

Manager,  Special  Education 
Principal  on  Special  Assignment 
Independent  Study  Coordinator 
High  School  Vice  Principal 
Middle  School  Vice  Principal 

Counselors 

5.0 

11.0 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

'  Pooja  Govil,  Caroline  Kim,  Roger  A.  Smith-Turss,  Jaime  L.  Vines,  Jill  Wimmer,  Karen  L. 

Carter,  Lila  G.  Keene,  Richard  A.  Kleine,  Robert  G.  Maccarthy,  Damion  L.  McNeil,  Zoe  Kalkanis,  and 
James  R.  Pawlak. 

?  Corina  Aleman  Topping,  Richard  S.  Conn,  and  Jamie  Knight. 

3 

Zoe  Kalkanis. 

‘  Sun  Hyung  Lee,  Angela  Price,  Erica  Rains-Vargas,  Cory  W.  Nakamoto  and  Brenda  Wong. 

 

  

Counselors 

(Including  counselors  serving  under  a  pupil  personnel  services  credential 
with  specialization  in  School  Social  Work  (Calif.  Code  Regs.,  title  5,  §  80049.1) 
College  Advisors 

9.0 

2.0 

15.21 
0.65 
5.8 
1.0 
0.2 
2.2 
0.2 
2.2 
0.6 

Teachers  on  Special  Assignment 

26.26 

Literacy/Reading  Recovery/Writing 
ULSS  (Universal  Learning  Supports  and  Services) 

Math 
BTSA/PAR 
Two  Way  Immersion 
Teacher  Leaders  BHS 
Counseling  Liaison 
School  Lunch  Initiative  Edible  School  Yard 
English  Language  Learner 

Enrollment  Adjustment  Elementary 

Middle  School  Math  Enhancement 

  

Enrollment  Adjustment  B-Tech 

Art 

2.0 

3.8 

2.0 

2.0 

Total  positions  eliminated  or  reduced  ..............  52.06 

5. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  13,  2008,  the  Assistant  Superintendent 

dispatched  preliminary  notices?  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders,  including  each 
respondent,  that  the  District’s  Governing  Board  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to  discontinue 
the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice.  Hence,  due  to  the 
prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  particular  kind  of  service  now  rendered  to  the 
District,  each  of  the  respondents  learned  the  District  would  not  reemploy  the  named 
individuals  in  the  certificated  positions  each  had  worked  over  the  past  school  year. 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  13,  2005,  conveyed  to  each  respondent  that  no 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  having  less  seniority  than  each  respective  respondent 
would  be  retained  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  to  render  a  service  that  each  respondent  was 
credentialed  and  competent  to  render  to  students  under  the  District’s  competency  criteria. 
The  letter  had  attached  to  it  the  Board’s  Resolution  No.  08-36,  a  copy  of a  form  titled 
“Request  for  Hearing”  as  well  as  copies  of  pertinent  statutory  provisions.  * 

> 

“Notice  of  Non-Reemployment.”

  

  

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

6. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  respondents  from  the  Assistant 
Superintendent  and  the  District’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons of the  District’s 
Board’s  intent  to  eliminate  the  course  as  taught  by  respondents. 

Respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  whether 

or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  Superintendent  timely  served  upon  each  respondent  the  Accusation,  dated 

April  2,  2008,  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense. 

All prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

Dr.  Lisa  Udell,  in  her  capacity  as  the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent 

(Dr.  Udell),  appeared  at  the  hearing.  She  provided  credible  and  persuasive  evidence. 

Dr.  Udell  established  that  the  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the 
District’s  budget.  Also,  the  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  service  is  due  to 
the  declining  pupil  census  for  the  district  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  In  order  to  partially  aid 
the  District  in  crafting  a  reasonable  budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District’s 
Superintendent  recommended  that  certain  certificated  positions  be  eliminated  due  to  lack  of 
funds. 

11. 

The  Superintendent  further  established  that  on  learning  that  the  District  was 
required  to  initiate  layoff  proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the  District,  the  Assistant 
Superintendent,  with  her  staff,  effected  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the  District’s 
seniority  list  for  the  District's  teachers. 

On  March  13,  2008,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  caused  to  be  placed  in  the  mail  all 

notices  to  affected  permanent  and  probationary  teachers  that  their  services  would  not  be 
needed  by  the  District  for  the  next  school  year.  But,  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  the 
Assistant  Superintendent  noted  that  her  office  had  erred  in  placing  the  name  of  Respondent 
Angela  Price  onto  the  District’s  seniority  list  and  sending  her  notice  of  her  right  to  participate 
in  the  instant  proceeding  as  a  respondent  because  Respondent  Price  actually  worked  as  a 
counselor  under  a  contract  the  designated  her  as  being  a  temporary  certificated  employee  for 
the  current  school  year. 

Respondents’  Contentions 

12. 

Certain  respondents  aver  that  the  District  incorrectly  applied  seniority  dates  for 

certain  respondents  by  failing  to  account  for  earlier  “start  dates”  for  employment  with  the 
The  respondents,  who  are  counselors,  assert  that  each  of  them  reported  to  work  to 
District. 
attend  orientation  meetings  about  nine  days  before  other  certificated  employees  began  work 
for  the  school  year.  Such  respondents  contend  that  the  seniority  list  must  be  adjusted  to 
reflect  for  each  of  them  an  earlier  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District. 

 

  

Respondent  Angela  Price  avers  that  the  District  erred  when  it  presented  her  with  a 
contract  to  work  as  a  temporary  employee  for  the  current  school  year.  Respondent  Price 
contends  that  the  decision  in  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Bakersfield  Ci ity 
School  Distr.  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  required  the  District  to  classify  her  as  a 
probationary  teacher  so  that  she  has  standing  as  a  respondent  in  this  matter. 

Respondent  Sun  Hyung  Lee  contends  that  she  was  misclassified  when  she  began 

work  in  August  2007.  Rather  than  now  being  a  probationary  one  teacher,  Respondent  Lee 
avers  that  the  District  should  have  recognized  her  first  year  as  a  classified  employee  during 
the  2006-2007  school  year  in  her  placement  on  the  seniority  list. 

And  Respondent  Poola  Govil  avers  that  because  she  attended  a  team  meeting  of 
fellow  teachers  on  a  date  before  the  day  specified  for  all  teachers,  with  multiple  subject 
credentials,  to  report  to  work  that  she  should  have  an  earlier  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the 
District  than  the  date  that  is  printed  on  the  District’s  most  recent  seniority  list. 

Respondents’  contentions  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

Individual  Respondents 

a. 

Ms.  Brenda  Wong 

of  this  matter. 

13. 

Respondent  Brenda  Wong  (Respondent  Wong)  offered  evidence  at  the  hearing 

Respondent  Wong  holds  a  pupil  personnel  services  credential.  She  works  as  a  high 
school  counselor  at  Berkeley  High  School.  The  District’s  seniority  list  shows  Respondent 
Wong  to  have a first  date of paid  service  to  the  District  as  August  28,  2006.  Respondent 
Wong  holds  status  as  a  probationary  certificated  employee  to  the  District. 

14. 

Respondent  Wong  was  not  persuasive  that  Tuesday,  August  15,  2006,  was  her 

first  day  of  paid  service  with  the  District.  She  recalled  that  her  supervisor,  Vice Principal 
Rory  Bled,  directed  her  to  report  to  the  school  site  to  prepare  for  counseling  work  on  a  date 
that  was  nine  days  before  teachers  arrived  at  the  work  site.  But,  Respondent Wong 
possessed  no  written  document,  which  was  issued  by  the  District,  that  demonstrated  a 
requirement  for  her  to  have  a  first  day  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary  employee. 

On  cross-examination,  Respondent  Wong  acknowledged  that  she  signed  a  contract 

with  the  District  that  reflected  her  handwriting.  The  contract  was  titled  “Offer  of  Temporary 
Employment  and  Contract.”  The  contract  shows  that  on  “8/26/06”  Respondent  Wong’s 
“employment  with  the  District”  will  commence  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.

  

  

15. 

Respondent  Wong  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Wong  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently 
competent  to  teach. 

b. 

Mr.  Cory  W.  Nakamoto 

the  hearing of  this  matter. 

16. 

|  Respondent  Cory  W.  Nakamoto  (Respondent  Nakamoto)  offered  evidence  at 

Respondent  Nakamoto  holds  a  pupil  personnel  services  credential.  He  works  as  a 

high  school  counselor  at  Berkeley  High  School.  The  District’s  seniority  list  shows 
Respondent  Nakamoto  to  have a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as  August  28,  2006. 
Respondent  Nakamoto  holds  status  as  a  probationary  certificated  employee  to  the  District. 

17. 

Respondent  Nakamoto  arrived  at  the  work  site  prescribed  by  the  high  school 
vice  principal  on  a  date  that  was  nine  days  before  other  District  teachers  reported  to  work. 
But  he  offered  no  document  that  was  issued  by  the  District  that  required  him  to  have a first 
date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  on  August  15,  2006. 

18. 

Respondent  Nakamoto  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any teacher  junior  to  him  for  which  Mr.  Nakamoto  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  teach. 

c. 

Ms.  Erica  Rains-Vargas 

19. 

Respondent  Erica  Rains-Vargas  (Respondent  Rains-Vargas)  presented 

evidence  at  the  hearing of  this  matter. 

Respondent  Rains-Vargas  holds  a  pupil  personnel  services  credential.  She  works  as  a 

high  school  counselor  at  Berkeley  High  School.  The  District’s  seniority  list  shows 
Respondent  Rains-Vargas  to  have a first  date of  paid  service  to  the  District  of  August  27, 
2007.  Respondent  Rains-Vargas  holds  status  as  a  probationary  certificated  employee  to  the 
District. 

20. 

Respondent  Rains-Vargas  was  not  persuasive  that  her  first  day  of  paid  service 

to  the  District  was  January  7,  2007,  as  a  high  school  counselor  in  a  probationary  employee 
status.  Rather  on  that  date  in  January  2007,  Respondent  Rains-Vargas  became  a  temporary 
employee  because  she  was  retained  to  fill  a  position  that  was  vacant  due  to  the  absence  of  a 
permanent  employce  of  the  District. 

21. 

Respondent  Rains-Vargas  arrived  at  a  work  site  prescribed  by  her  supervisor, 

Amy  Fry,  on a  date  that  was  nine  days  before  District  teachers  reported  to  work.  But  she 

 

  

  

offered  no  document  that  was  issued  by  the  District  that  required  her  to  have a first  date  of 
paid  service  to  the  District  on  August  14,  2007. 

22. 

Respondent  Rains-Vargas  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Rains-Vargas  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  teach. 

d. 

Ms.  Angela  Price 

of  this  matter. 

23. 

Respondent  Angela  Price  (Respondent  Price)  offered  evidence  ‘at  the  hearing 

Respondent  Price  holds  a  position  as  a  college  advisor  at  Berkeley  High  School.  She 

serves  in  a  classification  as  a  counselor  under  a  “waiver,”  as  she  does  not  possess  a  pupil 
personnel  credential.  Her  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  August  27,  2007. 

24, 

Respondent  Price  recalled  that  her  supervisor,  Vice  Principal  Rory  Bled, 

directed  her  to  report  to  the  school  site  to  prepare  for  counseling  work  on  a  date  that  was  nine 
days  before  teachers  arrived  at  the  work  site.  But,  Respondent  Price  possessed  no  written 
document,  which  was  issued  by  the  District,  that  demonstrated  a  requirement  for  her  to  have 
a  first  day  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary  employee  earlier  than  August  27,  2007. 

On  cross-examination,  Respondent  Price  acknowledged  that  she  signed  a  contract 

with  the  District  that  was  titled  “Offer  of  Temporary  Employment  and  Contract.”  The 
contract  shows  that  on  “8/27/2007”  Respondent  Price  began  employment  with  the  District 
for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  The  contract  classified  Respondent  Price  as  a  temporary 
employee  of  the  District.  Respondent  Price  holds  her  current  position  due  to  the  leave  of 
absence  taken  by  Ms.  Jennifer  Antonuccio,  who  is  a  counselor. 

25. 

Respondent  Price  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Price  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently 
competent  to  teach. 

e. 

Ms.  Sung  Hyung  Lee 

hearing of this  matter. 

26. 

Respondent  Sung  Hyung  Lee  (Respondent  Lee)  offered  evidence  at  the 

Respondent  Lee  holds  a  pupil  personnel  services  credential  as  well  as  a  social  work 

authorization.  She  works  as  a  counselor  at  the  middle  school  level  (grades  6  through  8).  The 
District’s  seniority  list  shows  Respondent  Lee  to  have a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the 
District  as  August  27,  2007.  Respondent  Lee  holds  status  as  a  certificated  employee  to  the 
District  and  notes  her  seniority  status  as  being  in  the  range  of  probationary  one.

  

  

27. 

On  August  22,  2007,  which  was  nine  days  before  the  date  teachers  reported  for 

the  school  year,  Respondent  Lee  reported  for  staff  orientation  meetings  in  accordance  with 
direction  from  her  supervisor.  (Respondent  worked  only  four  days  during  the  orientation 
phase  and  she  notes  that  she  “owes”  five  days,  which  she  will  perform  at  the  end  of  the  year 
to  earn  the  stipend  that  specifies  money  beyond  the  contract  salary  payable  to  her.)  But, 
Respondent  Lee  possessed  no  written  document,  which  was  issued  by  the  District,  that 
demonstrated  a  requirement  for  her  to  have  a  first  day  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary 
employee  earlier  than  August  27,  2007. 

28. 

In  August  2006,  the  District  hired  Respondent  Lee  to  work  as a  classified 

employee  whereby  she  performed  services  as  an  instructional  specialist,  and  after  the  passage 
of  four  months  her  classified  employee  position  changed  to  health  educator.  She  began  that 
school  year  on  August  27,  2006,  which  was  the  first  day  that  students  arrived  for  school. 
Respondent  Lee  observed  that  a  credential  is  not  required  to  work  as  an  instructional 
specialist.  She  did  not  know  whether  a  pupil  service  credential  is  required  to  work  as  a 
health  educator. 

When  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  the  current  school  year  was  distributed  among 

certified  employees  to  review  for  accuracy,  Respondent  Lee  did  not  complain  to  the  District 
that  she  believed  that  her  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  one  year  earlier  that  the 
date  of  August  27,  2007. 

29. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Udell  established  that  the  positions  of  health 

educator  and  instructional  specialist,  which  were  positions  held  by  Respondent  Lee  in  the 
2006-2007  school  year,  were  classified  employee  positions  for  which  a  credential  was  not 
required  to  hold the  jobs. 

30. 

Respondent  Lee  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 
any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Lee  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently  competent 
to  teach. 

f-  Ms.  Pooja  Govil 

31. 
this  matter. 

Respondent  Pooja  Govil  (Respondent  Govil)  offered  evidence  at  the  hearing  of 

Respondent  Govil  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  with  a  CLAD  certificate.  She 

works  as  a  fourth  grade  teacher  at  Berkeley  Arts  Magnet  school.  The  District’s  seniority  list 
shows  Respondent  Govil  to  have a  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as  August  27, 
2007.  Respondent  Govil  holds  status  as  a  certificated  employee  to  the  District  and  notes  her 
seniority  status  as  being  in  the  range  of  probationary  one. 

32.. 

On  August  17,  2007,  Respondent  Govil  attended  a  staff  meeting  for  fourth 
grade  and  fifth  grade  teachers.  The  meeting  was  prompted  by  the  direction  of  the  school 
principal  that  a  team  of  four  teachers,  which  included  Respondent  Govil,  to  attend  the 

   

  

meeting.  She  was  paid  for  that  single  day  of  team  meetings,  which  flowed  from  her  signing 
of a  time  sheet  for  the  work,  but  she  noted  that  the  stipend  was  in  excess of the salary 
specified  in  the  contract  that  she  entered  into  with  the  District  for  the  2007-2008  school year. 

33. 

_  Respondent  Govil  was  not  persuasive  that  before  the  date  of  the  hearing  in  this 
matter  the  District  had  failed  to  provide  her  with  a  seniority  list  that  reflected  the  correct  date 
for  her  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District.  She  did  not  show  by  corroborating  evidence 
that  the  District’s  seniority  list,  which  was  sent  to  her  by  mail,  had  no  date  for  her  first  day  of 
paid  service. 

District’s  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

34, 

During  the  current  school  year,  the  Board  has  found  that  the  District  faces  a 
prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State of  California  may 
be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board  has  determined  that 
sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  operate  the  same  number  of  teacher  and  administrator 
positions  and  programs  during  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  the  District  must  prospectively 
reduce  or  eliminate  a  number  of  FTE of particular  kinds of  services,  including  the  positions 
held  by  respondents. 

35. 

No  competent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of  the proposed 
elimination  of  the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  the  District 
will  retain  any  teacher  who  is  junior  to  respondents  to  perform  services  for  which 
respondents  have  been  certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach  in  such  FTE positions 
for  the  next  school  year. 

36. 

The  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent  and  the  Board’s  decision  to 

eliminate  or  discontinue a total  of  52.06  FTE  positions,  including  the  positions  held  by  each 
respondent,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s 
discretion. 

37. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 
positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  for  the  ensuing  school 
year  is  related  to  the  welfare of the  District  and  its  overall  student  population. 

38. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 

particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of  the 
next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of  the 
elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l. 
44949  and  44955,

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

  

  

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth 
in  Factual  Findings  1  through  9,  inclusive. 

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or  official 

duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been  regularly 
performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the  District  has 
properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non-reemployment  of 
respondents. 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44955  establishes,  in  part,  that  the  order  of  teacher 

layoff  must  occur  “in  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  [the  employee  teachers]  were  employed, 
as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  [Education  Code  section] 
...  44845...  .”  And,  Education  Code  section  44845,  in  part,  states:  “Every  probationary  or 
.  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  employed  on  the  date  upon 
permanent  employee  employed  . 
which  [s]he  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position.”  [Emphasis  added. ] 

. 

5. 

Respondents,  who  are  employed  as  counselors  for  the  District,  proclaimed  that 

they  had  earlier  first  dates  of  paid  service  than  shown  on  the  seniority.  They  asserted  that 
each  was  called  into  work  nine  days  before  other  teachers  reported  for  the  subject  school 
year.  But  Assistant  Superintendent  Udell  offered  a  copy  of  the  contract  between  the  District 
and  the  Berkeley  Federation of  Teachers  for  the  years  July  1,  2005  through  June  30,  2008. 
The  District’s  form  of  contract  for  counselors  established  that  counselors  are  paid  to  perform 
services  over  184  school  days.  But  teachers  are  paid  for  the  provision  of  service  for  nine 
days  that  may  be  rendered  either  before  the  beginning  of  the  school  year  or  after  the  final day 
of  the  school  year  or  even  during  the  mid-year  winter  break.  (The  stipend  paid  to  each 
teacher  for  the  nine  days  worked  beyond  the  length  of  the  contract  is  a  monetary  amount 
calculated  by  dividing  the  prescribed  gross  salary  by  184,  which  represents  the  length  of  the 
term  of  the  contract  for  counselors.)  Respondents  unpersuasively  argued  that  by  attending 
the  meetings  of  counselors  on  dates  in  August  2006  and  August  2007,  which  occurred  about 
nine  days  before  the  contract-prescribed  first  day  of  the  school  year  that  each  affected 
respondent-counselor  acquired  a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District,  which  were  dates 
earlier  than  as  reflected  on  the  existing  District  seniority  list.  But,  the  District’s  Assistant 
Superintendent  was  persuasive  that  the  stipend  paid  to  counselors  for  nine  “per  diem”  days 
was  not  a  part  of  the  contract  salary  paid  to  counselors  for  services  performed  during  the 
regular  school  year.  Dr.  Udell  noted  that  counselors  were  not  required  by  the  District  as  a 
term of  the  contract  of  employment  to  attend  training  or  team  meetings  specified  by 
individual  principals  or  supervisors.  Those  counselors  were  paid  a  special  stipend,  rather 
than  being  compensated  the  regular  wage  because  the  time  of  the  orientation  training  was  not 
part  of  certificated  employees’  salaries  under  the  District’s  employment  contract. 

Respondent  Govil  was  not  persuasive  that  her  attendance  at  a  staff  meeting  on  a  date 

before  other  teachers,  who  held  multiple  subject  credentials,  reported  for  work  for  that  school 

10 

 
  

  

year  bestowed  on  Respondent  Govil  first  performed  services  for  the  District  earlier  than  the 
seniority  list  indicated  for  her  as  probationary  employee of  the  District. 

No  respondent,  who  is  referred  to  in  this  Legal  Conclusion,  offeréd  sufficient 
evidence  to  alter  that  District’s  seniority  list  so  as  to  grant  such  respondent a  first  day of paid 
service  to  the  District  in  a  probationary  employee  status  that  is  contrary  to  the  date  set  out  for 
such  person  on  the  District’s  seniority  list.  The  dates  on  which  the  subject  respondents 
reported  on  training  dates  or  team  meeting  dates  were  not  part  of  the  contract  with  the 
District.  Rather  the  subject  certificated  employees  arrived  at  work  sites  at  the  direction  of 
individual  supervisors,  who  exercised  discretion  to  enhance  employee  development. 

6. 

Respondent  Price,  who  holds  the  position  of  college  advisor,  is  viewed  as 

being a  teacher  on  special  assignment.  Assistant  Udell  notes  that  Respondent  Price  is 
currently  classified  as  a  temporary  certificated  employee.  Respondent  Price  holds  her 
current  position  due  to  the  leave  of  absence  taken  by  Ms.  Jennifer  Antonuccio,  who  is  a 
counselor,  Assistant  Udell  credibly  asserted  that  Respondent  Price,  as  a  temporary 
employee,  had  her  name  mistakenly  placed  on  the  seniority  list  as  a  respondent  who  had  a 
statutory  right  to  participate  in  the  hearing  of  this  matter.  The  contract,  signed  by 
Respondent  Price  on  August  28,  2007,  in  four  places  on  the  contract  described  Respondent  as 
“a  temporary  employee”  or  “temporary  certificated  employee.” 

Respondent Angela  Price  cites  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v. Bakersfield 

City  School  Distr,  (2006)  145 Cal?App.4th  1260,  1287.  Respondent  Price  argued  that  the 
District’s  position  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter  that  she  was  a  temporary  employee  and 
therefore  she  was  ineligible  to  participate  in  the  layoff  action  was  erroneous.  Respondent 
Price  proclaimed  that  despite  language  in  the  contract  that  she  signed,  which  designated  her 
as  a  temporary  employee,  she  had  a  date  in  early  August  2007  as  a  probationary  teacher. 
But,  Respondent  Price  did  not  offer  adequate  evidence  that  the  District  erred  in designating 
her  as  being  a  temporary  employee  who  provided  service  as  a  counselor,  and  more 
specifically  as  a  college  advisor,  in  place  of  an  employee  who  was  on  a  leave  of  absence. 
Complainant,  through  Assistant  Superintendent  Udell,  demonstrated  that  the  District’s 
determination  as  to  classification  of  individual  teachers  as  temporary,  although  Ms.  Price  was 
incorrectly  provided  with  a  notice  of  hearing  and  inadvertently  placed  on  the  District’s 
seniority  list,  was  lawful  and  correct. 

Respondent  Price  has  no  proper  standing  to  challenge  the  District’s  seniority  list 
because  during  the  current  school  year  she  holds  a  position  as  a  temporary  certificated 
employee  who  serves  in  the  position of  a  District  employee  who  is  away  on a leave  of 
absence. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  cause  exists  to 
give  respondents  notice  of  the  discontinuation  of  full-time  equivalent  positions  in  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  rendered  by  respondents,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in 
Factual  Findings  10  and  11,  34  to  36  inclusive  and  38. 

     

7. 

11

  

8. 

The  discontinuation of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by  each 
respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason of  the  matters  in  Factual  Finding  37. 

1. 

The  Accusation  served  on  each  respondent  is  sustained. 

ORDER 

2. 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Pooja  Govil,  Caroline  Kim,  Roger 
A.  Smith-Truss,  Jaime  L.  Vines,  Jill  Wimmer,  Karen  L.  Carter,  Lila  G.  Keene,  Richard  A. 
Kleine,  Robert  G.  MacCarthy,  Damion  L.  McNeil,  Zoe  Kalkanis,  James  R.  Pawlak,  Corina 
Aleman  Topping,  Richard  S.  Conn,  Jamie  Knight,  Sun  Hyung  Lee,  Angela  Price,  Erica 
Rains-Vargas,  Cory  W.  Nakamoto  and  Brenda  Wong  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance of  the  particular 
kinds of  services  by  the  District. 

DATED:  May  2,  2008 

PERRY  0.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

12 

