BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
DIXON  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-Reemployment  of 
19.67  Full-Time  Equivalent  Certificated 
Employees  for  the  School  Year  2008-2009, 

OAH  No.  2008030019 

  

Respondent. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Melissa  G.  Crowell,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Dixon,  California,  on  April  28,  2008. 

Terry  Fillman,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Rudd,  &  Romo,  represented  the 

Dixon  Unified  School  District. 

Margaret  Geddes,  Esq.,  Beeson,  Tayor  &  Bodine,  represented  all  respondents  who, 

with  the  exception  of  Gretchen  Stenz,  were  present. 

The  record  was  left  open  for  submission  of  closing  briefs.  The  district’s  brief  was 

filed  on  April  30,  2008,  and  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  18.  Respondent’s  brief  was 
filed  on  May  2,  2008,  and  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  L.  The  record  was  closed  and 
the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  May  2,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Dixon  Unified  School  District 

adopted  Resolution  No.  08-1377,  in  which  the  board  resolved  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 
following  particular  kinds  of  services  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school 
year: 

A.  Administrative  Services: 

1.  Assistant  Superintendent,  Curriculum  and  Instruction 
2.  Senior  Director  Facilities  (vacant) 
3.  High  School  Vice  Principal 
4.  Middle  School  Vice  Principal 

B.  Secondary  Education  Services: 

: 

1.  Counseling 
2.  Continuation  High  School 

Cultural  Studies/  Counseling 

1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 

1.67  FTE 
1.00  FTE 

 

  

C.  Elementary  Education  Services: 

1.  Elementary  Preparation  Teaching  (Science/P.E./Computers) 

e@ 

Not  Music 

2.  Reading  Intervention  Teaching 
3.  Grade  K-6  Classroom  Teaching 

1.20  FTE 
6.30  FTE 
6.00  FTE 
19.67  FTE 

Total: 

The  resolution  directed  the  district’s  interim  superintendent,  or  her  designee,  to 

initiate  procedures  to  not  reemploy  the  equivalent  of  19.67  full-time  equivalent  certificated 
employees  of  the  district  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

2. 

On  March  10,  2008,  Senior  Director  of  Personnel  Brian  Dolan  sent  notice  to 

23  certificated  employees  of  his  recommendation  that  their  services  would  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Ten  teachers  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if 
there  was  cause  to  not  re-reemploy  them.  The  10  respondents  in  this  case  are:  Diane 
Chapman,  Barbara  Garlick,  Beverly  Harrison,  Tatiana  LaBass,  Juanita  Lupercio  Ortega, 
Thomas  Prieto,  Stephanie  Roupp,  Shondra  Sikes,  Gretchen  Stenz,  and  Michael  Vlach. 

3. 

The  parties  stipulated  that  the  district  has  complied  with  all  procedural 

requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

4. 

The  board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  was  based  on 
district’s  serious  fiscal  condition.  The  district  is  facing  significant  budgetary  shortfalls  for 
the  2008-2009  school  year  with  no  money  in  reserve.  The  district  has  been  operating  in  a 
deficit  for  a  number  of  years,  and  is  anticipating  a  significant  loss  of  revenue  from  the  State 
of  California  for  the  next  school  year. 

e@ 

The  district  is  currently  in  negative  status,  which  is  one  step  removed  from  being 
placed  in  receivership  and  being  taken  over  by  the  State  of  California.  For  most  of  this  fiscal 
year,  the  district  has  been  operating  with  an  interim  superintendent,  Solano  County 
Superintendent  of  Schools  Dee  Alarcén,  and  an  interim  chief  business  officer,  Solano  County 
Office  of  Education  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Business  and  Administrative  Services, 
Leticia  Allen.  This  was  done,  in  part,  for  salary  savings. 

The  district’s  enrollment  figures  for  the  next  school  year  are  still  in  flux.  Due  to 

financial  considerations,  the  board  has  decided  to  close  one  elementary  school,  Silveyville 
Primary  School,  at  the  end  of  this  school  year.  The  children  currently  enrolled  at  Silveyville 
will  be  relocated  to  the  district’s  other  elementary  schools.  The  board  is  considering,  among 
other  things,  discontinuing  participation  in  the  class  size  reduction  program.  Senior  Director 
of  Personnel  Dolan  is  satisfied  that  the  district  has  retained  a  sufficient  number  of  teachers  so 
that  all  mandated  services  will  be  provided.  Dolan  is  also  satisfied  that,  despite  the  deep 
cuts,  the  district  has  retained  a  sufficient  number  of  teachers  to  cover  its  needs  for  the  Grade 
K-6  Elementary  Teaching  program  in  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  district  is  hopeful  that

  

additional  categorical  funding  will  be  made  available  which  would  allow  it  to  restore  some  of 
the  Reading  Intervention  positions  that  are  being  reduced. 

5. 

Before  issuing  the  preliminary  notices,  the  district  took  into  account  all 

positively  assured  attrition.  The  district  has  also  taken  into  account  attrition  that  has 
occurred  since  the  preliminary  notices  were  issued. 

6. 

There  are  no  issues  in  this  proceeding  with  respect  to  the  reduction  of 

Administrative  Services  or  Secondary  Education  Services. 

7. 

With  respect  to  the  13.5  FTE  reductions  in  Elementary  Education  Services,  the 
decision  to  reduce particular  ‘kinds  of  services  was  made  with  the  goal  of  retaining  classroom 
instruction  as  the  highest  priority. 

a. 

There  are  no  issues  in  this  proceeding  with  respect  to  the  1.2  FTE  reduction  in 

Elementary  Preparation  Teaching  (Science/P.E./Computers). 

b. 

There  are  no  issues  with  respect  to  the  reduction  of  Reading  Intervention 

Teaching  positions.  Most  of  the  Reading  Intervention  Teachers  have  multiple  subject 
credentials  authorizing  them  to  teach  in  a  self-contained  classroom.  As a  result  of  their 
seniority,  they  were  able  to  bump a  teacher  junior  to  them  who  currently  occupies  a  Grade  K- 
6  Classroom  Teaching  position.  The  most  junior  Reading  Intervention  Teacher  received  a 
preliminary  notice  and  did  not  request  a  hearing. 

8. 

The  issues  in  this  case  concern  the  6.0  FTE  reductions  in  Grade  K-6 

Classroom  Teaching.  Each  of  the  10  respondents  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  has 
a  Grade  K-6  Classroom  Teaching  assignment,  with  the  exception  of  Beverly  Harrison,  who 
holds  the  position  of  Literacy  Coach.  The  10  respondents  are  among  13  teachers  that  have  a 
shared  seniority  date  of  August  8,  2005. 

9. 

In  Resolution  No.  08-1377,  the  governing  board  established  tie-breaking 

criteria  to  be  used  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  of  employees  having  the  same  first 
date  of  paid  service.  The  board  assigned  points  to  each  of  the 
resolved  that  any  ties  that  existed  after  application  of  the  criteria  were  to  be  resolved  by  a 
random  drawing  (lottery).  The  tie-breaking  criteria  to  be  applied  are: 

five  stated  criteria,  and 

a. 

b. 

c. 

Possession of  a  valid  preliminary  or  clear  California  teaching  credential  — 
one  point. 

.  Possession  of  multiple  valid  preliminary  or  clear  California  teaching 
credentials  —  one  point  for  each  additional  credential. 

Possession  of  one  or  more  language  certifications  (e.g.,  LDS,  CLAD, 
SB  1969,  SB  395,  BCC,  BCLAD)  —  two  points. 

  

 

d. 

Possession  of  evidence  of  core  academic  subject  competence  in 
accordance  with  NCLB  — one  point. 

@ 

e. 

Bilingual  competency  —  two  points. 

10. 

Dolan  applied  the  criteria  to  the  13  teachers.  With  respect  to  the  criteria  of 
“Bilingual  competency,”  Dolan  believed  the  board  was  seeking  information  that  he  could 
objectively  verify  from  the  seniority  list,  meaning  possession  of a BCLAD  with  a  language 
other  than  English  specified.  Only  one  respondent,  Thomas  Prieto,  has  a  BCLAD.  If  Prieto 
were  given  two  points,  he  would  be  the  most  senior  teacher  in  the  group,  but  the  other  12 
teachers  would  remain  tied. 

Officials  of  the  teachers’  representative  union  met  with  Dolan  and  challenged  his 
interpretation  of  the  board’s  “Bilingual  competency”  criterion  as  being  too  restrictive.  It  was 
argued  that  other  teachers  could  satisfy  that  criterion  by  being  a  native  speaker  or  by  having  a 
college  degree  in  Spanish.  After  meeting  with  the  union,  Dolan  concluded  that  the  board’s 
“Bilingual  competency”  criterion  was  too  vague  to  be  applied  fairly.  Dolan  therefore 
decided  not  to  apply  that  criterion,  and  as  a  result,  the  13  teachers  remained  tied  after 
application  of  the  other  four  criteria. 

11. 

In  the  event  of  a  tie,  the  resolution  provided  for  a  “[r]andom  drawing  by  lot  in 

the  presence  of  an  authorized  representative  of  the  exclusive  representative  union.”  Nolan 
conducted  the  lottery  with  Suzanne  Galloway,  a  high  school  math  teacher,  present.  The 
teacher  with  the  lowest  number  is  the  teacher  most  protected  (i.e.,  the  teacher  with  the  most 
seniority  of  the  group);  the  teacher  with  the  highest  number  is  the  least  protected  (i.e.,  the 
teacher  with  the  least  seniority).  The  following  list  reflects  the  results  of  the  lottery  most 
senior  to  least  senior: 

e 

01. 
02. 
03. 
04. 
05. 
06. 
07. 
08. 
09. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 

Michael  Vlach 
Gretchen  Stenz 
Tatiana  LaBass 
Thomas  Prieto 
Diane  Chapman 
Beverly  Harrison 
Juanita  Lupercio  Ortega 
 Sevgi  Bolkan 
Nadine  Vita 
|  Megan  White 
Shondra  Sikes 
Stephanie  Roupp 
Barbara  Garlick 

12. 

Respondents  challenge  the  district’s  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria. 

Respondent  Prieto  argues  that  he  was  erroneously  deprived  of  two  additional  points  for  his 
BCLAD.  Other  teachers,  who  do  not  hold  a  BCLAD,  argue  that  they  too  should  be  found  to 

   
  

e@ 

  

have  “Bilingual  competency,”  by  reason  of  being  a  native  Spanish  speaker  (Ortega),  by 
reason  of  having  a  college  degree  in  Spanish  (Garlick),  or  by  reason  of  their  Spanish- 
speaking  abilities  (Vlach).  It  is  not  unreasonable  for  the  district  to  conclude,  after  meeting 
with  respondents’  union  leaders,  that  the  criterion  of  “Bilingual  competency”  was  too  vague 
and  ambiguous  to  be  able  to  be  applied  fairly,  and  for  that  reason,  it  should  be  disregarded. 

13. 

Respondents  also  challenge  the  remaining  tie-breaking  criteria  as  being  too 

restrictive,  and  not  taking  into  account,  for  example,  the  number  of  years  of  prior  service  in 
the  district,  the  number of years of prior  service  in  another  district,  or  other  criteria  like 
demonstrated  leadership  or  mentoring  experience,  or  computer  authorization. 

A  board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  must  be  based  on  “the  needs  of  the  district  and  its 

students  thereof.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44955,  subd.  (b).)  It  has  not  been  shown  that  the  board’s 
criteria  fail  to  meet  this  standard. 

14. 

Respondent  Juanita  Lupercio  Ortega  is  an  elementary  teacher.  In  addition  to 

holding  a  multiple  subject  credential,  she  also  holds  a  single  subject  credential  in  science. 
Although  she  received  a  preliminary  notice  and  was  placed  in  the  lottery,  the  parties  stipulate 
that  she  is  entitled  to  bump  into  a  vacant  teaching  position  in  junior  high  school,  and  that  for 
that  reason,  the  accusation  against  her  should  be  withdrawn. 

15. 

Respondent  Stephanie  Roupp  is  an  elementary  teacher  who  was  placed  in  the 

lottery  by  reason  of  her  seniority  date.  She  argues  that  she  should  be  given  an  earlier 
seniority  date,  by  reason  of  her  previous  service  on  a  temporary  contract.  The  contention 
lacks  merit. 

It  is  true  that,  prior  to  the  layoff,  the  district  listed  Roupp’s  seniority  date  on  district 

records  as  April  27,  2005.  That  date  was  changed  to  August  8,  2005,  after  the  district 
researched  its  employment  records  in  preparation  for  the  layoff.  Roupp  worked  for  the 
district  in  the  2004-2005  school  year  as  a  temporary  teacher.  In  2005-2006,  she  worked  a 
full-time  temporary  employee.  In  the  2006-2007  school  year,  Roupp  was  classified  as  a 
second  year  probationary  teacher.  The  district  allowed  her  to  tack  one  year  for  her  temporary 
service,  as  authorized  by  Education  Code  section  44917,  thus  resulting  in  a  seniority  date  of 
August  8,  2005,  the  first  date  of  her  paid  service  in  the  2005-2006  school  year.  There  is  no 
error  in  Roupp’s  seniority  date. 

16. 

The  board’s  resolution  specifically  authorizes  skipping  Beverly  Harrison,  who 
holds  the  position  of  Literary  Coach,  “based  on  her  unique  qualifications  and  skills  related  to 
the  required  responsibilities  for  the  course/job.”  Out  of  caution,  however,  the  district  gave 
Harrison  a  preliminary  notice.  And  because  Harrison  shares  the  same  seniority  date  of 
August  8,  2005,  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  applied  to  her,  and  because  she  tied  with  all  the 
others,  she  was  placed  in  the  lottery.  As  a  result  of  the  lottery,  Harrison  ranks  6th  out  of  13 
in  seniority.  In  other  words,  Harrison  is  senior  to  seven  teachers,  including  respondent  Diane 
Chapman,  who  argues  that  she  is  competent  and  credentialed  to  be  a  Literary  Coach. 

  

  

 

  

Because  of  the  two  FTE  elementary  teaching  positions  vacant  due  to  attrition  and  the 

one  FTE  position  vacant  by  Ortega’s  moving  to  the  Junior  High  School  position,  there 
remain  three  FTE  positions  in  Grade  K-6  Elementary  Teaching  that  need  to  be  reduced  under 
the  board’s  resolution.  Based  on  Harrison’s  placement  on  the  seniority  list  the  district  no 
longer  needs  to  skip  Harrison  in  order  to  retain  her.  Harrison  must  be  retained  by  reason  of 
her  seniority:  she  is  more  senior  than  the  three  teachers  whose  positions  will  be  eliminated. 
There  is  no  cause  to  consider,  therefore,  whether  the  district  has  established  a  basis  for 
skipping  Harrison  over  a  more  senior  teacher. 

@ 

17. 

in  seniority  to  respondents  is  being  retained 
by  the  district  to  perform  services  that  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

No  certificated  employee  junior 

18. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds of services  is  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required  by  law. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant 

to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  all  respondents  other  than  Juanita 
Lupercio  Ortega  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The 
cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  its  pupils  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44949. 

e@ 

ORDER 

1. 

The  accusation  against  respondent  Juanita  Lupercio  Ortega  is  dismissed. 

2. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  holding  3  FTE  positions  in  Grade  K-6 
Classroom  Teaching  in  reverse  of  seniority  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

May  6, 

2008 

PN (UA 
MELISSA  G.  CROWELL 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

    
  

