BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE 
CORONA-NORCO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Involving Certain Employees of the  
Corona-Norco Unified School District under 
Board Resolution No. 85, 
 
 
 
 
 

          Respondents. 

 

 

 

OAH No. 2009120737 
 
 
 
 

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 

Margaret A. Chidester, Attorney at Law, and Alexandria M. Davidson, Attorney at 

Carlos Perez, Attorney at Law, represented all certificated employees named as 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
California, heard this matter in Norco, California, on April 13, 2010. 
 
 
Law, represented the Corona-Norco Unified School District. 
 
 
respondents who appeared at the hearing. 
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 13, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
The Corona-Norco Unified School District 

 
1. 

The Corona-Norco Unified School District (CNUSD or the district) is located 

in Riverside County.  The district encompasses approximately 156 square miles and serves 
the educational needs of approximately 54,000 students living in the cities of Corona and 
Norco.  After years of growth, the district’s enrollment has stabilized, but fortunately 
enrollment is not declining.  

 
CNUSD operates 31 elementary schools, seven middle schools, five comprehensive 

high schools, two alternative education programs, and one special education school.  The 
district currently employs over 4,500 individuals, approximately 2,680 of whom are 

 

1

2. 

3. 

Proposition 13, a constitutional amendment enacted in 1978, limited the 

A school district cannot determine the level of state funding it will receive until the 

certificated employees.  CNUSD’s projected annual budget for the 2010-2011 school year is 
approximately $364 million, about 84 per cent of which pays employee salaries and benefits.  
 
 
The district is governed by an elected five-member Board of Education (the 
governing board).  Kent L. Bechler, Ph.D. (Dr. Bechler), the Superintendent of Schools, is 
the district’s Chief Executive Officer.  Michael Lin, Ed.D. (Dr. Lin) is the district’s Assistant 
Superintendent of Schools, Human Resources.  Jay Johnson (Director Johnson) serves as the 
district’s Administrative Director, Human Resources. 
 
The Fiscal Crisis – Economic Layoffs 
 
 
imposition of local property taxes and reduced a major source of assured revenue for public 
education funding.  After Proposition 13 was passed, public school districts have looked 
primarily to the State of California and to other governmental entities for funding.  
 
 
state budget is chaptered, an event usually occurring in July, but sometimes taking much 
longer.  A school board’s obligation to balance its budget often requires that some teachers, 
administrators or other certificated employees be given preliminary layoff notices, warning 
them that their services will not be required for the next school year.  Under Education Code 
section 44949, these preliminary layoff notices must be given no later than March 15. 
 
 
retention of senior certificated employees over more junior employees and the retention of 
permanent employees over probationary employees and others with less seniority.  A public 
school district may deviate from the general rule requiring termination in reverse order of 
seniority only if it can demonstrate that identifiable junior employees possess a credential, 
special training or experience necessary to teach a course of study or to provide services 
which more senior employees do not possess, a process known as skipping. 
 
The District’s Response 
 
 
governing boards and staff of most other public school districts) were well aware of the State 
of California’s continuing budget problems and of the probable crippling impact on public 
education funding.  As a result of the impending financial crisis, CNUSD projected a budget 
deficit of about $31 million for the 2010-2011 school year.  The district was once again 
required to look into ways to balance its budget including the reduction of certificated and 
classified staffing and the elimination of various programs.  
 
 
Dr. Lin, Director Johnson and CNUSD staff prepared a recommendation which 
Superintendent Bechler presented to the governing board that outlined a proposed reduction 
and elimination of particular kinds of services being provided by certificated employees.  
 

The economic layoff statutes found in the Education Code generally require the 

By late 2009, CNUSD’s governing board and administration (as well as the 

4. 

 

2

On February 18, 2010, following Dr. Bechler’s recommendation and its consideration 

thereof, CNUSD’s governing board adopted Resolution No. 85, which related to the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 
 

5. 

On March 3, 2009, the governing board passed the following resolution: 

“RESOLUTION NO. 85 
 
RESOLUTION OF THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
CORONA-NORCO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
REGARDING A REDUCTION OR DISCONTINUANCE 
OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICE 
 

 
WHEREAS, the District’s governing board, upon recommendation of the Superintendent, 
has determined that it is in the best interests of the District, and the welfare of the students thereof, 
to reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds of services hereinafter enumerated. 

NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, DETERMINED AND 

 
ORDERED AS FOLLOWS: 

1. Pursuant to Education Code §§ 44949 and 44955, the following particular kinds of service 
shall be reduced or discontinued at the close of the 2009-20010 school year. These services,  
listed by full-time equivalent (FTE) positions, and performed by certificated employees are  
as follows: 

 
 

  
 

   
 

Secondary Language Arts Teachers  
Secondary Math Teachers  
 
Secondary Social Science Teachers 
 
Secondary Fine Arts Teachers 
 
Secondary Spanish Teachers 
 
Secondary Business Teachers 
 

(1.1)   K-12 Assistant Principals  
(1.2)   District Coordinators 
 
(1.3)   Elementary School Self-Contained Classroom Teachers  
   
(1.4)  
 
(1.5)  
 
(1.6) 
 
(1.7)  
 
(1.8)  
 
(1.9)  
 
(1.10)   Secondary Health Teacher 
 
(1.11)   Secondary Physical Education Teachers 
 
(1.12)   Independent Studies Teachers 
(1.13)   K-12 Special Education/Mild Moderate Teachers   
 
(1.14)   K-12 Music Teachers 
 
 
(1.15)   K-12 School Counselors   
 
 
(1.16)   Student Advisors 
   
(1.17)   School Librarians 
 
(1.18)   Intervention Support Teachers 
 
 

  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 

   
   
 
 
 

 
 
   
 
 

   

(10 FTE) 
(3 FTE) 
(220 FTE) 
(14 FTE) 
 (12 FTE) 
(11 FTE) 
(2 FTE) 
(3 FTE) 
(2 FTE) 
(1 FTE) 
(4 FTE) 
(3 FTE) 
(13 FTE) 
(5 FTE) 
(27 FTE) 
(8 FTE) 
(5 FTE) 
(150 FTE) 

       

 

493 TOTAL FTEs 

2.  
 
 
 
 

The Superintendent or his/her designee is hereby directed to serve notices of termination in 
accordance with and in the manner prescribed by Education Code §§ 44955 and 44949. In  
addition, the Superintendent/designee is authorized, where deemed necessary, to  
 
issue additional notices so that certain other employees whose rights may be affected  
will have an opportunity to be heard. 

3

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

3.  

4.  
 
 
 
 

In selecting those certificated employees who shall receive notice of termination pursuant to 
this resolution and the provisions of Education Code § 44955, those certificated employees 
whose names and positions are set forth in Exhibit “A,” a copy of which is attached hereto 
and by   this reference incorporated herein, shall receive notice; however, an exception from 
the order of layoff will be sought because of the special training and experience of certain 
certificated employees   who are assigned to teach a course of study or to fulfill a particular 
administrative task which others  with more seniority do not possess. 

The Governing Board has determined that as between certificated employees who first  
rendered service in a probationary position on the same date, the order of termination of  
said employees shall be determined by reference to the tiebreaker criteria and points to be  
assigned as described in Exhibit “B,” a copy of which is attached hereto and by this   
reference incorporated herein. 

ADOPTED, SIGNED AND APPROVED THIS 19th DAY OF February, 2010. 

Exhibit A provided: 

CERTIFICATED PERMANENT, PROBATIONARY AND TEMPORARY 
PERSONNEL WHOM THE DISTRICT SHALL SEEK TO EXEMPT FROM 
THE ORDER OF LAYOFF BY VIRTUE OF THEIR CREDENTIALS, 
COMPETENCE, ASSIGNMENT, EXPERIENCE OR CERTIFICATION 
 

The Governing Board will seek to exempt from the order certificated layoff, pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955 because of special training, experience, or credential that others with 
more seniority do not possess: 

1. 
Certificated personnel who possess a BCLAD credentials, and who may be 
assigned to teach in the Dual Immersion or Primary Language program (Option 3) 
for the 2010-11 school year. 
 
2. 
Certificated personnel who possess a BCLAD credential, who are assigned 
to a Title I school, are a TSA or assigned to Primary Language Instruction (Option 
3) for the 2009-10 school year, and will be assigned for the 2010-11 school year. 
 
3. 
language, speech and hearing, who are presently assigned within the scope of that 
credential, and who will be assigned within the scope of that credential for the 2010-
11 school year. 
 
4. 
currently assigned to administrative positions, and who will be assigned to 
administrative positions for the 2010-11 school year. 

Certificated personnel who possess administrative credentials, who are 

Certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service in 

Exhibit B provided: 
 
The District values the services of all employees who may, by coincidence, share the same date of first paid 
service in a probationary position.  Education Code section 44955 (b) states in part: 

 
 
the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the 
district and the students thereof.’ 

‘As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same date, 

4

 
1. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

The Governing Board has determined that as between certificated employees who first 

rendered service in a probationary position to the District on the same date, the order of termination of said 
employees shall be determined by reference to the tiebreaker criteria and points to be assigned as follows: 

 
a.  1 point for holding a Cross cultural, Language and Academic Development (CLAD) 

 
b.  2 points for holding a Bilingual Cross-cultural, Language and Academic Development 

(BCLAD) certificate emphasis or Bilingual Certificate of Competence (BCC) or Bilingual 
cross-cultural special credential. 

 
c.  5 points for currently teaching in a Dual Immersion program or Primary Language program 

certificate. 

(Option 3). 

 
d.  5 points for “hard to hire” credentials held (Math, Science, English, Spanish, Special 

Education) for preliminary and clear. 

 
e.  2 points for 1 or more years of service teaching in a “hard to hire” area (Math, Science, 

English, Spanish, Special Education) at the intermediate level within the last 3 years and will 
be assigned in that “hard to hire” area for the 2010-11 school year. 

 
f.  5 points for teaching in a program improvement school for the 2008‐2009 and 2009‐10 

school years. 

 
g.  5 points for National Board Certification. 
 
2. 

Individuals who are specifically exempted by resolution and individuals who do not 

receive a notice of layoff due to the scope of their credential will nevertheless receive point totals so that 
their service may be properly credited in the event of a dispute. 

Employees who receive a notice and who share the same date of first paid service shall be 

ranked by point totals.  Low point totals will indicate low seniority for that hire date.  For example, an 
individual with a point total of “1” will be laid off before an individual with a point total of “3” where both 
individuals share the same date, and provided layoff was not otherwise determined by virtue of credential 
or exemption. 

If the criteria listed above do not break a tie, the District shall hold a lottery at least five 

work days prior to the layoff hearing.  Each group of tied employees shall have the right to attend the 
lottery and pick a lottery number.  In the absence of the employee, the Superintendent or designee will 
select a lottery number on behalf of the employee. 

As between tied employees, low lottery numbers will indicate low seniority for that hire 
date.  For example, an individual with a lottery number of ‘1’ would be laid off before an individual with a 
lottery number of ‘10.’ 

 

 

6. 

These criteria have been determined to best serve the needs of the District and students 
thereof, and will be applied in the April 12, 2010, April 13, 2010, April 14, 2010 & April 15, 2010 layoff 
hearing in which the issue may arise.” 
 
6. 

Director Johnson established that the district made teaching and related 

 
assignments based on an employee’s seniority and an employee’s possession of appropriate 
authorizations and credentials for such an assignment.   
 

5

Under Exhibit A to the board’s resolution, certain employees were “exempt” from the 
 
layoff process so that that these employees would retain their employment over more senior 
employees.  The exempt employees included:  Certificated personnel who possessed a BCLAD 
credential and who were assigned to teach in the Dual Immersion or Primary Language program 
for the 2010-2011 school year1 (the possession of such a credential was critical to the program’s 
operation); certificated personnel who possessed a BCLAD credential assigned to teach in a 
Title I school, to serve as a teacher on special assignment or to teach in a Primary Language 
Instruction assignment for the 2010-2011 school year (the possession of such a credential was 
critical and sometimes required); certificated personnel who possessed a credential authorizing 
service in language, speech and hearing assigned to Special Education (the possession of an 
appropriate credential was required); and certificated personnel who possessed an administrative 
credential who were currently assigned to administrative positions and who would be assigned to 
administrative positions for the 2010-2011 school year (there was a need for administrative 
continuity at school sites and within the district). 
 
 
authorizations and credentials and possessed distinct practical experience that made their 
services particularly valuable to the district such that the retention of these employees over more 
senior employees was in the best interest of the district and the students thereof.  The proposed 
skipping of these individuals was recommended in good faith.  No capricious or arbitrary criteria 
were used to skip these junior employees.  Nothing suggested that the skipping of these junior 
employees was not in the best interest of the district or its students.  

The employees exempted from the layoff process under Exhibit A held appropriate 

 
7. 

 
Under all the circumstances, the governing board’s adoption of Resolution No. 
85, and Exhibits A and B was in the best interest of the district and the students thereof.  The 
governing board’s decision to reduce particular kinds of services was the direct result of 
California’s fiscal crisis, the probable reduction in CNUSD’s funding for the 2010-2011 
school year, CNUSD’s obligation to submit a balanced budget to the County Board of 
Education, and the drastic repercussions for the failure to do so, including the taking over of 
the district’s operations by other governmental entities.   
 
The Reduction in Force and the Issuing of Preliminary Layoff Notices 
 

8. 

The particular kinds of services identified in the governing board’s resolution 

were services the governing board was authorized to reduce and discontinue.  The board’s 
resolution to reduce and eliminate certain services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and the 
reduction and elimination of the particular kinds of services identified in Resolution No. 85 
was a matter squarely within the governing board’s sound discretion.  No particular kind of 
service was reduced to a level below that mandated by federal or state law.   

 
 
In accordance with Resolution No. 85, CNUSD administrative staff issued 
preliminary layoff notices to the most junior employees holding those positions that were 

                                                
1  
minority students (English learners) and language majority students (English speakers) to develop bilingualism and 
biliteracy in English and Spanish.   

The district operates a dual immersion programs at two elementary schools, which integrate language 

 

6

subject to reduction and elimination and exempted from the layoff process those employees 
who were granted an exemption under Exhibit A.  CNUSD served more notices than there 
were reductions in full-time equivalent positions to give employees whose rights might be 
affected (such as substitute teachers and temporary employees) an opportunity to be heard as 
well as to ensure that a sufficient number of preliminary notices were issued to cover any 
changes in the seniority list or other matters affecting the layoff process.  Before issuing the 
preliminary layoff notices, the administrative staff considered all known positive attrition 
including resignations, retirements and probationary non-reelects.   
  
Jurisdictional Matters 
 
 
served with written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services be 
terminated at the conclusion of the current school year, and that their services would not be 
needed for the upcoming 2010-2011 school year.  Each employee was notified of the right to 
a hearing.  Each employee who filed a request for a hearing was thereafter served with an 
accusation and other required jurisdictional documents.  Notices of defense were filed.  
 

On and before March 15, 2010, 366 CNUSD certificated employees were 

9. 

10.  On April 13, 2010, the record in the administrative hearing was opened.  

Attorneys Margaret A. Chidester and Alexandria M. Davidson appeared on behalf of the 
district.  Attorney Carlos Perez appeared on behalf of all respondents who were present at the 
layoff hearing.  No respondent at the hearing was unrepresented.  Counsel gave brief opening 
statements.  Jurisdictional documents were presented, sworn testimony was provided, and 
documentary evidence was introduced.  The parties stipulated that the accusations filed 
against respondents Lisa Nickerson and Jason Allen should be withdrawn and dismissed.  
The parties also stipulated that the district’s “Persons Subject to Layoff” list be amended to 
include at page 3 employee 2431, Sean Robinson, between employees number 2430 and 
2432  The parties further stipulated that the seniority list should be amended to delete that 
portion the entry for Brianna Brown, seniority number 2416, that indicated she was “L.O.” 
[laid off] and that the entry for Sean Robinson, seniority number 2431, be corrected to add a 
notation “2310 bumps – L.O.”  Following the taking of evidence and counsels’ brief closing 
arguments, the record was closed and the matter was submitted. 

The Seniority List, First Date of Paid Service, and the Implementation of Resolution No. 85 

For many years CNUSD maintained a seniority list, a continuously evolving 

 
schedule that sets forth each employee’s seniority number, name, seniority date, status 
(retiring, permanent, probationary 2, probationary 1, intern), the school site where services 
were most recently provided, the employee’s current assignment, the employee’s credentials, 
any supplemental authorizations, the employee’s English language authorization, district 
comments and, for teachers with the same date of employment, a tie-breaking column and a 
lottery result column when necessary.  CNUSD’s seniority list is based on information 
obtained from an employee’s personnel file, data provided by the employee, information 
from the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, and any relevant material 
provided by others.  The seniority list is modified as new employees are hired and when 
current employees retire, resign or otherwise separate from district employment.  The 

  

 
11. 

 

7

seniority list is corrected or updated when new information becomes available to 
administrative staff.  

 
12. 

 
13. 

 
The district attempts to ensure that each employee’s seniority date is based on the 
employee’s first date of paid service in a probationary position within the district.2  Establishing 
a first date of paid probationary service is sometimes complicated by such matters as previous 
service in long-term substitute or temporary employment positions or attendance at training 
sessions occurring before the formal school year begins.   

Substitute and Temporary Employees:  An individual who worked as a 

substitute or temporary employee for CNUSD for at least 75 percent of the school days 
during the previous school year in the same classroom for a single permanent teacher and 
who performed the duties normally required for that absent employee was deemed by the 
district to have served a complete school year as a probationary employee.  For such an 
employee, the prior year of service was “tacked” on for seniority purposes.3  However, 
CNUSD’s policy does not permit a substitute teacher or a temporary employee to use the 
cumulative time served when substituting for several teachers absent for relatively brief 
periods during the preceding school year.  

 
One employee, Valorie Enciso, was affected by this policy. 

 
14.  Attendance at Mandatory Training as a First Date of Paid Probationary Service:  
 
CNUSD and the Corona-Norco Teachers’ Association (the association) entered into a collective 
bargaining agreement that was in effect on and before the date of this proceeding.  Article 10 of 
that agreement was entitled “Hours of Employment” and provided in part: 
 

“The work year for Regular Probationary or Permanent Adult Education Teachers 
and Temporary Teachers shall be as mutually agreed by the District and the unit member.  
The work year of all other unit members shall be one hundred eighty-five (185) days 
unless otherwise agreed by the District and the unit member.  The work year for non-
support personnel unit members who have not been employed by the District in the past 
other than a substitute position and who are placed on Class A, Steps 1-3 and Class B, 
Step 1 shall be one hundred ninety (190) days . . . All other new non-support unit 
members shall work 186 days.  The per diem rate for these unit members shall be based 
on 185 days of service. . . .” 

Education Code section 44845 provides: 

                                                
2  
 
 
 
 
3  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Education Code section 44918 provides in part: 

 

8

“Every probationary or permanent employee employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been 
employed on the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.” 

“(a) Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary employee, who serves during one school year for 
at least 75 percent of the number of days the regular schools of the district were maintained in that school 
year and has performed the duties normally required of a certificated employee of the school district, shall 
be deemed to have served a complete school year as a probationary employee if employed as a 
probationary employee for the following school year.” 

 
By virtue of the agreement between the district and the teachers’ association, CNUSD 

employed all new teachers who were new to the district and who had no previous teaching 
experience under the 190 day per year contract.  But, CNUSD employed new teachers to the 
district without any teaching experience who held additional credentials or advanced degrees in 
a pay class above Salary Steps [Classes] A and B1 and under a 185/186 day contract.  And, 
CNUSD employed teachers with prior teaching experience outside the district who were new to 
the district under a 185/186 day per year contract and in a pay class above Salary Steps A and 
B1.  Thus, brand new teachers with no experience who were hired by the district were required 
to work five more days than teachers who were new to the district and were paid outside Salary 
Steps A or B1.  
 
15. 

In a memo dated May 30, 2006, addressed to “All New Corona-Norco Unified 

School District Teachers on Salary Steps A1, A2, A3 and B 1,” the district advised: 

 

 

 

 

•  “New teachers to the district and to teaching are required to work 190 days during 
their first year of service.  Five of these 190 days must be devoted to various 
curricular and professional development activities as approved by our site 
principal (in-service, classroom preparation, conferences, etc.).   

•  As one of these five days, all new teachers hired before June 29, 2006 must attend 

the new Teacher In-service Day . . . 

•  All new teachers need to register to attend one of the Kagan Cooperative Learning 
two-day training sessions.  These dates have been scheduled for June 27 and 28, 
2006 for year-round teachers and August 15 and 16, 2006, for traditional track 
teachers, as well as any other teacher that is not hired before August.  This 
training will provide teachers with the necessary tools to ensure a successful 
school year . . . 

•  All new teachers may also attend Effective Management and Planning for 
Teachers on either June 29 or August 28, 2006. . . .”  (Original emphasis.) 

16. 

In this proceeding, the district took the position that if a 190 day contract 

 
 
employee attended an approved course before the start of the school year, then that employee’s 
seniority date related back to the first day the employee attended the required training for which 
the employee was paid under the employee’s contract with the district; however, if the 190 day 
employee did not attend required training before the school year began, then that employee’s 
seniority date was the date on which the new employee first began providing services under the 
190 day contract.  The seniority date for teachers who were new to the district but who were not 
paid under Salary Steps A or B1 was the date on which that new employee first began providing 
services under the contract of employment, even if that new employee had “voluntarily” 
attended the training that was required for brand new teachers paid under Salary Steps A or B1.   
 

 

9

17. 

18. 

Before issuing preliminary layoff notices in this matter, the district made the 

It is clear that an inequity exists for teachers with prior teaching experience who 

The district argued that the seniority dates assigned to these four employees was correct. 

 
were new to the district and who were employed under a 185/186 day contract and were paid 
above Salary Steps A or B1.  Since there was no contractual obligation for those employees to 
attend the “voluntary” training, their seniority date was the date on which they first began 
providing services under the contract, even if they “voluntarily” attended a training occurring 
before the commencement of the 185/186 day contract.  Under the district’s method of 
establishing seniority, a newly hired, inexperienced teacher always received an earlier seniority 
date than that afforded to a more experienced teacher who received a higher rate of pay, even 
though both employees attended the same training on the same day. 
 
 
Four teachers – Karen Bunnell, Kristen D’Amato, Jason Bradbury and Katherine 
Kononchuk – each of whom was paid above Salary Steps A or B1 and each of whom worked 
under a 185/186 day contract—testified that they believed that they were entitled to an earlier 
seniority date than was set forth in the district’s seniority list by reason of having been told that 
their attendance at the training was required and because they attended that training.  In addition, 
Jason Bradbury testified that in an earlier reduction in force proceeding, the district had assigned 
him an earlier seniority date based upon his attendance at such a training.   
 
 
 
 
seniority list available to certificated employees and recommended that any certificated 
employee who had any questions about seniority or wanted to provide additional information 
concerning his or her seniority date or his or her authorizations and credentials contact the 
administrative staff to make corrections.  Several matters were brought to the administrative 
staff’s attention that necessitated a change in the seniority list, which was updated to reflect 
those changes until the day before this layoff proceeding.   
 
19.  Under Director Johnson’s supervision, the updated master seniority list was 
 
utilized to produce a bumping list and retention schedule that was employed in these layoff 
proceedings (Exhibit 2).  Those employees who were exempt under Exhibit A to Resolution 
No. 85 were not given preliminary layoff notices and were not included in the layoff 
proceeding.  No temporary employees or substitute employees were involved in this layoff 
proceeding.  For employees who were deemed to have rendered service in a probationary 
position on the same date, the administrative staff used the information in its possession to 
assign tie breaking points in a manner consistent with the governing board’s tie breaking 
criteria (Exhibit B to Resolution No. 85).  For those employees with the same seniority date 
and who had the same number of tie breaking points, a lottery was conducted in the presence 
of representatives of the teachers’ association to determine the order of layoff between those 
individuals.  There was no suggestion the district’s application of the tie breaking criteria or 
related use of the lotteries was improper.   
 
Seniority Date Issues 
 
 
seniority number 2189 with a seniority date of July 5, 2006.  Bunnell was hired by the 

20.  Karen Bunnell:  The seniority list indicated that Karen Bunnell (Bunnell) held 

 

10

22. 

Jason Bradbury:  The seniority list indicated that Jason Bradbury (Bradbury) 

district in mid-June 2006.  Bunnell had teaching experience outside the district and she also 
held a master’s degree.  Bunnell was initially under a 190 day contract, but she was given a 
185/186 day contract at a pay scale above Salary Steps A and B1 before she began her 
employment.  Before her first date of paid service under her employment contract with the 
district, Bunnell read and reviewed the memo to new teachers,4 which she concluded applied 
to her.  She believed it contained a misrepresentation.  Since she was in fact new to the 
district, Bunnell attended the Kagan Cooperative Learning training sessions on June 27 and 
28, 2006.  However, she was not given a seniority date of June 27, 2006.  While Bunnell was 
paid for attending the training, the district did not consider June 27, 2006, as her first paid 
date of probationary service because her service began under the 185/186 day contract.  
 
21.  Kristen D’Amato:  The seniority list indicated that Kristen D’Amato 
 
(D’Amato) held seniority number 2186 with a seniority date of July 5, 2006.  D’Amato was 
hired at Salary Schedule D and on a 185/186 day contract, but she was a new teacher to the 
district.  D’Amato’s site supervisor specifically told D’Amato that she was required to attend 
the Kagan Cooperative Learning training sessions held on June 27 and 28, 2006.  D’Amato 
did so based on that direction and for the purpose of clearing her credential.  D’Amato was 
paid for the training, but the district did not consider June 27, 2008, as her first date of paid 
probationary service for seniority purposes.  
 
 
held seniority number 2582 with a seniority date of August 26, 2008.  Bradbury enjoyed 
considerable teaching experience before he was hired by the district.  Bradbury was hired at a 
pay level above Salary Schedule A or B1 and on a 185/186 day contract.  Before he began 
his employment, Bradbury attended five days of training “to get it out of the way.”  That 
training began on August 18, 2008.  In last year’s layoff proceeding, Bradbury was given a 
seniority date of August 18, 2008.  In this year’s proceeding, however, the district assigned 
him a seniority date of August 26, 2008, the date he was required to report to work under his 
185/186 day contract.  Bradbury did not understand how the district could provide him with 
two different seniority dates. 
 
 
number 2505, with a seniority date of August 28, 2007.  Kononchuk was new to the district 
and had never worked as a probationary teacher.  The district hired Kononchuk at Salary 
Scale B1 on a 190 day contract, but after Kononchuk established that she had other teaching 
experience that qualified her for a higher pay scale, the district retroactively moved 
Kononchuk to salary schedule C1 and paid her at that rate for the full year.  However, she 
was never given a 185/186 day contract.  Before Kononchuk began her employment and 
while she was being paid at Salary Scale B1 on the 190 day contract, Kononchuk was told 
that she was required to attend the Kagan Cooperative Training sessions.  Kononchuk did so, 
with her first day of (then) paid probationary employment beginning on August 15, 2007.  
The district maintained Kononchuk’s seniority date as August 15, 2007, until this layoff 
proceeding, when it changed the seniority date to August 28, 2007.  
 
                                                
4  

23.  Katherine Kononchuk:  Katherine Kononchuk (Kononchuk) holds seniority 

See Factual Finding 15. 

 

11

24. 

Resolution of the Seniority Date Issues:  Bunnell, D’Amato and Bradbury 

 
were hired on 185/186 day contracts, and their first paid dates of probationary service did not 
begin until the commencement date specified in their employment contracts with the district.  
No authorized district representative made any representation to Bunnell, D’Amato, or 
Bradbury that reasonably caused any one of them to conclude that the district would assign 
them a seniority date that related to the first day they attended a pre-contract training, even 
though each of them believed their attendance at such a training session was required.  There 
was no factual basis established to support promissory estoppel.  Even if there was a basis for 
claiming that there was a misrepresentation in the district’s May 30, 2006, memo, and it was 
not established that there was such a misrepresentation, any misunderstanding arising out of 
that memo was unrelated to the assignment of a seniority date to Bunnell.  
 

25. 

The seniority dates of Bunnell and D’Amato remain July 5, 2006, their first 
date of paid probationary service with the district.  They could not have an earlier date of 
paid service because they held 186 day contracts under the teachers’ association agreement 
and because their payment for the pre-contract training was not included under that 
agreement. 

 
26. 

The district mistakenly established an incorrect seniority date for Bradbury, 

 
whose first paid date of probationary service occurred on August 26, 2008, the date his 
service began under his agreement with the district.  Bradbury, like Bunnell and D’Amato, 
held a 186 day contract, not a 190 day contract, and Bradbury could not be paid for attending 
pre-contract training under the teacher association’s bargaining agreement.  The district had a 
duty to correct Bradbury’s seniority date when it discovered the date it assigned was in error. 
 
27.  A far different factual situation exists in Kononchuk’s case.  Unlike Bunnell, 
 
D’Amato and Bradbury, Kononchuk was hired at Salary Scale B1 on a 190 day contract and 
began employment under that contract.  The district’s memo advising of the obligation of 
new teachers hired at Salary Schedules A and B applied directly to her, and she was required 
to attend the Kagan Cooperative Learning training sessions.  Unlike Bunnell, D’Amato, and 
Bradbury, she could have been fired had she not done so.  The fact that the district changed 
her contract at some point down the line and paid her retroactively did not affect her 
seniority.  Thus, Kononchuk’s seniority date is August 15, 2007, and the seniority list should 
be amended to reflect that date. 
 
Long Term Temporary Assignments 
  
 
the district’s seniority list is February 6, 2006.  Enciso contested that date, claiming a 
seniority date of June 30, 2005, the date she received in-service training before beginning 
long term substitute assignments for Heather Zepeda and other elementary school teachers. 
 

28.  Valorie Enciso (Enciso) holds seniority number 2106 and her seniority date on 

Enciso is an elementary school teacher.  On July 1, 2005, Enciso began a long-term 

substitute service assignment in Heather Zepeda’s classroom at Eisenhower Elementary 
School.  That assignment ended on September 2, 2005.  Enciso next worked as a substitute 
teacher from November 8 through November 22, 2005, in Jill Linne’s classroom at 

 

12

Eisenhower.  Enciso then worked as a substitute teacher in Katie Lawrence’s classroom at 
Eisenhower from November 28 through December 23, 2005.  Enciso returned to work as a 
substitute teacher in Jill Linne’s classroom from January 9 through February 3, 2006.  On 
February 6, 2006, the district placed Enciso in a vacant classroom at Eisenhower for the 
remainder of the 2005-2006 school year.   

The district asserted that day-to-day substitute service and multiple long-term 

Based on the rationale of Centinela Valley Secondary Teachers Assn v. Centinela 

 
 
Enciso claimed that she was entitled to a seniority date of June 30, 2005, because 
from that date through February 6, 2006, she worked at least 75 percent of the scheduled 
school days at Eisenhower Elementary School, although her period of service involved four 
separate assignments for three different teachers. 
 
 
substitute assignments for several teachers over the course of a single school year do not 
constitute probationary service for purposes of determining seniority.  
 
 
Valley Union High School District (1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 35, it is concluded that CNUSD’s 
determination of Enciso’s seniority date as reflected on its seniority list was correct, even 
though the service Enciso provided at Eisenhower Elementary as a substitute was extremely 
valuable to the district. 
 
Ultimate Conclusions Regarding CNUSD’s Layoff 
 
 
of services provided by teachers and other certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  
This decision was not related to the competency or dedication of the employees whose 
services were proposed to be reduced and discontinued.  The board’s determination that it 
was necessary to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of services and that employees with 
identifiable education, credentials, training and experience should be exempt from the 
reduction in force was lawful, reasonable, and ultimately in the best interest of the district 
and its students.   
 

CNUSD’s governing board resolved to reduce and discontinue particular kinds 

29. 

The district’s administrative staff initiated and followed a systematic procedure for 

identifying employees who were directly affected by the governing board’s reduction in 
force resolution.  Adjustments were made to the seniority list where indicated until the day 
before the layoff proceeding.  A careful evaluation was made to determine each employee’s 
seniority date, credentials and authorizations, and qualifications in making determinations 
about what bumping rights, if any, an employee had.  A preponderance of the evidence did 
not support a recommendation that any employee’s seniority date as set forth in the district’s 
seniority list be amended except for the seniority date assigned to Katherine Kononchuk, 
which should be amended to reflect a seniority date of August 15, 2007. 
 
 
credentialed employee was retained by the district to provide services which a more senior 
employee was certificated, competent and qualified to render. 
 

Except for those employees who were exempted from the reduction in force, no junior 

 

13

 

 

 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Statutory Authority  
 
 
 

1. 

Education Code section 44944 provides in part: 

(b) 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the 
governing board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year . . . 
the governing board and the employee shall be given written notice by the 
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been recommended 
that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor . . . 
 
 
The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for 
not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year . . . If an employee fails to request a 
hearing on or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his 
or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . . 
 
 
shall be conducted and a decision made in accordance with . . . the Government Code 
and the governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency therein, except 
that all of the following shall apply: 
 
 
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation and he or she shall be 
notified of this five-day period for filing in the accusation. 

In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the proceeding 

The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any, 

(1) 

(c) 

 

 

(3) 

The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge 

 
 
who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a 
determination as to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related to the 
welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be prepared 
for the governing board and shall contain a determination as to the sufficiency of the 
cause and a recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing board shall 
make the final determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and disposition. None 
of the findings, recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed 
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding on the governing 
board.  Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or 
governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the 
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.  Copies of the proposed decision shall 
be submitted to the governing board and to the employee on or before May 7 of the 
year in which the proceeding is commenced. . . .”  

. . . 

14

 

 

Education Code section 44955 provides in part: 

(b)  Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 

“(a)  No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 

2. 
 
 
causes other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 
44947, inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her 
position for cause other than as specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in 
the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary . . . 
to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board 
may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the 
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close 
of the school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to 
render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 
render.  

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 

 
same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the 
basis of needs of the district and the students thereof . . .   
 

(c) 

Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 15th of 

 
 
May . . . and services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the 
order in which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with 
the provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or 
probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for 
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year. 
 
The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that 
employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and 
qualifications entitle them to render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any 
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught, 
and for which he or she does not have a teaching credential or which is not within the 
employee’s major area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the 
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter competency test 
in the appropriate subject. 
 
 
Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following 
reasons: 

(d) 

 
. . . 
 

. . . 

15

 

(1) 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach 

 
 
a specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services 
credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a 
school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, which 
others with more seniority do not possess. 
 
 
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.” 

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 

(2) 

 

4. 

3. 

A school board’s decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service 

 
Jurisdiction 
 
 
Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955.  All notices and other jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were 
satisfied as to all respondent employees identified herein.   
 
The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
is not tied in with any statistical computation.  Where a governing board determines to 
discontinue or reduce a particular kind of service, it is within the board’s discretion to 
determine the amount by which it will reduce a particular kind of service as long as the 
district does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. 
v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) 
 
Competence 
 
The intent of the Education Code is to leave to a school board the discretion of 
 
determining whether in addition to possessing seniority an employee is also “certificated and 
competent” to be employed in a vacant position.  The term “competent” in this regard relates 
to an individual’s specific skills or qualifications including academic background, training, 
credentials, and experience, but does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance.  
(Forker v. Board of Trustees (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)  In addition to seniority, the 
only limitation in placing a teacher in a vacant position is that the teacher selected be 
“certificated and competent” to render the service required by the vacant position.  Among 
employees who meet this threshold limitation, there is no room in the statutory scheme for 
comparative evaluation.  (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299.)  An 
employee holding a special credential or needed skill, if such credentials or competence are 
not shared by a more senior employee, may be retained though it results in termination of a 
senior employee.  (Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.) 
 

5. 

 

16

6. 

The Statutory Scheme 

Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff statute, provides in 

Essentially this language provides “bumping” rights for senior certificated and 

Seniority, Bumping, and Skipping  
 
 
 
 
subdivision (b), in part, as follows:  “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of 
no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while . . . any 
other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.”  
 
 
competent employees, and “skipping” authority to retain junior employees who are 
certificated and competent to render services which more senior employees are not.  
Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to subdivision (b) where a district 
demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study and that a junior 
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course that 
the senior certificated employee does not possess.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. 
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.)  School districts have broad discretion in defining 
positions within the district and establishing requirements for employment.  This discretion 
encompasses determining the training and experience necessary for particular positions.  
Similarly, school districts have the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will 
be eliminated, even though a service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner 
by the district.  (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 
343.) 
 
 
 
 
determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an 
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be 
assigned to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra. at 136-137.) 
 
 
 
 
its specific “needs” and there is nothing in the statute that requires such needs to be 
evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job descriptions, or program requirements.  
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at 138.) 
 
Seniority 
 
 
certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”   
 
 
Based on its agreement with the teachers’ association, the district reasonably 
concluded that a new certificated employee who was hired under Salary Steps A or B1 on a 

Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 expressly allows a district to demonstrate 

Under Education Code section 44845, seniority is determined by the date a 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to 

Bumping 

Skipping 

8. 

9. 

7. 

 

17

10. 

11. 

Bunnell and D’Amato may have believed that the district required them to 

The elements of a promissory estoppel claim are (1) a promise clear and unambiguous in 

When a mistake is made, such as occurred with Bradbury’s seniority date in the last 

190 day contract was required to attend the Kagan Cooperative Learning training and that 
such an employee was entitled to a seniority date based upon a first paid date of probationary 
service if that new employee attended the required training before the formal teaching 
assignment began.  For employees employed under a 185/186 day contract, the district 
reasonably concluded that their attendance at the Kagan Cooperative Learning training was 
not mandatory under the district’s employment agreement and that their attendance at such 
training before the formal teaching assignment began did not constitute such an employee’s 
first paid date of probationary service.  
 
 
Education Code section 44846 provides in part:  “The governing board shall 
have power and it shall be its duty to correct any errors discovered from time to time in its 
records showing the order of employment.”  
 
 
reduction in force proceeding, CNUSD must correct the mistake. 
 
 
attend the Kagan Cooperative Learning training, but their testimony did not support the 
application of the promissory estoppel doctrine.   
 
 
its terms; (2) reliance by the party to whom the promise is made; (3) the reliance must be both 
reasonable and foreseeable; and (4) the party asserting the estoppel must be injured by his 
reliance.”  (US Ecology, Inc. v. State of California (2005) 129 Cal.App.4th 887, 901.)  Case law 
has also confirmed that promissory estoppel claims are peculiarly equitable in nature and courts 
are given broad discretion to allow or deny such claims.  (Id. at 907.) 
 
 
a seniority date, hence there was no reliance.  The memo was specifically addressed to new 
district employees within Salary Steps A and B1.  Thus, the district could not reasonably foresee 
that an employee outside these salary steps might mistakenly interpret the memo as requiring 
attendance.  Under these circumstances, promissory estoppel does not apply.  
 
Substitute and Temporary Service 
 
 
substitute employees those persons employed in positions requiring certification 
qualifications, to fill positions of regularly employed persons absent from service.”  Under 
Education Code section 44953, substitute employees may be dismissed at any time at the 
pleasure of the board.  As noted in California Teachers Ass’n v. Vallejo City Unified School 
Dist. (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135, 144-145 and Balen v. Peralta Junior College District 
(1974) 11 Cal.3d 821, 826, substitute and temporary teachers fill the short range needs of a 
school district and may be summarily released. 
 
 
position may be credited retroactively as probationary employment.  Thus, a certificated 

In specific situations, an employee’s position in something other than a probationary 

Here, there was no promise made in the district’s memo that related to the assignment of 

12.  Under Education Code section 44917, governing boards must “classify as 

 

18

employee working in a temporary position as a long-term replacement teacher under 
Education Code section 44920 or in a categorically funded position under Education Code 
section 44909 may accrue credit toward permanent status under certain circumstances 
described in Education Code sections 44909, 44917, 44918 or 44920.   
 
 
The Education Code recognizes two distinct types of substitute teachers:  Long-term 
substitute teachers and day-to-day substitute teachers.  Education Code section 44918 makes 
this distinction: 
 

“(a)  Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary employee, who 

serves during one school year for at least 75 percent of the number of days the regular 
schools of the district were maintained in that school year and has performed the duties 
normally required of a certificated employee of the school district, shall be deemed to 
have served a complete school year as a probationary employee if employed as a 
probationary employee for the following school year. 

Any such employee shall be reemployed for the following school year to 

fill any vacant positions in the school district unless the employee has been released 
pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 44954. 

If an employee was released pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 44954 
and has nevertheless been retained as a temporary or substitute employee by the district 
for two consecutive years and that employee has served for at least 75 percent of the 
number of days the regular schools of the district were maintained in each school year 
and has performed the duties normally required of a certificated employee of the school 
district, that employee shall receive first priority if the district fills a vacant position, at 
the grade level at which the employee served during either of the two years, for the 
subsequent school year. In the case of a departmentalized program, the employee shall 
have taught in the subject matter in which the vacant position occurs. 

Those employees classified as substitutes, and who are employed to serve 
in an on-call status to replace absent regular employees on a day-to-day basis shall not be 
entitled to the benefits of this section. 

Permanent and probationary employees subjected to a reduction in force 

pursuant to Section 44955 shall, during the period of preferred right to reappointment, 
have prior rights to any vacant position in which they are qualified to serve superior to 
those rights hereunder afforded to temporary and substitute personnel who have become 
probationary employees pursuant to this section. 

This section shall not apply to any school district in which the average 

daily attendance is in excess of 400,000.” 

 
(b) 

 
(c) 

 
(d) 

 
(e) 

 
(f) 

 

 
In a very similar factual situation (a substitute teacher providing a full year’s service for 
two different teachers who worked at the same school), and involving the application of a nearly 
identical predecessor statue (Ed. Code, § 13336.5), the court held:   
 

 

19

“In this context we are of the opinion that the statute in question and in particular 

the phrase ‘who teaches . . . any class or classes which would have been taught by one 
person absent from service . . .’ was intended to apply to the situation where a substitute 
teacher replaces one and the same permanent teacher for an entire school year regardless 
of particular class assignments.  Stated another way, the statute only applies when a 
substitute fills a vacancy in teacher complement of one year duration, created by the 
absence of one permanent teacher and does not apply to a one year vacancy which results 
from the aggregate of several teachers being absent for shorter periods. 

 
This interpretation preserves administrative discretion while affording fair 
treatment of substitutes and thus achieves what we presume to be the overall objective of 
the statute.”  (Centinela Valley Secondary Teachers Assn. v. Centinela Valley Union High 
Sch. Dist. (1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 35, 44.) 

 

This holding applies to Enciso’s situation.  Indeed, the failure to apply Centinela Valley 

 
might result in a claim that CNUSD exceeded its authority. 
 
 
In Fleice v. Chualar Union Elementary School District (1988) 206 Cal.App.3d 886, 
the school district misclassified Fleice as a tenured employee after she worked for just one 
complete school year.  The court stated: “[W]e believe that early tenure would conflict with 
the tenure statute and is, thus, beyond a school board’s power.”  (Id., at p. 890.)  
 
Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees 
 

13.  As a result of the governing board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of 

14. 

service being provided by certificated employees, cause exists under the Education Code for 
the district to give notice to those respondents who are identified hereafter that their 
employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services 
will not be needed by the district for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Determination 
 
The charges set forth in the accusation were sustained by a preponderance of 
 
the evidence and related to the welfare of the Corona-Norco Unified School District and the 
students thereof.  CNUSD’s administrative staff made assignments and reassignments under 
Resolution No. 85 in such a manner that the most senior employees were retained to render 
services which their seniority and qualifications entitled them to render, except as otherwise 
noted herein.  No employee with less seniority than any respondent will be retained to render 
a service which any respondent is certificated, competent and qualified to render.  
 
 
 
 

This determination is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 

 

20

RECOMMENDATIONS 

It is recommended that the preliminary layoff notices issued to Lisa Nickerson and 

It is recommended that the district’s “Persons Subject to Layoff” list be amended to 

Jason Allen be rescinded and that the accusations filed against them be dismissed. 
 
 
include at page 3 the inclusion of employee 2431, Sean Robinson, between employees 
number 2430 and 2431.   
 

It is recommended that the seniority list was amended by stipulation to provide that 

the entry for Brianna Brown, seniority number 2416, indicating “L.O.” [laid off] be stricken 
and that the entry for Sean Robinson, seniority number 2431, be corrected to add “2310 
bumps – L.O.” 
 
It is recommended that the seniority date assigned to Katherine Kononchuk on the 

 
district’s seniority list be amended to August 15, 2007. 
 

It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the respondents whose 

names are set forth in the attachment hereto that their employment will be terminated at the 
close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed for the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 
 
 
DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 

 
________________________________ 
JAMES AHLER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

 

21

