BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF EDUCATION  
STOCKTON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
    OAH No. 2009110492 
 
  

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of 
Certificated Employees of the Stockton 
Unified School District: 
 
Persons Occupying  
230 Certificated Full Time Equivalent 
Positions. 
 
                                                  Respondents 
 
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Ann Elizabeth Sarli, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter in Stockton, California, on 
April 19, 20 and 21, 2010. 
 
 
Diana D. Halpenny and Marie A. Nakamura, Attorneys at Law, Kronick, 
Moskovitz, Tiedemann & Girard, represented the Board of Education, Stockton 
Unified School District. 
 
 
(1) failure to file a timely notice of defense; (2) entry into a written stipulation to 
withdraw the Notice of Defense; and/or (3) the District’s rescission of the Notice of 
Non-Reemployment.  The respondents remaining in the action are listed in Exhibit 18 
A, which is attached hereto and incorporated herein. 
 

At hearing, several respondents were dismissed from the proceeding due to: 

Respondents were represented at hearing as follows: 

Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Ernest Tuttle, IV, 
represented Isabel Olivas. 

Heidi Primack Talbot, Attorney at Law, of the Talbot Law Group, represented 
Diane Fender.  Diane Fender’s Notice of Non-Reemployment was rescinded at 
hearing on April 21, 2010, and she is no longer a respondent in the action.  

Jose Cardenas represented himself. 

Andres Uyeda represented himself. 

1

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

Thomas J. Driscoll, Attorney at Law, Driscoll & Associates, represented the 
remaining respondents. 

 
Oral and documentary evidence was presented and the parties offered oral 
 
closing arguments.  The record was then closed and the matter was submitted for 
decision on April 21, 2010. 
 
 

FINDINGS  

1. 

Steve Vaczovsky is the Interim Superintendent of the Stockton Unified 
School District (District).  Robert Thompson is the Interim Assistant Superintendent, 
Human Resources, of the District.  Their actions, and those of the District’s governing 
body, the Board of Education (Board), were taken solely in their official capacities.  
 

2. 

The District serves approximately 38,000 students in 52 schools.  There 

are 43 kindergarten through eighth grade (K-8) schools, four comprehensive high 
schools, and four alternative high schools.  The District’s student population is 
ethnically diverse and includes substantial numbers of English language learners 
(ELL).  Seven of the District Schools have been categorized by the State under No 
Child Left Behind (NCLB) as lowest performing schools in the State and 28 of the 
schools have been categorized as the second lowest performing.   
 

3. 

The District currently has a $336 million budget and is facing a budget 

shortfall for the 2010-2011 school year of at least $28.1 million.  
 

4. 

On February 23, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No.09-45, 

reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services (PKS), affecting 200 Full Time 
Equivalent certificated positions (FTE). 
 

5. 

On March 2, 2010, the Board amended Resolution No. 09-45.  The 

amendment further reduced PKS, affecting an additional 30 FTE positions. 
 

6. 

Resolution No.09-45 and its amendment (Resolution) were based on  

the Interim Superintendent’s recommendation that it was necessary to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 

7. 

The Resolution states that the Board determined that it was necessary to 
reduce the following PKS of the District not later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 
school year: 
 
 
 

 

 

2

Services 

 

 

 

Number of FTE Positions 

 

1.  Administrative Services 

A. Central Office- Assigned 
Elementary Assistant Principals 

     

4.00 FTE 

2.  Counseling Services 

 

3.   Teaching Services 

A. K-8 Counseling Services  

3.00 FTE 

 

  

 

 

 

A. Elementary Teaching Services 

                    192.00 FTE 

B.  Program Specialist- Gifted and Talented            1.00 FTE 

C. K-8 Program Specialists Teaching Services 

  3.00 FTE 

D. High School Business Teaching Services 

  2.00 FTE 

E. High School English Teaching Services               9.00 FTE 

F.  High School Social Science Teaching Services   2.00 FTE 

G. High School Math Teaching Services                  2.20 FTE 

H. High School Spanish Teaching Services              1.00 FTE 

I.  High School Biology Teaching Services               2.00 FTE 

J. High School Physics Teaching Services               .40 FTE 

K. Edison High School Block Schedule  
Science Physics (.66)  
Field Research Problems (.33) 
Teaching Program  

 

 

 

L. Edison High School Block Schedule  
Child Development (.833) and  
High School Intro Consumer Science 
(.167) Teaching Program  

                                    1.00 FTE 

M. High School Chemistry Teaching Program           .20 FTE 

 

  1.00 FTE 

 

 

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

N. High School Earth Science Teaching Program       .60 FTE 

O. Middle School Science Teaching Program  
(6th Grade (0.4)) and (8th Grade (0.4))                          .80 FTE 

P. High School Introduction Consumer & Family       .40 FTE 

Q. High School Foundations in Literacy  
Teaching Program                                                         .60 FTE 

R. High School Foods & Nutrition  
Teaching Program                                                         .80 FTE 

S. High School WASC Teaching Program                     .20 FTE 

T. High School Home Economics Teaching  
 
 
Program             

 

 

        1.00 FTE 

U. High School Health and Drivers Education  
Teaching Services 

 

 

 

 

        1.00 FTE 

V. High School Accounting Teaching Services              .20 FTE 

W. High School Multi- Media Teaching Services           .60  FTE 
       _________ 
 
         230 FTE 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
Total 

8. 

As a result of the above PKS reductions and/or eliminations, the Board 

determined that it was necessary to decrease 230 FTE positions for certificated 
employees in the District at the close of the 2009-2010 school year, in accordance 
with Education Code section 44955.1

9. 

On March 12, 2010, the Interim Superintendent gave the Board written 

notice of his recommendation that notice be given to respondents that their services 
would not be required for the ensuing school year, and the reasons therefore.  The 
Board directed the Interim Superintendent to take all appropriate action needed to 
effectuate the PKS reductions and/or eliminations, including the sending of 
appropriate notices to all employees whose positions would be affected by virtue of 
this action. 

                                                 

1 All statutory references are to the California Education Code unless otherwise indicated. 

4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10.  On March 12, 2010, Robert Thompson timely served a letter entitled 

“Subject: Recommendation That Services Will Not Be Required” (Preliminary 
Notice) on each of the permanent and probationary certificated employees affected by 
the PKS reductions and/or eliminations set forth in the Resolution.2  The Notice 
advised that Mr. Thompson had recommended to the Board that the recipient be given 
preliminary written notice that his/her services might not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year, due to reductions in PKS. 
 

11.  All the respondents in this action3 timely filed a Request for Hearing to 

determine whether there was cause for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 

12.  On March 30, 2010, Robert Thompson made and filed the Accusation, 
and caused it to be served on respondents or their legal counsel.  Respondents timely 
filed Notices of Defense. 
 
Process for Identifying Certificated Employees Subject to Layoff   
 

13. 

In anticipation of a “dire” budget shortfall and PKS reduction, Mr. 

Vaczovsky and Mr. Thompson directed staff to begin updating the District’s 
computerized seniority list in December 2009.  In December, the seniority list was 
posted on the District website and presented to all bargaining units.  Each certificated 
employee was sent a verification sheet, listing his or her seniority date, status and 
credentials.  The verification sheet advised that any changes to this information 
should be returned to the District office by January 8, 2010.  Multiple certificated 
employees responded with additional information.  The District staff researched this 
information and when appropriate, updated the seniority list.  District staff took into 
account known attrition by retirement and resignation.4
 

14.  After the Resolution was adopted, District staff identified the 

individuals serving in the positions affected by the PKS reductions.  District staff used 
the updated seniority list to identify the least senior persons occupying the positions 
affected by the PKS reductions.  
  

15.  When the least senior persons occupying the positions affected by the 
PKS reductions were identified, District staff looked at each individual’s credentials 
to determine whether he or she could displace any less senior certificated employees.  
District staff conducted this inquiry for each affected employee in each service area 

                                                 

2 “Precautionary” Preliminary Notices were also served on certain employees whom the District 
classified as temporary and on other employees whom the District believed were not legally entitled to a 
Preliminary Notice. 

3 See Exhibit 18 A. 
4 The District has offered employees a retirement incentive.  It will not be known for at least two 

months from the date of the hearing how many certificated employees wish to accept the offer and whether  
the incentives would be cost effective. 

 

5

identified in the Resolution, and in the same order the service area was set forth in the 
Resolution.  District staff completed a “bumping chart” which documents the results 
of the displacement process.  On March 12, 2010, District staff served the Preliminary 
Notice identified in Finding 10, on the most junior employees affected by the PKS 
reduction. 
 
Challenges to Counseling Reductions Affecting Andres Uyeda and Jose 
Cardenas 
 
 
8 Counseling Services were reduced.  District staff identified the least senior school 
counselors occupying 3.00 FTE in K-8 counseling.  They are: Isabel Olivas, Vicki 
Zeyen and Carly Moore. 
 

Pursuant to Resolution item 2 A., 3.00 FTE in Counseling Services- K-

16. 

Isabel Olivas is the least senior certificated employee assigned to K-8 
counseling services.  She is a permanent employee, has a seniority date of August 18, 
2004, and is assigned as an elementary school counselor.  She holds a pupil personnel 
services (PPS) credential.  Ms. Olivas is unable to displace any junior employee. 
There are no junior employees being retained to provide services which Ms. Olivas is 
certificated to provide.  She is subject to layoff and was served a Preliminary Notice. 
 

Vicki Zeyen was the next least senior certificated employee assigned to K-8 
counseling services.  She is a permanent employee, with a seniority date of August 
16, 2004.  She holds a PPS credential.  The District determined that she is senior to 
Jose Cardenas and could displace him.  Mr. Cardenas has a seniority date of August 
11, 2005.  He holds a PPS credential and is a permanent employee.  He holds the 
position of Guidance Chairperson at a District high school. 
 

Carly Moore was the next least senior certificated employee assigned to K-8 

counseling services.  She is a permanent employee, with a seniority date of December 
10, 2003, and is assigned as an elementary school counselor.  Ms. Moore holds a PPS 
credential.  The District determined that she is senior to Andres Uyeda and could 
displace him.  Mr. Uyeda has a seniority date of August 9, 2006.  He holds a PPS 
credential and is a permanent employee.  He holds the position of guidance 
chairperson at a District high school. 
 

17.  Mr. Uyeda and Mr. Cárdenas maintain that the PKS reduction of 3.00 

FTE K-8 Counseling Service does not specify a reduction in the service of “Guidance 
Chairperson” or “Guidance Chairperson at a District High School.”  Therefore, they 
maintain that since they occupy guidance chairperson positions, they are not subject 
to layoff.  However, Mr. Uyeda and Mr. Cárdenas were not directly affected by the 
PKS reduction of K-8 counseling services.  Rather, as noted above, each was 
displaced by a senior certificated employee. 

 

 

6

18.  Mr. Uyeda and Mr. Cárdenas maintain that the senior certificated 
employees who are displacing them are not certificated or competent to displace 
them.  They maintain that there are substantial distinctions between the positions of 
guidance chairperson and K-8 counselors, and that the collective bargaining 
agreement that covers the District’s counselors recognizes these distinctions.  They 
also point to the fact that, pursuant to the collective bargaining agreement, guidance 
chairperson positions must be filled by an “interview and select” process. 
 

These arguments are not persuasive.  The PPS credential authorizes its holder 
to perform counseling services in grades K-12.  There are no additional credentials or 
authorizations required for the PPS credential holder to serve as a high school 
guidance chairperson.  Accordingly, senior employees Carly Moore and Vicki Zeyen 
hold the certification required to displace Mr. Uyeda and Mr. Cardenas.  There is no 
evidence that either Carly Moore or Vicki Zeyen lack competency to perform as high 
school guidance chairpersons.  Ultimately, the District may fill the high school 
guidance chairperson positions through an internal competitive process, pursuant to 
the collective bargaining agreement.  However, the certificated employees who 
comprise the District’s applicant pool of PPS credential holders, including Carly 
Moore and Vicki Zeyen, are senior to Mr. Uyeda and Mr. Cárdenas. 
 

19.  Mr. Uyeda and Mr. Cárdenas further maintain that they should be 

“skipped” from the layoff because they have special skills and qualifications which 
more senior employees do not possess.  They cite section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), 
as authority for this proposition.  This section provides in pertinent part: 
 

(d)… a school district may deviate from terminating a 
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the 
following reasons: 

(1) The District demonstrates a specific need for personnel to … 
provide services authorized by a services credential with a 
specialization in … pupil personnel services… and that the 
certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to … provide those services, which others with more 
seniority do not possess.  (Italics added) 

Although Mr. Uyeda and Mr. Cárdenas may be very well-qualified to occupy 

their positions as high school guidance chairpersons, the District is not required to 
retain them and release more senior certificated employees.  Conversely, the District 
has an affirmative obligation to reassign senior teachers who are losing their 
positions.  Pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), only the District may seek to 
“skip” a junior employee, under the limited circumstances set forth therein.  A junior 
employee has no legal right to insist that he or she be skipped. 
 

 

 

 

7

20. 

There are no junior employees being retained to provide services which 

21. 

There are no junior employees being retained to provide services which 

Mr. Cárdenas is certificated and competent to provide. 
 

Mr. Uyeda is certificated and competent to provide. 
 
Service of Accusation on Andres Uyeda 
 

22.  Mr. Uyeda maintains that the District failed to properly serve him with 

the Accusation, and therefore his Preliminary Notice should be rescinded.  The 
District served attorney Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, with the Accusation against Mr. Uyeda, 
after Mr. Tuttle advised the District that he was serving as Mr. Uyeda’s counsel.  Mr. 
Tuttle timely filed a Notice of Defense on Mr. Uyeda’s behalf.  After Mr. Tuttle and 
Mr. Uyeda reached an impasse about the nature and extent of representation, Mr. 
Tuttle forwarded the Accusation to Mr. Uyeda.  My Uyeda received the Accusation 
no later than April 16, 2010.  Mr. Uyeda claims he never authorized Mr. Tuttle to 
serve as his counsel, and therefore the District should have served the Accusation 
upon him, and did not.5
 

23. 

The Education Code does not mandate that the employee subject to 

layoff be personally served with the Accusation by a particular date.  The inference 
may be properly drawn that since the employee is required to file a Notice of Defense 
within five days after service of the Accusation (section  44949, subdivision (c)(1)), 
there would be at least five days elapsing between the time the employee receives the 
Accusation and the date the hearing commences.  However, a Notice of Defense was 
filed on Mr. Uyeda’s behalf and the timely filing of a Notice of Defense is not at 
issue.  Mr. Uyeda had timely received the Preliminary Notice, had timely filed a 
Request for Hearing and was aware of the hearing dates.  The evidence was 
persuasive that Mr. Uyeda, shortly before the hearing was set to commence, decided 
he should seek counsel or obtain different counsel.  The appropriate remedy for a 
party who finds himself unrepresented on the eve of hearing, either because of 
misunderstanding with counsel or counsel’s withdrawal, is to seek a continuance.  Mr. 
Uyeda did so and the Administrative Law Judge declined to continue the entire 
hearing while Mr. Uyeda sought counsel.  Mr. Uyeda participated fully in the hearing.  
He presented his case on the final day of hearing.  At that time, he was unable to 
identify any evidence that he would require additional time to locate.  His renewed 
request for continuance was denied. 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

5 No additional evidence was taken on the history of Mr. Tuttle's representation of Mr. Uyeda, 
because Mr. Tuttle represents other respondents in this proceeding, and because of the application of the 
attorney-client privilege. 

 

8

Skipping Certain Alternative Education Teachers 
 

24. 

Julio Lopez is a probationary employee with a seniority date of July 28, 

2008.  He holds a single subject credential in social sciences, with a BCLAD in 
Spanish.  Mr. Lopez is currently assigned to teach at the District’s only continuation 
high school, Jane Frederick Continuation High School (Jane Frederick).  He teaches 
independent study, consisting of multiple classes, including English, world history, 
earth science, algebra, math, seasonal sports, US history, American government, 
biology, economics, algebra and humanities.  Mr. Lopez was not noticed for layoff. 
 

25. 

Christina Katen is a probationary employee with a seniority date of July 

9, 2008.  She is assigned to teach secondary education.  She holds a multiple subject 
credential, with authorizations in intro social sciences-grades 9 and below and intro 
English grade 9 and below.  Her Bachelor’s degree is in Liberal studies and she holds 
a Master’s degree in education administration.  She is assigned to teach introductory 
English 9th grade and below at Merlot High School, a small alternative high school 
themed around environmental education.  Because Merlot High School is small, the 
District maintains that it is easier for staffing and programming to retain a teacher like 
Ms. Katen, who has more than one subject authorization.  Scheduling is very tight and 
teachers usually teach in more than one subject area.  Ms. Katen was not noticed for 
layoff. 
 

26. 

Susan Lockman is a probationary employee with a seniority date of 
July 9, 2008.  She is assigned as a secondary teacher and holds a multiple subject 
credential.  Her Bachelor’s degree is in general studies and she has a master’s degree 
in education.  She is assigned to teach English at the Stockton Alternative High 
School.  She is NCLB compliant in English.  When the District was recruiting, it 
attempted to hire someone holding a single subject English credential, but received no 
applications.  Ms. Lockman was selected because of her No Child Left Behind 
(NCLB)/HOUSSE6 compliance in English.  Ms. Lockman was not noticed for layoff. 
 

27. 

There are four respondents who are senior to Mr. Lopez, Ms. Katen and 

Ms. Lockman and who maintain that they should bump into the skipped positions. 
 

A. 
Joseph Shelby is a probationary employee with a seniority date of 
September 10, 2007.  He is employed by the District as an intermediate school 
teacher and holds a multiple subject credential, with a CLAD authorization.  
He is assigned to teach fourth through sixth grades at the Stockton 
Intermediate Alternative School, a school which primarily serves students who 
have had behavioral or attendance issues at their home schools. 

                                                 

6 HOUSSE Qualification is granted when sufficient evidence is presented that the teacher has 

demonstrated competence in the K-12 content standards pertaining to the teaching assignment (core 
academic assignment) and has met California Standards for the Teaching Profession 3 and 5.1.   

 

 

9

B.  Michelle Munoz is a permanent employee of the District with a 
seniority date of July 25, 2007.  She is employed as an intermediate school 
teacher and holds a multiple subject credential with a CLAD authorization.  
Ms. Munoz has no supplemental authorizations except CLAD.   Ms. Munoz 
teaches fourth grade at Wilhelmina Henry Elementary School, and has done so 
for the three years of her employment with the District.  She has experience 
teaching in alternative education settings.  She worked for San Joaquin Office 
of Education in their alternative and court schools for four years and taught 
grades seven through 12.  She also taught for one year at a Tracy School 
District alternative education site, in grades seven through 11.  She has also 
worked in the field of probation for a year.  

  C.    Clinton Earle Stoddard is a permanent employee of the District with a 
seniority date of September 4, 2007.  He is employed as an intermediate 
school teacher and holds a multiple subject credential with an ELL 
authorization.  In the current school year, he has been assigned to teach 
science, and then history, at Roosevelt Elementary School.  He is NCLB 
qualified in multiple subjects and has HOUSSE qualification in 11 subject 
areas, including mathematics, English, reading and language arts, science, 
geography, economics, civics and government and history.  He has taught at a 
K-12 charter school, in all subjects for five years.  Although he has not taught 
specifically in alternative education, he has taught for 30 years.   

 

Jeannine Huffman is a probationary employee of the District with a 

D.   
seniority date of July 25, 2007.  She is employed as an intermediate teacher, 
teaching eighth grade and holds a multiple subject credential.  She does not yet 
have a CLAD authorization.  She has no supplemental authorizations, although 
she holds a CTE (California Technical Education) credential in business and 
finance, with marketing and sales pending.  This credential allows her to teach 
technical education to high school and adult students.  She is authorized to 
teach the trade subjects of business, marketing and entrepreneurship.  
Although she has no specific experience with working in alternative education, 
she works  on an “intensive level” with students who have problems with 
gangs, violence and drugs.  She uses ELL and other techniques designed to 
teach difficult student groups.  She teaches all subjects at Hoover Intermediate 
School, including algebra, high school equivalent physical science, English 
language arts, US history and bilingual Spanish.   

28. 

Skipping Julio Lopez - The District maintains that Mr. Lopez was 

skipped for several reasons and should not be bumped.  The District acknowledges 
that a certificated employee holding a multiple subjects credential is certificated to 
teach in a continuation high school.  However, the District maintains that it has a 
specific need for Mr. Lopez to teach the high school subjects he teaches at Jane 
Frederick.  The No Child Left Behind Act requires that teachers assigned to teach 
core subject areas either hold a single subject in the subject area or be NCLB 

10

 

 

 

qualified to teach in the subject area.  The District maintains that Mr. Lopez’s single 
subject credential in social sciences enables him to teach several core subject areas, 
such as world and US history, American government and economics.  The District is 
attempting to have continuation schools staffed by NCLB qualified and single subject 
credential holders, so that it has greater flexibility in staffing.  Additionally, Mr. 
Lopez’s BCLAD in Spanish permits them to teach in that language.  Jane Frederick 
has a significant population of students whose first language is Spanish.  Although 
Mr. Lopez is not NCLB qualified in all subject areas he teaches, he is highly qualified 
in several subjects due to his single subject credential, and this flexibility is valuable 
to this small continuation high school.7
 

29.  Mr. Shelby, Ms. Munoz and Ms. Huffman each have multiple subject 
credentials with no supplemental authorizations and no NCLB qualifications in core 
subject areas.  Although they have experience teaching in alternative education 
settings, the District has demonstrated that it is vital for teachers at the District’s only 
continuation high school to hold either single subject credentials, or be NCLB 
qualified in core areas.  Accordingly, Mr. Shelby, Ms. Munoz and Ms. Hoffman may 
not bump into the position held by Mr. Lopez. 
 

30.  However, Mr. Stoddard is NCLB qualified in multiple subjects and has 

HOUSSE/NCLB qualification in 11 subject areas, including core academic areas.     
Although he has not taught specifically in alternative education, he has taught for 30 
years, in multiple settings.  He has ELL certification, which enables him to teach a 
population with a large number of English-language learners.   He is thus able to 
teach several core subject areas and has the flexibility required to teach in the 
continuation high school. 
 

31.  Although Mr. Lopez may have been and may still be the “best 
candidate” to fill his position, the Education Code does not permit districts in a layoff 
proceeding to weigh the qualifications of teaching staff and retain junior employees it 
believes have superior skills.  The District must show that the skipped teacher has 
special training and experience necessary to teach the specific course.  The District 
has established that the special training and experience necessary to teach 
continuation high school consists of highly qualified status in multiple subject areas.  
Mr. Stoddard has this special training and experience and is senior to Mr. Lopez.  
Accordingly, Mr. Stoddard may displace Mr. Lopez. 

 

                                                 
7 The District advanced several other arguments supporting its skip of Mr. Lopez , that do not 
 
have merit.  For instance, the District maintained that Mr. Lopez had ties to the community, was a callback 
from the prior year layoff reinstatement list, and that other teachers had not applied for his position at the 
time it was advertised.  The only relevant issues to the determination of whether an employee should be 
skipped are whether the District has a specific need for the employee’s special training and experience and 
whether others with more seniority possess that training and experience. 
 

 

11

32. 

Skipping Susan Lockman - Mr. Shelby, Ms. Munoz and Ms. Hoffman 

maintain that they can bump into Ms. Lockman’s English teaching position at 
Stockton Alternative High School.  But, as noted in Findings 29, Mr. Shelby, Ms. 
Munoz and Ms. Huffman do not hold single subject credentials and are not NCLB 
qualified in core areas.  Ms. Lockman is NCLB qualified in the English courses she 
teaches.  Accordingly, Mr. Shelby, Ms. Munoz and Ms. Hoffman may not displace 
Ms. Lockman. 
 

33. 

Skipping Christina Katen - Mr. Shelby, Ms. Munoz and Ms. Hoffman 

maintain that they can bump into Ms. Katen’s 9th grade English position at Merlot 
High School.8  Ms. Katen holds authorizations in intro social sciences-grades 9 and 
below and intro English grade 9 and below.  As set forth in Findings 29 and 32, Mr. 
Shelby, Ms. Munoz and Ms. Hoffman may not displace Ms. Katen. 
 
Skipping Arts Resource Teacher 
 

34.  Kathy McCarron is a permanent employee with a seniority date of 

August 27, 2007.  She is assigned as an arts resource teacher (visual arts) at Harrison 
Elementary School.  She holds a multiple subject credential with authorizations in 
English and in intro Social Sciences grade 9 and below.  She also holds a single 
subject credential in English and a single subject credential in social science.  She 
earned a liberal arts baccalaureate degree, with a concentration in art.  When she was 
hired into this position she was in a master’s program for curriculum and instruction 
in art education.  On November 10, 2009, the Board passed resolution No. 09- 20 
authorizing Ms. Mc Carron to teach art outside of her credential area, pursuant to 
section 44256, subdivision (b).  The resolution identifies several teachers teaching 
outside of their credential area for the 2009-2010 school year.  Respondents argue that 
this resolution does not apply to the upcoming school year and that therefore there is 
no resolution in place allowing Ms. McCarron to teach art in 2010-2011. 
 

35.  Donna Mittlestedt is a permanent employee assigned as an intermediate 
school teacher.  She has a seniority dated July 21, 2007.  She holds a multiple subject 
credential with a supplemental authorization for business grades 9 and below.  She 
teaches fifth grade at a magnet school at John Marshall Elementary School.  The 
magnet school program is designed to expose students to science and math.  Ms. 
Mittlestedt is senior to Kathy McCarron.  Ms. Mittlestedt received a Preliminary 
Notice as part of the layoff of 192 FTE Elementary Teaching Services.  Ms. 
Mittlestedt maintains that she should displace Ms. McCarron as an arts resource 
teacher. 
 

                                                 

8 During respondents’ closing argument, counsel apparently acknowledged that respondents could 
not bump into Ms. Katen’s position.  The issue is addressed herein because evidence was taken on the issue 
and counsel’s argument did not constitute a clear waiver. 

 

12

36.  Ms. Mittlestedt has 21 units of fine art education and 15 units of other 

arts related classes, including ceramics, sculpture, painting, drawing color and design. 
She attained these units by taking classes at Delta College between 1999 and 2000, 
for personal enrichment.  Ms. Mittlestedt’s baccalaureate degree does not include a 
concentration or emphasis in art.  She has not sought an authorization in art, nor has 
she requested a Board resolution allowing her to teach art outside of her credential.  
When she applied for her current position, she included transcripts from Delta 
College showing credits accumulated in art classes. 
 

37.  Ms. McCarron is qualified to teach art in 2009-2010 by virtue of the 

Board resolution authorizing her to do so and her baccalaureate concentration in art.  
Ms. Mittlestedt claims that she, too, is authorized to obtain a Board resolution 
enabling her to teach art, because she has accumulated units of art education.  
Essentially, she maintains that she and Ms. McCarran are in the same position for the 
2010-2011 school year in that each has over 12 units of art education, and neither will 
have a resolution in effect authorizing her to teach outside of her credential. 
 

38. 

The District maintains that Ms. McCarron’s baccalaureate 

concentration in art and the fact that she has already obtained a Board resolution 
enabling her to teach art for three years, and she can thus obtain a Board Resolution 
for the following year, qualifies her for the arts resource position.  The District 
maintains that Ms. Mittlestedt is not qualified without Board authorization to teach art 
resources and it is speculative whether she will be able to obtain Board authorization 
for the upcoming year. 

 

39. 

The District’s argument is persuasive.  Reductions in force pursuant to 
the Education Code necessarily require the District to consider employees’ credentials 
and qualifications as they exist at the time the Preliminary Notices are issued.  
Credentials and qualifications include Board resolutions authorizing teaching outside 
a credential area.  Ms. Mittlestedt is currently not qualified to teach art resources, 
while Ms. McCarron is.  Ms. Mittlestedt may not bump into the arts resource position 
held by Ms. McCarron. 
 
Retaining Numeracy Specialist 
 

40.  Heather Espitia is a permanent employee with a seniority date of 

November 1, 2007.  She holds a multiple subject credential with a CLAD 
authorization.  She is assigned to Fremont Middle School as a numeracy specialist.  
This is a non-teaching position in which she coaches elementary teachers on strategies 
and skills designed to result in more effective classroom teaching of math.  Ms. 
Espitia’s services are being terminated pursuant to the 192 FTE reduction in 
elementary teaching services. 
 
 
 

 

13

41.  Ms. Espitia contends that she is not subject to lay off, because the 
resolution did not identify numeracy specialists as a particular kind of service for 
reduction.  Ms. Espitia also maintains that if arts resource teachers were not a PKS 
identified in the resolution, then numeracy should not be considered a PKS.  The 
District responds that Ms. Espitia is subject to layoff because she is one of the least 
senior multiple subject holders and is within the range of layoff of 192 FTE Multiple 
Subject holders providing elementary teaching services.  The District explains that the 
arts resource teachers were skipped because of their skills and experience in art, not 
because arts resource teachers were not identified as a PKS.  The District was 
persuasive.  Employees involved in the layoff process testified that there was 
discussion and agreement that arts resource teachers should be skipped because of the 
District’s specific need for teachers with these skills, and because of the great 
difficulty the District had encountered in filling these positions.  Further, Ms. Espitia 
makes too fine a distinction between classroom teaching services and her services 
teaching classroom teachers.  The PKS reduces elementary teaching services, and she 
is an elementary teacher. 
 
General Challenges 
 
Skipping Process 
 

42. 

Respondents argue that there is a “fundamental flaw” in the procedure 

the District utilized in skipping certain teachers.  There was no Board resolution 
authorizing skipping and the District did not provide information to teachers as to 
whom would be skipped and why, so that senior teachers could assert that they too 
have the special skills required by the District to fill the positions that are skipped.  
Respondents also maintain there is an affirmative duty upon the District to review the 
backgrounds of senior employees who are subject to layoff, when retaining a junior 
employee pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). 
 

43. 

The Education Code does not require that the governing body of a 

school district adopt a resolution respecting its intent to skip certificated employees 
under section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).  Nor are there notice requirements in the 
Education Code designed to ensure that persons subject to layoff are aware of a skip 
and have an opportunity to challenge it. 
 

44. 

Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), places the burden upon the District 

to demonstrate a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of 
study and to demonstrate that the certificated employee skipped has special training 
and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study, which others with 
more seniority do not possess.  Clearly then, the District has an affirmative duty to 
examine the qualifications of senior employees to fill the positions it proposes to skip. 
It cannot determine that there are no senior employees with necessary skills without 
conducting an inquiry.  In a District the size of Stockton Unified School District, that 
task can be onerous, especially when the special training and experience the District 

 

14

requires to fill the position does not come in the form of a credential.  A District may 
choose to utilize a procedure similar to the procedures used to update seniority lists.  
A District may advise all senior employees that it proposes to skip certain junior 
employees, and the reasons therefore, and give senior employees an opportunity to 
present written evidence that they have the special training and experience necessary 
to teach the skipped position. 
 

45.  However, here the District’s failure to advise senior employees that it 
intended to skip junior arts resource teachers and certain junior alternative education 
teachers was not a deprivation of due process.  In Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School 
District (Bledsoe) (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 138, Bledsoe challenged the District’s 
decision to serve him with a preliminary lay off notice while retaining junior 
employees pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), to teach Community Day 
School.  The court found that “[s]ubdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 expressly allows 
a district to demonstrate its specific ‘needs’ and there is nothing in the statute that 
requires such needs to be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job 
descriptions, or program requirements.”  The court explained, however, that in order 
for a school district “to retain a certificated employee under section 44955, 
subdivision (d)(1), … a district must not only establish a specific need for personnel 
to teach a specific course of study, but establish the certificated employee it proposes 
to retain ‘has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course 
of study or to provide those services[.]’” (Ibid.) 
 

46. 

The  Bledsoe court stated: “Of course, we agree the District should 
have assessed Bledsoe’s qualifications [to teach Community Day School] prior to 
giving him the first layoff notice.  However, while such failure is an error, it was not 
prejudicial in this case as Bledsoe requested a hearing, the District timely served an 
accusation, notice of hearing, and notice of defense form on Bledsoe, who timely filed 
a notice of defense, and a full hearing on the merits followed. The ALJ issued a 
detailed proposed decision, which was considered by the Board and adopted. Only 
then was a final layoff notice sent to Bledsoe.  That is, Bledsoe’s discharge occurred 
after the Board considered his competency to remain.”  (Id. at 143) 
 

47.  As in Bledsoe, and as set forth in the Findings above, those senior 

employees who have challenged retention of junior arts resource teachers and 
alternative education teachers have had a full hearing on the merits.  Each was given 
the opportunity to provide evidence he or she believed qualified him or her to teach 
the courses the District proposes to skip.  The burden of proof remains with the 
District to show both that the junior teachers have special training and experience 
specifically needed by the District and that the challenging senior teacher does not 
possess the special training and experience necessary.  Here, there has been no 
deprivation of due process rights. 

 
 
 

 

15

Applicability of Competency Criteria 
 

48. 

The Board adopted “competency criteria” (Resolution No. 09-44) 

which a senior employee must meet in order to bump into a position held by a junior 
employee.  The competency criteria requires that the senior employee hold credentials 
authorizing provision of instruction to English-language learners and requires that the 
employee hold a regular credential and not a provisional credential.  There were no 
challenges to application of the competency criteria in this proceeding. 
 

49.  However, respondents argue that since the Board has adopted these 

competency criteria, it has acknowledged that these are the only criteria necessary to 
teach in the District.  Accordingly, the argument goes, the District cannot assert under 
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), that it requires personnel with special training and 
experience to teach any particular course.  This argument lacks merit.  The Education 
Code imposes an affirmative duty on the District to assign and reassign senior 
employees so that junior employees are not retained while a senior employee, who is 
competent and certificated to perform the same duty, is laid off.  Competency criteria 
allow the District to apply uniform standards to the determination of competency to 
displace.  Notably, section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), gives the District the right and 
opportunity to exempt certain positions requiring special training and experience from 
the seniority rules. Competency criteria are irrelevant to the determination whether a 
certificated position should be exempted from layoff. 
 
Other Defenses 
 

50.  Any other assertions raised by respondents at hearing which are not 

addressed above are found to be without merit. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

As set forth the Findings, all notice and jurisdictional requirements set 

forth in sections 44944 and 44945 were met.  The notices sent to respondents 
indicated the statutory basis for the reduction of services and, therefore, were 
sufficiently detailed to provide them due process.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. 
Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing 
Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  The description of services to be reduced, both 
in the Board Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe particular kinds of 
services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.  See, also, Degener v. 
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 

2. 

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular 

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another 
manner. (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California 
Teachers Association v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 

 

 

16

Cal.App.3d 32.)  A school board may reduce services within the meaning of the 
statute either by determining that a certain type of service shall not be performed at all 
or by reducing the number of district employees who perform such services.  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 
Cal.App.3d 167.) 
 

3. 

The services identified in PKS Resolution No. 09-45 are particular 
kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under sections 44949 and 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for 
the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949. 
 

4. 

As set forth in the Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, and with 

the exception noted in Findings 30 and 31 (Clinton Stoddard), the District has 
established that no employees junior to respondents are being retained to perform the 
services which respondents are competent and certificated to render. 
 

5. 

The District’s reductions and discontinuances of particular kinds of 

services relate solely to the welfare of its schools and pupils. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

The District shall rescind the Preliminary Notice issued to Clinton 

 
1. 
 
Stoddard. 
 

2. 

The District may give notice to the remaining respondents in the 

inverse order of seniority that it will not require their services for the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 
 
 
DATED:  May 6, 2010 
 
 
 
 

 

_____________________________ 
  ANN ELIZABETH SARLI 

 
 

 
   
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

          Administrative Law Judge 
          Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

17

