 
 
 

BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD 
LOWELL JOINT SCHOOL DISTRICT 
LOS ANGELES AND ORANGE COUNTIES 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Nancy  Beezy  Micon,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

      
 
       Case No.  2010030556 
 
 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Layoffs Of: 
 
Keith Collins and Other  
  Certificated Employees of the  
  Lowell Joint School District, 
 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
heard this matter on April 26, 2010, in Whittier, California. 
 
 
Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  by  Barbara  J.  Ginsberg,  Attorney  at  Law, 
represented  Patricia  A.  Howell,  Ed.D.  (Howell),  Superintendent,  Lowell  Joint  School  District 
(District). 
 
 
Keith Collins and Tamara Irving, collectively referred to as Respondents. 
 
 
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  and  other  certificated  employees  of  the  District  notice  of  its  intent  not  to 
reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year.  Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for  a 
determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
received at the hearing, and the matter was submitted for decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence,  and  evidence  by  oral  stipulation  on  the  record,  was 

Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  by  Deborah  Eshaghian,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented 

Superintendent Howell filed the Accusation in her official capacity. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. 

2. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

3. 

4. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Total 

                      Service   

 
                         

                      FTE1 Positions

          19.0 
2.0 
 
1.0  
 
 
1.0 
            0.2 
            1.0   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      24.2 

On  March  1,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
 
adopted Resolution 2009/10 No. 505, reducing or discontinuing the following services for the 
2010-2011 school year: 
 
 
 
Elementary Instruction 
Intermediate English/Language Arts Instruction 
Intermediate Social Studies Instruction 
Intermediate Counseling 
Independent Study Program Instruction 
Special Education (Mild/Moderate – RSP) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On or about March 1, 2010, Superintendent Howell notified the Governing Board 
that she had recommended that notice be provided to Respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
On or about March 2, 2010, the District provided notice to Respondents that their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds of services.  
 
 
reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
7. 
on Respondents.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
within the meaning of Education Code2 section 44955. 
 
/// 
 

The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

On or about March 11, 2010, the District issued the Accusations, and served them 

Respondents  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

Respondents thereafter filed timely Notices of Defense.  

10. 

11. 

5. 

6. 

9. 

8. 

                     
1 Full-time equivalent. 

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

 

 

 
 
 

2 

 

a. 

b. 

12. 

13. 

finding number 3 because of the anticipated decline in State funding. The decision to reduce or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a 
proper exercise of the District’s discretion.  
 
 
The reduction or discontinuance of services set forth in factual finding number 3, 
in the context of the anticipated decline in revenue, is related to the welfare of the District and its 
pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  as 
determined by the Governing Board.  
 
 
Respondent  Tamara  Irving  (Irving)  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  (1.0 
FTE) currently assigned to teach fifth grade.  She was first employed by the District during the 
1999-2000 school year.  She became tenured in 2001. In 2007, Irving resigned from the District 
to accept a teaching position in the Anaheim Union School District, a placement she believed 
had the potential to allow her to advance into an administrative assignment.  Irving was laid off 
from her teaching position in Anaheim due to a reduction in its work force. Irving was then hired 
by the District as a permanent employee with a seniority date of August 28, 2008. Irving holds 
an elementary school teaching position that is being eliminated by the District. 
 
 
Respondent  Irving  asserts  that  she  can  teach  the  position,  which  is  not 
being  eliminated  by  the  District,  that  Respondent  Keith  Collins  (Collins),  a  probationary 
employee,  is  assigned  to  teach  in  middle  school.  Collins  is  currently  assigned  to  teach 
Computers  classes  and  an  elective  course  called  Careers  in  Technology.  Irving  holds  a  clear 
multiple-subject teaching credential with a cross-cultural, language and academic development 
(CLAD) certificate. She has a supplemental authorization in business, which authorizes her to 
teach computers, and a supplemental authorization in English. The Careers in Technology course 
is an elective course, which does not require an authorization. District acknowledges that Irving 
is certificated and competent to teach the courses.  
 
Irving  possesses  the  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  the 
 
Computers and Careers in Technology courses. Irving taught the Computers course during the 
2005-2006 school year at a middle school in the District. She also taught the Computers course 
at the high school level in the Fullerton Joint Union School District during the summer of 2006. 
Irving  holds  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  business  management.  She  has  eight  units  of 
computer courses, five at the graduate level. The Computers course curriculum covers the basic 
Microsoft  package.  Irving  is  proficient  in  the  use  of  Microsoft  and  Macintosh  computers, 
including the use of the Microsoft software programs taught in the Computers course. Irving’s 
testimony that the Careers in Technology elective course had previously been taught by a math 
teacher was not disputed by the District.  
 
 
If  a  permanent  teacher  whose  assignment  is  being  eliminated  is 
certificated and competent to teach a probationary teacher’s courses, the District must reassign 
the permanent teacher to render that service. The District must then either reassign or terminate 

d. 

c. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

3 

a. 

14. 

the probationary employee. (§ 44955, subd. (b).) As a permanent employee who is certificated 
and  competent  to  render  services  currently  being  rendered  by  a  probationary  employee, 
Respondent Irving must be retained.   
 
 
Respondent  Collins  is  a  middle  school  teacher  (1.0  FTE)  with  a  clear 
single subject (social science) credential. He is currently assigned to teach Computers and one 
section  of  an  elective  course  called  Careers  in  Technology.  He  receives  a  stipend  for  being  a 
“technical lead” for grades seven and eight. The stipend is for services, including maintenance of 
the computer network, that are not part of his teaching position. Collins was first employed by 
the District during the 2007-2008 school year as a temporary teacher. He taught Social Studies 
and  Careers  in  Technology.  During  the  2008-2009  school  year,  Collins  was  again  hired  as  a 
temporary  teacher.  He  again  taught  Social  Studies  and  the  Careers  in  Technology  elective 
course.  During  the  2009-2010  school  year,  Collins  was  initially  hired  under  a  temporary 
contract. On February 22, 2010, after a determination that Collins had replaced a teacher3 who 
resigned,    Collins  was  offered  and  signed  a  “retroactive  Probationary  (Year  2)”  contract 
“effective  Thursday,  September  3,  2009,  open-ended  through  Friday,  June  18,  2010.”  The 
contract states:  “Your services have been scheduled as a computer teacher.” The contract does 
not  mention  the  Careers  in  Technology  elective  course.  The  Governing  Board  approved  the 
contract on April 19, 2010. The position held by Collins is not being eliminated by the District. 
Collins was served with a layoff notice because the District was uncertain whether Irving could 
displace (“bump”) Collins from his position. Collins is a probationary employee who has been 
assigned a seniority date of August 28, 2008. 
 
 
Respondent  Collins  asserts  that  he  should  be  retained  because  he 
possesses special knowledge, training, and experience that are necessary to teach the courses he 
was assigned and that Respondent Irving lacks these special skills. Collins contends his special 
training  from  Apple  and  Macfusion,  a  specialized  network  support  provider,  enable  him  to 
maintain  and  configure  the  computers  at  his  school.  Collins  argues  that,  without  his  special 
knowledge, training, and experience, the classrooms would be disrupted when computers fail to 
operate. He can also set the computers to run in a manner that prevent students from accessing 
inappropriate  material.  He  can  also  modify  the  computers  so  they  are  compatible  with  the 
teaching environment. As a result of his ability to correct computer problems, the class does not 
have to wait for the District’s technical director to arrive to fix a problem. Collins has a board 
authorization  under  the  Education  Code,  which  enables  him  to  teach  the  Computers  course. 
Collins  developed  the  curricula  for  the  elective  course  he  teaches  in  Careers  in  Technology, 
although the course was originally taught by another teacher who is no longer with the District. 
   
/// 
 

The District did not demonstrate a specific need for Respondent Collins to teach 

15. 

b. 

 

                    
 
 

 

3 The teacher who taught Computers. 

 

 
 
 

4 

a. 

16. 

the  Computers  or  the  Careers  in  Technology  courses.  Superintendent  Howell  believes  both 
Collins  and  Irving  are  very  professional  and  that  both  are  highly  qualified.  In  looking  at  the 
assignment, Howell felt, although a difficult decision, that Collins was “more experienced” and 
thus “more competent” for the assignment. 
 
 
On March 1, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Exhibit B to Resolution 
2009/10 No. 505, setting forth its criteria for breaking seniority ties for employees with the same 
first date of paid service with the District. In pertinent part, the Resolution provides that the order 
of termination would be decided “based solely on the needs of the Lowell Joint School District 
and  the  students  thereof.”  Twelve  criteria  were  used  in  determining  this  need,  in  order  of 
priority, and each criterion was used only if the preceding criteria did not delineate the order of 
termination. 
 
 
criteria. The final provisions read, as follows: 

Irving and Collins were considered equal in a comparison of the first nine 

b. 

 

10. 

 
Persons with years of service in any district within 
the subject matter or field of current assignment. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c. 

11. 

12. 

Length of service in the District. 

Persons with multiple teaching credentials.     

 
 
 
 
 
 
Superintendent Howell applied the tie-breaking criteria to rank the relative 
seniority  between  Irving  and  Collins.  In  applying  the  tenth  criteria,  Howell  interpreted  the 
language  “years  of  service  in  any  district  within  the  subject  matter  or  field  of  current 
assignment” to mean the number of years of service in the assignment the person was seeking to 
fill  (rather  than  in  the  person’s  “current”  assignment).  Howell  testified  that  she  looked  at  the 
assignment  in  question  in  order  to  determine  whether  the  person  was  more  qualified  to  bump 
into the assignment he or she was seeking to fill.  
 
Howell gave Collins credit for three and one-half years of teaching 
 
the Careers in Technology course. He was also credited with one and one-half years of teaching 
the Computers course. 
 
 
was not given credit for the summer school computers course Irving taught in 2006. 
 
There were a total of seven employees who held the seniority date 
 
of August 28, 2008. No evidence was presented to show how seniority was established between 
the entire group of employees who shared this same seniority date.  
 

Superintendent Howell did not apply the tie-breaking criteria based on the 

Irving  was  given  credit  for  one  year  of  teaching  computers.  She 

iii. 

ii. 

d. 

i. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

5 

 

e. 

evidence  in  the  record.  Collins  was  given  credit  for  one  and  one-half  years  for  teaching  the 
computers course but the evidence showed he had just begun teaching the course in September 
2009. He therefore would have been teaching the course for approximately six or seven months 
at the time the tie-breaking criteria were applied. Irving, on the other hand, was given credit for 
only one year of teaching the computers course when, in fact, she had taught computers for a full 
school  year  and  a  summer  school  session.  Irving  thus  had  more  experience  teaching  in  the 
subject  matter,  computers.  It  was  also  factually  inaccurate  to  give  Collins  credit  for  three  and 
one-half  years  of  teaching  Careers  in  Technology  when  the  evidence  shows  Collins  was 
primarily a social studies teacher for the 2007-2008 and the 2008-2009school years. The Careers 
in  Technology  course  was  only  a  fraction  of  his  teaching  assignment.  Also,  Collins  had  been 
teaching for the District for only two and one-half years, not three. The Careers in Technology 
elective  was  also  not  included  as  part  of  the  position  in  the  contract  offered  to  Collins.    The 
position  was  for  a  computers  teacher.  If  Howell  was  comparing  the  years  of  service  in  the 
assignment  to  be  filled,  she  should  have  focused  on  years  of  experience  in  the  computers 
position. 
 
 
Consistent application of criteria requires all employees to be evaluated in 
the same manner. Under a plain reading of the words of the criteria, all employees should have 
been evaluated on the basis of their “current” assignments. Since five other employees also held 
the same date of first paid service and were not being compared for a potential assignment, the 
District  did  not  use  the  same  standard  in  determining  the  seniority  as  between  the  other 
employees with the August 28, 2008 seniority date. If Respondents had been compared based on 
their current assignments, Irving would have been found to be senior. If Respondent had been 
compared based only the years of experience teaching computers, Irving would still have been 
senior.  Irving  would  also  have  been  found  senior  under  the  next  criteria,  which  required  a 
comparison of length of service in the District. Irving had ten years teaching experience in the 
District. Collins had less than three.  
 
Superintendent  Howell’s  use  of  tie-breaking  criteria  number  ten  to 
 
determine  Respondents’  relative  qualifications  for  a  potential  assignment  was  improperly 
applied.  Tie-breaking  criteria  are  not  to  be  used  to  determine  a  person’s  qualifications  for  an 
assignment. The use of criteria ten as a basis to determine competency is inherently unfair since 
the person currently holding the potential assignment is likely to have more years of service in 
the  subject  matter  or  field.  The  majority  of  employees  who  have  the  same  first  date  of  paid 
service are not being compared for potential assignments. The criteria are intended to be used to 
rank seniority based on the needs of the District. In this case, the wording of tie-breaking criteria 
number  ten  was  vague  and  it  led  to  the  application  of  tie-breaking  criteria  number  ten  in  a 
manner that was arbitrary and capricious. 
 
 
Respondent  Irving  contests  the  District’s  seniority  determination.  She 
notes  the  Resolution  states  it  is  to  be  applied  to  determine  the  order  of  layoff  for  certificated 
employees with the same date of “first paid probationary service.” Irving argues that, since she 

g. 

f. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

6 

was a permanent employee on August 28, 2008, the date the District asserted was Respondent 
Collins’  first  paid  date  of  probationary  service,  the  criteria  for  determining  layoff  should  not 
have been applied because only Respondent Collins is a probationary employee. Section 44955, 
subdivision  (b),  however,  requires  school  districts  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  as 
between  employees  “who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date.”  Under 
section  44848,  when  a  teacher  has  resigned  and  thereafter  been  reemployed  by  a  District,  the 
employee’s  employment  date  is  “deemed”  to  be  the  date  on  which  he  or  she  first  accepted 
reemployment, or rendered paid service after his or her reemployment. The title of the document 
in  this  case  does  not  change  that  the  District’s governing board adopted the resolution for the 
purpose  of  determining  the  order  of  termination  as  between  employees  sharing  the  same 
seniority  date.  Respondent  Irving  is  correct  that  she,  in  fact,  had  seniority  under  a  proper, 
consistent application of the tie-breaking criteria. Respondent Irving is also correct that she was 
entitled,  as  a  permanent  employee,  to  displace  a  probationary  employee  who  holds  a  position 
that Irving is certificated and competent to render.  
 
 
17.  With the dismissal of the Accusation against Respondent Irving, it is the case that 
no certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to render a service which any 
Respondent is certificated and competent to render.   
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

3. 

2. 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 9. 
 
 
within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 and 10.   
 
 
Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers 1 through 17.  
 
 
Employment as a substitute or other temporary status may become employment in 
a probationary capacity in some circumstances. “A year of employment as a temporary teacher 
may,  in  some  cases,  be  treated  as  a  year  of  probationary  service  for  purposes  of  attaining 
permanent status if the employee is rehired for the following year ‘as a probationary employee in 
a position requiring certification qualifications’ (§ 44909); ‘in a position requiring certification 
qualifications’  (§  44917);  ‘as  a  probationary  employee’  (§  44918);  or  ‘in  a  vacant  position 
requiring  certification  qualifications’  (§  44920).  .  .  .”  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers 
Association v. Bakersfield City School District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1278-1279, fn 11.)  
 
 

Section 44955, subdivision (c) provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he governing board 

5. 

4. 

 

 
 
 

7 

 

shall make assignments and reassignments in such manner that employees shall be retained to 
render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.”  The statute, in 
subsection  (b),  gives  preference  to  permanent  employees:  “Except  as  otherwise  provided  by 
statute, the services of no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this 
section while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained 
to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.”  
 
Section 44955, subdivision (b), addresses the rights of permanent employees.  
 
That  subdivision  prohibits  a  school  district  from  terminating  a  permanent  employee  while 
retaining a probationary employee to render a service the permanent employee is certificated 
and competent to render.  That subdivision also prohibits a school district from terminating a 
permanent  employee  while  retaining  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority  to  render  a 
service  the  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  “Certificated”  is 
defined by the provisions of the Education Code pertaining to credentials, but “competent” is not 
specifically defined.  In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 19, the Court 
defined the term in a reemployment proceeding under section 44956, in terms of the teachers’ 
skills and qualifications, specifically, as “relating to special qualifications for a vacant position, 
rather than relating to the on-the-job performance of the laid-off permanent employee.” In doing 
so, the Court noted that courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing Board 
(1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and  Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109 
Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, had interpreted the term in a similar manner. 
 
 
employees may be laid off following reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 
The statutes embody a legislative choice for seniority-based layoffs, subject to specific 
limitations set forth in the statutes. Section 44955 plainly requires examination of both 
certification and competence in reduction in force decisions. 
 
Respondent Tamara Irving is both certificated and competent to teach the 
 
Computers classes and the Careers in Technology elective course currently assigned to 
Respondent Keith Collins, a probationary employee. She possesses the knowledge and 
experience to hold the position. The District does not dispute Irving’s certification or 
competency to render the services. Irving must therefore be retained to render the services in 
those courses. 
 
 
School District (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, argues that he should be retained because he 
possesses “special knowledge, training, and experience” required to teach the Computers 
classes and the Careers in Technology elective course. In Bledsoe, the district skipped two 
junior teachers who were teaching in the district’s community day school, a special school 
for students who had been expelled or who had behavior problems that had prevented them 
from being in a regular classroom. Mr. Bledsoe, who was certificated and competent to teach 

Respondent Keith Collins, relying upon the case of Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified 

Sections 44949 and 44955 set forth the process through which certificated 

6. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

8 

 

the day school classes, was senior to the teachers the district skipped. Nevertheless, the 
district served him with a layoff notice. The court held that, pursuant to Code section 44955, 
subdivision (d)(1), the district had demonstrated a specific need for personnel to teach in the 
day school and that in order to teach there special training and experience were necessary.  
The court found that Mr. Bledsoe did “not possess the special training and experience” the 
junior teachers possessed.4 The court did not make an express finding as to whether Mr. 
Bledsoe did “not possess” the “special training and experience necessary.” The district in the 
Bledsoe case demonstrated, within the terms of section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), that it had 
a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study for which special training and 
experience were necessary.  
 
 
In this case, the District did not demonstrate a specific need for Respondent 
Collins to teach the Computers classes or the elective course in Careers in Technology. In 
addition, the District, unlike the district at issue in Bledsoe, did not demonstrate that special 
training and experience was necessary to teach the courses. Also, the District did not 
demonstrate that Collins possessed special training and experience “necessary” for the 
position, and that Irving lacked the necessary training and experience. The District, in fact, 
acknowledges that Irving is competent to teach the position. This is supported by the 
evidence, which shows that Irving has more experience than Collins does in teaching the 
computers course.   
 
 
possesses knowledge which is beneficial for teaching the course. Collins did not demonstrate, 
however, that his particular academic attributes are necessary in order to teach the courses. 
The technical skills possessed by Collins were not shown to be necessary for teaching the 
courses. It was established that the District employed a technical director, who was 
responsible for maintaining the computer network. This is a separate job that is not part of the 
necessary duties of a computers course teacher. Respondent Irving’s background in business 
administration and her years of teaching experience will also benefit the students. Both 
Respondents possess knowledge, training, and experience that make them qualified to teach 
the courses. 
 
 
courses and programs. A senior teacher has a right to have a competency determination 
focused on his or her specific training and experience as they relate to the duties of a 
position.5  A school district may not, in the guise of determining whether a teacher is 
competent, promote some policy that is not focused on that question. 

A senior teacher has a right to have competence determined with a view to 

Respondent Collins currently teaches the courses and there is no doubt he 

 

 

                     

 
4 Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 142. 
 
5 In King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1019, note 

 

 
 
 

9 

 

If a senior teacher is competent, that is the end of the inquiry, and a district 

 
 
may not change the focus of the inquiry in order to pursue a policy of retaining the most 
competent teacher. In Martin v. Kentfield School District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, a former 
elementary school teacher who had been terminated pursuant to Code sections 44949 and 
44955 asserted the teacher’s preferred right of reappointment pursuant to Code section 
44956. The Court observed that employers have adopted a broad spectrum of policies 
regarding the weight to be given to seniority in making personnel decisions. The Court said, 
however, that the California Legislature has clearly articulated the preferred right of 
reappointment of teachers on lay-off status. 
 

[T]he Legislature has made seniority the sole determinant as to 
which tenured teachers on lay-off status should be appointed to 
a vacant position.  The only limitation is that the teacher 
selected be “certificated and competent” to render the service 
required by the vacant position.  Among the employees who met 
this threshold limitation, there is not room in the statutory 
scheme for comparative evaluation.  Thus, . . . which of the two 
employees under consideration . . . was “better” qualified for 
the job is not the question here, nor was it properly the question 
before the board.  The question for the board’s determination 
was simply whether Martin, the senior tenured teacher on layoff 
status, was “certificated and competent” to render the required 
service. 

 

7. 

 
 
Respondent Irving is certificated and competent to render the services currently 
assigned to Collins. She has the training and experience necessary to perform the duties of the 
position currently held by Respondent Collins. Respondent Irving must therefore be retained.  
 
 
factual finding numbers 1 through 17 and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 6.  
 
/// 
 
reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 17 and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 6.  
 

Cause does not exist to terminate the services of Respondent Tamara Irving, by 

Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondent Keith Collins, by reason of 

8. 

                                                                 
2, the Court of Appeal noted the trial court’s conclusions of law – one of which was that 
competence has to do with “the correlation between [a teacher’s] specific training and 
experience and the duties of the available position.” 

 

 

 

 
 
 

10 

RECOMMENDATION 

2. 

1. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  layoff  notice  be  rescinded,  and  the  Accusation  be 

 
 
It  is  recommended  that  the  Accusation  against  Respondent  Keith  Collins  be 
sustained and the District notify him that his services will not be needed during the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 
 
dismissed as to Respondent Tamara Irving. 
 
DATED:  May 6, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 

____________________________ 
Nancy Beezy Micon 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
                                 
         
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

11 

