BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
SAN JACINTO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
 
                Respondents listed in Appendix A. 
 
 

 

    OAH No. 2010030630 
 

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

Mark W. Thompson, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, Attorneys at Law, 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
of California, heard this matter in San Jacinto, California on April 22, 2010. 
 
 
represented the San Jacinto Unified School District.  
 
 
A.1
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 22, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Ronald G. Skipper, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents listed in Appendix 

1. 

 
 
Diane Perez, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel Services of the San Jacinto 
Unified School District, made and filed the accusation dated March 11, 2010, in her official 
capacity as the designee of Dr. Shari L. Fox, Ed.D., District Superintendent. 
 
 
 

Respondents2 are certificated district employees. 

2. 

3. 

On March 2, 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955, the superintendent notified the Board of Trustees of the San Jacinto Unified School 

Respondents’ counsel also represents three other individuals, Alan Fischer, Wendy Morphew, and Kelly 

                                                 
1  
Tysen Stokes, who did not request a hearing and thus are not respondents in this matter. 
 
2  
The district also designated a number of employees for precautionary layoff, in the event that the district’s 
proposed actual layoff list was not upheld in its entirety.  Prior to the conclusion of the hearing, the district’s motion 
to dismiss these individuals from this layoff proceeding was granted.  Accordingly, they are excluded from the list 
of respondents listed in Exhibit A. 
 

 

1

District in writing of her recommendation to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
services for the upcoming school year.  The superintendent stated the reasons for the 
recommendation.  The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment 
was not related to their competency as teachers. 
 

4. 

On March 2, 2010, the board adopted Resolution No. 09-10-19, determining 
that it would be necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of 
the current school year.  The board determined that the particular kinds of services that must 
be reduced for the 2010-2011 school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE) 
positions: 
 

Particular Kind of Service3   

 

 

Full-Time Equivalent

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

          11 
5 
 
1 
 
1 
 
1 
 
3 
 
2 
 
1 
 
1 
 
1 
 
2 
1 
1 

K-5 Elementary Teaching Services   
Elementary Categorical Intervention Services 
 
TOSA Services (Instructional Coach) 
TOSA Services (ASES) 
 
TOSA Services (Assistant to the Principal)  
 
TOSA Services (Enrichment) 
MS Reading/Language Arts Teaching Services 
MS Math Teaching Services  
 
MS Art Teaching Services 
MS Core Teaching Services  
MS Categorical Intervention Math Teaching Services 
MS Bobcat Academy Teaching Services 
MS Science Teaching Services 
HS Freshman Seminar/Computer Literacy/Computer 
1 
 
1 
HS Math Teaching Services  
HS English/Language Arts Teaching Services 
3 
HS English Language Development Teaching Services  1 
3 
HS Social Science Teaching Services 
1 
HS Agriculture Teaching Services   
HS Freshman Seminar Health/Psychology Teaching 
 
 
 
HS Home Economics Teaching Services 
HS Industrial Tech/Photography Teaching Services 
HS CAHSEE Math Teaching Services 
 
HS CAHSEE English Language Arts Teaching 
 
HS Alternative Education Warrior Academy English/ 
 

Essentials Teaching Services 
 

Social Studies Teaching Services 

Services 

Services 

1 
1 
1 
1 

 
 
 

1 

1 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
3  
respectively. 

TOSA refers to Teacher on Special Assignment.  MS and HS refer to middle school and high school, 

2

Services 

HS Alternative Education Math/English Teaching 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special Education Teaching Services 
 
School Counseling Services  
 
 
 
Counselor on Special Assignment Services  

 

 

1 
2 
2 
1 

The proposed reductions totaled 53 FTE positions.  

 

 

 

5. 

The board further determined in Resolution No. 09-10-19 that “competency,” 
as described in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for the purposes of bumping, 
“shall necessarily include possession of a valid credential in the relevant subject matter area, 
‘highly qualified’ status under the No Child Left Behind Act, appropriate EL authorization 
(if required by the position), special training and experience to teach AVID classes, special 
training and experience to teach Advanced Placement classes, special training and experience 
to teach Theater classes, special training and experience to serve as a Teacher on Special 
Assignment, and special training and experience.” 
 

6. 

The board further determined in Resolution No. 09-10-19 that it would be 

necessary to retain certificated employees who possess special training and competency that 
other certificated employees with more seniority might not possess, to wit: certificated 
employees who possess the training and experience to teach Advanced Placement and AVID 
classes.  The board’s determinations in this regard were neither arbitrary nor capricious, and 
constituted a reasonable exercise of the board’s discretion. 
 

7. 

The board directed the superintendent or her designee to determine which 

employees’ services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of the 
reduction of the foregoing particular kinds of services.  The board further directed the 
superintendent or her designee to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the 
district who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services. 
 

8. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district timely served on respondents a 
written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services would not be 
required for the upcoming school year, along with the related accusation.  The notice set 
forth the reasons for the recommendation.  The notice advised respondents of their right to a 
hearing, that each respondent had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person 
sending the notice by the date specified in the notice, a date which in each case was more 
than seven days after the notice was served, and that the failure to request a hearing would 
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 

The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment was not 

related to their competency as teachers. 
 
 
All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.  
 

9. 

Respondents timely filed written requests for hearing and notices of defense.  

3

10. 

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of the 

district. 
 
11. 

13. 

12. 

The services the board addressed in Resolution No. 09-10-19 were “particular 

14.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any 

 
kinds of services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education 
Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of 
services was not arbitrary or capricious and constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  No 
particular kinds of services were lowered to levels less than those levels mandated by state or 
federal law. 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
welfare of the district and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as 
determined by the board. 
 
 
The board considered all positively assured attrition, including resignations, 
retirements and requests for transfer, in determining the actual number of necessary layoff 
notices to be delivered to its employees. 
 
 
services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
single subject credential in health science, and a supplementary authorization in psychology.  
She testified concerning the critical importance of providing health education to ninth 
graders, and she expressed concern about the district’s ability to provide this education if she 
is laid off. 
 
A teacher is not authorized to teach a health class unless he or she holds a health 
 
science credential.  However, a teacher need not hold such a credential in order to teach 
health education as a component of another course.  The district currently employs only one 
other individual besides Ms. Aspril who holds a health science credential; that individual is 
also slated for lay off.  The district does not presently know how it will provide health 
education to its students if these two teachers are laid off.  However, the district is not legally 
required to teach a health science course per se. 
 
 
Ms. Aspril’s sincere testimony reflected a profound commitment to teaching and to 
the wellbeing of her students.  However, the board’s decision to identify freshman seminar 
health/psychology as a particular kind of service to be reduced or eliminated was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious, but instead constituted a proper exercise of the board’s discretion.   
 
 

Sally Aspril teaches freshman seminar health and psychology.  She holds a 

15. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

1. 

 

4

2. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 

3. 

Pursuant to section 44995, a senior teacher whose position is discontinued has 
the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to 
fill.  In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is 
filling that position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  
Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Santa 
Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified 
School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843; Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. 
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.) 
 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine 

4. 

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in 

whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic 
layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned 
to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at 136-137.) 
 
 
with any statistical computation.  It is within the governing authority’s discretion to 
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued 
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose 
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)  A school district has wide 
discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or 
so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of 
law.  (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 
318, 322.) 
 

5. 

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district 

and establishing requirements for employment.  This discretion encompasses determining the 
training and experience necessary for particular positions.  Similarly, school districts have 
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a 
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.  
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)  
 
 
accusation.  Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the district to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the welfare of the schools and 
the pupils thereof.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the district 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The district 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

6. 

 

5

identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board 
be directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is recommended that the board give respondents 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services are no longer required by the district. 
 
 

ADVISORY DETERMINATION 

The following advisory determination is made: 

The accusations served on respondents are sustained.  Notice may be given to 

 
 
respondents before May 15, 2010, that their services will not be required because of the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated. 
 
 
 
DATED:  ________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
DONALD P. COLE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

6

Appendix A 

Sally Aspril 

Susan Lopez 

Bill Boggess 

Annette Doyle 

Angela Lepale 

Kami Johnston 

Katheryne McGregor 

 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
7. 
 
8. 
 
9. 
 
10 
 
11.  Gloria Ohair 
 
12.  April Phillips 
 
13.  Gloria Solorio-Valenzuela 
 
14. 
 

Tamara Meadows 

Christi McKiney 

Sheela Miller 

Scott Stewart 

 

7

