BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
FULLERTON SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 
 
In the Matter of  the Accusation 
Against:   
 
 
EVA ARREOLA and Other Certificated 
Employees of the Fullerton School District,  
 
 
                                    Respondents. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
OAH Case No. 2010030299 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard by Vincent Nafarrete, Administrative Law Judge, on April 5, 

Respondents Pablo Diaz, Russell Harrison, and Derek Jaronczyk did not appear and 

 
 
2010, at Fullerton.  Complainant Mark L. Douglas, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel 
Services, of the Fullerton School District was represented by David C. Larsen, Attorney at 
Law.      
 
 
were not represented at the hearing.   The remaining respondents, as designated in Exhibit D, 
and each of them, were represented by Marianne Reinhold, Attorney at Law.1   
 
 
Oral, documentary, and stipulated evidence having been received and arguments 
heard, the Administrative Law Judge submitted this matter for decision on April 5, 2010, and 
finds as follows: 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.   

The Administrative Law Judge takes official notice that, on March 9, 2010, the 

 
 
Accusation was made and filed by Mark L. Douglas in his official capacity as Assistant 
Superintendent, Personnel Services, Fullerton School District, State of California (District).   
 

                                                 

1 At the commencement of the hearing, respondents’ counsel determined that she also 

represented respondents Ruben Reed and Dalila Tirado and these two respondents were 
added to the List of Certificated Employees represented by her law firm (Exh. D).    

2.   

Respondents, and each of them, are employed by the District as permanent or 

3. 

4. 

The District is an elementary and middle school district that serves and 

probationary certificated employees.   
 
 
educates approximately 13,600 students in Fullerton in Orange County.  Due to the ongoing 
state budget crisis and its concomitant effect upon the District’s budget, which has also been 
affected by a few years of declining enrollment and program encroachments, the 
Superintendent determined that the District must reduce expenditures by discontinuing 
particular kinds of services and laying off certificated personnel.   The Assistant 
Superintendent of Business Services prepared a preliminary budget for the District based 
upon the Governor’s Proposed Budget and determined that the District must reduce 
expenditures by $11.2 to $11.7 million for the next school year to ensure a balanced budget 
and the required three percent reserve.   
 
(A) On February 23, 2010, in Resolution No. 09/10-12, pursuant to Education 
 
Code sections 44949 and 44955 and based upon recommendation of the Superintendent, the 
Board of Trustees of the District determined and resolved that the ongoing state budget crisis 
continued to have a negative impact on District revenue, that the District must eliminate 
programs and services for the 2010-2011 fiscal year to maintain a balanced budget and 
provide for essential services, and that it was necessary to reduce or discontinue particular 
kinds of services being rendered by certificated personnel for the 2010-2011 fiscal year by a 
total of 87.5 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.   The Board of Trustees directed the 
Superintendent and/or his designee to serve written notices upon certificated employees in 
accordance with and in the manner prescribed by Education Code sections 44955 and 44949 
in order to reduce certificated positions by a number corresponding to the services reduced or 
discontinued and positions affected thereby.  The Board of Trustees further resolved that the 
actual layoff of any employee would be subject to its final review and determination after 
appropriate hearings and deliberations.   
 
 
also adopted a Determination of Seniority Among Certificated Employees with the Same 
Seniority Date, or a tie-breaker resolution, which set forth tiebreaking criteria to be used in 
determining the order of termination or layoff of certificated employees who first rendered 
paid service to the District on the same date or have the same first date of paid service.    
 
 
Board of Trustees and the provisions of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the 
District’s Assistant Superintendent of Personnel Services as designee of the Superintendent 
gave written notices by personal service to respondents, and each of them, that the 
Superintendent had recommended and the Board of Trustees had resolved that their services 
will not be required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year and the reasons for this action. 
Respondents were notified that their positions will be eliminated or filled by “regular” 
employees with more seniority pursuant to Education Code section 44955.  The preliminary 
notices included Resolution No. 09/10-12 of the Board of Trustees to reduce and/or 
discontinue particular of services or programs performed by certificated employees in the 

(B) On February 23, 2010, in Resolution No. 09/10-12, the Board of Trustees 

On or about February 24, 2010, pursuant to Resolution No. 09/10-12 of the 

5. 

 

 

2

7. 

6.  

The District’s preliminary notice of layoff dated February 24, 2010 

District, the list of particular certificated services or programs to be eliminated or reduced, 
the tie-breaking criteria, pertinent sections of the Education Code, and a blank Request for 
Hearing.   Respondents, and each of them, timely requested a hearing to determine if there is 
cause for not re-employing them for the ensuing school year.   
 
 
(preliminary notice), was sufficient in providing notice to respondents under Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955.  Respondents were not prejudiced by errors in the notices, if any, 
with respect to the description of their employment status, addresses, or any other matters.   
No claims were raised in the hearing that the preliminary notices or contents thereof were 
deficient in any respect. 
 
 
On or about March 9, 2010, the District properly served respondents, and each 
of them, with an Accusation, Statement to Respondent, copies of Government Code sections 
11507.5-11507.7, a blank Notice of Defense form, and Notice of Hearing.  Except for 
certificated employees named in Finding 8 below, respondents filed timely notices of 
defenses, requesting a hearing to determine if there is cause not to employ them for the 
ensuing school year and objecting to the Accusation.  All prehearing jurisdictional 
requirements have been met by the parties.    
 
 
properly served with the preliminary notice of layoff and the Accusation but did not file 
notices of defense or appear at the hearing.  Said three respondents were deemed in default of 
this proceeding under Government Code section 11524.  Complainant elected to proceed and 
to present evidence with respect to these three respondents pursuant to Government Code 
section 11520.   No evidence was presented for or on behalf of these three respondents. 
 
 
On February 23, 2010, pursuant to Resolution No. 09/10-12 and its findings, 
the Board of Trustees resolved and took action to reduce or discontinue certain services or 
programs offered by the District for the 2010-2011 school years in the following FTE 
positions:   
 
 
 
 

Respondents Pablo Diaz, Russell Harrison, and Derek Jaronczyk were 

      Full-Time 
Equivalent Positions   

 
 
 
Elementary Assistant Principal(s) 

 
 
 
Administration 

1.5 

9. 

8. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

Pupil Services 

 
 
School Psychologists  
 
School Counselor 
 
School Nurse  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

3.0 
1.0 
1.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

10. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Course Offerings/Instruction 

The services set forth in Finding 9 above are particular kinds of services 

          60.0 
 3.0 
 
 2.0 
 
 3.0 
 
 2.0 
 
 2.0 
 
 2.0 
 
 2.0 
 
 2.0 
 
 3.0 
 
 1.0 
 

Grades K – 6 Teacher Reduction 
Foods/Sewing/Home Economics 
Choir/Movement 
Keyboarding/Business/Computer Applications 
 
Mathematics   
 
 
Science 
 
Social Science 
 
Language Arts 
 
Physical Education 
Art 
 
Academic Counselor  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuance of the services set forth hereinabove constitute a total of  
88.5 full-time equivalent positions.   
 
 
performed by certificated employees of the District which may be reduced or discontinued 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The determination of the Board of 
Trustees to reduce or discontinue these services is within its sound discretion and not 
arbitrary or capricious.   The District demonstrated that the reduction or discontinuance of 
these particular kinds of services is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils and is 
necessary in order for the District to maintain a balanced budget and sufficient reserves as 
well to provide essential services.   
 
 
the names of certificated employees and their seniority dates or dates of first paid service, 
current assignments and site locations, FTE positions, employment status, and credentials 
and authorizations.  The District asked certificated employees to file Verifications and 
Updates of Personnel Information and incorporated any information received and deemed 
valid onto the Seniority List.   The District also complied and reviewed Job Descriptions 
(Exh. 6) of the services or positions that it was required to reduce or discontinue pursuant to 
the resolution of the Board of Trustees and applied the tiebreaking criteria to certificated 
employees who are affected by this layoff and first rendered paid service in a probationary 
position on the same dates beginning with the date of August 31, 2005, and ranked them in 
order of termination.   The District developed flow charts of the least senior certificated 
employees currently assigned in the particular kinds of services that it is seeking to reduce in 
this layoff proceeding (Exh. 7).   The District determined whether the least senior certificated 
employees hold credentials in other areas of service or teaching and are entitled to bump 
other employees and whether certain employees should be skipped and retained.   
 
 
particular kinds of services described in Finding 9 above and to terminate the employment of 
all respondents given preliminary notice and accusations by taking into account the personnel 

The District prepared and maintains a Seniority List (Exh. 7) which contains 

Further, the District has obviated the need to reduce or discontinue all of the 

12. 

11. 

 

4

 

13. 

(B) Debra Rosengarten is an assistant principal at Fisler Elementary School 

(A) Thirty-three certificated employees have or will resign or retire from their 

changes and attrition due to reassignments, retirements, and/or resignations of individual 
certificated employees within the District.  As set forth in the list of resignations and 
retirements (Ex. 9), there are three certificated employees who will or have resigned and 30 
certificated employees who will or have retired from the District before the next school year.  
The District has reasonably determined and accounted for what will be positively assured 
attrition among its certificated staff for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year and reduced by 
corresponding number the number of certificated employees whose employment must be 
terminated due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.   
Consequently, the District has determined that 43 certificated employees must be laid off in 
this proceeding pursuant to the resolution to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
services.   
 
 
employment with the District before the ensuing school year.  Four are special education 
teachers and the District plans to replace three of them and to reassign Ivy Ninofranco to a 
special education position or service.  Ninofranco is a fifth grade teacher with a seniority date 
of August 31, 2005, who has a preliminary credential or authorization in mild and moderate 
special education.  Based on her preliminary credential, Ninofranco may be reassigned to 
special education by bumping a teacher in that service with less seniority.   
 
 
and has a first date of paid service with the District of January 4, 1993.  In addition to a 
administrative services credential, Rosengarten has a clear multiple subject credential and is 
authorized and competent to teach at the elementary or middle school level.  The District has 
determined that Rosengarten is entitled to bump a middle school teacher with less seniority 
and will reassign her to that position.   As a result of this bumping, respondent Russell 
Harrison, an assistant principal at Richman Elementary School, becomes the least senior 
assistant principal subject to layoff pursuant to the reduction of assistant principals by 1.5 
FTE.   
 
 
seniority date of August 29, 2000, and holds a clear pupil personnel services credential and 
single subject credential in English.   Based on her English credential, the District has 
determined that Soriano may bump a less senior English teacher at a middle school and will 
be retained.   
 
 
with a first date of paid service of August 27, 2009, is one of the most junior certificated 
employees of the District.  She received a preliminary notice of layoff.  However, in addition 
to her preliminary multiple subject credential, Florendo also has a waiver authorization in 
language and speech pathology.   She is also working towards her credential in speech 
pathology.  The District has determined to skip Florendo and retain her to provide speech 
services pursuant to her waiver authorization.   
 

(D) Lisamarie Florendo is a speech teacher at Maple Elementary School and, 

(C) Sally Soriano is a counselor at Nicolas Junior High School.  She has a 

 

 

 

5

 

 

(E) Choir and movement are to be reduced by 2.0 FTE.  Respondent Andrea 
 
Calvo is a music, movement, and choir teacher at Nicolas Junior High School and holds a 
preliminary single subject credential in music.  Her seniority date is August 28, 2001.  As the 
least senior of teachers in her service area, Calvo may be laid off pursuant to the reduction of 
choir and movement services.  Melissa Martinez is a vocal music and physical education 
teacher at Parks Junior High School; she holds not only a dance and supplemental 
authorization in music but also a clear single subject credential in physical education.  
Because she holds a physical education credential, the District has determined that Martinez 
may bump a less senior teacher in physical education and will be reassigned into that 
position.   With the layoff of Calvo and the reassignment of Martinez, the District has 
reduced choir and movement by 2.0 FTE.   In addition, the District will be terminating a 
temporary choir and movement teacher who occupies a 0.5 FTE position, leaving the District 
with no teachers in choir and movement.   
 
(F) Kyle Stava is a technology teacher a Fisler Elementary School.  His 
 
seniority date is February 6, 1989.  Jillian Nagler is a computer teacher at Ladera Vista 
Junior High School.  Her seniority date is August 28, 2001.  Because both Stava and Nagler 
hold a clear multiple subject credential, they are able to bump less senior teachers and are to 
be reassigned to teaching positions.   Respondent Stephanie Wilmoth is a computer teacher at 
Parks Junior High School.  She has a seniority date of January 26, 2004.  Because she holds 
only a clear single subject credential in business and cannot be reassigned, Wilmoth is 
subject to be laid off pursuant to the reduction of keyboarding, business, and computer 
applications by 3.0 FTE.    
 
 
middle school art teachers, each of whom holds a single subject credential in art.   Crowley, 
Champlin, and Beaver are the most junior of the District’s four art teachers and may be 
terminated pursuant to the reduction of the art program by 3.0 FTE.   Stacy Udkoff-Vetrovec 
with a seniority date of August 30, 1989, is the most senior of the four art teachers in the 
District and the District has determined to skip and retain her for the next school year.   
 
 

(G) Respondents Kelley Crowley, Brandy Champlin, and Aaron Beaver are 

 

Claims of Individual Respondents 

14. 

(A) Respondent Allison Demonteverde is a certificated employee of the 

 
 
District who teaches a fifth grade elementary classroom and was served with a preliminary 
notice and Accusation as part of the reduction of elementary classroom teachers by 60 FTE.  
Demonteverde has a seniority date of August 31, 2005, along with a number of other 
certificated employees.  During the hearing, the District determined that Demonteverde has 
additional certificates or credentials and, upon re-applying the tie-breaking criteria, 
determined that she is entitled to move up in the order of termination of certificated 
employees who have the same seniority date.  Accordingly, Demonteverde was moved up in 
the order of termination to the same level or ranking as respondents Hannah Kim, Kathleen 
Fox, and Rudolph Petris.    
 

 

6

 

16. 

15. 

Respondent Kimberly Barr is a certificated employee of the District who 

(A) Respondent Leslie Corsini is a certificated employee of the District with a 

(B) The District did not receive any other challenges to the application of the 
 
tie-breaking criteria to those respondents who are elementary classroom teachers and share 
the seniority date of August 31, 2005.  After applying the tiebreaking criteria, the District 
determined that nine respondents, who are elementary school teachers and share the seniority 
date of August 31, 2005, have to be brought back to teach next school year.  The District 
thereupon moved to dismiss the Accusation against the following nine respondents who have 
the seniority date of August 31, 2005:  Kathleen Escaleras-Morillo, Catherine Vito Maxfield, 
Allison Demonteverde, Hannah Kim, Kathleen Fox, Rudolph Petris, Emily Hancock, 
Theresa Benveniste, and Sonya Lee.   
 
 
teaches language arts at Parks Junior High School and was served with a preliminary notice 
and Accusation as part of the reduction of languate arts teachers by 2.0 FTE.  Barr has a 
seniority date of August 28, 2007, along with fellow language arts teachers and respondents 
Anthony Wilson and Ruben Reed, who teach at Nicolas Junior High School and Beechwood 
Elementary School, respectively.  During the hearing, the District determined that Barr has 
an additional certificate under criteria 5a of the tie-breaking criteria and, upon re-application 
of said criteria, is entitled to move to the top of the inverse order of termination among these 
three certificated employees in language arts who all have the same seniority date.    
 
 
first date of paid service of August 31, 1999.  She has a clear single subject credential in 
home economics and was issued a limited assignment teaching permit or authorization in 
health science that is effective for one year and expires on January 1, 2011.   Earlier, on or 
before January 1, 2010, Corsini received the limited assignment single subject teaching 
permit to teach health science after the District submitted a certificate of necessity showing 
that her services were needed to teach health science.  While she was first scheduled to teach 
four sections of health science, Corsini actually teaches one section of health science 
pursuant to her limited assignment permit and four sections of home economics under her 
single subject credential at Nicholas Junior High School.   Corsini was served with a notice 
and Accusation as part of the District’s reduction of home economic teachers by 3.0 FTE. 
 
 
high school health science teacher Marlon Barcelona, who is junior to her in seniority with 
the District.  Corsini asserts that her permit to teach health science is valid until the end of 
the calendar year and that, on March 12, 2010, she took the state examination for renewal of 
the permit or issuance of a health science credential.  She also asserts that she took courses in 
health science when she was completing her degree in family and consumer science at 
California State University Long Beach and the requirements for her credential, including 
courses in nutrition and individual and family health and development.   
 
 
(C) However, unlike Barcelona who holds a clear single subject credential in 
health science, it was not established that respondent Corsini is credentialed to teach health 
science.  She holds only a limited assignment single subject teaching permit in health 
science, which expires on January 1, 2011, and has not been renewed by the District.  As set 

(B) In this proceeding, Corsini contends that she should be able to bump junior 

 

 

 

7

17. 

(A) Respondent David DeGrazia is a certificated employee of the District and 

forth on the permit (Exh. A), in order to renew this permit, Corsini must not only complete at 
least six semester units of coursework applicable to the credential or pass two sections of all 
examinations appropriate to the permit but also she must re-apply for the permit through her 
employer, the District.  The regulations provide that a teacher must submit an application for 
renewal to the Commission on Teacher Credentialing and the employing district must also 
submit a declaration of need.  Here, Corsini did not demonstrate that she has completed the 
six semester units of coursework and she has not passed the two sections of the examination.   
She will not know the results of her examination until later in this spring semester.  As such, 
Corsini cannot be considered credentialed or qualified to teach health science.  Moreover, 
Corsini did not demonstrate that the District has a need for an additional health science 
teacher next year.  As established by the testimony of the Assistant Superintendent for 
Personnel Services, the District does not plan to renew Corsini’s permit and it would not be 
reasonable to require the District to create a half-year assignment for Corsini so that she can 
teach health.  The evidence aptly demonstrated that, as of March 15, 2010, Corsini was not 
credentialed to teach health and the District may rely upon her lack of a health science 
credential to terminate her employment in her credentialed and service area of home 
economics.  (See Campbell v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 814-815.)    
 
 
a third grade teacher at Woodcrest Elementary School.  He has a clear multiple subject 
credential.  According to the District’s seniority list, DeGrazia’s date of first paid service is 
August 29, 2006.  However, he contends that his seniority date should be no later than July 
24, 2006, because he taught algebra to fifth graders in a summer enrichment program called 
the “Summer Algebra Readiness Lab School” program which was held at the District’s 
Ladera Vista Junior High School.  He was paid approximately $1,400 for teaching in the 
three-week summer program and received a certificate of participation.   
 
 
(B) In or about July 2006, DeGrazia accepted the District’s offer of a teaching 
job at Golden Hill Elementary School that was to begin at the start of the fall 2006 semester.  
The principal at the elementary school recommended that he teach in the summer program 
and DeGrazia participated in the program from July 24 through August 10, 2006.  It was not 
established, however, that DeGrazia’s participation in the summer program was mandatory 
or a condition of his hiring or employment.  Nor was it established that the District 
considered or treated DeGrazia’s participation in the summer program to have been his first 
date of paid service.  Because it was not shown that the District’s determination of his 
seniority date is erroneous or should be changed, respondent DeGrazia’s seniority date will 
remain August 29, 2006, and he may be terminated pursuant to the District’s reduction of 
elementary teachers.   
 
 
School and holds a clear multiple subject credential.  Licona has a date of first paid service 
with the District of August 29, 2006, which she shares with a number of other certificated 
employees.  In this proceeding, Licona takes issue with the District’s application of tie-
breaking criteria no. 5(a)(v), which provides that persons currently holding a “CTAP II 
Certificate” are entitled to “greater seniority than employee[s] holding an item lower on the 

Respondent Shalimar Licona is a fourth grade teacher at Richman Elementary 

18. 

 

 

8

19. 

(A) Respondent Patricia Miller is a fifth grade teacher at Richman Elementary 

ranked list.”  Licona asserts that she should receive seniority credit under this tie-breaking 
criteria because she has completed a course or courses in educational technology for the 
classroom at the UCLA Extension program as well as other technology classes in order to 
receive her credential.   Licona’s argument is not persuasive.  The District’s formulation of 
the criteria for breaking ties in seniority among certificated employees with the same date of 
first paid service was reasonable, the result of the sound exercise of its discretion, and related 
to the welfare of the District and it pupils.  Here, the tie-breaking criteria in question 
specifically requires that a certificated employee currently hold a “CTAP (California 
Technology Assistance Project) II Certificate” and Licona does not hold such certificate.  It 
was not shown that the District’s application of the tie-breaking criteria was erroneous or 
arbitrary and capricious.  Licona is not entitled to receive additional credit or ranking for 
purposes of seniority under this tie-breaking criteria.   
 
 
School and holds a multiple subject credential.  She has a date of first paid service with the 
District of August 29, 2006, but claims that her seniority date should be changed to on or 
about July 3, 2006, because she was required by her site principal to work and participate in 
a Grade Level Professional Development (GLPD) program.  For an undetermined number of 
hours that summer, Miller and other teachers worked with and received training from District 
consultant(s) and were paid for their participation or work in the GLPD program.   However, 
it was not established by probative evidence, such as direct evidence from a site principal or 
District administrator, that Miller’s participation in the summer 2006 GLPD program was 
mandatory or a condition of her employment with the District in the fall 2006 semester.  Nor 
was it shown that the Miller’s status as probationary or permanent employee started when 
she began her participation in the GLPD program.   As such, Miller’s seniority date should 
remain as determined by the District.  
 
 
ranking among those certificated employees with the same seniority date of August 29, 2006, 
based upon application of two tiebreaking criteria.  First, Miller contends that she should 
receive tie-breaking credit under criteria no. 5(a)(v) because she completed a course in 
advanced technology in education at California State University Fullerton in the spring of 
2006 in fulfilling requirements for her credential.  Miller argues that her university 
coursework and/or the courses that she completed to earn her clear multiple subject 
credential are the same as the requirements for obtaining a CTAP II certificate.   Like 
respondent Licona, however, Miller’s argument is not persuasive, for the District’s criteria 
requires that she currently hold a CTAP II certificate to earn tiebreaking credit or ranking 
and Miller does not hold such certificate.  Further, the evidence did not establish that the 
coursework Miller completed for her credential was or is similar to what is required to obtain 
a CTAP II certificate.   
 
 
criteria no. 5(a)(ix) for having been a teacher in a Program Improvement school.   In her first 
year of employment with the District, which was during the 2006-2007 school year, Miller 
taught at Richman Elementary School.  At that time, her elementary school was participating 

(C) Second, Miller asserts that she should receive tiebreaking credit under 

(B) Respondent Patricia Miller also contends that she should have higher 

 

 

 

9

20. 

(A) The District may take action against any certificated employee, who was 

in the Program Improvement program.  However, Miller’s school is currently not 
participating in or considered a Program Improvement school for the 2009-2010 school year.   
Because criteria 5(a)(ix) provides for tiebreaking credit if the certificated employee is 
“currently assigned” as a teacher in a Program Improvement level 3-5 school and Miller’s 
school is not a Program Improvement school, her argument for additional tiebreaking credit 
or ranking under this criteria must also fail.   It was not shown that the District’s application 
of the tie-breaking criteria was erroneous or arbitrary and capricious with respect to Miller.  
Miller is not entitled to receive higher ranking among teachers with her same seniority date 
under these two tie-breaking criteria.  Respondent Miller may be laid off pursuant to the 
reduction or discontinuance of elementary teachers.   
 
 
duly served with a preliminary notice of layoff but then did not request a hearing, pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44944 and 44955.   
 
 
duly served with a preliminary notice of layoff and an accusation but then did not file a 
notice of defense or make an appearance at the hearing after filing a notice of defense, 
pursuant to Government Code section 11520, subdivision (a), and Education Code sections 
44944 and 44955.   
 
It was not established there are any certificated employees with less seniority 
 
than respondents who are being retained by the District to provide services that respondents 
are certificated and competent to render.   
 
 
 

(B) The District may likewise take action against any respondent, who was 

21. 

 

*  *  *  *  *  *  * 

Pursuant to the foregoing findings of fact, the Administrative Law Judge makes the 

 
 
 
following determination of issues: 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.   

Jurisdiction exists for the subject proceedings pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, based on Findings 1 – 21 above.  All notices, accusations, and 
other related papers and reports required by these Education Code sections have been 
provided in a timely manner and, as such, the parties have complied with the statutory 
requirements.   
 
Cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to reduce 
 
by 88.5 full-time equivalent positions the concomitant number of certificated employees of 
the District due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services, as set forth 

2.   

 

 

10

3. 

Cause does not exist pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to 

in Findings 1 – 21 above.   With respect to those respondents whose may be laid off by the 
District and any other certificated employees who received notices but did not request a 
hearing, if any, the causes set forth in the Accusations relate solely to the welfare of the 
District's schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.   
 
 
terminate the employment of respondents Kathleen Escaleras-Morillo, Catherine Vito 
Maxfield, Allison Demonteverde, Hannah Kim, Kathleen Fox, Rudolph Petris, Emiily 
Hancock, Theresa Benveniste, and Sonya Lee due to the reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services inasmuch as the District withdrew or dismissed the Accusation 
against them, based on Finding 14 above.   
 
 
Based on Findings 1 – 21 above, there is no certificated probationary or 
permanent employee with less seniority than any one of respondents or the certificated 
employees who is being retained by the District for the 2010-2011 school year to render 
services which any one of respondents or certificated employees is certificated and 
competent to render.  
 
 
 
 

4. 

*  *  *  *  *  *  * 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

WHEREFORE, the Administrative Law Judge makes the following Order:  

ORDER 

2. 

1. 

 
 
The Accusation issued against respondents Kathleen Escaleras-Morillo, 
Catherine Vito Maxfield, Allison Demonteverde, Hannah Kim, Kathleen Fox, Rudolph 
Petris, Emily Hancock, Theresa Benveniste, and Sonya Lee must be dismissed, based on 
Conclusion of Law 3 above, respectively.  These respondents may not be given notice that 
their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
based on Conclusions of Law 1, 2, and 4 above.   The District may give notice to these 
respondents, and each of them, in the inverse order of seniority that their services will not be 
required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code section 44955.   
 
The District may give notice to any respondents and certificated employees, 
 
who were served with notices and/or accusations that their services will not be needed next 
year but did not file requests for hearing or did not appear at the hearing, that their services 

The Accusation issued against all of the remaining respondents is sustained, 

3 

11

4. 

Before giving notice to respondents, the District shall further determine and 

will not be required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955.   
 
 
take into account any additional positively assured attrition among certificated employees in 
deciding how many and when respondents should be terminated before the ensuing 2010-
2011 school year.   
 
 
 
Dated:  May 5, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Vincent Nafarrete 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

12

