BEFORE THE 

GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
YOSEMITE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF MADERA 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In The Matter of the Reduction In Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE YOSEMITE 
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
                                                 Respondents. 

 
OAH No. 2010031594 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Jonathan Lew, State of 

Stephen A. Mendyk, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of the Yosemite Unified 

 
 
California, Office of Administrative Hearings, on April 20, 2010, in Oakhurst, California. 
 
 
School District. 
 
 
 
 

James F. McBrearty, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of respondents.   

Evidence was received and the case was submitted for decision on April 20, 2010.     

 
 
FACTUAL FINDINGS  
 
1.     Steve Raupp is the Superintendent of the Yosemite Unified School District 

(District).  The actions of Mr. Raupp in making and filing the Accusation were taken in his 
official capacity. 
 

2.     Respondents are seven permanent or probationary certificated employees of the 

District.1  On March 9, 2010, the District served on each respondent a written notice that it 
had been recommended that notice be given to respondents pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would be reduced or would not be required for 
the 2010-2011 school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation 
and noted that the District Governing Board had passed a Resolution reducing the 

                                                 

Trebor and Amy Weigel.   

1 Respondents include Michelle Brewer, Melinda Gresham, Dana Hall, Duff McCartin, Tom Swan, Tamara 

1

 
 

 
 

 

certificated staff by 5.34 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. Four respondents timely 
requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the 
ensuing school year.2  Three did not request a hearing or were late in requesting a hearing.3  
The parties stipulated that these three certificated employees are deemed laid off as a result 
of their failure to timely request a hearing. 
 

3.     On March 30, and April 1, 2010, the District timely served Accusations with 
required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense on respondents Michelle 
Brewer, Dana Hall, Duff McCartin and Amy Weigel.  Each respondent timely filed Notices 
of Defense to the Accusation.   
 

At the time of hearing, respondents Michelle Brewer, Dana Hall and Amy Weigel 

withdrew their Notices of Defense.  These three thereby waived their right to a hearing.  The 
hearing proceeded as to respondent Duff McCartin only. 
 

4.     On February 8, 2010, at a regular meeting, the District Governing Board was 
given notice of the Superintendent’s recommendations that certificated employees holding 
5.34 FTE positions be given notice that their services would be reduced or not required for 
the next school year and stating the reasons for that recommendation. 
 
 
necessary to decrease programs and services and thus it was necessary to reduce teaching and 
other certificated services affecting employment of 5.34 FTE positions.  The District 
Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2009/2010-09 providing for the reduction or 
elimination of the following particular kinds of services (PKS): 
 

On February 8, 2010, the District Governing Board determined that it was 

5. 

Services 

 

 

 

Equivalent Positions  

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
Hourly Adult Education Teacher  
 
Hourly Adult Education Teacher 
   
 
English Teacher 
 
 
English Teacher 
Elementary Teacher   
 
Elementary Teacher (Precautionary Notice) 
Elementary Teacher (Precautionary Notice) 

   
 
 
 
   

 
 
  

  0.60 
  0.40  
  0.34    
  1.0 
  1.0  
 
 

  1.0  
  1.0  

 

 

 

 

TOTAL  

              5.34 FTE 

 

 

6. 

The District serves approximately 2,100 students through one comprehensive 
high school, two elementary schools, two necessary small schools, two continuation schools, 
two community day schools, one adult education and two independent study programs.  In 
January/February 2010, the Superintendent reviewed the District’s financial situation and 

                                                 
2 These included Michelle Brewer, Dana Hall, Duff McCartin and Amy Weigel.   
3 These included Tom Swan (late), Melinda Gresham and Tamara Trebor.   

2

determined that it was necessary to revise enrollment projections downward and to reduce or 
eliminate particular kinds of services for the District to account for revenue shortfalls.    
 

The Governing Board’s resolution to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 

services was made in anticipation of decreased revenues.  The proposed reductions are 
necessary for the District to remain solvent.  
 
Skipping  
 
 
Resolution No. 2009/2010-08) that provided that the District has the need to retain certain 
certificated employees who possess certain credentials and which more senior employees do 
not possess.  The Superintendent was authorized to deviate from terminating certificated 
employees in order of seniority in instances where:   
 

On February 8, 2010, the Board adopted a second resolution (Board 

7. 

 

To fill a demonstrated specific need for personnel to  

1. 
teach a specific course or courses of study; or 
 
2.  When the certificated employee has the special training 
or experience which others with more seniority do not possess; 
or 

3.  When the certificated employee has BCLAD and/or 
CLAD authorization or prior subsequent equivalent; or 

To maintain or achieve compliance with constitutional 

4. 
requirements related to equal protection of the law; or 

To maintain or achieve compliance with federal and state 

5. 
requirements and regulations. 

8. 

The District’s rationale for skipping is its belief that other provisions of the 

 
 
Education Code require that a teacher who provides instruction to even a single English 
language learner (ELL) student4 must possess a CLAD or the equivalent.  Failure to comply 
with this perceived mandate would, in the view of the District, subject it to the risk of civil 
liability and sanctions by state and federal governmental agencies.  These sanctions include 
the loss of funding.  The District noted that it receives federal financial assistance and that 
the U.S. Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights (OCR), evaluates school district 
compliance with Title VI.  Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and its implementing 
regulations provide that a recipient of Federal financial assistance may not, directly or 

                                                 

4 Education Code section 306, subdivision (a), reads: “‘English learner’ means a child who does not speak 
English or whose native language is not English and who is not currently able to perform ordinary classroom work 
in English, also known as a Limited English Proficiency or LEP child.” 
 

3

  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

9. 

through contractual or other arrangements, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, 
exclude persons from participation in its programs, deny them any service or benefits of its 
programs, or subject them to separate treatment.  (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq; 34 C.F.R. § 
100.6.)  OCR maintains that a school district is not compliant with Title VI where a district 
fails to ensure the availability of instructional staff persons whose qualifications are 
sufficient to meet the instructional needs of ELL students.  Thus, the District believes that 
ELL students must be taught by a teacher with appropriate certification in order to receive 
equal access to education. 
 
 
provides resources for school districts to ensure that poor and minority students have an 
equal opportunity to achieve and meet state academic standards.  As part of its performance 
goals, NCLB desires that all students be taught by highly qualified teachers, that all students 
attain proficiency in reading and mathematics, including ELL students, and that all ELL 
students become proficient in English.  The District is required to report compliance with 
NCLB highly qualified teacher requirements, including ELL certification.   
 
 
by ELL students.  Education Code section 44253.3 provides:   
 

The District further notes that the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act of 2001 

Finally, the District points to state requirements for access to quality education 

10. 

The Legislature recognizes that limited-English-proficient 
pupils have the same right to a quality education as all 
California pupils.  For these pupils to have access to quality 
education, their special needs must be met by teachers who have 
essential skills and knowledge related to English language 
development, specially designed content instruction delivered in 
English, and content instruction delivered in the pupils’ primary 
languages.   

The District believes that it is obligated to pursue 100 percent ELL certification for 

 
 
certificated employees, and therefore is justified in using ELL certification as skipping 
criteria in order to maintain employees with this specialized training.5   
 
Duff McCartin 
 
 
subject teacher, currently employed by the District without ELL authorization.  He has had 
several opportunities to become certified.  In early 2004, he had an opportunity to enroll 
through a California State University-Fresno class, paid for by the District and taught at a 
District campus. He failed to enroll, expressing preference for a summer course.   
 

Respondent Duff McCartin is one of five teachers, and the only multiple 

11. 

                                                 

5 The District is assessed by the California Department of Education through Categorical Program 
Monitoring (CPM).  CPM, for purposes of ELL students, examines whether ELL students have equitable access to 
all programs provided by the schools and whether all staff members are trained to ensure program effectiveness.   

 

4

12. 

Less than one percent of District students are ELL.  This has been true over the 

On May 9, 2007, District certificated employees were notified of another ELL 

In Spring 2007, Mr. McCartin was offered another opportunity to enroll in ELL 

Mr. McCartin also had the option of enrolling in online coursework and/or checking 

 
certification training offered by the Tulare County Office of Education during the fall 
semester, paid for by the District.  The District paid employees at the daily rate or granted 
credit on the salary schedule for employees’ time spent on the course outside of the regular 
work day.  Mr. McCartin failed to enroll in this course.  
 
 
certification training opportunity in June, also paid for by the District.  Mr. McCartin did 
enroll in this course beginning in June 2007, but did not complete the portfolio requirement 
necessary to receive the ELL authorization.  However, Mr. McCartin is scheduled to take an 
examination for certification on June 19, 2010.  This would bypass the portfolio requirement 
if he passes the test and he would become ELL certified. 
 
 
out the online course compact discs in order to complete ELL certification. 
 
 
past five years.  Currently, only four District students are recognized as ELL learners. 
 
 
multiple subject, and single subject social science credentials.  He is currently assigned to 
Raymond High School, one of the District’s two necessary small schools.  He will be 
assigned to Rivergold Elementary School for the 2010-2011 school year where he would 
teach grades 7/8 social science.  He will be the only teacher at this site who will teach the 
social science classes.  There are no ELL students at Rivergold Elementary School this year. 
 
 
The District schools are remote and distant from each other.  Students cannot easily be 
transported to different sites and many need to stay closer to their homes.  The District is 
concerned that if an ELL student enrolls at a particular school site, the District may not have 
the flexibility to assign an ELL certificated teacher to provide instruction.  In this case, the 
District notes that Mr. McCartin will be the only teacher assigned to teach 7/8 social science 
at the Rivergold Elementary School site.  The District fears that if an ELL student is enrolled 
in grade 7/8 at that site next school year, the District would be found to be noncompliant and 
federal financial assistance may be placed at risk.  (See Findings 8 and 9.) 
 
 

13.  Mr. McCartin’s seniority date is August 14, 1992.  He holds professional clear 

The District will not hire new teachers unless they have ELL certification.  

14. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  

1. 

There is a single issue in this case – whether the District may, pursuant to 

 
 
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), skip junior employees who hold a BCLAD 
and/or CLAD authorization or prior subsequent equivalent and lay-off a more senior 
employee who does not.  The District’s contention that it may do so is based, in large 
measure, on the premise that only teachers holding a CLAD Certificate or equivalent may 
provide instruction to designated English language learners. 

 

5

2. 

The Legislature has directed the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (CTC) to “implement an assessment system to certify those teachers who have 
the essential skills and knowledge necessary to meet the needs of California’s limited-
English-proficient pupils.” (Ed. Code, § 44253.1)  This statute follows a legislative 
declaration that limited-English-proficient pupils have the right to a quality education and 
“their special needs must be met by teachers who have essential skills and knowledge related 
to English language development and specially designed content instruction delivered in 
English…” (Ed. Code, § 44253.1.)  Education Code section 44253.5 requires the CTC to 
develop an examination by which teachers may establish their “competence in the knowledge 
and skills necessary for effective teaching of limited-English-proficient pupils.”  School 
districts must report instances in which teachers have been misassigned including those 
instances in which districts have failed to follow Education Code sections 44253, et seq.  
(Ed. Code, §44258.9.)  In summary, it is the CTC which “licenses” teachers and prescribes 
the areas in which they may provide instruction by virtue of their credentials. (Ed. Code, §§ 
44001, 44830, 44831, and 44253.1.) 
 

3. 

The CLAD certificate was the designated certificate created in response to the 
Legislative mandate.  If such certificate, or its equivalent, “authorizes” instruction to limited-
English-proficient pupils, the teaching of such students without the certificate is necessarily 
unauthorized.  This interpretation is in accord with the position taken by CTC itself and the 
California Department of Education. 
 
 
language learners, must be taught by a teacher possessing a CLAD or equivalent, the next 
step is determining whether the District may skip the holders of such certificates and lay off a 
more senior teacher who does not possess them.  If District may do so, the authority must be 
found in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d).  Education Code section 44955 
provides in pertinent part: 
 

Having established that limited-English-proficient students, or English 

4. 

¶…¶  

 

 

(b) Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in 
all of the schools of a district for the first six months in which 
school is in session shall have declined below the corresponding 
period of either of the previous two school years, whenever the 
governing board determines that attendance in a district will 
decline in the following year as a result of the termination of an 
interdistrict tuition agreement as defined in Section 46304, 
whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school 
year, or whenever the amendment of state law requires the 
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the 
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary 
by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of 
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may 

6

terminate the services of not more than a corresponding 
percentage of the certificated employees of the district, 
permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school 
year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of 
this section while any probationary employee, or any other 
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service 
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 
render.  

¶…¶ 

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of 
the following reasons: 

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 
specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by 
a services credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel 
services or health for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee 
has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or 
course of study or to provide those services, which others with more 
seniority do not possess.  

 

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.  

5. 

Education Code section 44955 provides that when certificated employees face 
layoffs due to economic exigency, the school district has an affirmative obligation to reassign 
senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions held by junior teachers, if the 
senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to occupy such positions.  The intent 
of the Legislation is clearly to prevent Districts from laying off senior teachers while 
retaining junior teachers. 
 

However, the District is permitted to depart from a seniority-based economic layoff in 

situations where the District “demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course or course of study…and that the certificated employee (to be exempted from layoff) 
has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to 
provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.” (Ed. Code, § 
44955, subd. (d)(1).) 
 

6. 

The District has the burden in this case of demonstrating a “specific need” for 

personnel to teach a “specific course or course of study.”  If this specific need is 
demonstrated, the District must further establish that junior employees possess special 
qualifications necessary to teach such course or course of study; and that senior teachers do 

7

 

 

 

 

 

not possess those special qualifications. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2009) 170 
Cal.App.4th 127.)  The analysis of these factors by the court in Bledsoe makes it clear that 
ordinarily these are factual questions and the school district bears the burden of proving each 
element. (Id. at pp. 138-144.) 
 

7. 

In this case, District has essentially designated its entire District educational 
instruction program as a “course or course of study.”  The District does not simply contend 
that certain classes, by virtue of anticipated enrollment of ELL students, require the special 
training and experience evidenced by the possession of a CLAD certificate; rather, District 
implicitly asserts that all classes require such special qualifications. 
 

The District’s designation of its entire educational instruction program as a “course or 
course of study” does not comport with the more narrow definitions of the words and phrase.  
Thus, Education Code section 51015 provides: “‘Course’ means an instructional unit of an 
area or field of organized knowledge, usually provided on a semester, year, or prescribed 
length of time basis.”  Section 51014 states “‘Course of study’ means the planned content of 
a series of classes, courses, subjects, studies, or related activities.”  The “field of organized 
knowledge” and the “planned content” of the studies vary from class to class. 
 

8. 

Neither the testimony of District administrators nor any other evidence 

established that Mr. McCartin would be required to provide instruction to ELL students next 
school year.  The District’s case is based on the possibility of having an ELL student enroll at 
Rivergold Elementary School.  There are no ELL pupils currently enrolled at Rivergold 
Elementary School.  There are currently four ELL pupils in the entire district.  The District 
has had fewer than one percent enrollment of ELL pupils over the past 5 years.  Mr. 
McCartin has been in the District for 18 years.  He has never had an ELL student removed 
from his classroom because he was not ELL certificated.  The District, in an abundance of 
caution, would like teachers at Rivergold Elementary School to have a CLAD certificate or 
other ELL certification in the event that ELL pupils enroll next year at that school.  Mr. 
McCartin is the only District teacher holding a multiple subject credential who is not ELL 
authorized.  This may change by June 2010. 
 

9. 

If an ELL student does enroll in Mr. McCartin’s class, and Mr. McCartin is 

not successful in passing the examination this year, it may then become necessary to reassign 
him to a different assignment in which he is certificated and competent to render service.    
There may be a Grade 1-3 position opening up next year at Rivergold Elementary School.  If 
Mr. McCartin is deemed certificated and competent to serve in that assignment, Education 
Code section 44955 affords him rights for consideration for assignment as a senior 
employee.6
                                                 

6 See Alexander v. Board of Trustees of the Delano Union High School District (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 

567.  The decision predated the addition of subdivision (d) to Education Code section 44955. However, the court’s 
holding that among teachers with different seniority dates, program needs, and not the “needs of the district and 
students” is the proper focus, remains viable. The Alexander court invalidated the District’s skipping of junior 
teachers regarded as bilingual where there was no demonstrated connection between teachers’ Spanish speaking 
ability and actual program needs.  

 

8

10. 

The District suggests that if a teacher has been afforded adequate notice and a 

reasonable opportunity to secure ELL authorization and simply did not do so in a timely 
manner, a school district should be able to skip over him, even if he is in the process of 
attaining authorization.  (See Ripon Unified School District v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (2009) 177 Cal.App.4th 1379.)  In Ripon Unified School District, a music 
teacher’s persistent refusal to become ELL certified was lawful ground for termination 
proceedings, and a requirement that all teachers within a school district become certified to 
teach English learners or face termination was a proper condition of continued employment. 
 

Here, the District is justifiably concerned with Mr. McCartin’s protracted history of 
delays in obtaining ELL certification.  District funding may be at risk if it is non-compliant 
and penalized.  Mr. McCartin surely received ample notice and opportunity to become ELL 
certified.  He offers no good excuse.  Yet these factors would be relevant only in disciplinary 
proceedings against Mr. McCartin.  The District cannot otherwise make possession of  
BCLAD and/or CLAD authorization skipping criteria absent a showing that such is also 
necessary to teach a course or course of study, in this case Grade 7/8 Social Studies at 
Rivergold Elementary School.  Such showing has not been made here.  The notice to Mr. 
McCartin must therefore be rescinded. 
 

12. 

11. 

The District’s decision to skip junior certificated employees holding BCLAD 

13.  All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in California Education 

Because the District failed to demonstrate a specific need for personnel to 
teach a specific course or course of study (Grade 7/8 Social Studies), it is unnecessary to 
discuss whether the District established that junior employees whom the District proposed to 
skip possess the special qualifications necessary to teach such a course or course of study and 
whether the District established that the senior employee does not possess such 
qualifications. 
 
 
and/or CLAD authorization was not proper in this case.  Cause does not exist under 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to provide notice to respondent Duff McCartin 
that his services will not be required in the ensuing school year. 
 
 
Code sections 44949 and 44955 were met.  The notices sent to respondents indicated the 
statutory basis for the reduction of services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide 
them due process.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa 
Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  The 
description of services to be reduced, both in the Board Resolution and in the notices, 
adequately describe particular kinds of services.  (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 
Cal.App.4th 838.  See, also, Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 
 
kinds of services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  
The Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. 
 

The services identified in Board Resolution No. 2009/2010-09 are particular 

14. 

 

9

Except as noted in Legal Conclusion 12, cause exists to reduce the number of 
certificated employees of the District due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular 
kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the 
welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 
44949. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

The Accusation against Duff McCartin is dismissed. 

Notice shall be given to other respondents occupying up to 5.34 FTE that their 

2. 

 
 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 23, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

___________________________ 
JONATHAN LEW 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

10

