BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
LOS BANOS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Employment Status of: 
 
AMANDA SMITH, et al., 
 
                                                   Respondents. 
 
 

 
 
 
    OAH No. 2010031245 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
Robert Walker, Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Los Banos, California, on April 21, 2010. 
 

Kevin R. Dale, Attorney at law,1 represented the complainant, Dr. Steve Tietjen, 

Superintendent, Los Banos Unified School District. 
 

Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law,2 represented the respondents.  There are 35 

respondents, and they are listed in exhibit A. 
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 21, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
GENERAL FINDINGS CONCERNING STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS 
 

1. 

Respondents are certificated district employees. 

 

 

 

2. 

Not later than March 15, 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955,3 the superintendent of the school district caused the governing board of 
the district and respondents to be notified in writing that it was recommended that 
respondents be notified that the district would not require their services for the ensuing 

                                                

1 Kevin R. Dale, Attorney at Law, 555 West Shaw Avenue, Suite C-1, Fresno, California 93704. 

2 Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, 750 East Bullard Avenue, Suite 101, Fresno, California 93710. 
 
3 All references to the Code are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 
 

1

school year.  The notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.  The recommendation 
was not related to respondents’ competency. 
 

3. 

A notice was delivered to each respondent, either by personal delivery or by 

depositing the notice in the United States mail, registered, postage prepaid, and addressed to 
respondent’s last known address. 
 

4. 

The notice advised each respondent of the following: He or she had a right to a 

hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, he or she had to deliver a request for a hearing in 
writing to the person sending the notice.  The request had to be delivered by a specified date, 
which was a date that was not less than seven days after the notice of termination was 
served.4  And the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a 
hearing. 
 

5. 

Respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to determine whether 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  An accusation was timely 
served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice that, if they were going to request a 
hearing, they were required to file a notice of defense within five days after being served 
with the accusation.5  Respondents filed timely notices of defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 

6. 

The governing board of the district resolved to reduce or discontinue particular 

kinds of services.  Within the meaning of Code section 44955, the services are “particular 
kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce or discontinue 
these services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 
SERVICES THE DISTRICT INTENDS TO REDUCE OR DISCONTINUE 
 

7. 

The governing board of the district determined that, because particular kinds 

of services are to be reduced or discontinued, it is necessary to decrease the number of 
permanent or probationary employees in the district by 50 full time equivalents (FTE). 
 

8. 

The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to 

Middle school multiple subject classes in grades 7 and 8:         1 FTE 
Elementary multiple subject classes in grades K through 6:    49 FTE 

 
 

reduce or discontinue are:  
 
 
 
 
                                                

4 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

5 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a notice 
of defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
termination cases, the notice of defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

 

2

RIGHT TO BE RETAINED ACCORDING TO SENIORITY AND QUALIFICATIONS – DATE OF HIRE 
 

9. 

Job security is not inherent in seniority.  The Legislature chose to provide 

teachers with limited job security according to their seniority.   
 
RIGHT TO BE RETAINED ACCORDING TO SENIORITY AND QUALIFICATIONS – BUMPING 
 

10. 

The second paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), does not add to 

teachers’ seniority rights.  It does, however, make it clear that governing boards must make 
assignments in such a way as to protect seniority rights.  Employees must be retained to 
render any service their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.  Thus, if a senior 
teacher whose regular assignment is being eliminated is certificated and competent to teach a 
junior teacher’s courses, the district must retain the senior teacher and reassign him or her to 
render that service.  This is commonly referred to as bumping.  The district must either 
reassign or terminate the junior employee.   
 

11. 

The district served precautionary notices on Jason Bretz and Larry Borelli 

because of a concern that a more senior teacher might assert a right to bump into a position 
held by one of them.  There was no proof, however, that any teacher has a right to bump into 
either of those positions.   
 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS REGARDING RETENTION OF EMPLOYEES 
 

12.  With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district is not 

retaining any probationary employee to render a service that such a respondent is certificated 
and competent to render. 
 

13.  With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district is not 

retaining any employee with less seniority than such a respondent has to render a service that 
the respondent is certificated and competent to render.6 
 

14.  With regard to respondents who are either permanent or probationary 
employees, the district is not retaining any employee with less seniority than such a 
respondent has to render a service that the respondent’s qualifications entitle him or her to 
render.7 
 
 
 
 
                                                

6 Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides seniority protection for a permanent employee in terms of 

the services the employee is “certificated and competent to render.”   

 
7 Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides seniority protection for both permanent and probationary 

employees in terms of the services an employee’s “qualifications entitle [him or her] to render.”  
 

 

3

STIPULATION TO RESCIND TWO NOTICES 
 

15. 

Complainant stipulated that, in the event no one proved that he or she has a 

right to bump into the position of either Mr. Bretz or Mr. Borelli, the notices served on Mr. 
Bretz and Mr. Borelli should be rescinded. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

The notices served on Mr. Bretz and Mr. Borelli should be rescinded. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Code sections 44949 and 44955.  All 

 
 
notice and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
 
3.  Within the terms of Code sections 44949 and 44955, the district has cause to 
 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services and to give notices to 33 respondents that 
their services will not be required for the ensuing school year.  The cause relates solely to the 
welfare of the schools and the pupils. 
 
 

ORDER 

1. 

2. 

The notices served on Mr. Bretz and Mr. Borelli are rescinded. 

The district may give notice to the remaining 33 respondents that the district 

 

 

 

will not require their services for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
 
Dated:  April 26, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

4

_________________________________ 
ROBERT WALKER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

EXHIBIT A 
LIST OF RESPONDENTS 
 

Amparan, Lisa  
Avila, Danielle  
Borelli, Larry  
Bracey, Michael  
Bretz, Jason  
Castaneda, Chamroeun  
Chheuth, Serey  
Clarke-Weidman, Denise  
Gamino, Juventina  
Henley, Erin  
Kocher, Lisa  
Kruger, Carole  
Landon, Megan  
Lewis, Patty 
Locarnini, Stefanie  
Lowery, Ana  
Merrill, Deanna  
Miranda, Angelica  
Mouro, Nicole  
Nicholson, Megan  
Perdomo, Monica  
Pierce, Leanna  
Ramirez, Cynthia 
Rivas, Lupita  
Rocha, Dawn  
Rola, Audrey  
Romero, Wendy  
Sanghera, Gurpreet  
Silva, Jaclyn  
Singh, Michael  
Smith, Amanda  
Smith. Jennifer  
Windecker, Brianne  
Wolfsen, Leigh Ann  
Yang, Mai  

 
 

 

 

 

5

