BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE 
UPLAND UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
Respondents listed in Appendix A. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

    OAH No. 2010020621 
 

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

Kerrie E. Taylor, Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost LLP, represented the Upland Unified 

Shirley A. Lee, Schwartz, Steinsapir, Dohrmann & Sommers LLP, represented the 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
of California, heard this matter in Upland, California on April 16, 2010. 
 
 
School District.  
 
 
respondents listed in Appendix A.  
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 16, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

 
 
as the Superintendent of the Upland Unified School District. 
 
 
 

Respondents1 are certificated district employees. 

2. 

Gary Rutherford, Ed.D., made and filed the accusation in his official capacity 

3. 

On February 23 2010, Board of Trustees of the Upland Unified School District 

adopted Resolution 02-23-10(a), determining that it would be necessary to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of the current school year.  The board 

                                                 
1  
from this proceeding, so that at the conclusion of the hearing, the 17 individuals identified in Appendix A were the 
remaining respondents in this matter.  All references to respondents are to these 17, unless otherwise indicated.  

The district initially identified 18 certificated employees for layoff.  One individual was later dismissed 

 

1

determined that the particular kinds of services that must be reduced for the 2010-2011 
school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE) positions: 

 
Particular Kind of Service 
 
Elementary Teaching  
Elementary Physical Education Teaching 
Elementary Music Teaching  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

27 
3 
2 

Full-Time Equivalent

The proposed reductions totaled 32.0 FTE positions. 
 
Subsequently, in an amended recommendation, the board determined that it was not 

necessary to lay off any elementary music teachers, so that by the date of the hearing, the 
proposed reductions totaled 30.0 FTE positions.  

The board directed the superintendent to determine which employees’ services 

would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of the reduction of the 
foregoing particular kinds of services.  The board further directed the superintendent to send 
appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the district who would be laid off as a 
result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services.  
 

5. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district timely served on respondents a 
written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services would not be 
required for the upcoming school year.  The notice made reference to the board’s resolution, 
which was enclosed with the notice.  The notice advised respondents of their right to a 
hearing, that each respondent had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to an identified 
district representative by the date specified in the notice, a date which in each case was more 
than seven days after the notice was served, and that the failure to request a hearing would 
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing.  

 
The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment was not 

related to their competency as teachers.  

Respondents timely filed written requests for hearing to determine if there was 
cause for not reemploying them for the upcoming school year.  The accusation, along with a 
notice of hearing and certain other documents, was thereafter timely served on all 
respondents.  Respondents timely filed notices of defense.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional 
requirements were met.2

 
4. 

 
6. 

 
7. 

The services the board addressed in Resolution No. 02-23-10(a) were 

 
“particular kinds of services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these 

                                                 
2  
respondents also filed individual notices of defense and requests for hearing.  The parties stipulated that all 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 

Timely joint notices of defense and requests for hearing were filed on behalf of all respondents. Many 

 
 

 

2

9. 

8. 

10.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any 

particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious and constituted a proper exercise 
of discretion. 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
welfare of the district and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as 
determined by the board.  
 
 
The board considered attrition in determining the actual number of necessary 
layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.  No evidence was presented that any known 
positively assured attrition was not considered. 
 
 
services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.  
 
 
teachers:  Sarah Farnworth, Deborah Panattoni, and Jennifer Garbick.  Farnworth, the least 
senior of the three, currently teaches elementary PE, and has a clear single subject credential 
in PE.  Panattoni, the second least senior, currently teaches junior high PE, and has a clear 
single subject PE credential as well as a supplementary authorization in family health with 
drug use and abuse, and an authorization to teach introduction to health science.  Garbick, the 
third least senior, currently teaches elementary PE, and has a clear multiple subject (i.e., 
elementary school) credential, as well as a supplementary authorization in PE.  The 
supplementary authorization permits Garbick to teach physical education at any grade level 
at or below ninth grade.  
 
The district ultimately designated Farnworth and Panattoni for layoff.3  Respondents 
 
do not contest the layoff of Farnworth, but contend that Panattoni should not have been laid 
off. 
 

The district initially identified for layoff its three least senior physical education (PE) 

The district articulated two alternative explanations for its decision to lay off 
Panattoni.  First, considering all district PE teachers as a group, Panattoni is the second most 
junior PE teacher in the district.  Second, considering only those PE teachers currently in an 
elementary school assignment, Garbick is the second most junior in that subclass.  However, 
assuming that Garbick was thus appropriately designated for lay off, she was certificated and 
qualified to bump Panattoni out of the latter’s junior high PE position.  Either way, then, 
Panattoni and not Garbick was appropriately designated for layoff.  

 
Respondents contended, on the other hand, that since Garbick has a multiple subject 

credential, she could have bumped not only Panattoni, but also, and more appropriately, a 
number of district elementary school teachers who have lower seniority than does Panattoni.  
In other words, respondents asserted that the district should have been required to reassign 
Garbick to an elementary school position in order to preserve Panattoni’s junior high PE 

                                                 
3  
reduction in elementary PE teaching positions.  

Due to attrition, it was not necessary to lay off three PE teachers in order to effectuate the 3.0 FTE 

 

3

position.  By not doing so, the district ran afoul of the layoff statute’s recognition of seniority 
as a critical value to be upheld. 

 
The district did not deny that it could have reassigned Garbick to an elementary 
teaching position, but asserted that it retains the discretion to determine how best to use 
Garbick, and that it properly exercised that discretion by deciding that it was best to continue 
her service as a PE teacher, a position in which she has several years of recent experience.  

 
In response, respondents contended that if the district wished to retain Garbick in a 
PE position because of her experience, skipping criteria should have been included in the 
board’s resolution.  

 
Respondents read the Education Code (and in particular § 44955) too broadly.  For 

example, while the Code certainly reflects the importance of seniority, seniority does not 
always control, but only to the extent specifically prescribed in the Code.  Thus, section 
44955, subdivision (b) provides, “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a 
service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.”   

 
The proposed layoffs of Farnworth and Panattoni is not inconsistent with section 

44955, subdivision (b):  No teacher junior to Panattoni is being retained to render services 
(i.e., teach PE) for which Panattoni is certificated and competent to perform.  

 
Further, respondents identified no authority in support of their assertion that a district 

must reassign a bumping employee to the position that will result in the layoff of the least 
senior certificated employee.  Respondents’ reliance on the skipping provision of section 
44955 (subd. (d) thereof) is unavailing.4  That provision simply provides for an exception to 
the normal rule under subdivision (b) that employees are to be terminated by inverse 
seniority.  Since as discussed above, the district’s proposed layoffs of Farnworth and 
Panattoni is not inconsistent with subdivision (b), the issue of skipping does not come into 
play. 

 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
accusation.  Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the district to 
                                                 
4  
experience as a PE teacher, it could only do so on the basis of formal skipping criteria contained in the board 
resolution.  Skipping criteria would have been a relevant consideration had the district retained Garbick and laid off 
a more senior teacher who was certificated and competent to teach elementary PE.  Respondents did not identify any 
such individual.  

Specifically, respondents contended that since the district sought to reassign Garbick based on her 

 

4

reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the welfare of the schools and 
the pupils thereof.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the district 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The district 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board 
directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is recommended that the board give respondents 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services are no longer required by the district. 
 
 

ADVISORY DETERMINATION 

The following advisory determination is made:   

The accusations served on respondents are sustained.  Notice shall be given to the 17 

 
 
respondents listed in Appendix A, before May 15, 2010, that their services will not be 
required because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated.  
 
 
 
DATED:  ________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
DONALD P. COLE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

5

Appendix A 

Francine Avila 
Steven Curtis 
Sarah Farnworth 
Sarah Fash 
Denise Guerrero 
Mariella Hart 
Arlene Jones 
Stephanie Masterson 
Stacy Olguin 
Deborah Panattoni 
Randolph Pratt 

 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9. 
10. 
11 
12.  Maribel Santana 
13.  Melody Simons 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 

Kelley Smith 
Amanda Swan 
Lee Taylor 
Jennifer Yang 

 

6

