BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
OXNARD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

OAH No.:  2010030713 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Layoffs of: 
 
Certificated Employees of the Oxnard 
Unified School District, 
 
                                                 Respondents. 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter came on for hearing before Richard J. Lopez, Administrative Law Judge 

James R. Lynch, Attorney at Law, represented the Complainant. 

 
 
 
of the Office of Administrative Hearings, at Oxnard, California, on April 19, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was received. 
 
 
 
 

The Administrative Law Judge now finds, concludes and orders as follows: 

Alexis Ridenour, Attorney at Law, represented all Respondents. 

Oral and documentary evidence and evidence by way of stipulation and official notice 

SUMMARY 

 
 
 
The Governing Board (Board) of the Oxnard Unified School District (District) 
decided to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by certificated 
personnel for the 2010/2011 school year for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related 
to the competency and dedication of the teachers whose services were proposed to be 
reduced or eliminated.  District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection  
process involving review of credentials and seniority, “skipping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process complied with 
Education Code requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 

1.  Complainant Sean Goldman filed the accusation1 in this proceeding in his official 

2.  The following persons, the Respondent’s herein, are certificated employees of the 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
 
Parties 
 
 
 
capacity as Assistant Superintendent of the District. 
 
 
District: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Maria Belen-Ortiz 
Mirna Castro 
Susan Castro 
Rudy Gonzalez 
Veronica Gonzalez 
Stacie Halas 
Cindee Hernandez 
Tamara Hunt 
Claudia M. Pantoja 
Sylvia Valencia 
Irene Zavala 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3.  On February 10, 2009, the Governing Board of the District, upon recommendation 

Reduction of Services 
 
 
by the Complainant, adopted and issued resolution number 09-15 entitled “Reduction of 
Elimination of Particular Kinds of Service” (Resolution) to reduce or discontinue particular 
kinds of certificated services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year 
because of financial constraints resulting from revenue being insufficient to maintain the 
current levels of programs and necessary program changes resulting therefrom.   
 
 
Services as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 

4.  The Resolution specifies the Reduction or Elimination of Particular Certificated 

                                                
1 The term “accusation” refers to a pleading utilized under the Administrative Procedure Act, Government Code 
section 11503.  Respondents are not “accused” in the every-day sense of that word, unless it can be said they are 
accused of not having enough seniority to retain their positions with the District in the face of a resolution to reduce 
positions. 

 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

30 
 .3 
 

                    30.3 FTE 

TYPE OF PROGRAM 

FTE (Full-Time Equivalent)

The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are particular kinds of 

K-6 Classroom Teacher 
Categorically-Funded Teacher EL Specialist 
(TOSA) 
 
 
  
Total FTEs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. 
 
 
5.  With regard to services provided by the District, Exhibit B of the Resolution sets 
forth tie-breaking criteria to determine the order of layoff for those certificated employees 
with the same date of first paid probationary service. 
 
 
nor capricious, but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s discretion given the 
budgetary constraints, other factors considered by the Board, and the manner in which the 
decision to reduce or discontinue services was reached. 
 

6.  The decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was neither arbitrary 

7.  The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 
District and its pupils, and has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees as determined by the Board. 
 
Notice and Process 
 

 
8.  On March 3, 2010, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the 

10.  Each Respondent timely requested a hearing.  Thereafter, an accusation was 

Governing Board directed that notice be given to Respondents that their services will not be 
required for the ensuing school year, and stating the reasons therefore. 
 
 
9.  On or before March 15, 2010, within the deadline set forth in Education Code 
section 44949, the Respondents were provided written notice of the recommendation that 
Respondents receive notice pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their 
services will not be required for the ensuing school year, and stating the reasons therefore. 
 
 
served upon each of the Respondents, and the Respondents filed notices of defense, which 
were timely, or accepted, by the District without objection. 
 
Skipping Criteria 
 
 
Education Code section 44955(d)(1)” as follows: 
 
 

11.  Exhibit A, part of the Resolution, sets forth “Skipping Criteria pursuant to 

 

3

 

 

The District shall retain certificated employees in the particular  
kind of services identified in Board Resolution #09-15,  
regardless of their seniority, to the extent one or more of their  
assignments meet any of the following criteria: 
 

1.  Employees with experience and who possess a  
credential authorizing the teaching of special  
education classes during at least two of the  
previous three school years, and are expected to  
teach one or more special education classes for  
the District in the 2010-2011 school year. 

2.  Employees with experience and who possess  

bilingual teaching certification in English/Spanish,  
are teaching English/Spanish bilingual courses  
during at least two of the previous three school  
years, and are expected to teach one or more of  
these courses for the District in the 2010-2011  
school year. 

 

Employees who meet any of the foregoing criteria for some  
but not all of their assignment(s) shall be retained only as to  
that portion of their assignment(s) in 2009-2010 that meets  
the foregoing criteria. 
 
The Superintendent or designee is authorized to determine  
which employees qualify to be “skipped” from the Reduction  
in Force and to determine the manner in which the foregoing  
criteria shall be applied to each employee. 

 
The evidence established that the skipping criteria were reasonable and not arbitrary and that 
the promulgation of Exhibit A was within the sound discretion of the District and the Board 
and in the best interest of the District and its pupils. 

 

12.  Sylvia Valencia testified on her own behalf.  Ms. Valencia currently teaches 

Findings Re: Certain Respondents 
 
 
kindergarten SEI (Structured English Instruction) at McAuliffe School and has been 
employed by the District as a certificated employee (teacher) since October 3, 2005.  Ms. 
Valencia did establish that she has had 20 years teaching experience beginning in the 
Modesto City Schools and that for many years she had bilingual teaching assignments  

 

 
 

 

4

13.  Mirna Castro testified on her own behalf.  Ms. Castro currently teaches 

consistent with her BCLAD2 credential.  However, Ms. Valencia did not establish that she 
has taught English Language/Spanish Language bilingual courses during at least two of the 
previous three school years. 
 
 
combination fifth/sixth grade SEI at Elm School and has been employed by the District since 
November 15, 2004. Ms. Castro originally taught in the Los Angeles Unified School District 
and that for at least 10 years in that District she had bilingual teaching assignments consistent 
with her BCLAD credential.  However, Ms. Castro did not establish that she has taught 
English Language/Spanish Language bilingual courses during at least two of the previous 
three school years. 
 
Seniority 
 
 
dates (the first date of paid service) current assignments and locations, credentials, 
authorizations and employment status (permanent, probationary or temporary).  The evidence 
established that the Seniority List utilized in the layoff process is accurate as to the 
information contained therein.  No junior certificated employee is being retained to perform 
services which a more senior employee subject to layoff is certificated and competent to 
render. 
 
 

14.  The District maintains a Seniority List3 which contains employees’ seniority 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2.  Cause was established required by Education Code section 44955 to reduce the 

 
 
 
1.  All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 
were met.  Therefore, jurisdiction was established for this proceeding as to all Respondents 
by reason of Findings 8, 9 and 10. 
 
 
number of certificated employees due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds 
of services by reason of Findings 3, 4 and 5.  The Board’s decision to reduce or eliminate the 
identified services set forth in Finding 4 was neither arbitrary nor capricious in that the 
decision relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and the pupils within the 
meaning of Education Code section 44949, by reason of Findings 6 and 7. 
 
 
 
 

                                                
2 Crosscultural, Language and Academic Certificate authorizing teachers to provide certain types of instruction to 
English Language learners. 
3 The most senior employee is listed as number 76 on the Seniority List; the least senior employee is listed as 
number 1. 

 

5

3.  Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c), set forth a general rule 

 
requiring school districts to retain senior employees over more junior employees and to 
retain permanent employees over temporary employees.  Any exception to this general rule 
must be based on statute. 
 
 
4.  Education code section 44955, subdivision (d) sets forth an exception to the 
general rule that the services of a senior employee must be retained over the services of more 
junior employees. 
 
 
 
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d) provides: 

 

 

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may  
deviate from termination a certificated employee in order  
of seniority for either of the following reasons: 
 
(1)  The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to  
teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide  
services authorized by a services credential with a  
specialization in either pupil personnel services or health  
for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has  
special training and experience necessary to teach that  
course or course of study or to provide those services,  
which others with more seniority do not possess. 

 
(2)  For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with  
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of  
the laws. 

5.  Cause exists to sustain the Accusation as to Sylvia Valencia pursuant to Education 

7.  No permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to 

6.  Cause exists to sustain the Accusation as to Mirna Castro pursuant to Education 

 
 
Code section 44955, subdivision (d) by reason of Findings 11 and 12. 
 
 
Code section 44955, subdivision (d) by reason of Findings 11 and 13. 
 
 
render a service for which Respondents are certificated and competent by reason of Finding 
14.  Accordingly, cause exists to sustain the Accusation as to all Respondents. 
 
 
for the 2010/2011 school year by reason of the whole of the Findings herein. 
 
 
 
 
 

9.  Cause exists to give notice to Respondents that their services will not be required 

 

6

ORDER 

 

 

The Accusations are sustained as to all Respondents.  Notice may be given to 

 
 
 
Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010/2011 school year. 
 
 
 
Dated:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RJL:rfm 
 

 
 
RICHARD J. LOPEZ 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

