BEFORE THE GOVERING BOARD OF THE 
PALM SPRINGS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
OAH No. 2010020591 

 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Respondents Listed on Exhibit ”A” 
 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

William A. Diedrich, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud and Romo represented 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Respondents Nidia Bustamante, Kim 

 
Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Palm Springs, California on April 26, 2010. 
 
 
the District. 
 
 
McClinton, Maria Rivas and Kristin Wells. 
 
 
and Kristin Wells, Jon Y. Vanderpool, Esq., Tosdal Smith Steiner & Wax, represented all 
Respondents.   
 
 
 
 

With the exception of Respondents Nidia Bustamante, Kim McClinton, Maria Rivas 

The matter was submitted on April 26, 2010. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

The Governing Board of the Palm Springs Unified School District determined to 

 
 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers and other certificated 
employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the competency and 
dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.   
 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 

review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” “skipping” and breaking ties between/among 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in accordance 
with the requirements of the Education Code.  
 
 

 

1 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” (Respondents) are probationary or 

permanent certificated employees of the Palm Springs Unified School District (District). 
 

2. 

On March 9, 2010, Lorri McCune, the District’s Superintendent 
(Superintendent), notified the District’s Governing Board (Board) of her recommendation to 
reduce or discontinue services for the ensuing school year “due to budgetary limitations”. 
 

3. 

On March 9, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2009/2010-53 reducing 

4. 

or eliminating particular kinds of services for the ensuing school year and establishing 
“competency” criteria as described in Education Code section 44955 for purposes of 
bumping.  
 
On March 9, 2010, the Board adopted the Superintendent’s recommendation 
 
and thereby took action to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services, commencing the 
2010-2011 school year.  Further, the Board directed the Superintendent to determine which 
employees’ services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year and to take all 
necessary steps under the law “not to employ those certificated employees of the District” 
because of the reduction and elimination of these programs and services. 
 

5. 

On March 10, 2010, Mauricio Arellano, Assistant Superintendent Human 

6. 

Respondents submitted a timely request for hearing to determine if there was cause 

Resources (Assistant Superintendent), served Respondents with written notice that, due to 
financial conditions of the District, the Superintendent recommended not to re-employ them 
for the ensuing school year.  In addition, the notice advised Respondents of the right to 
hearing, that the request for hearing must be delivered to the District’s office no later than 
March 22, 2010 and that failure to request a hearing would constitute waiver of the right to a 
hearing.  
 
 
for not re-employing them for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
On March 10, 2010, the Assistant Superintendent made, filed and timely 
served an Accusation for lay-off of certificated employees and related materials on each 
Respondent.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
On March 9, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2009/2010-53 and 
thereby took action to reduce or eliminate the following particular kinds of certificated 
services commencing the 2010-2011 school year as follows: 
 

In response, Respondents submitted a timely Notice of Defense. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied. 

8. 

7. 

2 

 

 

Elementary (K-5) Classroom Teachers 

34 

F.T.E. 

Elementary Music Teachers 

Certificated Registered Nurse 

ARRA Intervention Teachers 

Secondary Business Teacher 

Elementary Reading Teacher 

Elementary Teacher on Special Assignment 

Middle School Core Teachers 

Middle School Nutrition Exploratory Teacher 

Secondary English Teacher 

Secondary French Teacher 

Secondary P.E. Teacher 

Secondary Social Studies 

School Psychologists 

Vice Principals 

5 

1 

8 

1 

1 

1 

5 

1 

2 

1 

1 

1 

3 

1.5 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E 

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

66.5 

F.T.E. 

 

 

 

 
The proposed reductions totaled 66.5 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. 
 
 
retirements, in determining the actual number of final layoff notices to be delivered to its 
certificated employees.    

The District considered all known attrition, including resignations and 

9. 

 
10. 

The Assistant Superintendent was responsible for implementing the technical 

aspects of the layoff.  The District developed a seniority list that contained, among other 
matters, the teacher’s name, status, seniority date, assignment, credentials, credential status, 
and application of tie-breaker criteria.    
 

The seniority date was based on the first date of paid service rendered in a 
probationary position.1  To assure the accuracy of the District’s information, the District 
notified certificated employees of seniority date, credentials and other data that it had on file 
and provided an opportunity to challenge or update this information.  If the District 

                                                 
 
 

Education Code section 44845. 

 

3 

substantiated the employee’s requested changes, the District changed its records.  The date of 
the District’s seniority list for certificated personnel (Exhibit 12) is April 21, 2010.   
 
The District used the seniority list for permanent and probationary certificated 
 
employees to develop a proposed order of layoff and a “bumping” list to determine the least 
senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced.  The District then 
determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another area that would 
entitle them to “bump” other junior employees.  In determining who would be laid off for 
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions and determined 
the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  The District then checked the 
credentials of affected individuals and whether they could “bump” other employees.  In so 
doing, the District considered “competency” criteria established by the Board in its 
Resolution, to wit: 

“That "competency" as described in Education Code section 44955(b) for the purposes of 
bumping  shall  necessarily  include:  (1)  possession  of  a  valid  credential  in  the  relevant 
subject matter area; (2) "highly qualified" status under the No Child Left Behind Act in 
the position into which the employee is bumping; (3) and an appropriate EL authorization 
(if required by the position); and (4) with regard to bumping into a position that includes 
instruction in "Read 180," special training in implementing the "Read 180" program; (5) 
with regard to bumping into a Secondary Theatre, Secondary Band, or Secondary Chorus 
positions, special training and experience necessary to serve in said positions and at least 
one (1) year of experience in the previous five (5) years serving in the position; (6) with 
regard  to  assignments  involving  instruction  in  Language  3,  completion  of  Language  3 
training;  (7)  with  regard  to  assignments  involving  GATE  instruction,  possession  of 
GATE  Certification;  and  (8)  with  regard  to  bumping  an  employee  who  possesses  a 
National Board Certification, possession of a National Board Certification.” 

11. 

The District applied some but not all of the competency criteria adopted in the 

 
 
Board’s Resolution.  At issue in this proceeding are the Board’s competency criteria 
described in subsections (5) and (6) of its Resolution [Finding 10].  
 
 
be allowed to bump Respondent Allyson Huntsman (Respondent Huntsman).  The District 
contends that in order to do so he must satisfy the competency criteria set forth in the 
Board’s Resolution; in other words, he must establish that he has the special training and 
experience necessary to serve in the position and that he has served in the position at least 
one year of the previous five. 

Respondent Andrew Buchanan (Respondent Buchanan) asserts that he should 

12. 

 
The Assistant Superintendent testified regarding the distinction between secondary 

 
Band, secondary Chorus and elementary music teachers.  He explained that secondary Band 
and secondary Chorus teachers “run” the CORE music program and described their 
responsibilities outside of the classroom, such as marching band, jazz band and after school 
events; in addition, these teachers work with boosters and are involved with civic events.  In 
response to questioning regarding particular skill set that secondary Band and secondary 

 

4 

 

Chorus teachers require, the Assistant Superintendent testified that these teachers have a 
background in instrumental music and choral music arrangements respectively; further, they 
put on a production with the Fine Arts Program.  Finally, he testified that issuing lay off 
notices to these teachers would have a “huge effect” on the continuity of instruction of that 
program “because of their connections to the city, to different programs and participation in 
different events that the District has locally.” 

 
The District issued Respondent Huntsman a precautionary layoff notice.  During the 

current school year, Respondent Huntsman teaches Choral Music to the District’s middle 
school students.  She holds a preliminary music credential, and her seniority date is August 
27, 2009.  
 
 
During the 2009 – 2010 school year, Respondent Buchanan is assigned to teach 
elementary music.  His seniority date is August 27, 2008.  He holds a clear music credential.  
He has had experience teaching secondary Band in Michigan as well as at La Quinta High 
School.  None of the teaching experience occurred within the past five years.  The District 
issued him a layoff notice. 
 

Though he is more senior than Respondent Huntsman, Respondent has not taught 

secondary Band or secondary Chorus within the past five years.  Therefore, he did not 
establish that he satisfied the District’s competency criteria in order to displace Respondent 
Huntsman.  As such, Respondent Buchanan is not entitled to bump Respondent Huntsman.     
 

13. 

The District seeks to retain the most senior teachers who have “special training 

and experience” to assignments involving instruction in Language 3. 
 

Language 3 is an alternative CORE language arts program, an intervention program 
for at-risk readers who are two or more grade levels behind level in English Language Arts, 
beginning in the third grade.  It is taught in grades three through twelve.  The District offered 
Language 3 for the first time during the 2009 – 2010 school year at one school, Two Bunch 
Palms Elementary School.   
 

Teachers who provide this service receive five days initial training and another six 

days of maintenance training.  The total cost to the District is $7,500.00 per teacher.   
Deborah Collier (Collier) and Rochelle Warila (Warila) are certificated employees of the 
District, teach Language 3 during the current school year and did not receive layoff notices.  
Each described the distinctions in teaching methods, benefits for the students and excellent 
results that she has witnesses as a result of implementation of Language 3 this year.  
According to the Assistant Superintendent, if not allowed to retain these teachers, principals 
would be required to identify additional teachers to take the training and expend additional 
funds for these teachers to do so because the District has identified a goal to help these 
students reach grade level to the extent possible. 
 

Considering the evidence, the District established a need for Language 3 teachers and 

provided evidence of the training and experience these teachers have.   

 

5 

Respondents Maritza Castro, Juanita Perez Chica and Shelby Holton are certificated 

Collier and Warila each has a seniority date of August 27, 2008, has had Language 3 

 
 
training and teaches Language 3 during the 2009 – 2010 school year. 
 
 
employees of the District and assert that they should be allowed to bump Warila and Collier.  
Though more senior to Collier and Warila, Respondents Castro, Perez Chica and Holton do 
not have training or experience to teach Language 3.   
 
 
teachers.  The teachers it seeks to retain Collier, Warila have the special training and 
experience teaching Language 3.  There is no evidence that any more senior teacher is 
competent to displace Collier and/or Warila. 
 

The District demonstrated that it has a need to retain more experienced Language 3 

14. 

Between the employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the 

same date, the Board determined their order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the 
District and the students.  The Board adopted specific criteria and provided clear instructions 
for implementation of the criteria.  The order of termination was based on the needs of the 
District and its students.  There is no evidence that tie-breaker criteria were not fairly applied 
to rank those employees hired on the same date. 

 
15. 

 
16. 

The services that the District proposed to reduce were “particular kinds of 

 
services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  

 
The District’s reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services 
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
of the District as determined by the Board.  

 
17.  No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform 

 
any services that any Respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

2. 

 

6 

3. 

deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the Palm 
 
Springs Unified School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The 
cause for the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to 
the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  
 

4. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he/she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior 
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Lacy vs. 
Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 469.)  
 

 

5. 

The District has the discretion to determine whether teachers are certificated 
and competent to hold the position for which said teachers have been skipped and retained.  
(King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016)  Junior teachers may 
be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or 
capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High 
School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 
v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831)   
 
 
perform a service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
the law and therefore rejected. 
 

All arguments not addressed herein are not supported by the evidence and/or 

No employee with less seniority than any Respondent is being retained to 

6. 

7. 

ORDER 
 

The Accusation served on Respondents listed on Amended Exhibit “A” is sustained.  

Notice shall be given to Respondents listed on Amended Exhibit “A” before May 15, 2010 
that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the 
reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 

 

 
 
DATED: _________________________ 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

7 

_______________________________________ 
VALLERA J. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

8 

PALM SPRINGS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
AMENDED EXHIBIT “A” 
 
 

1.  Borbro, Gail 
2.  Buchanan, Andrew 
3.  Castro, Maritza 
4.  Clem, Amanda 
5.  Cortez, Elba 
6.  Feffer, Tricia 
7.  Gasciogne, Amber 
8.  Goldshteyn, Tatyana 
9.  Heard, Rebecca 
10. Holton, Shelby 
11. Kistler, Casey 
12. Lauthen, Jennifer 
13. Lee, Brandy 
14. Lopez, Sabrina 
15. Miramontes, Christina 
16. Moser, Amber 
17. Nisco, Leigh-Ann 
18. Nuno, Sandra 
19. O’Connor, Jennifer 
20. Omier, Erika 
21. Perez Chica, Juanita 
22. Rosen, Brandi 
23. Schindler, Kelly 
24. Scotti, Gina 
25. Simpson, Jessica 
26. Smith, Shannon 
27. Smith, Nancy 
28. Stone, Guy 
29. Thompson, Rhonda 
30. Velazquest-Romero, Christina  
31. Verhasselt, Michael 
32. Wade, Heather 
33. Walters, Robyn 
34. Washburn, Polly 
35. Whittaker, Angela 
36. Yasuda, Jason 

 
 
 
 

 

9 

