BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF  
THE CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
Certificated Employees of the Capistrano    
Unified School District,  
 
 
 
 
 
 

             Respondents. 

 

 

 

    OAH No. 2010030097 
     
    
     
 

      

PROPOSED DECISION 

Chris Ruiz, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative 

Hearings, heard this matter on April 23, 2010, in San Juan Capistrano, California.    
 

Anthony P. DeMarco and Cathie L. Fields, Esqs., represented the Capistrano Unified 

School District (District).    

 
Marianne Reinhold, Esq., represented most of the Respondent teachers 

(Respondents).  All Respondents represented by Ms. Reinhold are listed in Exhibit A, which 
is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.   

 
Craig Cunningham, a Respondent, represented himself.   
 
The District served a Notice of Layoff on each of the Respondent teachers.  104 
permanent/probationary teachers and 61 “temporary” teachers requested a hearing.  At 
hearing, Bonny Pitkinmeyer was added as a Respondent.  Exhibit 6 contains a column 
entitled “Request Hearing Due.”  When an “X” appears in that column, it indicates that the 
corresponding teacher is a Respondent.  Exhibit 6 is hereby incorporated by reference as if 
fully set forth herein as it indicates the 166 Respondent’s at issue.   

 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.      Jodee Brentlinger (Brentlinger), Assistant Superintendent of the District, 

acting in her official capacity, caused all pleadings, notices and other papers to be filed and 
served upon each Respondent pursuant to the provisions of Education Code sections 44949 
and 44955.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.      
 

2.     Respondents are employed by the District as permanent, probationary, intern, 

pre-intern, emergency permitted, waiver, and/or temporary certificated employees of the 
District. 

3.     On March 9, 2010, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the 

Governing Board of the District (Board) issued Resolution numbers 0910-57 and 0910-59 
which approved the recommendation by the Superintendent that notice be given to 
Respondents that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year and stating 
the reasons for that recommendation.  

4.     Prior to March 15, 2009, Respondents were given written notice of the 

recommendation that notice be given to Respondents, pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year 
and stating the reasons for that recommendation.  

5.     

It was established that cause exists, within the meaning of Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955, for not reemploying Respondents, except for Sarah Smith) for the 
ensuing school year for all of the reasons set forth below.  

6.        The District decided the following:  

                       Grades 4 – 6   

The following particular kinds of services of the District will be 
reduced or eliminated no later than the beginning of the 2009-10 school 
year: 

Grades 7 – 12:  

English              

Social Science 

Math 

 

Life Science    

Physical Science  

Spanish     

French  

German 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

25 

FTE1

16 

10 

FTE 

FTE 

10  

FTE 

3 

3 

2 

2 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

                  

2          FTE 

                                                

1  Full- Time Equivalent position(s).  

 

2

Japanese 

PE 

Art 

 

 

Nurses  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SETPD – Teachers on Special Assignment  

 

 

 

 

 

1 

4 

4 

2 

2 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

             ___________________________________________ 

 

             TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS     

            84 

FTE 

 

7.      The Board decided that it is necessary to decrease the number of certificated 

employees as a result of the reduction in services.  These services are “particular kinds of 
services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious, but rather, constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  The Board 
is faced with a budget shortfall and pending contract negotiations with the teachers’ union.      

8.     The reduction or discontinuation of these particular kinds of services is related 

to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular 
kinds of services is necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District 
as determined by the Board.   This reduction is necessary because of budget reductions.  

 
9.      The District properly created its seniority list by determining the first date of 
paid service of each certificated employee and the District will properly utilize reasonable 
“tie-breaker” criteria when necessary.  The District has not yet performed the “tie-breaking” 
calculations.  However, Respondents did not contend that the District’s failure to do so was  
improper.  Further, it was not established that if the tie-breaking calculations had been 
performed it would have resulted in any Respondent not being subject to layoff.  The District 
also “skipped” over some categories of personnel.  Respondents did not challenge these 
“skips” except as discussed below.   
 

10.    The District’s seniority list, Exhibit 25, is hereby incorporated by reference as 

if fully set forth herein.   
  
Respondents Sarah Smith and Josephine Val Logie  
 

11.     The District wishes to retain Sarah Smith because she teaches “Culinary Arts 

Academy” at Aliso Viejo High School.  Smith holds a “preliminary; designated subjects 
vocational education teaching credential” and her credential list six subject areas which 
involve the food industry and hotel and lodging occupations.  Smith’s seniority date is 
February 26, 2007.  Josephine Val Logie (Logie), seniority date December 8, 2003, believes 
she should “bump” the more junior Smith.  Logie holds four credentials, but the two at issue 

 

3

are:  “life; standard designated subjects adult education teaching credential; subject: home 
economics;” and a “life; standard secondary teaching credential; major: home economics 
(academic).”  Logie also established that California State University, Long Beach, has 
recommended her to the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CCTC) for a “5-
year Preliminary Career Technical Education: Full-time; subject authorization: hospitality, 
tourism, and recreation.” Credential.  If this credential was required to be considered, it 
potentially could allow Logie to bump Smith.  However, this credential need not be 
considered by the District because it has not yet been issued and it was not in effect at the 
time notice was given to Logie that her services will not be needed for the 2010-2011 school 
year.   
 

12.    The issue then becomes whether Logie’s currently held credential’s allow her 

to “bump” Smith.   This issue was already litigated and the undersigned agrees with 
Administrative Law Judge Daniel Juarez’s decision in Office of Administrative Hearings 
case number L2008020611 wherein he concluded: 
 

Respondent Josephine Logie, a teacher at Ladera Ranch Middle School, with a 
seniority date of December 8, 2003, argued that she should “bump” another 
teacher, with a seniority date of February 26, 2007, who teaches the Culinary 
Arts Academy at Aliso Niguel High School.  Logie argued that with a single 
subject home arts (home economics) credential, she could teach the culinary 
arts classes.  However, the Culinary Academy classes involve the teaching of 
food industry subject matter, emphasizing the business aspects of the food 
industry, including the restaurant and hotel businesses.  As a vocational 
education program, the Culinary Academy prepares students to move from 
school into the work arena.  In support of her position, Logie asserted that she 
has taught home economics, food and nutrition, and hospitality services when 
engaged with the Los Angeles Unified School District at an earlier time.  
Respondent Logie failed to provide sufficient evidence that her experience and 
credential qualify her to teach the Culinary Arts Academy at Aliso Niguel 
High School.   

While Logie offered some additional evidence of her work experience in the food 

 
   
services industry, she did not establish that her presently held credentials qualify her to teach 
the Culinary Arts Academy.  The District may skip Sarah Smith.   
 
Respondent Craig Cunningham 
 
    
“Academic Intervention” at Tesoro High School.  Cunningham holds a single subject 
credential in business.  He contended that his classes require certain expertise and that he 
does not believe he should be “bumped” by the more senior Jonathan Pierce (Pierce).  
However, Pierce hold a multiple subject teaching credential, with an authorization in 
business.  Thus, Pierce holds the required credential to “bump” the more junior Cunningham.   
 

13.    Craig Cunningham (Cunningham) teaches “College and Career Planning” and 

 

4

14   

Jennifer Todd (Todd) was chosen “Middle School Teacher of the Year.”  She 

15.   Amal Khalil (Khalil) is a high school French teacher and she established that 

 
 
Respondent Jennifer Todd 
 
  
was also recently nominated by Brentlinger for Orange County “Teacher of the Year.”  As 
part of the process,  Brentlinger verified that Todd “will be in the classroom for the 2010-
2011 school year.”  Brentlinger’s verification is dated March 12, 2010, two days after the 
District sent Todd a notice that her services will not be necessary for the 2010-2011 school 
year.   Todd contended that the “Nominee Verification Form” amounts to a contract between 
herself and the District.  While this is an unusual situation, Brentlinger’s statement can not 
override the Board’s decision to reduce particular kinds of services.  Brentlinger’s statement 
does not establish a contract between the parties.   
 
Respondent Amal Khalil 
 
   
she is an outstanding teacher.  She is being “bumped” by a more senior French teacher.  
However, Khalil did not establish that she is being replaced by a junior teacher and/or that 
the teacher does not hold the required credential to teach French.   
 
Respondent Ann Roche 
 
   
nurses to provide care to approximately 57,000 students.  The District proposes to lay off two 
nurses, one of whom is Roche.  Roche contended that the safety of the students will be 
negatively affected if the two nursing positions are eliminated.  However, the District is 
responsible for complying with its obligations under the law and there was no evidence that a 
specific nurse-to-student ration must be maintained.  The District has the discretion to choose 
how provide nursing care to its student. 
 
Attrition  
 
 
March 9, 2010, the date the two resolutions were adopted by the Board, there were 
approximately 10 resignations known to the District.  When the lay off notices were sent, the 
District took this attrition into account “as much as possible.”  For example, some of the 
resignations were from Spanish teachers.  Thus, the two FTE Spanish positions sought be 
eliminated under the resolutions became unnecessary.  As to the remaining attrition, it was 
not established that the attrition occurred in areas where the District seeks reduction, nor was 
it established that any teacher’s position would be saved based on the attrition that occurred 
prior to March 15, 2010.  Further, the District has remedied any possible defect by agreeing 
to account for all attrition prior to issuing final layoff notices.  (Exhibit 26, p. 20, line 20.)  
The Board therefore properly considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements and 
requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 

16.  Ann Roche (Roche) is a school nurse.  The District presently employees eight 

 Susan Carlisle, Human Resources specialist, testified regarding attrition.  On 

17.   

 

5

18.     All other arguments presented by Respondents were unconvincing and were 

delivered to its employees prior to March 15, 2009.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen 
(1983) 144 Cal.App. 3d 627, 636). 
 
    
not established by the evidence.  Respondents’ did not establish that the District did not 
follow the required procedures or that the District acted in an arbitrary and capricious 
manner.  
 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 

Jurisdiction for these proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

 
1.     
44949 and 44955.   
      

2.    

 Each of the services set forth in Finding 6 is a particular kind of service which 

may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and case law.   

 
3. 

 
4. 

The District’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither  

arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.   

Cause exists to reduce the District's teaching positions as described above and 
to give notice to the affected teachers pursuant to Education Code section 44955.  (Campbell 
v. Abbot (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796; Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 
689).  Based on the above Findings, including the preamble to this Proposed Decision, the 
names of the affected teachers, those as to whom final notices of layoff may be given, are as 
follows: All Respondent teachers listed in Exhibit 6 with an “X” in the column entitled 
“Request Hearing Due” except for Sarah Smith as to whom the Accusation is dismissed.   

 
ORDER 

 
Because of the reductions of services, the District may give notice to the teachers 
identified in Legal Conclusion Number. 4 that their services will not be required for the 
2010-2011 school year.  The Accusation is dismissed as to Sarah Smith.  The Distict is also 
ordered to account for any further attrition prior to issuing final layoff notices.  
 
Dated: April ___, 2009. 
                        
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

___________________________ 
CHRIS RUIZ 
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  

 
                         
                                    
                                    
 
 
 
 

 

6

 
 

 

7

