BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
SOUTH PASADENA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 
 
      
 
OAH Case No. 2010030090 
 
 

In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
Kristina Biederman and Other Certificated 
Employees of the Pasadena Unified School 
District, 
 

                                                Respondents. 

 

 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Candace M. Bandoian, Attorney at Law, represented Julie Jennings (Jennings), the 

Administrative Law Judge, Sophie C. Agopian, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
heard this matter on April 19, 2010, in South Pasadena, California. 
 
 
Assistant Superintendent, Personnel Services, of the South Pasadena Unified School District 
(District). 
 
Richa Amar, Attorney at Law, represented 34 certificated employees of the District, 
 
who were present at the hearing.  Two other certificated employees, Cassandra Caskey and 
Natasha Prime, did not appear at the hearing and were not represented by counsel.  The 
hearing proceeded in their absence.  All 36 employees are respondents in this matter 
(Respondents).1
 
 
Pearson, and retain her for the 2010-2011 school year.   Ms. Pearson is not a Respondent in 
this case.  
 
 
 
                                                

Prior to the hearing, the District agreed to dismiss the Accusation against Annalee 

Evidence was received and the matter was submitted for decision on April 19, 2010. 

1 Kristina Biederman, Albert Chung, Lilia Cuervo, Belinda Diaz, Richard Fiedler, 

Noelle Fong, Susan Gendreau, Christina Hansen, Kim Hernandez, Paul Hugasian, Kathryn 
Hutto, Kristen Kato, Tammy Lai, Janet Lim, Allen Lin, Melissa Moon-Burke, Maggie 
Moore, Melissa Muntz, Nan Ng, Valerie Nishikubo, Diana Olivarez, Katherine Perry, Sharon 
Reed, Denise Romano-Tanaka, David Speck, Marcile Vadell-Strickland, Laura Vaden, 
Kristen Kludt, Gigi Leung, Maria Long, Sella Simonian, Soomin Zee, Bethany Budde, 
Cassandra Caskey, Natasha Prime, and Landis Airo. 

 

 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 

 

1. 

2. 

Assistant Superintendent Jennings filed the Accusation in her official capacity. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

3. 

 
On March 1, 2010, the District’s Governing Board (Board) adopted Resolution 
 
No. 2009-2010-30 (Resolution) by which it determined that it will be necessary for the District 
to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2010-2011 school year for a 
total of 40.97 certificated full-time equivalent (FTE) positions, as follows: 
 
Particular Kinds of Programs or Services 

No. of Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) 
Positions 

Counseling Services 

 

DIS2 Counselor 
Elementary 
Middle School 
High School 

Elementary Services 
K-5 Teachers 
Art 

Middle School Services 

Special Education Teacher 
Art 
Physical Education 
6th Grade Science 
6th Grade Social Studies 
6th Grade English 

High School Services 

Band 
Advance Placement Spanish 
Special Education Teacher 
English (including Teacher Specialist 
(.6), ELD3 (.2), Eng. Prep. (.2) 

1.0 
.5 
1.0 
2.0 
 
19.0 
  .8 
 
  .67 
1.0 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
 
.4 
.2 
1.0 
3.0 

                                                

2  “DIS” is an acronym for “designated instruction and services,” which is a “related 

service” available to children with disabilities under the Individuals with Disabilities 
Education Act (20 U.S.C. § 1401).  In this case, a “DIS” counselor is one who provides 
specialized counseling to assist children with special needs to benefit from their educational 
program. (Educ. Code § 56363, subd. (a).) 

 
3  “ELD” refers to English Language Development. 
 

 

2

Math 
Science 
Art 
U.S. History 
Physical Education 

 
Regional Occupational Program (ROP) 

Animation (.2), Graphic Design (.8), 
Computer Application (.4) 
Virtual Business (.4), Small Business 
(.4), Careers in Education (.4) 
Multi-Media Production  (.2) 

1.4 
.4 
.4 
.4 
1.0 

 
1.4 

1.2 

.2 
40.97 

4. 

5. 

All notices and jurisdictional documents were timely and properly served upon 

The Board also determined that the reduction or elimination of the PKS made 

Total FTE Reduction - All Programs 
 
 
it necessary to terminate the employment of certain certificated employees prior to the 
beginning of the 2010-2011 school year.  The Board directed the Superintendent to send 
appropriate notices to all employees whose positions may be lost or reduced by the Board’s 
action. 
 
 
Respondents.  All other procedural requirements of Education Code4 sections 44949 and 
44955, and applicable Government Code provisions have been met.5
 
 
of services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955. 
 
 
Finding 3 was not arbitrary or capricious and constitutes a proper exercise of the Board’s 
discretion.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue such services was related to the 
needs and welfare of the District and its pupils.6  

The certificated services identified in Factual Finding 3 are “particular kinds 

The Board’s decision to reduce or eliminate the PKS set forth in Factual 

6. 

7. 

                                                

4 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 
 
5 Factual Findings 3 through 5 were established by way of a stipulation between the 

District and Respondents who appeared at the hearing and were represented by counsel.  
Respondent Kristina Biederman did not file a timely Notice of Defense, but did not waive 
her right to a hearing based on Government Code section 11506, subdivision (c). 
participation in the hearing  

 
6 Although the Board’s Resolution did not assert that the PKS was related to the needs 

and welfare of the District and its students, Assistant Superintendent Jennings established 
that the reduction in force related to fiscal uncertainties that impact the manner in which the 
District will provide services to its students. 

 

3

9. 

8. 

10. 

District personnel complied with the Board’s directive to reduce the number of 

 
 
certificated employees by implementing the procedures set forth in sections 44949 and 
44955. 
 
 
In determining the number of lay-off notices to issue, the District considered 
all assured and/or known attrition, including resignations and retirements, as of March 19, 
2010.  The District considered attrition after the March 15 deadline to notify affected 
employees of the proposed lay-off in order to determine if any notices could be rescinded.  It 
was not established whether there was any further attrition that would have resulted in the 
rescission of any lay-off notices. 
 
 
To determine the order of termination or lay-off, the District properly created a 
seniority list by determining the date in which each certificated employee first rendered paid 
service to the District in a probationary position, and applying “tie-breaking” criteria when 
necessary.  The parties stipulated that the District properly applied the “tie-breaking” criteria 
set forth in Resolution No. 2009-2010-25, adopted by the Board on February 23, 2010, to 
Respondents.  It was undisputed that the tie-breaking criteria was based on the needs of the 
District and its students, and was correctly applied to determine the order of lay-off.   
 
 
with less seniority is being retained to render a service which any senior Respondent is 
certificated and competent to render.  The District properly permitted senior employees, 
whose positions are subject to lay-off, to “bump” into positions held by junior employees as 
long as the senior employee is certificated and competent to render such service. 
 
 
 
12.  At the hearing, the parties stipulated to the following amendments to the 
seniority list, some of which resulted in the dismissal of certain Accusations by the District: 
 
 
resulting in the dismissal of the Accusation against Ms. Reed. 
 
 
change does not affect Ms. Nishikubo’s lay-off, but may impact her potential 
reemployment.7
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                       

The Accusations against Respondents Gigi Leung and Susan Gendreau are dismissed. 

Respondent Valerie Nishikubo’s seniority date is changed to March 6, 2006.  This 

Respondent Sharon Reed’s seniority date is changed to August 29, 2005, thereby 

Pursuant to the parties’ stipulation, no permanent or probationary employee 

11. 

 
7 Although Respondents’ reemployment rights are not subject to this proceeding, part 

of the stipulation between the parties included the District’s agreement to “honor the 
reemployment rights guaranteed under Education Code sections 44956 and 44957 for those 
certificated employees who are laid off.” 

 

 

4

 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

2. 

 
1. 

 
Jurisdiction for this matter was established pursuant to sections 44949 and 

 
44955, by reason of Finding Findings 1 through 5. 
 
 
A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App. 3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 
 
under sections 44949 and 44955 because the services identified in the Board’s Resolution are 
particular kinds of services that can be reduced or eliminated within the meaning of section 
44955, and because the District established that the reduction of such services is related to 
the welfare of its schools and students pursuant to section 44949, subdivision (c)(3).  (Factual 
Findings 6 and 7.) 
 
 
 

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 

Section 44955, subdivision (b), further provides that: 

4. 

3. 

[T]he services of no permanent employee may be terminated… while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained 
to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and 
competent to render. 
 
[¶]…[¶] 
 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 
same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely 
on the basis of needs of the district and the students thereof. 
 
5. 

The District properly developed and applied tie-breaking criteria to determine the 

 
Cause exists to sustain the Accusations against 33 Respondents because the 
District complied with the requirements of section 44955, subdivision (b), with respect to 
such Respondents, as set forth in Factual Findings 8 through 11, in that: 
 
 
correct order of termination among employees with the same seniority date; and  
 
 
service which a more senior Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
 

The District ensured that no junior certificated employee will be retained to render a 

5

6. 

Cause, therefore, exists to terminate the services of Kristina Biederman, Albert 

 
Chung, Lilia Cuervo, Belinda Diaz, Richard Fiedler, Noelle Fong, Christina Hansen, Kim 
Hernandez, Paul Hugasian, Kathryn Hutto, Kristen Kato, Tammy Lai, Janet Lim, Allen Lin, 
Melissa Moon-Burke, Maggie Moore, Melissa Muntz, Nan Ng, Valerie Nishikubo, Diana 
Olivarez, Katherine Perry, Denise Romano-Tanaka, David Speck, Marcile Vadell-Strickland, 
Laura Vaden, Kristen Kludt, Maria Long, Sella Simonian, Soomin Zee, Bethany Budde, 
Cassandra Caskey, Natasha Prime, and Landis Airo. 
 
 
against remaining Respondents Sharon Reed, Gigi Leung and Susan Gendreau, and retain 
them for the ensuing school year. 
 
 

By reason of Factual Finding 12, cause exists to dismiss the Accusations 

7. 

ORDER 
 

The Accusations against Respondents Sharon Reed, Gigi Leung and Susan Gendreau 

 
Notice may be given to the 33 Respondents identified in Legal Conclusion 6 that their 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Notice shall be given in inverse 
order of seniority. 
 
 
are dismissed pursuant to the parties’ stipulation. 
 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

__________________________________ 
 
 
 

SOPHIE C. AGOPIAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

May 4, 2010   

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

6

