BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
PLEASANT VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Employment Status of: 
 
Teachers of the Pleasant Valley Unified 
School District, 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

    
 
 OAH No. 2010030611 
     
    
     
 
 

 
 

      

PROPOSED DECISION 

Ralph B. Dash, Administrative Law Judge with the Office of Administrative 

Hearings, heard this matter on April 7, 2010, at Camarillo, California.  
 

Sharon J. Ormond, Attorney at Law, represented Pleasant Valley Unified School 

District (District).   
 

Tareq Hishmeh and Robert M. Ostrove, Attorneys at Law, represented the 39 

Respondents named in Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof.   
  

 
Oral and documentary evidence having been received and the matter submitted, the 

Administrative Law Judge makes the following Finding of Facts. 
      

1. 

Luis C. Villegas, Ed. D., Superintendent of the District, acting in his official 

capacity, caused all pleadings, notices and other papers to be filed and served upon 
Respondents pursuant to the provisions of Education Code Sections 44949 and 44955.  All 
pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements have been met with respect to the District and the 
Respondents named in Exhibit A have been met.1  

 

1  Marie French Risk is not named in Exhibit A.  She was duly served with the pleadings in this matter but 

                                                
 
failed to file a Request for Hearing/Notice of Defense.  She appeared at the hearing and requested to be made a 
Respondent in these proceedings.  The District objected to her request, correctly noting that her failure to file a 
Notice of Defense deprived her of a right to a hearing as provided in Education Code section 44949, subdivision (b).  
Ms. French Risk testified, but offered no evidence from which it could be determined that she should be relieved 
from her default under the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure section 473, subdivision (b).  Accordingly, 
although she was permitted to remain at the hearing under representation of Respondents’ counsel, it is found that 
Ms. French Risk shall not be included as a named Respondent in these proceedings. 

2. 

On March 4, 2010, the District's Governing Board adopted a Resolution to 

reduce and discontinue the services of 47.5 full time equivalent (FTE) certificated positions 
for the 2010/2011 school year as follows: 

 

Reduce 6th – 8th Grade Counseling Services 

Reduce Psychologist Services 

Reduce Nurse Services 

Reduce Special Education Mild to Moderate Teaching Services 
Reduce K – 3rd Grade Teaching Services 
Reduce 6th Grade Teaching Services 
Reduce 7th – 8th Grade English Teaching Services 
Reduce 7th – 8th Grade Social Science Teaching Services 
Reduce 7th – 8th Grade Digital Imaging Elective Teaching Services 
Reduce 6th – 8th Grade Physical Education Teaching Services 

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

  3.00 

F.T.E. 

1.00 F.T.E. 

.50 F.T.E. 

2.00 F.T.E. 

30.00 F.T.E. 

6.00 F.T.E. 

1.00 F.T.E. 

2.00 F.T.E. 

1.00 F.T.E. 

1.00 F.T.E. 

47.50 

F.T.E. 

      

 
3. 

 
These services are “particular kinds of services” that may be reduced or 

 
5. 

 
4. 

discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision to 
reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but 
constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of these particular kinds of services related to 
the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds 
of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District as 
determined by the Board.     
 
 
deaths and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices 
to be delivered to its employees as of March 15, 2010.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. 
Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627 at 636 (1983).2   
 
 
permanent teachers in order of each one’s first date of paid service.  Respondents are 
certificated District employees.  Except in one instance, no certificated employee junior to 
any Respondent was retained to perform any services which any Respondent was certificated 
and competent to render.  That exception is with respect to Respondent Rhonda Espinoza, a 
tenured teacher whose seniority date is February 7, 2005.  Ms. Espinoza holds a CLEAR-

The Board properly considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements, 

The District created a seniority list (Exhibit 10) naming all probationary and 

6. 

                                                
 
positively assured attrition to be considered through May 15, 2010. 

2 All layoffs were for particular kinds of service, and not “average daily attendance” which might require 

 

2

Multiple Subject credential with a supplemental certification in English.  After all bumping, 
skipping and tie-breaking criteria were applied, Ms. Espinoza was listed as being laid off 0.4 
FTE, retaining 0.6 FTE (Exhibit 11 at page 20).  Peter Jamieson, a tenured teacher who holds 
a CLEAR single subject-Social Science credential, with a supplemental certification in 
Computer Concepts and Applications, has a seniority date of August 24, 2006, was retained 
in full time employment.  In addition to teaching technology, Mr. Jamieson teaches 
Yearbook, a 0.2 FTE subject.  The District retained Mr. Jamieson over Ms. Espinoza to teach 
Yearbook because of his computer skills.  Because the yearbook is assembled with the use of 
computer technology, the District determined Mr. Jamieson possessed superior skills than 
Ms. Espinoza for purpose of teaching this elective subject. 
 
 
within a single subject credential, which the credential holder may teach.  Under this 
regulation, Yearbook may be taught by the holder of either an Art or English credential only. 
Mr. Jamieson possesses neither.  Education Code section 44258.7, subdivision (c), provides: 
 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80005, sets forth the subjects, 

7. 

(c)  A teacher employed on a full-time basis who teaches kindergarten or any 
of grades 1 to 12, inclusive, and who has special skills and preparation outside 
of his or her credential authorization may, with his or her consent, be assigned 
to teach an elective course in the area of the special skills or preparation, 
provided that the assignment is first approved by a committee on assignments. 
For purposes of this subdivision an "elective course" is a course other than 
English, mathematics, science, or social studies. The membership of the 
committee on assignments shall include an equal number of teachers, selected 
by teachers, and school administrators, selected by school administrators. 

  
The District produced no evidence that it had complied with the above code section when it 
made the determination to skip Ms. Espinoza in favor of retaining Mr. Jamieson.   
 
 
8.  Education Code section 44955 concerns a reduction in the number of a school 
district’s employees.  Job security is not inherent in seniority.  In section 44955, however, the 
Legislature chose to provide teachers with limited job security according to their seniority.  
Students and society, in general, benefit from the Legislature’s choice.  If school districts 
were permitted simply to choose which teachers not to rehire, one could expect some teacher 
to be much more cautious in deciding what to discuss and what ideas to express.  In Board of 
Education v. Round Valley Teachers Association (1996) 13 Cal.4th 269, 278, the Supreme 
Court quoted with approval from Turner v. Board of Trustees (1976) 16 Cal.3d 818.  The 
Turner court noted various interests that are affected by rules regarding the hiring and 
retention of teachers.  The Court said, “Our school system is established not to provide jobs 
for teachers but rather to educate the young.”  (Turner, supra, 16 Cal.3d at p. 825.)  Students 
and society benefit from teachers’ willingness to promote critical discussions of important – 
and sometimes unpopular – topics.  It is primarily for the benefit of students that the seniority 
rights provided in Code section 44955 must be protected. 
 

 

3

9. 

A teacher’s seniority rights are limited, generally, by what he or she is 

certificated and competent to teach and by the courses a district has chosen to offer.  Subject 
to these limitations, a teacher, generally, has a right to be terminated according to his or her 
seniority. 
 

10.  Of course, seniority cannot be used to determine the order of termination of 
teachers who have the same date of hire because they all have the same seniority.  In Code 
section 44955, the Legislature also dealt with the order of termination of teachers with the 
same date of hire.  If there are teachers with the same date of hire and a district is going to 
terminate some but not all of them, the district must determine the order of termination.   
 

11. 

The Legislature treated the two matters very differently.  With regard to the 

limitations on job security among teachers with different dates of hire, the Legislature 
provided very specific standards that a school district must respect.  With regard to the 
circumstance in which there is no seniority, however, the Legislature gave school districts a 
free hand to establish the order of termination according to any criteria the governing board 
chose so long as the criteria are based on needs of the district and students. 
 

12. 

The Legislature also has provided a few justifications for terminating a senior 

teacher while retaining a junior teacher.3  A school district may not create additional 
justifications for doing that.  Creating additional justifications for terminating a senior 
teacher while retaining a junior teacher would deprive the senior teacher of his or her 
seniority rights. 
 

13. 

The Legislature has provided two limitations on a permanent teacher’s right to 

be retained over a probationary or junior teacher.  First, the teacher must be certificated to 
render the service the probationary or junior teacher is rendering.  Second, the teacher must 
be competent to render the service.4  A subsequent provision that limits the rights of both 
permanent and probationary employees speaks in terms of the services their “qualifications” 
entitle them to render.5 
 

14.  A teacher either is or is not certificated to render a service.  A school district 
may not require a higher certification than the law requires.  Creating a super-certification 
requirement for a senior teacher who is certificated to render a service would deprive the 
teacher of his or her seniority rights. 
 

15. 

The question of whether a teacher is competent to render a service has to do 
with his or her specific training and experience as they relate to the duties of a position.  In 
determining whether a teacher is competent to render a service, a district exercises discretion.  
                                                
3 Code § 44955, subd. (d). 
 
4 Id. at § 44955, subd. (b). 
 
5 Id. at § 44955, subd. (c). 
 

 

4

But a district may not, based on some policy that is not focused on competency, determine 
that a senior teacher is not competent.  To permit a district to do that would deprive the 
teacher of his or her seniority rights. 
 

16.  When there are teachers among whom there is no seniority, a district has a 

rather free hand in ranking them for termination so long as the criteria are based on needs of 
the district and students.  As among teachers with different employment dates, however, the 
Legislature has specified the needs that must be the focus of decisions that impact their 
seniority rights.  The Legislature has specified (1) the need to have a teacher who is 
certificated to render a service, (2) the need to have a teacher who is competent to render a 
service, and (3) the need to have a teacher who has the special training and experience 
necessary to teach a course for which a district demonstrates a specific need. 
 
ANALYSIS OF CODE SECTION 44955 
 

17. 

Section 44955, subdivision (b), concerns the seniority rights of permanent 

employees.  That subdivision prohibits a school district from terminating a permanent 
employee while retaining a probationary employee to render a service the permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.  That subdivision also prohibits a school 
district from terminating a permanent employee while retaining any other employee with less 
seniority to render a service the permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.   
 

18. 

The first paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), concerns the seniority 

rights of both permanent and probationary employees.  That paragraph provides that 
employees shall be terminated in the inverse order in which they were employed.  This adds 
nothing to the seniority rights provided to permanent employees by subdivision (b), but it 
does establish seniority rights for probationary employees. 
 

19. 

The second paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), applies to 

“employees.” Thus, it applies to both permanent and probationary employees.  That 
subdivision requires a district to retain senior employees to render services their 
“qualifications entitle them to render.”  There is no definition of “qualifications.”  It is 
reasonable to interpret that term as referring back to the language requiring permanent 
employees to be “certificated and competent.”  With that interpretation, the limitation on the 
seniority rights of probationary employees is the same as the limitation on the seniority rights 
of permanent employees.  They must be certificated and competent to render the service. 
 

20. 

The third paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (b), deals with teachers 
hired on the same date, that is, teachers who have the same seniority.  A governing board 
must develop “specific criteria” to be used in determining the order of termination of 
teachers with the same date of hire, and the criteria must be based on “needs of the district 
and the students.”  Such criteria are commonly referred to as tie-breaking criteria. 
 
 

 

5

21. 

The second paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), does not add to 

teachers’ seniority rights.  It does, however, make it clear that governing boards must make 
assignments in such a way as to protect seniority rights.  Employees must be retained to 
render any service their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.  As noted above, it 
is reasonable to interpret the term “qualifications” as meaning “certificated and competent.”  
Thus, if a senior teacher whose regular assignment is being eliminated is certificated and 
competent to teach a junior teacher’s courses, the district must reassign the senior teacher to 
render that service.  This is commonly referred to as bumping.  The district must then either 
reassign or terminate the junior employee.6 
 

22. 

In Code section 44955, subdivision (d), the Legislature has established four 

justifications for a school district’s skipping over a junior employee, not terminating him or 
her, but terminating a more senior employee.  That is, the Legislature has established four 
justifications for deviating from terminating employees according to their seniority. 
First, a district may skip over a junior teacher and terminate a senior teacher if “the district 
demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study.”  
Second, a district may skip if “the district demonstrates a specific need for personnel . . . to 
provide the services authorized by a services credential with a specialization in . . . pupil 
personnel services.”  Third, a district may skip if “the district demonstrates a specific need 
for personnel . . . to provide the services authorized by a services credential with a 
specialization in . . . health for a school nurse.”  Fourth, a district may skip to maintain or 
achieve “compliance with constitutional requirements related to equal protection . . . .” 
 

23.  A school district may not create justifications for skipping.  The only 
permissible justifications are the four listed in Code section 44955, subdivision (d).  Creation 
of other justifications for skipping would deprive teachers of their seniority rights.  The 
District in this matter failed justify its skipping of Ms. Espinoza, who is certificated to teach 
Yearbook over Mr. Jamieson, who is not so certificated. 
 

1. 

Jurisdiction for these proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code Sections 

Conclusions of Law 
 

44949 and 44955.   
      

2. 

The services set forth in Finding 2 are particular kinds of service which may 
be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and case law.  A district 
may reduce services, within the meaning of Education Code Section 44955, subdivision (b), 
“either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, thereafter, be 
performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered 

                                                

6 The second paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), speaks of the duty of a school board to make 
assignments in such a manner that employees will be retained to render any service “their seniority . . . [entitles] 
them to render.”  (Italics added.)  A teacher’s entitlement to bump a junior teacher out of his or her assignment 
derives from the senior teacher’s seniority.   (Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 
555.)  

 

6

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to deal with 
the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)   

Cause exists because of the reduction in particular kinds of services to reduce 

the District's teaching positions by 47.5 Full Time Equivalents and to give notice to the 
affected teachers pursuant to Education Code Section 44955. (Campbell v. Abbot (1978) 76 
Cal.App.3d 796; Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689).      

The District’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither arbitrary 

nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.  

6. 

Although junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers 

Except as set forth in Findings 6 through 8, no junior certificated employee is 

 
scheduled to be retained to perform services which a more senior employee is certificated 
and competent to render. 
 
 
if the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior 
counterparts lack (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 
399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831), 
the District offered insufficient evidence that it had any justification to skip Ms. Espinoza in 
favor of Mr. Jamieson. 
      

ORDER 

 
As a result of the reductions of services, the District may give notice to all teachers 

listed on Exhibit A that their services will not be required for the 2010/1011 school year; 
provided, however, the District must retain Ms. Espinoza for 0.2 FTE, in addition to the 0.6 
FTE for which she has already been retained. 
 
 
Dated: 
                        

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

___________________________ 
RALPH B. DASH  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  

                         
 
                                    
                                    
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

7

EXHIBIT A 
 
Michele Ackerman 
Jamie Albrent 
Rebecca Almanza-Vujorich 
Lillian Barton 
Tiffany Baker 
Kayce Betzel 
Erica Blumfield 
Shaun Blumfield 
Barbara Broihier 
Tamra Butler-Rice 
Andrew Chambers 
Jessica Cisneros-Elliott 
Keeva Conde 
Marissa Dahme 
Kristin Durley 
Rhonda Espinoza 
Paula-Jeanne Feinberg 
Renee Guiang 
Kent Jacobs 
Gloria Kirk 
Robyn Kodish 
Christina Kyriacou 
Lindsey Lehman 
David Locken 
Kimberly Michaud 
Daryl Myers 
Tanya Narasaki 
Wanda Nealon 
Andrea Nevin 
Michelle Newbold 
Michelle Odle 
Mary Postal 
Timothy Pryor 
Kellie Saylor 
Cheri Toyen 
Lisa Trueblood 
Krista Van Wagner 
Sandra Walk 
 
 
 

8

 

 

