BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE  
OCEANSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2010020345 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Respondents Listed on Exhibit “A.” 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Kelly R. Minnehan, Esq., Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost LLP, represented Luis Ibarra, 

Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of 

With the exception of Respondent Marjorie Schlosser, Jon Y. Vanderpool, Esq., 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Oceanside, California on April 1, 2010. 
 
 
Ed.D., Associate Superintendent, Human Resources, Oceanside Unified School District. 
 
 
Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax, represented Respondents.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Respondent Marjorie Schlosser. 

The matter was submitted on April 1, 2010. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

The Governing Board of the Oceanside Unified School District determined to reduce 

 
 
or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers and other certificated 
employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the competency and 
dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.  
 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 
review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between employees with 
the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in accordance with the 
requirements of the Education Code.  

 

 

1

 

 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

5. 
 
6. 

Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” (Respondents) are probationary or 

permanent certificated employees of the Oceanside Unified School District (District). 

On March 9, 2010, the District’s Governing Board (Board) adopted Resolution 
number 21 (09-10) reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services for the ensuing school 
year and establishing “competency” for purposes of Education Code section 44955.  Further, 
the Board directed the Superintendent to determine which employees’ services would not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year and to take all necessary steps under the law “not to 
employ those certificated employees of the District” because of the reduction and elimination 
of these programs and services. 

On March 10, 2010, Luis Ibarra, the District’s Associate Superintendent, Human 

 
Resources (Associate Superintendent) served Respondents with written notice that he 
recommended not to re-employ them in the 2010-2011 school year and stated the reasons 
therefor.  In addition, the notice advised Respondents of the right to hearing, that the request for 
hearing must be delivered to the District’s office no later than March 17, 2010, and that the 
failure to request a hearing would constitute waiver of the right to a hearing.  

 
Each Respondent submitted a timely request for hearing to determine if there was 

 
cause for not re-employing him or her for the ensuing school year. 

 
On March 19, 2010, the Associate Superintendent made, filed and timely 
served an Accusation for lay-off of certificated employees and related materials on each 
Respondent.  In the packet of materials, the District informed Respondents that the Notice of 
Defense must be delivered to the Board no later than March 24, 2010.  

 
Michele Diekelman filed a Request for Hearing but failed to file a Notice of Defense 

 
in a timely manner.  She made a motion to be allowed to participate in the hearing.  The 
District objected.  After considering the facts, the law and arguments of counsel, the 
District’s objection was overruled, and Michele Diekelman (Respondent Diekelman) was 
allowed to participate as a Respondent in the hearing. 
 
 
of Defense. 
 
 

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 

With the exception of Respondent Diekelman, each Respondent filed a timely Notice 

On March 9, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. (09-10) and thereby 

 
took action to reduce or eliminate the following particular kinds of certificated services 
commencing the 2010-2011 school year: 
 

2

 

 
Services 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Number of Full-time 
Equivalent1 Positions 

 

 

69 

  4 

20 

  1 

  1.2 

      (Secondary Grades) 
 

Teacher – Elementary Grades 
 
Teacher – CORE Teaching Services (Grades 6 -8) 
 
Teacher – Art (Secondary Grades) 
 
Teacher – Biology (Secondary Grades) 
 
Teacher – Intro to Computer Applications 
 
 
Teacher – English (Secondary Grades) 
 
Teacher – Independent Study (Secondary Grades) 
 
Teacher – Industrial Technology  
 
Teacher – Music (Secondary Grades) 
 
Teacher Physical Education (Elementary Grades) 
 
Teacher – Social Science (Secondary Grades) 
 
Teacher – Spanish (Secondary Grades) 
 
 
 
The proposed reductions totaled 117.2 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. 

Total FTE2 

         117.2 

  1 

  2 

  1 

  6 

  6 

  4 

  2 

 

 

 

 

 

 
7. 

The District considered all known attrition, including retirements, resignations 

 
and deaths, in determining the actual number of final layoff notices to be delivered to its 
certificated employees. 
 

8. 

The Associate Superintendent was responsible for implementing the technical 

aspects of the layoff.  The District developed a seniority list that contained, among other 
matters, each employee’s name, seniority date, tie-breaker points, credentials, supplemental 
authorizations, No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Certifications, site and assignment.   
 

                                                 
 
2  
 

Full-time Equivalent.  

 

3

The seniority date was based on the first date of paid service rendered in a 

probationary position.3  

 
9. 

In reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services, the services of no 

permanent employee may be terminated while retaining any employee with less seniority to 
render a service that said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.4  The 
District used the seniority list for permanent and probationary certificated employees to 
develop a proposed order of layoff and “bumping” list to determine the least senior 
employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced.  Then, the District 
determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another area that would 
entitle them to “bump” other junior employees.  In determining who would be laid off for 
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions and determined 
the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  The District then checked the 
credentials of affected individuals to determine whether they could “bump” other employees.  
The District retained employees who satisfied “competency” criteria established by the 
Board in its resolution, which states, in pertinent part: 
 

“WHEREAS, it will be necessary to retain certificated employees who possess 
special training or experience, which other certificated employees with more seniority do not 
possess, to teach a specific course of study: 
 

1.  Six or more certificates within the “core” subject areas of science, English, math, 
or social science, which certificates demonstrate “Highly Qualified” status as 
contemplated in the No Child Left Behind Act; 

 
2.  Completion of “Paxton Patterson Modules” training seminar within the past four 
school years, together with implementation of the Paxton Patterson Modules 
concepts in the employee’s assigned area of teaching within the past two years; 

 
3.  Possession of a single subject teaching credential in Physical Education and a 
Supplemental Authorization in Dance issued by the California Commission on 
Teacher Credentialing, together with two years of teaching experience, within the 
past six years, in a specialized dance program at the 9th – 12th grade level; 

 
4.  Demonstrated experience, knowledge and skills in the area of assisting teachers, 
planning and implementing in-service trainings, planning, implementing, and 
evaluating the school plan, coordinating parent advisory groups, and assisting in 
the referral process for remediation together with three years of teaching 
experience and current experience as a School-Based Resource Teacher. 

 

Education Code section 44845. 

                                                 
3  
 
4  
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b). 

 

4

5.  Demonstrated experience, knowledge and skills in the area of curriculum and 

instruction as evidenced by completion of the following activities during one of 
the two most recent school years; participating in developing and drafting the 
language arts scope and sequences of document for grades K-10; participation in 
developing and drafting the mathematics scope and sequences for grades K-7; 
possession and utilization of knowledge of all core standards in all K-12 grades; 
led multiple staff development trainings concerning professional development 
presentations, including but not limited to implementation of language arts and 
mathematics scope & sequences; navigation and utilization of the Follett Library 
System computer program; navigation and utilization of the ESCAPE computer 
system to order district consumable core materials; and acted as a liaison to the 
science center and warehouse.” 

 
10. 

 
11. 

The District asserts that no junior employee is being retained to perform a 

service that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.  Certain 
Respondents disagreed. 

The District skipped and retained Bradley Hamby (Hamby).  The Associate 

Superintendent testified that the District did not notice Hamby because he possesses the 
competency described in paragraph 2 of the Board’s Resolution (Finding 10), and no 
certificated employee with more seniority does. 

 
The Associate Superintendent explained that the “Paxton Patterson Modules” are 

integrated in the Career Tech Lab course at Chavez Middle School (Chavez) — and no other 
middle school in the District — because of the relationship between the ROP program at 
Chavez and El Camino High School (El Camino).  Chavez is the District’s newest middle 
school, now three years old.  Students who take the career tech lab course at Chavez are 
introduced to a variety of career technical pathways in 20-day modules.  For example, 
students at Chavez may take a 20-day computerized architectural design module at Chavez, 
and thereafter take a one-year course as an elective at El Camino.  In other words, the 
modules provide the students an opportunity to explore a range of interests to assist in 
identifying which courses to take in high school. 

 
The Associate Superintendent described the training and skills necessary to teach the 

“Paxton Patterson Modules.”  No special credential or qualification under NCLB is required.  
However, a five-day course in Michigan is necessary; thereafter, the teacher receives a 
certificate.  In the training, the teacher learns to use the modules and the intricacies of the 
program.  Company staff provides hardware and software and assists with setting up the 
school’s lab and troubleshooting issues.  In the classroom, the teacher facilitates the use of 
computer software as students work through various modules, troubleshooting and assisting 
them.  The teacher is in contact with the company’s staff as changes and improvements are 
made to the program. 

 
Hamby has a seniority date of August 25, 2000, and holds a multiple subject 
credential.  For at least the past two years, he has been assigned to Chavez, teaching 
Computer Tech Lab and READING 180.  He has taken the “Paxton Patterson Modules” 

 

5

training seminar within the past four school years and has implemented the Paxton Patterson 
concepts in his assigned area of teaching within the past two years. 

 
Respondent Rachel Chambers (Respondent Chambers) argued that she is certificated 
and competent to teach the “Paxton Patterson Modules.”  She has the same seniority date as 
Hamby, holds a multiple subject credential, a supplemental authorization in Introduction to 
English, is highly qualified under NCLB in English and “RDG/LA.”5  She has not taken the 
training necessary to teach the “Paxton Patterson Modules” nor has she taught the program in 
the District.  However, she is ready and willing to do so.  

 
Given the foregoing facts, the District established that it has a need for a certificated 
teacher who has the training and skills to incorporate the “Paxton Patterson Modules” in the 
Career Tech Lab class at Chavez and has experience doing so.  By this standard, Hamby is 
competent.  Neither Respondent Chambers nor any other Respondent established that he/she 
is competent to perform the service that Hamby is being retained to perform.  There is no 
more senior employee who is competent to displace Hamby.   

 
12. 

The District skipped and retained Justin Kern (Kern), Dana Spencer (Spencer), 

Jonathan Stone (Stone) and Donna Wilkins (Wilkins) because these are the most senior 
certificated teachers who satisfy the competency criteria described in paragraph 4 of the 
Board’s resolution.   

 
The Associate Superintendent testified regarding the District’s need for the School 

Based-Resource Teacher (SBRT), the special skills and training required and the service 
provided.  

 
An SBRT is a teacher (because he/she is part of the bargaining unit) and quasi-
administrator, and the position requires a wide range of knowledge, demonstrated leadership 
skills, and performance of a variety of duties.  In order to become an SBRT, the teacher 
applies for the position and is interviewed by the principal, based on the principal’s criteria.  
If selected, the SBRT receives a stipend.  In this District, the SBRT is typically assigned to 
an elementary school; however, one is assigned to King Middle School. 

 
The District seeks to retain any SBRT who has “demonstrated experience, knowledge 

and skills in the area of assisting teachers, planning and implementing in-service trainings, 
planning, implementing, and evaluating the school plan, coordinating parent advisory groups, 
and assisting in the referral process for remediation together with three years of teaching 
experience and current experience” as an SBRT.  

 
The District provided evidence to establish its need to retain experienced SBRTs.  
Among other things, the Associate Superintendent testified that retention of experienced 
SBRTs would assist in reducing the “damage” associated with the reduction or elimination of 
particular kinds of services in the District.  Further, both the Associate Superintendent and 
Rand Johnston (Johnston), a principal in the District, explained that the District is a program 

                                                 
5  

No evidence was offered to establish the meaning of “RDG/LA.” 

 

6

improvement year three district and concerning the significance of the foregoing.  Johnston 
testified that his school is a program improvement year one, likely to go to program 
improvement year two; as a result, the District has an effective schools plan (ESP) that was 
developed by the District in conjunction with the San Diego County Office of Education.  
Johnston described the elements of the ESP and explained that the goal of the ESP is to 
remove the District and its schools from program improvement status.  The SBRTs (along 
with administrators) are instrumental in working on the school site plan to achieve the goals 
established in the ESP.  If the District is not removed from program improvement status, 
administrators and staff can be removed and/or the District can be taken over by the State of 
California.  Given the foregoing, the District does not have time for teachers to be trained 
and gain experience as SBRTs.  

 
13.  According to the evidence, Kern, Spencer, Stone, and Wilkins are certificated 

teachers who have various seniority dates and credentials, but all satisfy the Board’s 
competency criteria as SBRTs.  

 
Respondents Chambers and Valerie Hillhouse-Shokes (Respondent Hillhouse-
Shokes) each testified that she has the skills, and, therefore, is qualified to be assigned as an 
SBRT.  In fact, the parties stipulated that there are noticed Respondents more senior to Kern, 
Spencer, Stone and Wilkins who have “demonstrated experience, knowledge and skills in the 
area of assisting teachers, planning and implementing in-service trainings, planning, 
implementing, and evaluating the school plan, coordinating parent advisory groups, and 
assisting in the referral process for remediation.”  However, there is no Respondent who has 
current experience and assignment as an SBRT. 

 
Given the facts in Findings 13 and 14, the District established that it has a need for 

certificated teachers who have the training, skills, and current experience as a SBRT.  Kern, 
Spencer, Stone and Wilkins are each certificated and competent to serve as SBRT.  There is 
no more senior employee who possesses the competency to bump Kern, Spencer, Stone 
and/or Wilkins. 
 
14. 

The Board adopted tie-breaker criteria (Board Resolution No. 14 (09-10) to 
determine the order of termination of employees with the same seniority date, as follows: 
 

“The governing board of the district hereby adopts the following resolution 

 
regarding tie-breaking criteria for seniority order in reduction in service layoff.  The 
Education Code, section 44955, provides for the reduction of permanent certificated 
staff under certain conditions, and further provides that, “As between employees who 
first rendered service to the district on the same date, the governing board shall 
determine the order of termination solely on the basis of the needs of the district and 
the students thereof.”  In order to prepare for the possibility of such an event, the 
governing board adopts the following criteria for the determination of the order of 
termination of employees who first rendered service to the district on the same date.  
The employee with the most points is entitled to preference in seniority, but only as 
between two people who first rendered service on the same date. 

 

 

7

 

  Need:  Staff with appropriate credentials and training to meet program requirements 

 

10 

Per additional degree 

20 
15 

10 

 

                         
Certification authorization in areas of critical needs: 
a. 
b. 

Special Education 
 
 
Single Subject Math (Primary Credential)   

 

 

 

 

 

        Points 

 
Special skills and experience: 
 
National Board Certified Teacher 
a. 
Need:  Broadly trained staff with wide experience 
 
Advanced degree(s)    
 
Need:  Staff that keeps current with subject matter and  

 

 

 

 

 

trends 

Each additional primary credential   

Breadth of teaching experience: 
a. 
b.     Each supplemental credential 
Need:  Flexibility in difficult times; staff able to teach  

   

 
 

15 
  5 

several subjects on several levels.   

Service to the school and students: 
a. 

10 

Recent service (within last three years) as:   
Department Chair – High School 
Grade Level Team Leader – Middle School 
Head Teacher – Elementary School  
Co- or Extra-curricular activities (within last three years)  
as listed below 
(per activity, up to 15 points) 

 

 
b. 

 
*Item 5 only pertains to permanent employees. 
Need:  Staff that will support students, student activities, and provide leadership to 
 

students and staff 

  5 

   

 

ADVISORS 
 
Director – Athletics  

  COACHES 
 
Head Varsity Football 
Boys Athletic Trainer (fall, winter, spring)  Director – Marching Band 
Girls Athletic Trainer (fall, winter, spring)  Director – Student Activities 
Boys Head Varsity Baseball 
Boys Head Varsity Basketball 
Girls Head Varsity Basketball 
Boys Head Varsity Cross Country 
Girls Head Varsity Cross Country 
Boys Head Varsity Golf 
Girls Head Varsity Golf 
Girls Head Varsity Gymnastics 
Boys Head Varsity Soccer 

Forensics Coach 
Debate Coach 
Director – Choir (fall, spring) 
Director – Drill Team/Color Guard 
Drama Coach 
Asst. Director – Marching Band (fall, spring) 
Choir Accompanist (fall, spring) 
Director – Dance (fall, spring) 
Director – Orchestra 

8

 

 
 

 
1. 

2. 

 
 
3. 
 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 

 

 

 

Girls Head Varsity Soccer 
Girls Head Varsity Softball 
Boys Head Varsity Swimming 
Girls Head Varsity Swimming 
Boys Head Varsity Tennis 
Girls Head Varsity Tennis 
Boys Head Varsity Track 
Girls Head Varsity Track 
Boys Head Varsity Volleyball 
Girls Head Varsity Volleyball 
Boys Head Varsity Water Polo 
Girls Head Varsity Water Polo 
Head Varsity Wrestling 
Boys Assistant Varsity Baseball 
Boys Head Freshman Baseball 
Boys Head J.V. Baseball 
Boys Assistant Varsity Basketball 
Boys Head Freshman Basketball 
Boys Head J.V. Basketball 
Girls Assistant Varsity Basketball 
Girls Head Freshman Basketball 
Girls Head J.V. Basketball 
Assistant Varsity Football 
Head Freshman Football 
Boys Head J.V. Football 
Boys Head J.V. Golf 
Girls Head J.V. Golf 
Head J.V. Gymnastics 
Assistant Varsity Soccer 
Boys Head Freshman Soccer 
Girls Head Freshman Soccer 
Boys Head J.V. Soccer 
Girls Head J.V. Soccer 
Girls Assistant Varsity Softball 
Girls Head Freshman Softball 
Girls Head J.V. Softball 
Assistant Varsity Swimming 
Boys Head J.V. Tennis 
Girls Head J.V. Tennis 
Boys Assistant Varsity Track 
Girls Assistant Varsity Track 
Boys Assistant Varsity Volleyball 
Girls Assistant Varsity Volleyball 
Boys Head J. V. Volleyball 
Boys Head Freshman Volleyball 
Girls Head Freshman Volleyball 

  Band 
  Choir 
  Orchestra 
  ASB 
  Yearbook 

Director – Percussion (fall, spring) 
Director – Rally Group (fall, winter) 
Director – Tall Flags (fall, spring) 
Varsity Academic League Coach 
Asst. Academic League Coach 
Asst. Director – Rally Group (fall) 
Director – Stage/Concert Band 
Journalism Advisor 
Show Choir Choreographer (fall, spring) 
Yearbook Advisor 
Middle School Advisors 
  Designated Advisors: 
 
 
 
 
 
Safety Patrol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

9

Girls Head J.V. Volleyball 
Head Freshman Wrestling 
Head J.V. Wrestling 
Assistant Freshman Football 
Assistant J.V. Football 
Weight/Strength Coach (fall, winter, 
spring) 
Middle School Coaches 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Lottery / Number Drawing Provision 
 
If, after application of the above-listed tie-breaking criteria, any two or more 
 
certificated employees who first rendered paid service in a probationary position to 
the district (“FDPS”) on the same date also have the same number of tie-breaking 
points, the following procedure will be applied to determine the order of layoff of 
those employees:  there shall be one numbered ticket in the “hat” for each person who 
has both the same “FDPS” and number of tie-breaking points.  Each of these 
employees shall draw a ticket from the hat, until all of the tickets are gone.  The 
employees shall draw in alphabetical order (by last name and then first name).  The 
order of layoff shall be arranged according to the numbers drawn by these employees, 
with the employees being laid off in numerical order, from lowest number to highest.  
For example, the person who drew the number “1” will be the first to be laid off, 
followed by the person who drew number “2,” and so on.  For any person for whom a 
number needs to be drawn but who is not present when it is their turn to draw, the 
Superintendent’s designee shall draw for the absent person.” 

For purposes of determining the order of layoff, the District has the discretion to 

 
 
establish criteria for purpose of breaking ties.  There is insufficient evidence in the record to 
establish that application of the District’s tie-breaker criteria was unfairly applied or is 
otherwise arbitrary or capricious. 
 

15. 

The services that the District proposed to reduce were “particular kinds of 

services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  

 
16. 

 
The District’s reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services 
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
of the District as determined by the Board.  

 
17.  No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform 

 
services that any Respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

 

10

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
 
Oceanside Unified School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The 
cause for the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to 
the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  
 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the 

3. 

4. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

5. 

No employee with less seniority than any Respondent is being retained to 

continuing position which he/she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior 
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Lacy vs. 
Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 469.)  
 
 
render a service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
the law and therefore rejected. 
 
 

All arguments not addressed herein are not supported by the evidence and/or 

6. 

ORDER 
 

The Accusations served on Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” are sustained.  Notice 

shall be given to Respondents before May 15, 2010 that their services will not be required for 
the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of 
services. 
 
 
DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
VALLERA J. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

11

Respondents 
Oceanside Unified School District 
Exhibit “A” 

1.  Bouret, Tara 
2.  Chambers, Rachel 
3.  Doyle, Becky 
4.  Dudley, Lisa 
5.  Fairchild, Nicole 
6.  Flanagan, Teresa 
7.  Fruin, Johanna 
8.  Gonzales, Lisa 
9.  Hillhouse-Shokes, Valerie 
10. Hogue, Lorrah 
11. Hovenden, Matthew 
12. Hueth, Dave 
13. Hutchison, Timothy 
14. Kassis-Dikiy, Stephani 
15. Leaverton, Sheri 
16. Lindsey, Bonnie 
17. Luft, Jeffrey 
18. Luther, Julie 
19. Mackenzie, Suzanne 
20. Madueno, Marcelina 
21. McConchie, Briar 
22. McGuire, Patricia 
23. McNaughton, Paula 
24. Messerschmitt, Diane 
25. Methven, Keith 
26. Meza-Magallanes, Lydia 
27. Mossa-Mariani, Victoria 
28. Murchison, Constance 
29. Obrite, Lynn 
30. Riley, Jacqueline 
31. Rockdale, Kristy 
32. Schlosser, Marjorie 
33. Shaw, Holly 
34. Steiner, Patricia 
35. Thielen, Karyn 
36. Windham, Daniel 
37. Wright II, Kenneth 
38. Zendejas, Kristin 
39. Zimny, H. Carmel 
40. Johnson Cynthia 
41. Diekelman, Michele 

 
 

 

 

12

