+BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF  
THE BEVERLY HILLS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

    OAH No. 2010030101    
    
     
 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
Certificated Employees of the Beverly Hills 
Unified School District: 
 
JENNIFER POSTLEWAITE 
ASHLEY IRELAND 
LAURA MITCHELLE 
REBECCA METRANO 
EMILY MCCOWAN 
KATHRYN FEELEY 
ALEXANDER BREITMAN 
LYNEE HENEIDI 
MELISSA JOSEPH 
KEVIN CUTLER 
 
 
Teachers of the Beverly Hills Unified School 
District 
 
 
 
 
 

             Respondents. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

      

(District).    

Chris Ruiz, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative 

Hearings, heard this matter on April 7, 2010, at 255 S. Lasky Drive, Beverly Hills, 
California.    
 

Aaron O’Donnell, Esq., represented the Beverly Hills Unified School District 

 
Deborah Eshaghian, Esq., represented all Respondent teachers (Respondents), with 

the exception of those who did not file a Notice of Defense.     

 
            
              
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.      Jerry  Gross,  Superintendent  of  the  District,  acting  in  his  official  capacity, 
caused all pleadings, notices and other papers to be filed and served upon each Respondent 
pursuant to the provisions of Education Code Sections 44949 and 44955.  The parties, by and 
through  their  counsel,  stipulated  that  all  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been 
met.   
 

2.     Respondents are employed by the District as permanent, probationary, intern, 
pre-intern,  emergency  permitted,  waiver,  and/or  temporary  certificated  employees  of  the 
District. 

3.     On February 25, 2010, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, 
the Governing Board of the District (Board) issued a written Resolution (number 2009-2010-
014)  which  approved  the  recommendation  by  the  Superintendent  that  notice  be  given  to 
Respondents that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year and stating 
the reasons for that recommendation.  

4.     On  March  24,  2010,  Respondents  were  given  written  notice  of  the 
recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year 
and stating the reasons for that recommendation.   The District served a Notice of Layoff on 
each of the teacher Respondents.  Laura Mitchelle, Emily McCowan, and Lynne Heneidi did 
not file a Notice of Defense and were not present at the hearing.   

5.      The  evidence  established  that  cause  exists,  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  for  not  reemploying  Respondents  for  the  ensuing  school 
year for all of the reasons set forth below.  

6.        The District decided the following:  

The following particular kinds of services of the District will be 
reduced or eliminated no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 
school year: 

                       K – Fifth grade teachers 

 

English Teacher, grades 9-12 

Math Teacher, grades 9-12                                     1 

Phys. Ed. Teacher, grades 9-12 

1 

FTE 

6 

1 

FTE1

FTE 

FTE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                

1  Full- Time Employee position(s).  

2

 

 

Director, Curriculum and Assessment 

 

1 

FTE 

             ___________________________________________ 

             TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSTIONS       10.0   FTE 

 

7.      The Board decided that it is necessary to decrease the number of certificated 

employees as a result of the reduction in services.  These services are “particular kinds of 
services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious; rather, it constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  Alex 
Cherniss (Cherniss), Director of Human Resources, testified that the Board’s decision was 
based on budgetary cutbacks.  Further, while Cherniss was not fully aware of how the 
“tiebreaking” criteria was established, his testimony did establish that said criteria was 
modified from past years’ criteria and is based on the present needs of the District.   

8.     The reduction or discontinuation of these particular kinds of services is related 

to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular 
kinds of services is necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District 
as determined by the Board.   This reduction is necessary because of budget reductions.   

 
9.     The Board properly considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements 
and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees as of March 15, 2010.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen 
(1983) 144 Cal.App. 3d 627 at 636).   
 

10.     The District properly created its seniority list by determining the first date of 

paid service of each certificated employee and properly utilized reasonable “tie-breaker” 
criteria when necessary.     
 

11.     The District provided the ALJ with a list of the teachers’ positions at issue.  

That list was marked after the conclusion of the hearing as exhibit 15.  The list only indicated 
9 FTE positions to be eliminatted.  For reasons that were not established, the “Director” 
position was no longer at issue at the time of the hearing.   
 

12.    Respondent Joseph (Joseph) is a .6 FTE.  She teaches physical education for .4 

FTE and a special dance class for .2 FTE.  She established that her correct seniority date is 
November 1, 2008.  Her contention that her seniority date should be October 4, 2008, the 
date she took and passed the “C-Best” test, was not convincing.  Education Code section 
44845 requires that a teacher be certified and probationary, which Joseph was not until 
November 1, 2008.  Even with her corrected seniority date, Joseph is still subject to layoff as 
there is still no less senior physical education teacher.    
 

13.    The District “skipped” Joseph regarding her .2 FTE dance class.  Respondent 

Cutler (Cutler) is a .6 FTE and is also a physical education teacher.  He contended that he 

 

 

 

3

could teach the dance class and thus he should “bump” the less senior Joseph.  His seniority 
date is October 27, 2008, making him four days more senior than Joseph.   
 

14.   

Joseph and Cutler both have a credential authorizing them to teach physical 

education classes.  Cutler’s contention that he should bump into Joseph’s .2 FTE dance class 
was not convincing.  In sum, the District “skipped” Joseph with respect to her dance class, 
which requires specialized experience and knowledge regarding dance.  Joseph has such 
specialized experience, training, and knowledge.  While Cutler has some gymnastics training 
and he took a few university courses regarding dance, he has not taught dance at any high 
school.  Thus, the District established a specific need and reason for “skipping” Joseph as to 
her dance class.   
   
 

15.     Education Code Section 44955, subdivision (d), states:   

 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to 

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate 
from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for 
either of the following reasons: 
 
 
  (1) 
  teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide services 
   authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either 
  pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the 
  certificated employee has special training and experience necessary 
    to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services 
    which others with more seniority do not possess. 
 
  (2) 
For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 
    constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws. 
 
16.   There is thus a two prong test under subdivision (d)(1) for skipping a junior 
employee: (1) a district must demonstrate a specific need for a specific course or course of 
study; and (2) the junior employee has the special training to teach the course which a more 
senior teacher does not.  The District sustained its burden with respect the Dance class that 
Joseph teaches and with respect to establishing a specific need to retain Joseph.  Joseph 
possesses the necessary training and experience required under Education Code Section 
44955, subdivision (d), to be properly skipped.     
 

17.     Respondents contended that “fractional” portions of a FTE position cannot be 

subject to layoff.   The undersigned is unaware of any statute which prohibits eliminating 
portions of a position.  It would be unfair to “skip” a teacher merely because he/she was a 
“fractional” employee in order to layoff a more senior FTE.   
 

18.     Respondents Breitman, Ireland, Postlewaite, and Feeley testified.  It was 

established that they are dedicated and devoted to their chosen profession.   

 

 

4

 

 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 

Jurisdiction for these proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code Sections 

 
1.     
44949 and 44955.   
      

 
3. 

 
4. 

2.    

 Each of the services set forth in Findings 5 and 6 is a particular kind of 

service which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and 
case law.   

The District’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither  

arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.   

Cause exists to reduce the District's teaching positions as described above and 
to give notice to the affected teachers pursuant to Education Code Section 44955. (Campbell 
v. Abbot (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796; Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 
689).  Based on the above Findings, including the preamble to this Proposed Decision, the 
names of the affected teachers, those as to whom final notices of layoff may be given, are as 
follows: 
 

JENNIFER POSTLEWAITE 
ASHLEY IRELAND 
REBECCA METRANO 
KATHRYN FEELEY 
ALEXANDER BREITMAN 
MELISSA JOSEPH   ( .4 FTE) 
KEVIN CUTLER  (.6 FTE) 
 

ORDER 

 
Because of the reductions of services, the District may give notice to the teachers 
identified in Legal Conclusion No. 4 that their services will not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year. 
 
 
Dated: April ___, 2010. 
                        
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

___________________________ 
CHRIS RUIZ 
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  

                         
 
                                    
                                    
 
 
 

5

 
 
 

 

6

