BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
OAK PARK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In The Matter of the Reduction-in-Force 
of Certificated Staff of: 
 
OAK PARK UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
OAH No. 2010030314 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Warren S. Kinsler, Attorney at Law, represented the Oak Park Unified School 

H. Stuart Waxman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 15, 2010, at the Oak Park 
High School, Oak Park, California. 
 
 
District (District). 
 
 
 
 
Respondents, Tawnya Watson, Cindy Stephens, and Becky Koch. 
 

Richard J. Schwab, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents1.    

At the outset of the hearing, the District rescinded the Accusations against 

The matter was submitted on April 15, 2010. 

                                                 
 

1 The respondents did not personally appear at the hearing. 

1

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
The Governing Board of the Oak Park Unified School District (Board) 
determined to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers 
and other certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related 
to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to 
be reduced or eliminated.   
 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process 

involving review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in 
accordance with the requirements of the Education Code.  
  
  

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.  Anthony Knight, Ed.D., is the Superintendent of the District. 

2.  Between March 10, and March 12, 2010, the District served on each 

 
 
 
 
respondent a written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to 
respondents pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services 
would not be required for the next school year.  Each written notice set forth the 
reasons for the recommendation and noted that 11.5 full time equivalent (FTE) 
positions would be reduced and/or discontinued.   
 

3.  Notice was served by personal service on all respondents except for 

Heather Powers, who was served by certified mail because she was on maternity 
leave and was not on campus.   
 
 
4.  As it did last year, the District served the respondents with a single packet 
containing the notices and all other documents mandated in Education Code2 sections 
44949 and 44955, and Government Code section 11500 et seq.  The packet included the 
Accusation and a combined Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense form.  The 
respondents were given through and including March 26, 2010, to request a hearing, a 
time commensurate with or in excess of the statutory deadlines for requesting a hearing 
and filing a Notice of Defense.  District personnel chose this “one-step” process over the 
“two-step” process set forth in the Code because they reasoned that any respondent who 
filed a Request for Hearing would, in all probability, file a Notice of Defense to the 
Accusation.  Therefore, the “one-step” would streamline the process and make it easier 
on the respondents requesting a hearing. 
 
/// 
 

                                                 
 

2 All statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise indicated. 

 

2

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

6.  Timely Requests for Hearing/Notices of Defense were filed by or on behalf 

NUMBER OF FULL TIME
EQUIVALENT POSITIONS

8.  On March 1, 2010, in Resolution No. 10-07, the Board took action to 

7.  Respondents in this proceeding are probationary or permanent certificated 

5.  The District considered teachers Erik Amerikaner, Ken Paulson, and 
 
Brenda Pasqua to be temporary employees with respect to their positions in the ROP 
program.  However, it served “precautionary” notices on those individuals in the 
event that any or all of them chose to challenge that designation.  Neither Mr. 
Amerikaner, Mr. Paulson, nor Ms. Pasqua filed a Request for Hearing/Notice of 
Defense3. 
 
 
of those respondents who desired a hearing.   
 
 
employees of the District. 
 
 
reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 
school year: 
 
SERVICES 
 
 
 
Elementary Music Instruction 
 
Elementary Classroom Instruction   
Elementary Counseling Services 
 
Middle School Instrumental Music Instruction 
High School Video Production 
Middle School Technology   
Secondary Special Education Instruction 
Secondary Counseling Services 
ROP Computer Instruction   
ROP Athletic Training 
 
ROP Cabinet-Making & Architecture 
 
Total   
 
 
vacancies in School Year 2009-2010 due to retirements, release of temporary 
teachers, and resignations.   
 
/// 
 
                                                 
  
retained in those positions for the upcoming school year and received layoff notices 
only in connection with the ROP program.  Ms. Pasqua teaches only in the ROP 
program. 

9.  Subsequent to adoption of the Board’s Resolution, the District identified 

2.6 
2.0 
1.0 
0.1 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
2.0 
0.5 
0.4 
0.5 

3 Mr. Amerikaner and Mr. Paulson also teach in the regular program.  They are 

          11.5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

10.  Board Resolution 10-09 established tie-breaker criteria for determining 

 
the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the 
same date.  It provided that the order of termination shall be based on the needs of the 
District. 
 
 
11.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 
dates (first date of paid service as a probationary employee), current assignments and 
locations, advanced degrees, credentials, and authorizations.  Credential and 
authorization data are obtained from the records of the County Office of Education, at 
which certificated employees must register such documents.   
 

12.  The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and 
“bumping” list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services 
being reduced.  The District then determined whether the least senior employees held 
credentials in another area and were entitled to “bump” other employees.  In 
determining who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District 
counted the number of reductions not covered by the known vacancies, and 
determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  The District 
then checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they could “bump” 
other employees.   
 
 
breaker criteria of Board Resolution No. 10-09.   
 
 

13.  The District used information from its seniority list to apply the tie-

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2.  Respondents argued that the “one-step” notice packet the District used is 

1.  All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955 were met. 
 
 
fatally flawed because it does not comply with the requirements in the Education and 
Government Codes.  Therefore, they asserted, jurisdiction does not exist to reduce the 
particular kinds of services authorized by the Board.  The District argued that the 
issue was raised in last year’s hearing, that the Administrative Law Judge decided the 
issue in the District’s favor at that time, that the District adopted the Administrative 
Law Judge’s Proposed Decision, and that the respondents did not contest the decision 
in a higher court.  Therefore, the District argued, the respondents are collaterally 
estopped from raising the issue again this year.  Secondly, the District asserted that, 
even if collateral estoppel does not preclude the issue, the rationale of the 
Administrative Law Judge last year was sound and is applicable to this year’s 
proceeding.  Lastly, the District argued that, even if the “one-step” process does not 
comply with applicable law, it is a non-substantive, non-prejudicial, procedural error 
that does not justify dismissing the charges.  (§ 44949, subd. (c)(3).)  The District is 
correct. 

 

4

3.  In order to establish collateral estoppel, several threshold requirements 

 
must be met.  First, the issue sought to be precluded from litigation must be identical 
to that decided in a former proceeding.  Second, this issue must have been actually 
litigated in the earlier action.  Third, it must have been necessarily decided in the 
earlier action.  Fourth, the decision in the former proceeding must be final and on the 
merits.  Finally, the party against whom preclusion is sought must be the same as, or 
in privity with, the party to the former proceeding.  (See, Zapata v. Department of 
Motor Vehicles (1991) 2 Cal.App.4th 108, 112.) 
 
 
4.  Collateral estoppel may be applied to prior decisions made by 
administrative agencies when the agency acts in a judicial capacity and resolves 
disputed issues of fact properly before it.  The prior proceeding should possess a 
judicial character, be conducted in an impartial manner, provide the parties with the 
opportunity to examine and cross-examine witnesses under oath and offer other 
evidence and argument.  A record of the proceedings should be maintained.  The 
resulting decision should be adjudicatory in nature.  (People v. Sims (1982) 32 Cal.3d 
468.) 
 
 
5.  The privity requirement for collateral estoppel is satisfied when the 
relationship between the party against whom collateral estoppel is asserted and the 
unsuccessful party in the earlier action are sufficiently close to justify the imposition 
of collateral estoppel.  In this case, the respondents are either the same in both actions 
or are sufficiently close by virtue of their being probationary or permanent certificated 
employees of the same school district who have been served notices that their services 
will not be required for the following school year because of reductions or 
eliminations of particular kinds of services, and who received the District’s one-step 
packet. 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

 

5

6.  The elements of collateral estoppel are met in this case, and Respondents 

 
are precluded from raising the issue again.  Even in the absence of collateral estoppel, 
in finding that all jurisdictional requirements had been met, the reasoning of the 
Administrative Law Judge in last year’s hearing is applicable to this year’s hearing.  
That reasoning is repeated verbatim below, and is incorporated as legal conclusions 
herein: 
 

Respondents argue that the process utilized by the District in 

 
providing all required documents in a single step is not authorized by 
section 44949 and, therefore, jurisdiction does not exist.  They correctly 
point out that the statute provides for a two-step process.  Thus, section 
44949, subdivision (a), provides for a notice of non-reemployment; 
section 44949, subdivision (b), requires the employee to request a 
hearing within seven days of service of the notice; and section 44949, 
subdivision (c)(1), requires that, “In the event a hearing is requested by 
the employee, the proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made 
in accordance with [the Administrative Procedure Act] . . . except that  
. . . [t]he respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any, within 
five days after service upon him or her of the accusation and he or she 
shall be notified of this five-day period for filing in the accusation.” 
 
 
from the two-step process.  It does state, in subdivision (c)(3), that 
“[n]onsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or 
governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for 
dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial.” 

Section 44949 does not contain a specific penalty for deviation 

7.  Jurisdiction would exist in this case even if the District’s one-step process 

8.  Respondents next argued that “precautionary” notices are not provided for 

 
 
was found to be improper.  It was designed for the convenience of the employees 
involved and would be a non-prejudicial, non-substantive procedural error pursuant to 
section 44949, subdivision (c)(3). 
 
 
in the Education Code and therefore, the District improperly sent precautionary 
notices to the three teachers it deemed temporary.  The issue is moot in that none of 
the three teachers who received precautionary notices requested a hearing, and 
accordingly, those notices had no procedural or substantive impact. 
 
9.  All of the identified services are particular kinds of services that could be 
 
reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision 
to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, 
and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation 
of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the 
meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
  

 

6

13.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to 

12.    No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

10.  A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available 
to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 
167, 178-179.)   
 
11.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 
 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the 
Board directed be reduced or discontinued.   
 
 
services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
  
 
a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing 
so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 
position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) 
 
 
14.  Teachers Jan Willis, Caitlin Fowler, and Frances Hermosillo all have a 
first date of paid service as a probationary employee of August 27, 2007.  Applying 
the tie-breaker criteria, the District determined that the order of seniority for those 
teachers, from senior to junior, is Willis, Fowler, and Hermosillo.  Of the three 
teachers, only Fowler received a preliminary notice.  Hermosillo has a clear, single 
subject credential in physical education and is presently teaching physical education 
at Medea Creek Middle School.  Fowler has a clear, single subject credential in 
English and is presently teaching English at Oak Park High School.  Willis holds a 
clear, single subject physical education credential with supplemental authorizations in 
introductory social science and introductory English.  She presently teaches English at 
Oak Park High School. 
 
 
Willis is certificated and competent to teach physical education, Willis should 
“bump” Hermosillo and teach physical education instead of English.  This would 
allow Fowler to move into the vacancy left by Willis.  This is a process known as 
“inverse bumping.”   
 
/// 
 
/// 

15.  Fowler argues that, because Willis is senior to Hermosillo, and because 

 

7

16.  Teachers are not entitled to inverse bumping.  The second paragraph of 
 
section 44955, subdivision (c), speaks of the duty of a school board to make assignments 
in such a manner that employees will be retained to render any service “their seniority . . . 
[entitles] them to render.”  A teacher’s entitlement to bump a junior teacher out of his or 
her assignment derives from the senior teacher’s seniority.  A teacher’s seniority does not 
entitle him or her to bump a more senior teacher out of his or her assignment just because 
the more senior teacher could move into some other position.   
 
 
17.  Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 
concerned the seniority rights of teachers in community colleges.  The bumping rights for 
community college teachersare similar to those provided by the second paragraph of 
section 44955, subdivision (c).  Duax was a community college teacher who was subject 
to layoff.  In a manner similar to the instant case, he contended that he was entitled to 
inverse bumping, and that the District was required to bump a more senior teacher out of 
his position because Duax was qualified to fill that position, and the more senior teacher 
had a right to move into a different position.  In rejecting Duax’s contention, the court 
ruled that the District’s “obligation to make assignments and reassignments . . . is limited 
to attempting to place an employee who would otherwise be terminated in a position 
being held by another employee with less seniority.”  (Id. at 568.)  In other words, a 
senior employee may bump a junior employee from a course or course of study the senior 
employee is certificated and competent to teach, but may not bump an even more senior 
employee requiring the more senior employee to bump someone in a different area.  The 
District correctly determined the seniority and bumping rights of teachers Hermosillo, 
Willis, and Fowler. 
 
 

ORDER 

2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

 
 
1.  The Accusations against the respondents are sustained.  Notice may be given 
to the respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year 
because of reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
  
  
DATED:  April 19, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
H. STUART WAXMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

  

 

 

 

 

8

