BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE 
CALEXICO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Involving 25 Credentialed Employees of  
the Calexico Unified School District, 
 
 
 
 
 

          Respondents. 

 

 

OAH No. 2010031057 
 
 
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 

 
 
California, heard this matter in Calexico, California, on May 20, 2010. 
 
 
Clifford D. Weiler, Attorney at Law, represented the Calexico Unified School 
District.  He was assisted by Teresa Estrada, Director of Personnel Commission and Human 
Resources, Calexico Unified School District.    
 
 
John W. Breeze, Attorney at Law, represented the 22 certificated employees who 
were identified as respondents in this reduction in force proceeding.  He was assisted by 
Ernie Bristow, Regional Uniserv Staff, California Teachers Association. 
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on May 20, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

The Calexico Unified School District serves the educational needs of 

 
The Calexico Unified School District 
 
 
thousands of kindergarten through 12 grade students in Calexico, California.  The district is 
governed by an elected five-member Board of Education (the governing board).  Christina 
Luna, Ed. is the Superintendent of Schools.  Teresa Estrada, Director of Personnel 
Commission and Human Resources, is Superintendent Luna’s designee in this reduction in 
force proceeding. 
 
The Continuing Fiscal Crisis – Economic Layoffs 
 
 
Proposition 13 limited the imposition of local property taxes and reduced a 
major source of assured revenue for the funding of public education in California.  After 

2. 

 

1

The economic layoff statutes found in the Education Code generally require the 

A school district cannot determine the level of state funding it will receive until the 

Proposition 13 was enacted, public school districts have looked primarily to the State of 
California and to other governmental entities for funding.  
 
 
state budget is chaptered, an event usually occurring in July, but sometimes taking much 
longer.  A school board’s obligation to balance its budget often requires that some teachers, 
administrators or other certificated employees be given preliminary layoff notices, warning 
them that their services will not be required for the next school year.  Under Education Code 
section 44949, these preliminary layoff notices must be given no later than March 15. 
 
 
retention of senior employees over more junior employees and the retention of permanent 
employees over probationary employees and others with less seniority.  A public school 
district may deviate from the general rule requiring termination in reverse order of seniority 
only if it can demonstrate that identifiable junior employees possess a credential, special 
training or experience necessary to teach a course of study or to provide services which more 
senior employees do not possess, a process known as skipping. 
 
The District’s Response 
 
 
By early 2010, the district’s governing board and administration (as well as the 
governing boards and staff of other public school districts) were aware of California’s budget 
deficit and its probable crippling impact on the district’s operations.  The district was 
required to look into methods by which it could balance its budget including the reduction of 
certificated and classified staffing.   
 

3. 

4. 

On March 10, 2010, the governing board passed the following resolution: 

 

Resolution Number  22-03-10

 

On motion of member      Cordero        , seconded by member     De La Rosa   , the 

following Resolution is adopted: 

WHEREAS, because of financial realities such as budget and revenue considerations 

state-wide and the resulting reductions of revenue to this school district and financial constraints 
resulting from revenue being insufficient to maintain current levels of programs and services 
including particular kinds of certificated services, and because of the desire and need to reassess 
educational priorities, and it being necessary to commence implementing program changes in a 
timely fashion within the current structure of the law, this District’s Governing Board determines 
that it is in the best interest of the District and the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof, to 
commence certificated layoff proceedings to reduce particular kinds of services (“PKS”) as 
hereinafter enumerated and to reduce the corresponding number of certificated staff no later than 
the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year; 

WHEREAS, the cause of this reduction in certificated services is not the separate 
statutory basis involving declining average daily attendance during either of the past two years; 

WHEREAS, this discontinuance and reduction of certificated services shall result in 

layoffs of certificated personnel in accordance with Education Code sections 44955 and 44949 

 

2

which provide a process whereby particular decisions, actions and notifications must be 
undertaken beginning no later than March 15 of each school year regarding layoffs of certificated 
personnel in order to reduce the number of certificated staff, and this Board desires to reduce 
certificated staff as permitted by law;  

WHEREAS, this Governing Board desires to discontinue and reduce the particular kinds 
of certificated services as listed in Exhibit A, attached, and to that extent of full time equivalents 
(“FTEs”) not later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year (in addition to the release of 
temporary certificated employees and/or the expiration of their contracts without renewals or re-
issuances); 

WHEREAS, in the opinion of the Governing Board, it will be necessary as a result of the 

discontinuances and reductions of these particular kinds of services reflected in Exhibit A to 
decrease the number of certificated permanent and/or probationary employees by a corresponding 
number of full-time equivalent positions; 

  WHEREAS, in determining the extent of staff FTE reductions and services to be 
discontinued and reduced, as noted in Exhibit A, the Governing Board has considered all 
assured and/or known attrition as of this time to the extent required by law (including but 
not limited to resignations and retirements received and to be effective not later than the 
close of this current school year, non-reelections of certificated employees, if any, for 
reasons unrelated to these discontinuances and reductions of services, and the release of 
temporary certificated employees and the expirations of their contracts), so that the total 
referenced above and in Exhibit A has already accounted for such attrition; but for that 
attrition, this Board would have found it necessary to discontinue or reduce additional 
particular kinds of certificated services and/or full time equivalents; 

NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, DETERMINED AND ORDERED by 

this Governing Board, as follows: 

All of the above recitals are true and correct; 

The particular kinds of services as listed in Exhibit A are hereby to be and will 
be discontinued and reduced and otherwise eliminated to the described extent not 
later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year, within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b); 

It is the opinion of this Governing Board, in view of the reductions of these 
particular kinds of services, that it is necessary to decrease the number of 
permanent and/or probationary employees serving in positions requiring 
certification qualifications within this school district at the close of this school 
year by a corresponding number of full-time equivalent positions as set forth 
within Exhibit A, and that such decrease in number of certificated staff be 
implemented by the termination of employment of certificated employees above 
and beyond attrition and the termination or expiration of employment of 
temporary and substitute employees; 

4. 

 Due to the discontinuances and reductions of particular kinds of services set forth 
herein, the legal number of employees of the District, pursuant to Education 
Code Section 44955, shall not be reemployed for the 2010-2011 school year; 

1. 

2. 

3. 

 

3

5. 

6. 

7. 

 
 
 

 

Subject to requirements (if any) within the Educational Employment Relations Act, 
that for purposes of “competency” as to “bumping” (displacement) rights within 
the meaning of Education Code section 44955(b) and as to reemployment rights 
within the meaning of Education Code sections 44956 and 44957, to the extent 
such might apply, “competency” shall be based upon the following:  possession 
and current filing of a preliminary or clear credential for the subject matter into 
which the employee would bump for the 2010-2011 school year or be reemployed; 

For purposes of seniority tie-breaking criteria within the context of layoff and 
reemployment within the meaning of Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
(b) (third paragraph), section 44846 (second paragraph), section 44956 and section 
44957, the Governing Board determines that seniority ties shall be broken in 
accordance with the critera within Exhibit B, said criteria being based solely upon 
the current needs of the District and the students thereof;  

The Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee(s) is(are) instructed to take 
the steps necessary pursuant to the Education Code including, in part, sections 
44955 and 44949, to implement the above and to reduce the certificated staff as set 
forth herein above; 

The actions of this Governing Board will not, in any way, be considered to 
prejudice the rights of any certificated employee to whom notice will be given of 
the superintendent’s recommendations of layoff, should any employee request a 
hearing to contest this matter and a recommended decision of an administrative 
law judge be presented to this Board for consideration. 

Above is as adopted by the Governing Board of the Calexico Unified School District at a 
special meeting held on March 10, 2010, in Calexico, Imperial County, by the following 
vote: 

Ayes: 
Nayes: 
ABSTAINED:         Pacheco 

Cordero, De La Rosa, Castillo, Romo 
None 

I, Christina Luna, Superintendent and Secretary to the Governing Board of the Calexico 
Unified School District of Imperial County, California, do hereby certify that the 
foregoing is a true, and correct copy of a resolution and reflection of its vote as duly 
adopted by said Board at a meeting thereof, which Resolution is on file and of record in 
the office of the Superintendent. 

Date:  March 10,  ____ 2010 

__________________________________________ 
Christina Luna, Ed.D. 
Superintendent/Secretary to Governing Board 
Calexico Unified School District 

Upon a motion to amend, moved by:   Member Romo    seconded by: Member De La 
Rosa the following amendment was adopted to the above resolution within its Exhibit A:  
add to the listing Particular Kinds of Service Assistant Superintendent Educational 

 

4

Services, discontinuance of 1.0 FTE.  Passed and amended at the same special meeting 
by the following vote: 

Ayes:   Romo, De La Rosa, Pacheco 
Nayes: Cordero, Castillo 

I, Christina Luna, Superintendent and Secretary to the Governing Board of the Calexico 
Unified School District of Imperial County, California, do hereby certify that the 
foregoing is a full, true, and correct reflection of an amendment duly adopted by said 
Board at a meeting thereof, the vote above stated, which Resolution is on file and of 
record in the office of the Superintendent. 

 

Date:    March 10, 2010 

 
Christina Luna, Ed.D. 
Superintendent/Secretary to Governing Board 
 
EXHIBIT A 
 
IDENTIFICATION OF 
PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES (PKSs) 
AND 
FULL TIME EQUIVALENCIES (FTEs) 
TO BE DISCONTINUED OR REDUCED NOT LATER THAN THE BEGINNING OF THE 
2010-2011 SCHOOL YEAR 
 

Discontinuance or Reduction

Full time Equivalents

Particular Kind of Service
Kindergarten through sixth grade 
teaching services 
Biology, high school, teaching services 
Core class teaching services, junior high 
schools 
Counselor services 
English teaching services, high school 
English/English Language Arts teaching 
services, junior high schools 
Social science teaching services, junior 
high schools 
Special education teaching services  
   moderate/severe classroom RSP 
setting (1.0 FTE) 
   special day class (1.0 FTE) 
Spanish teaching services, high school 

Elementary itinerant music teaching 
services 
Physics secondary teaching services   
Spanish teaching services, junior high 
school 
Adult education teaching services 
 

reduction 

reduction 
reduction 

reduction 
reduction 
reduction 

reduction 

reduction 

reduction 

reduction   

reduction   
reduction 

discontinuance 

 

5

6.0 

1.0 
5.0 

1.0 
2.0 
3.0 

3.0 

2.0  
 

1.0  
 
1.0 

1.0 
1.0 

1.0 

Discontinuance 

All 
[22] 

Categorically funded services:* 
   Agriculture teacher services 
             (one employee) 
   Social science teaching services 
             (one employee) 
   Home instructor services 
             (one employee) 
   English teacher services 
             (one employee) 
   RTI (Response to Intervention 
Teacher) services 
             (three employees) 
   RTI (Response to Intervention) tutor 
services 
             (fifteen employees) 
 
 

TOTAL FTEs 

28.0** (plus categorically 
funded services)  

* These services as specified in the listing will be discontinued; all employees providing those 
services will be released.  Inclusion of these and any categorically funded services within this 
Resolution is not intended to grant those individuals who are impacted any rights greater than 
provided by law, nor to nullify any provisions within each impacted individual’s employment 
contract, nor to supersede any other action by this Board to release or otherwise terminate the services 
of any impacted individual. 
 
 
As per amendment of March 10, 2010; 
Particular Kind of Service:  Assistant Superintendent Education Services, discontinuance, 1.0 FTE. 
 
**Total as Amended: 

29.0 (Plus categorically funded services) 

EXHIBIT B 
 
CRITERIA FOR BREAKING SENIORITY TIES 

 
Subject to requirements (if any) within the Educational Employment Relations Act, this 
Governing Board determines, based solely on the needs of this District and the students of this 
District, that seniority ties within the meaning of Education Code sections 44955, subdivision (b) 
(third paragraph) and section 44846, shall be resolved by applying the following criteria: 
 
The following rating system shall be applied in determining the order of termination of 
certificated employees, such that a tie will be broken in favor of the employee with a greater 
number of total points: 
 
A. 
credential 
 
B. 
 

Clear Professional, Standard, or General Teaching Credentials. Rating: +3 points per 

Preliminary Teaching Credentials. Rating: +2 points per credential 

6

 
 

 
 

 

Supplementary Authorization, issued by the California Commission on Teacher 

Complete years of teaching experience in any California school district under a full 

 
Earned degrees beyond the BA/BS level.  Rating:  +1 point per degree  
 
Credentials and experience to teach in a special categorical program (e.g., bilingual, 

C.  
Credentialing: Rating: + 1 point per area of supplementary authorization 
 
D. 
 
E. 
special education). Rating: +1 point per credential, +1 point per year of experience 
 
F. 
credential.  Rating: +1 point per year 
 
G. 
administrative services credential.  Rating: +1 point per year 
 
The above-referenced determinations shall be based upon information and data which exists in 
the District’s possession and within the employee’s personnel file as of the date of this 
Resolution. 
 
 
TIE-BREAKING PROCEDURE FOR EQUAL POINT TOTALS
 
 
will then break ties by utilizing a lottery. 

Number of complete years of service in the District in a position requiring an 

In the event that a tie still exists following application of the above criteria, the District 

5. 

On and before March 15, 2010, at least 25 permanent certificated employees 

 
Jurisdictional Matters 
 
 
of the Calexico Unified School District were served with a written preliminary notice that the 
Superintendent of Schools had recommended that their services be terminated at the 
conclusion of the current school year and that their services would not be needed for the 
upcoming 2010-11 school year.  Each employee was notified of the right to a hearing.  Each 
employee who filed a request for a hearing became a respondent in this proceeding and was 
thereafter served with an accusation and other required jurisdictional documents.  
 

6. 

On May 20, 2010, the record in the administrative hearing was opened.  

Jurisdictional documents were presented.  It was stipulated by the parties that all 
jurisdictional requirements related to the respondents in this proceeding were met.  It was 
stipulated that the district’s exhibits 1 through 28 could be received in evidence to support 
the proposed decision in this matter. 

It was stipulated that the district could withdraw the preliminary layoff notices 

served upon Peter Carlos Borobia for 0.4 FTE, Christina Barron for 1.0 FTE, Karla Valdez 
for 1.0 FTE, Noemi Esquer for 1.0 FTE, and Ashly Reitsma for 1.0 FTE and dismiss the 
accusations filed against those respondents to the extent supported by the stipulation. 

It was stipulated that the district’s seniority list should be amended to 

document that Maria Elena Paola Sanchez-Romero is a permanent employee. 

 
7. 

 
8. 

 

 

7

9. 

It was stipulated that after March 15, 2010, Maria V. Martinez, a permanent 

certificated employee whose seniority date was September 5, 1972, taught 1.0 FTE of 
elementary school in a self-contained classroom that Martinez submitted her notice of 
retirement to the district and that on May 13, 2010, the governing board approved her 
retirement.  It was further stipulated that respondent Lourdes Cuesta, whose seniority date is 
September 22, 2005, was the most senior certificated district employee who is credentialed 
and qualified to fill the position vacated as a result of Martinez’s retirement.   

 
It was stipulated that the only issue to be decided in this matter was whether the 

 
accusation filed against Cuesta should be sustained as a matter of law in light of Martinez’s 
retirement.  Respondent Cuesta argued that Martinez’s retirement and the board’s acceptance 
of it constituted positively assured attrition and that the accusation could not be sustained as 
a matter of law because of that fact.  The district argued that in a reduction in force 
proceeding involving particular kinds of services, any attrition occurring after the March 15 
deadline for issuing preliminary layoff notices did not need to be considered.  Each party 
relied on San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627 to support its 
contention. 

   

10. 

The governing board resolved to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of 

The Layoff Procedure 
 
 
services provided by teachers and other certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  This 
decision was not related to the competency or dedication of the valued employees whose 
services were proposed to be discontinued.  The governing board’s determination was in the 
best interest of the district and its students.   
 

The district’s administrative staff initiated and followed a systematic procedure for 
identifying employees directly affected by the governing board’s resolution.  Evaluation of 
each employee’s seniority date, credential, and qualifications preceded the determination of 
what bumping rights, if any, an employee had.  Adjustments were made to the seniority list 
where indicated.   
 
 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Statutory Authority  
 
 
 

1. 

Education Code section 44944 provides in part: 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the 
governing board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year . . . 
the governing board and the employee shall be given written notice by the 
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been recommended 
that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor . . . 
 
(b) 

The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 

 

8

reemploying him or her for the ensuing year . . .  If an employee fails to request a 
hearing on or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his 
or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . . 

 
In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the proceeding shall be 

(c) 
conducted and a decision made in accordance with . . . the Government Code and the 
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency therein, except that all 
of the following shall apply: 
 
 
The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any, within five 
days after service upon him or her of the accusation and he or she shall be notified of 
this five-day period for filing in the accusation. 

(1) 

. . . 

(3) 

The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge who 

 
 
shall prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a determination as 
to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof.  The proposed decision shall be prepared for the 
governing board and shall contain a determination as to the sufficiency of the cause 
and a recommendation as to disposition.  However, the governing board shall make 
the final determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and disposition.  None of the 
findings, recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed decision 
prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding on the governing board.  
Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or governing board 
of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the charges unless the 
errors are prejudicial errors.  Copies of the proposed decision shall be submitted to the 
governing board and to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the 
proceeding is commenced. . . .”  

Education Code section 44955 provides in part: 

2. 
 
“(a)  No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes 
other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, 
inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 
cause other than as specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
(b)  Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not 
later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in the opinion of 
the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary . . . to decrease the 
number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate 
the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated 
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school 
year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee 
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary 

9

 

 
 

 

employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service 
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.  

. . . 
 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis 
of needs of the district and the students thereof . . .   
 

. . . 

Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 15th of May . . 

 
(c) 
. and services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in 
which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with the 
provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or 
probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for 
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year. 
 
The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that 
employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and 
qualifications entitle them to render.  However, prior to assigning or reassigning any 
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught, 
and for which he or she does not have a teaching credential or which is not within the 
employee’s major area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the 
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter competency test 
in the appropriate subject. 
 
(d) 
Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following 
reasons: 
 
 
specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services 
credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a 
school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, which 
others with more seniority do not possess. . . .” 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 

(1) 

3. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
Jurisdiction 
 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied 
as to all respondent employees who were identified in the accusation.   
 
 
 
 

 

10

4. 

A school board’s decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service 

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
is not tied in with any statistical computation.  Where a governing board determines to 
discontinue or reduce a particular kind of service, it is within the discretion of the board to 
determine the amount by which it will reduce a particular kind of service as long as a district 
does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen 
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) 
 
Attrition after March 15 in a PKS Reduction in Force Proceeding 
 

 

5. 

“Positively assured attrition” is attrition which has actually occurred and it is 
distinguished from “potential attrition” which may be anticipated but is still unknown.  As 
noted in San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, at pages 634-635, 
courts had previously held that in terminating certificated employees because of a decline in 
a school district’s average daily attendance (ADA), a district was required to consider all 
positively assured attrition.  However, in San Jose the terminations were the result of the 
reduction of particular kinds of services (PKS), not ADA, which the appellate court 
described as “an issue of first impression.”  The appellate court considered the previous 
ADA decisions and the language of the statute in reaching the conclusion that a district need 
not consider attrition occurring after March 15.  In this regard, the court reasoned that it is 
within a district’s discretion, subject to the minimum level required by law, to determine the 
extent to which a reduction of services was deemed necessary and proper under the 
circumstances.  The decision is made at the time of the final notice.  In PKS cases the 
determination of the amount by which a service is to be reduced is the determination of the 
number of positions to be eliminated by statute.  In making a final decision on PKS 
reductions, the extent to which the services are reduced inherently determines the number of 
positions to remain.  If a service is to be eliminated, for example, it is obvious that it is 
unnecessary to consider attrition in any way.  (Ibid., at 636.) 

 
 

This aspect of the San Jose decision remains unchallenged.  It supports the district’s 

position in this matter.  Based on this decision, cause exists to sustain the accusation filed 
against Cuesta. 
 
Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees 
 

6. 

As a result of the governing board’s lawful reduction and elimination of 

particular kinds of service, cause exists under the Education Code for the district to give 
notice to those respondents identified hereafter that their employment will be terminated at 
the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed by the district 
for the 2010-11 school year. 
 
Determination 
 
 
The charges set forth in the accusation were sustained by the preponderance of 
the evidence and were related to the welfare of the district and the pupils thereof.   Necessary 

7. 

 

11

assignments and reassignments were made in such a manner that the most senior employees 
were retained to render services which their seniority and qualifications entitled them to 
render.  No employee with less seniority than any respondent will be retained to render a 
service which any respondent identified hereafter is certificated, competent and qualified to 
render.  This determination is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 

 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 

It is recommended that the governing board dismiss the accusations filed against the 

 
following respondents in the amount of the full time equivalent indicated: Peter Carlos 
Borobia (0.4 FTE); Christina Barron (1.0 FTE); Karla Valdez (1.0 FTE); Noemi Esquer (1.0 
FTE); and Ashly Reitsma (1.0 FTE). 

It is recommended that the governing board make certain that the district’s seniority 

list reflects the fact that Maria Elena Paola Sanchez-Romero is a permanent employee. 

 
It is recommended that the governing board give final notice to the following 
respondents that their employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year 
and that their services will not be needed for the 2010-2011 school year: Anel E. 
Bustamante, Nelly Coronel, Lourdes Cuesta, Gisela De La O, Rodrigo Figueroa, Delia 
Susana Hurtado (0.60 FTE), Martin Leyva, Victoria Susan Medina, Carmen Moncada, Juan 
Moncada, Juan Carlos Padilla (0.40 FTE),; Eliza Pereda, Juan P. Ramirez, Alejandrina 
Rangel, Yordan Rivera, Cynthia Salgado, Maria Elena Paola Sanchez-Romero, and Martha 
Torres. 
  
 
 
DATED:  ______________ 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
JAMES AHLER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

12

 
 
 
 

 

