BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE DEL MAR UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certified Employees Identified in 
Exhibit A, 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

  
 
   OAH No.  2010020352     
    
     
 
 

 
PROPOSED DECISION 

William Wood Merrill, Best Best & Kriger, Attorneys at Law, represented the 

 
 
Greer D. Knopf, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in San Diego, California on April 26, 
2010. 
 
 
Del Mar Union School District. 
 
 
the respondents.   
 
 
 
 

Fern M. Steiner, Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax, Attorneys at Law, represented 

The matter was submitted on April 26, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Holly McClurg, Assistant Superintendent of Instructional Services 

 
 
(Assistant Superintendent) of the Del Mar Union School District (the District), made 
and filed the accusation dated March 30, 2010, in her official capacity as the Assistant 
Superintendent of the District and as the designee of the Superintendent of the 
District.  The accusation was originally filed against 27 respondents identified in 
Attachment A attached hereto and incorporated herein.    
 

The respondents are all certificated employees of the District.   

On February 12, 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 

44949 and 44955, Dr. Sharon McClain, the Superintendent of the District 
(Superintendent), notified the Governing Board of the District (the Board) in writing 

2. 

3. 

     

 

1

of her recommendation to reduce or discontinue services for the ensuing school year.  
The Superintendent stated the reasons for the recommendation.  The Superintendent 
recommended the reduction of particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school 
year.  
  

4. 

On February 10, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2010-01 

Determination of Seniority Among Certificated Employees With The Same Seniority 
Date “Tie Breaker Resolution” (Tie Breaker Resolution).  This Tie Breaker 
Resolution set forth the tie breaker criteria by which ties between employees with the 
same first hire date would be broken in order to determine the final order of layoff.     

 
5. 

On February 17, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2010-02 
Reducing and Eliminating Certain Certificated Services for the 2010-2011 School 
Year (the Resolution to Reduce Services) determining that it is necessary to reduce 
particular kinds of services at the end of the current school year.  The Board 
determined that the particular kinds of services that must be reduced for the 2010-
2011 school year are the following full time equivalent (FTE) positions: 
 
Music Teaching 

F.T.E. 

6.6 

Art Teaching 
Science Teaching 
Physical Education Teaching 
Technology Teaching 
Drama Teaching 
Spanish Teaching 
Classroom Teachers K-6 
Coordinator of State and Federal Projects 
Total 

7.0 
2.2 
6.0 
3.2 
1.1 
0.5 
22.0 
1.0 
49.6 

F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 

6. 

The Board directed the Superintendent to determine which employees’ 

services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of the 
reduction of these particular kinds of services.  The Board further directed the 
Superintendent to “take all steps necessary under the law not to employ those 
certificated employees of the District because of the reduction and elimination of 
these programs and services.”  These steps included sending notices to all certificated 
employees of the District who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these 
particular kinds of services.            
 
 
Governing Board of Service of Preliminary Notice of Layoff Pursuant to Education 
Code sections 44949 and 44955, by either personal delivery or by registered mail, a 
written notice to each of the respondents herein that the Superintendent had 

On or before March 12, 2010, the Superintendent served a Notice to the 

7. 

 

 

2

recommended not to re-employ them in the upcoming 2010-2011 school year.  The 
written notice notified respondents that their services would not be required for the 
upcoming 2010-2011 school year.  The written notice to respondents set forth the 
reasons for the recommendation.  Each written notice advised respondents of their 
right to a hearing, that each respondent had to deliver a Request for Hearing in writing 
to the District no later than ten days from receipt of the preliminary notice of layoff, 
and that the failure to deliver a Request a Hearing would constitute the waiver of the 
right to a hearing.  The recommendation that respondents be terminated from 
employment was not related to their job performance as teachers.   
 
 
be re-employed for the ensuing school year did not file a Request for Hearing.  
However, each of the 27 respondents named in Attachment A to the accusation herein 
timely filed a written Request for Hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.   
 

Some certificated employees given written notice that they would not 

8. 

9. 

Subsequently, on March 30, 2010, the District filed and then timely 

served the Accusation dated March 30, 2010, a Notice to Respondent, a blank Notice 
of Defense form, a Notice of Hearing, and relevant Education Code and Government 
Code sections, upon each of the 27 respondents listed in Attachment A to the 
accusation herein who had timely requested a hearing in this matter.  Some of the 
certificated employees who were served with the Accusation herein filed a timely 
Notice of Defense.  However, at the hearing, there was an issue as to whether or not 
the Notices of Defense were received by the District for several of the respondents 
who were present at the hearing.  The District agreed to waive the issue of timely 
receipt of the Notices of Defense for all respondents present at the hearing with the 
understanding that this waiver would not serve as precedent for any other proceedings 
in future years.  The District did not make this waiver as to respondent Ariella Leeder, 
who was not present at the hearing and who did not submit a timely Notice of 
Defense requesting a hearing in this matter.   

 
10.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met by the District. 

11. 

The services the Board addressed in the Resolution to Reduce Services 

are “particular kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the 
meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but 
constituted a proper and reasonable exercise of its discretion.  The Board’s decision to 
make these cuts was the result of deliberation and consideration of the necessary cuts 
in the District’s budget for the ensuing school year.  The District is facing a 
significant budget deficit in the next school year.  The Board’s action to reduce 
services is a proper exercise of its discretion to address the need for budget cuts for 
the 2010-2011 school year.   

 

  

 

3

 
13. 

12. 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services relates 

 
solely to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The District faces extremely 
difficult financial times due to the current state budget crisis.  While it may not be 
desirable to cut back staff, the District is facing a grave financial situation in the 
coming year.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services was 
necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District as 
determined by the Board. 
 

Some of the employees named as respondents were hired on the same 
date.  Between these employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 
same date, the Board determined their order of termination solely on the basis of the 
needs of the district and the students.  The specific criteria used to determine the order 
of termination was set forth by the Board in the Tie Breaker Resolution.  The District 
fairly applied the tie breaker criteria to rank those employees hired on the same date.  
Under these criteria the District properly retained certain employees while the 
respondents herein were properly given notice that their services would no longer be 
required for the ensuing school year.  

 
14. 

The Board considered all known attrition, resignations, and retirements 

in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its 
employees.  The District also first released temporary employees that had been 
employed during the 2009-2010 school year.   
 

15. 

Respondent Sarah Grosso (Grosso) testified at the hearing that she 
believed the District should have considered the fact that she had a supplemental 
credential in deciding on the order of layoff.  However, Grosso’s supplemental 
credential, while issued in January 2010, was not actually cleared and registered by 
the state until April 2010.  The District is entitled to rely on the information it has 
prior to March 15 so that it may accurately determine the order of layoff and send out 
the notices of layoff by March 15, 2010 as required by law.       
 

16.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent is being retained to 
perform any services which any respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
The Board appropriately set forth the criteria to determine whether an employee is 
deemed “competent” to render services, within its discretion, as part of the Resolution 
to Reduce Services and the District properly applied those criteria.        
 
 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 

 
 
and 44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections 
were satisfied. 
 

 

4

2. 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the 
 
Del Mar Union School District to reduce particular kinds of services.  The cause for 
the reduction of particular kinds of services is related solely to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof.   
 

3. 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

accusations herein. Therefore, cause exists for the Board to give the respondents listed 
in Attachment A final notice before May 15, 2010, that their services will no longer 
be required by the District for the 2010-2011 school year.   
 
 

ORDER 

The accusation served on the respondents listed in Attachment A herein is 
sustained and notice shall be given to those respondents listed in Attachment A before 
May 15, 2010 that their services will not be required in the next school year because 
of the reduction of particular services as indicated. 
 
 
 
 
Dated:  ______________________                    
 
 
 

                            

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

________________________ 
GREER D. KNOPF 
Administrative Law Judge 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
                                                                                 Office of Administrative Hearings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   

  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5

ATTACHMENT A 
 

 
1.  Rachelle Armstrong 
2.  Michelle Beeson 
3.  Marisa Camarillo  
4.  Genevieve Chapluk 
5.  Donna Chung 
6.  Karyn Conner 
7.  Adrienne Crabtree 
8.  Christopher Delehanty 
9.  Abby Farricker 
10.  Alison Fieberg 
11.  Robin Gordon 
12.  Sarah Grosso 
13.  Stephanie Ilkhanipour 
14.  Ariella Leeder 
15.  Emily Mackie 
16.  Lauren Markarian 
17.  Shannon McAfee 
18.  Shawna Murphy 
19.  Natasha Rosario 
20.  Alicia Saunders 
21.  Marie Schwab 
22.  Andrea Shea 
23.  Adrienne Sheffield 
24.  Kristin Stanton 
25.  Michelle Turnbull 
26.  Traci Waxman 
27.  Melissa Weinbaum-Davis 
 
 

 

 

6

