BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD  
ORCUTT UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
OAH No. 2010020635 

 

 
In the Matter of  the Accusation 
Against:   
 
  
KELLI BORNHOFT and  
GREG SANDERS,  
Certificated Employees of the  
Orcutt Union School District,  
 
 
                                    Respondents. 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Respondents Kelli Bornoft and Greg Sanders were present and represented by Robert 

This matter was heard by Vincent Nafarrete, Administrative Law Judge, on April 22, 

 
 
2010, in Orcutt.  Complainant Sharon McHolland, Superintendent, Orcutt Union School 
District, was represented by David C. Larsen, Attorney at Law.      
 
 
M. Ostrove, Attorney at Law. 
 
 
Documentary, stipulated, and oral evidence having been received and oral argument 
made, the Administrative Law Judge submitted this matter for decision on April 22, 2010, 
and finds as follows: 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.   

The Administrative Law Judge takes official notice that, on March 24, 2010, 

 
 
the Accusation was made and filed by Sharon McHolland in her official capacity as 
Superintendent of the Orcutt Union School District, State of California (District).   
 

2.   

Respondents Kelli Bornoft and Greg Sanders are permanent or probationary 

3. 

certificated employees of the District.   
 
 
The District is an elementary and intermediate school district in Santa Barbara 
County.  The District has an undetermined number of elementary schools with approximately 
3,600 pupils and two intermediate schools with approximately 900 pupils.  Due to the 
ongoing state budget crisis and the concomitant loss of revenue from the state, the District 

 

4. 

(A) On March 10, 2010, the Superintendent gave written notice to the 

(B) On March 10, 2010, in Resolution No. 10, pursuant to Education Code 

has been having budgetary problems.  Last fiscal year, the District used federal stimulus 
monies and funds from its reserve to offset its deficit spending.  For the current fiscal year, 
the District will be operating at a deficit of $3.5 million with revenues at $29.5 million and 
expenditures at $33 million.  In or about January 2010, the Assistant Superintendent of 
Business Services prepared a projection of the District’s expected revenues and expenditures 
for the next two fiscal years based on the Governor’s proposed budget for the State of 
California.   For 2010-2011, the Assistant Superintendent projects that the District not only 
will receive $1.6 million less in revenue and have an even larger deficit but also will become 
insolvent if it continues to offer the same number of existing programs and services.   The 
Assistant Superintendent has recommended that the District make budget cuts for the next 
fiscal year by reducing or discontinuing programs and services, laying off certificated and 
classified personnel, lowering wages, and reorganizing management in order to help ensure a 
balanced budget and to maintain the required three percent reserve.   
 
 
Governing Board of her recommendation that programs and services and related certificated 
positions be reduced for the 2010-2011 school year in order for the District to maintain a 
balanced budget and provide essential services.    
 
 
sections 44949 and 44955 and based upon recommendation of the Superintendent, the 
Governing Board determined that the District may no longer have the financial ability or 
resources to provide all of the services that it is currently providing; that the District will 
have to reduce certain services for the 2010-2011 fiscal year to maintain a balanced budget 
and provide for services in the most acceptable manner; and that the District must reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services and decrease a corresponding number of certificated 
employees at the close of the current school year in accordance with Education Code section 
44955.  The Governing Board thereupon resolved and directed the Superintendent and/or her 
designee to determine which certificated employees’ services may not be required for the 
2010-2011 school year and to give written notices to those certificated employees of the 
Superintendent’s recommendation that they not be re-employed in accordance with and in 
the manner prescribed by Education Code sections 44955 and 44949.     
 
 
adopted criteria to be applied in the priority order indicated to determine which certificated 
employees meet the particular needs of the District in the event that all certificated 
employees with the same date of hire are not terminated.  The Governing Board determined 
that, as between certificated employees who first rendered paid service in a probationary 
position to the District on the same date, the order of termination shall be determined by 
reference to six tiebreaking criteria.   The Governing Board further found that, if certificated 
employees remain equal or tied after applying these tiebreaking criteria, priority will be 
determined by lot.   The Governing Board found that the tiebreaking criteria met the 
particular needs of the District.   
 

(C) On March 10, 2010, in Resolution No. 10, the Governing Board also 

 

 

2

5. 

6.  

On or before March 15, 2010, pursuant to Resolution No. 10 and the 

 
provisions of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the designee of the Superintendent 
gave written notices to respondents and four other certificated employees that the 
Superintendent had recommended that notice be given to them that their services will not be 
required for the upcoming 2010-2011 school year and that the Governing Board had resolved 
that it was necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services and to decrease the 
number of certificated employees by the end of current 2010-2011 school year due to 
financial conditions (preliminary notice).   Respondents, and each of them, timely requested 
a hearing to determine if there is cause for not re-employing them for the 2010-2011 school 
year.   
 
 
respondents under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  Respondents were not 
prejudiced by errors, if any, in the preliminary notice.  Respondents did not raise any claims 
in the hearing that the preliminary notice, its contents, or the timing thereof, was deficient in 
any respect. 
 
 
each of them, with an Accusation, Resolution No. 10, and a Notice of Hearing.   On or about 
April 12, 2010, respondents and four other certificated employees, David Greenelsh, Kirsten 
Riede, Renee Schmid, and Michelle Topping, filed a joint Notice of Defense, objecting to the 
Accusation and requesting a hearing to determine if there is cause not to employ them for the 
ensuing school year.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.    
 

The District’s preliminary notice of layoff was sufficient in providing notice to 

On or about March 24, 2010, the District properly served respondents, and 

7. 

8. 

On or about March 10, 2010, the Superintendent recommended to the 

Governing Board that it take action to reduce or discontinue certain services or programs 
offered by the District for the 2010-2011 school year in the following full-time equivalent 
(FTE) positions:   
 
 
 

 
Equivalent Positions   

Full-Time 

 
     

 
     

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
Services 
 
K-6 Classroom Teachers 
7-8 Classroom Teachers 
English 
 
 
Social Science 
 
 
 
 
Math 
 
Psychologist   

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

     3.0 

      1.0 
      1.0 
      2.0 
      1.0 

 
 
On or about March 10, 2010, pursuant to Resolution No. 10, the Governing Board 
determined to reduce or discontinue the services set forth hereinabove which constitute a 
total of 8.0 FTE positions.  No claims were made that the resolution of the Governing Board 
to reduce or discontinue services was deficient or arbitrary and capricious in any respect.   
 

 

3

9. 

10. 

The services or programs set forth in Finding 8 above are particular kinds of 

 
services performed by certificated employees of the District which may be reduced or 
discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The determination of the 
Governing Board to reduce or discontinue these services is within its sound discretion and is 
not arbitrary or capricious.   The District demonstrated that the reduction or discontinuance 
of these particular kinds of services is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils and 
is necessary in order for the District to maintain a balanced budget and a sufficient reserve.   
 
 
Further, the District has obviated the need to reduce or discontinue all of the 
particular kinds of services or programs described in Finding 8 above and to terminate the 
employment of all certificated employees given preliminary notice and accusations by taking 
into account the personnel changes and attrition due to reassignments, retirements, and/or 
resignations of individual certificated employees within the District.   Accordingly, due to 
retirements and reassignments or transfers of certificated employees, the District withdrew 
the Accusation against certificated employees Michelle Topping, Renee Schmid, Kirsten 
Riede, and David Greenelsh.  The District determined that there are no retirements of 
certificated employees who teach English and Social Science in the seventh and eighth 
grades.  As such, the District has reasonably determined and accounted for what will be 
positively assured attrition among its certificated staff for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year 
and reduced by a corresponding number of certificated employees whose employment must 
be terminated due to the present reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.    
 
 
forth the names of certificated employees and their seniority dates or dates of first paid 
service, FTE position, credentials and/or authorizations, and current assignments and work 
site locations.   No claims were raised concerning the District’s Seniority List or 
determinations of how many certificated employees and which specific certificated 
employees must be reassigned or laid off in each service area affected by the present 
reduction of particular kinds of services.    
 
 
facilitate the reduction or discontinuance of 2.0 FTE in English and Social Science teachers 
by reducing the five sections or periods of both English and Social Science classes.  Even 
with the reductions of these class sections, the District will be able to offer a full program of 
English and Social Studies to its pupils.   
 
 
subject credential in English.  She is a probationary 2, certificated employee of the District 
with a seniority date of August 18, 2008.  Bornhoft is the least senior of the District’s 
intermediate school English teachers.  The District is not retaining any certificated employee 
junior to Bornhoft to teach seventh and/or eighth grade English next year.   Respondent 
Bornhoft may be terminated due to the reduction or discontinuance of 7-8 grade English 
teachers by 1.0 FTE.   
 

Respondent Kelli Bornhoft is a seventh grade English teacher who has a single 

The District has prepared and maintains a Seniority List (Exh. 4) which sets 

In the service or program area of classroom instruction, the District plans to 

13. 

11. 

12. 

 

4

 

 

15. 

14. 

(A) Certificated employee Chae Meadows is a seventh and eighth grade 

(C) In or about August 2008, after becoming an employee of the District on 

(B) Meadows was formerly the sole teacher and sole site administrator of the 

Respondent Greg Sanders is an intermediate school History and Keyboarding 

 
teacher who has a single subject credential in Social Science.  He is a tenured certificated 
employee and has a seniority date of August 17, 2007.  Sanders is the least senior of the 
District’s teachers authorized to teach Social Science.  The District is not retaining any 
certificated employee junior to Sanders to teach seventh and eighth grade Social Science next 
year.  Respondent Sanders may be laid off due to the reduction or discontinuance of 7-8 
grade Social Science teachers by l.0 FTE.  
 
 
English teacher who holds a multiple subject and administrative credentials as well as an 
authorization in English.   He is a tenured certificated employee of the District.      
 
 
nearby Casmalia School District, a school district that was comprised of one school.  
Effective on July 1, 2008, the territory of the Casmalia School District was transferred to the 
District.  Pursuant to Education Code section 35555, upon transfer or reorganization of the 
Casmalia School District to the District, Meadows retained his certificated status that he had 
with the Casmalia School District, including his first date of paid service, which was August 
16, 1999.   
 
 
reorganization of the Casmalia School District, Meadows elected to transfer to and become a 
teacher at Orcutt Academy, a new K-12 charter school approved by the State Board of 
Education.   After teaching at the Orcutt Academy for the 2008-2009 school year, Meadows 
exercised his right under the charter school petition to return to the District in a regular or 
traditional teaching assignment within two years.   For the current 2009-2010 school year, 
Meadows has been an English teacher at Orcutt Junior High School and Lakeview Junior 
High School.   
 
 
of the District whose seniority date is August 16, 1999.  He is not subject to layoff in this 
proceeding.  Meadows has more seniority with the District than certificated employees 
Renee Schmid, Kirsten Riede, and David Greenelsh whom the District is retaining for next 
school year and is senior to respondents Bornhoft and Sanders who are subject to layoff.  
Accordingly, the District may retain Meadows to teach for the next school year.   
 
 
who was duly served with a preliminary notice of layoff but then did not request a hearing, 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.   
 
 
respondent, if any, who was duly served with a preliminary notice of layoff and an 
accusation but then did not file a notice of defense or make an appearance at the hearing after 
filing a notice of defense, pursuant to Government Code section 11520, subdivision (a), and 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.   

(D) Based on Findings 15(A) – (C) above, Meadows is a certificated employee 

(B) The District may likewise take action against any certificated employee or 

(A) The District may take action against any certificated employee, if any, 

16. 

 

 

 

5

17. 

It was not established there are any certificated employees with less seniority 
 
than respondents who are being retained by the District to provide services that respondents 
are certificated and competent to render.   
 
 
 

*  *  *  *  *  *  * 

Pursuant to the foregoing findings of fact, the Administrative Law Judge makes the 

 
 
 
following determination of issues: 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.   

Jurisdiction exists for the subject proceedings pursuant to Education Code 

3. 

2.   

Cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to reduce 

sections 44949 and 44955, based on Findings 1 – 17 above.  All preliminary notices, 
accusations, and other related papers and reports required by these Education Code sections 
have been provided in timely manner and, as such, the parties have complied with the 
statutory requirements.   
 
 
the concomitant number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services, as set forth in Finding 8 above.   With respect 
to those respondents whose employment have been found to be terminable by the District 
and any other certificated employees who received notices but did not request a hearing, if 
any, the causes set forth in the Accusation relate solely to the welfare of the District's schools 
and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.   
 
 
terminate the employment of respondents and/or certificated employees Michelle Topping, 
Renee Schmid, Kirsten Riede, and David Greenelsh due to the dismissal of the Accusation 
against them, as set forth in Finding 10 above.   The District has determined to retain these 
certificated employees.   
 
 
terminate the employment of certificated employee Chae Meadows, based on Finding 15 
above.     
 
 
Cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to 
terminate the employment of respondents Kelli Bornhoft and Greg Sanders due to the 
reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services, based on Findings 1 – 17 above.   
 
 

Cause does not exist pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to 

Cause does not exist pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to 

4. 

5. 

 

 

6

6. 

Based on Findings 1 – 17 above, there is no certificated probationary or 

 
permanent employee with less seniority than any one of respondents who is being retained by 
the District for the 2010-2011 school year to render services which any one of respondents is 
certificated and competent to render.  
 
 
 

*  *  *  *  *  *  * 

WHEREFORE, the Administrative Law Judge makes the following Order:  

ORDER 

3 

1. 

2. 

The Accusations issued against the respondents Kelli Bornhoft and Greg 

The Accusations issued against respondents and/or certificated employees 

 
 
Michelle Topping, Renee Schmid, Kirsten Riede, and David Greenelsh must be dismissed, 
based on Conclusion of Law 3 above, respectively.  These certificated employees will not be 
given notice that their services are not required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Sanders are sustained, based on Conclusions of Law 1, 2, 5, and 6 above.   The District may 
give notice to these respondents, and each of them, that their services will not be required for 
the ensuing 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular 
kinds of services pursuant to Education Code section 44955.   
 
 
The District may give notice to those certificated employees, if any, who were 
served with notices and/or accusations that their services will not be needed next year but did 
not file requests for hearing or did not appear at the hearing, that their services will not be 
required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.   
 
 
not request a hearing, the District shall further determine and take into account any additional 
positively assured attrition among certificated employees in deciding how many and when 
certificated employees should be terminated before the ensuing 2010-2011 school year.   
 
 
Dated:  May 3, 2010    
 
 
 
 
 
  

Vincent Nafarrete 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings   

Before giving notice to respondents and any certificated employees who did 

4. 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

7

