BEFORE THE 
SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY  
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

OAH No. 2010030636 

 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
WILLIAM HANCOCK, 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondent. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Sharon J. Ormond, Esq. and Heather A. Dozier, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, 

Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of 
 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in San Bernardino, California on April 30, 2010. 
 
 
Ruud and Romo represented the District. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondent William Hancock was present and represented himself. 

The matter was submitted on April 30, 2010. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

The San Bernardino County Superintendent of Schools determined to reduce or 

 
 
discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers and other certificated 
employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the competency and 
dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.   
 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 

review of credentials and seniority.  The selection process was in accordance with the 
requirements of the Education Code.  
 
 

 

1 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.  William Hancock (Respondent) is a certificated employee of the San 

Bernardino County Superintendent of Schools (SBCSOS). 

 
2. 

 
3. 

On March 8, 2010, Gary S. Thomas, Ed.D., San Bernardino County 

Superintendent of Schools (Superintendent) adopted a resolution reducing or discontinuing 
Regional Occupational Program (ROP) services for the ensuing school year. 

On March 9, 2010, Denise J. Danne, Ed.D., Assistant Superintendent, Human 

Resources (Assistant Superintendent), served Respondent with written notice that she 
recommended to the Superintendent that he be given notice that his services would not be 
required for the ensuing school year and the reasons for her recommendation.  In addition, 
she informed Respondent of his right to hearing, that the request for hearing must be 
delivered to the SBCSOS no later than March 22, 2010, and that failure to request a hearing 
would constitute waiver of the right to a hearing.  
 
 
office operations/technician from the ROP services to be reduced or eliminated.   
 

On March 9, 2010, the Superintendent adopted a revised resolution, removing 

4. 

5. 

On March 10, 2010, the Assistant Superintendent served Respondent with 

6. 

Respondent submitted a timely request for hearing to determine if there was cause not 

another letter informing him that she recommended to the Superintendent that he be given 
notice that his services would not be required for the ensuing school year and the reasons for 
her recommendation.  Again, she advised Respondent of his right to hearing, that the request 
for hearing must be delivered to the SBCSOS no later than March 22, 2010, and that failure 
to request a hearing would constitute waiver of the right to a hearing.  
 
 
to re-employ him for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
an Accusation and related materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On March 10, 2010, in the revised Resolution, the Superintendent took action 
to reduce or eliminate the following particular kinds of certificated services commencing the 
2010-2011 school year: 
 

On April 14, 2010, the Superintendent made, filed and served Respondent with 

The prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied.  

In response, Respondent filed a timely Notice of Defense. 

7. 

8. 

Reduce Adults in Correction ROP Teaching Srvcs: Restaurant Occupations 

.250  F.T.E. 

Reduce Adults in Correction ROP Teaching Srvcs: Custodial Occupations 

.250  F.T.E. 

Reduce Adults in Correction ROP Teaching Srvcs: Computer Applications 

.250  F.T.E. 

2 

 

 

Reduce Adults in Correction ROP Teaching Srvcs: Printing Occupations 

.625  F.T.E. 

Reduce Adults in Correction ROP Teaching Srvcs: Desktop Publishing 

.250  F.T.E. 

Reduce Adults in Correction ROP Teaching Srvcs: Auto Body/Fender Rpr 

.625  F.T.E. 

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS: 

2.25 F.T.E. 

 
The proposed reductions totaled 2.25 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. 
 

9. 

During the hearing, Lisa Norman, the Director of Certificated Personnel and 

Human Resources (Director), testified that the reasons for the reduction of particular kinds of 
services are (1) the State of California’s reduction of the ROP budget by 21%, and (2) 
decline in enrollment within the ROP Program, and, as a result, less ADA funding for the 
ROP program.  As a consequence, with no changes, there will be a $300,000.00 deficit; 
further, there is concern that there will be further reductions in funds from the State of 
California.  

 
10. 

Respondent questioned the validity of the analysis that was the basis for the 

Superintendent’s decision (as he understood it), as well as the reasonableness and fairness of 
his decision to reduce or eliminate ROP services.  On cross-examination, Respondent asked 
the Director if the SBCSOS relied on the “ROP adults in corrections labor market summary 
job survey (Job Survey).”1  In response, she testified that the Job Survey was one factor but 
reiterated the reasons she described on direct examination (Finding 9).  

 
Respondent readily acknowledged that the SBCSOS has a budgetary problem.   
 
Further, Respondent agreed that the SBCSOS has no control of assignment of 
students to the classes.  Some, if not all, of the ROP classes are taught at Glen Helen 
Rehabilitation Center, a correctional facility.  As a result, the San Bernardino County Sheriff 
assigns the students/inmates.   

 
In summary, even if the Superintendent inaccurately evaluated the Job Survey, there 

were other reasons for the reduction or discontinuing ROP services, including budgetary 
reductions in the ROP program.  There is no evidence to the contrary. 
 

Based on the evidence in the record, the Superintendent properly exercised his 

discretion in determining to reduce or discontinue ROP services. 
 

11. 

The Director developed a seniority list that contained, among other matters, 

the certificated employee’s name, date of hire,2 assignment, credential and subject 
authorization.  She verified the information on file with the SBCSOS and with the 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing. 

 

                                                 
1  
 
2  

Exhibit A. 

 

The Director testified that hire date also means seniority date. 

3 

 
13. 

 
14. 

 
15. 

 
16. 

12. 

Respondent has a seniority date of October 22, 1986 and holds a clear 

designated subject credential that authorizes him to teach auto body, auto repair and fender 
repair, a service identified for reduction by .625 FTE.  He is the only certificated teacher that 
teaches this course.  His credential does not authorize him to provide any other service, and 
he holds no other credential.  The Assistant Superintendent properly noticed Respondent.  

The Superintendent considered all known attrition, including all deaths, 

resignations, retirements, nonreelection of probationary employees and other permanent 
vacancies in service to be effective no later than the end of the current school year. 

Between the employees who first rendered paid service to the SBCSOS on the 

same date, the order of termination was based solely on the basis of the needs of the 
SBCSOS and its students.  

The services that the Superintendent proposed to reduce were “particular kinds 

 
of services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955.  The Superintendent’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds 
of services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  

The reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services related to the 

 
welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the SBCSOS as 
determined by the Superintendent.  

 
17.  No certificated employee junior to Respondent was retained to perform any 

 
services that he was certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

The Superintendent may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
 
Bernardino County Superintendent of Schools to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
services.  The cause for the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is 
related solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  
 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the San 

3. 

 

4 

All arguments not addressed herein are determined not to be relevant and/or 

4. 

 
unsupported by the evidence and therefore rejected. 
 
 

ORDER 
 

1. 

The Accusation served on Respondent William Hancock is sustained.   

2. 

Notice shall be given to Respondent William Hancock that his position will be 
reduced by .625 full-time equivalent for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction 
or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
 
DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
VALLERA J. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

5 

