BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF 
THE LYNWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
Certificated Employees of the Lynwood 
Unified School District,  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

             Respondents. 

 

    OAH No. 2010020633 
     
    
     
 

      

PROPOSED DECISION 

Chris Ruiz, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), heard this matter on April 14-15, 2010, in Lynwood California.    
 

Darren C. Kameya and Mark K. Kitabayashi, Esqs., represented the Lynwood Unified 

School District (District).    

 
Glenn Rothner and Kathleen M. Erskine, Esqs., represented all Respondents (as listed 

in exhibit A), with the exception of David Oronoz (Oronoz), who represented himself for a 
portion of the hearing.   

 
The District served a Notice of Layoff on 197 teachers.  Of those, 157 teachers filed a 

Notice of Defense and requested a hearing.  The Respondent teachers are listed, in order of 
seniority, in exhibit 9B, which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.   

 
On April 15, 2010, the parties moved for a continuance and requested that they be 

allowed to file an agreed upon updated “seniority” list and updated “bump” list, and closing 
briefs.  That motion was granted and the matter was continued until those documents were 
received and reviewed.   

 
The following documents were thereafter received by OAH, marked as indicated, and 

received into evidence: final seniority list (exhibit 9B), final “bump” chart (exhibit 11B), a 
list of 122 Respondents’ names who remain at issue (exhibit 15), an updated tie breaking 
analysis chart (exhibit 10B), and five pages of documents submitted by teacher Sylvia 
Cabrales (exhibit M).  Also received and marked for identification were Respondents’ 
Closing Brief (exhibit L), District’s Closing Brief (exhibit  16), and Oronoz’s Closing Brief 
(exhibit N).  The matter was submitted on April 27, 2010. 

 

Accordingly, and pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (e), the 

dates mandated by the Legislature, and set forth in Education Code section 44949, 
subdivision (c)(3), are extended by a period of time equal to the continuance. 

   

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.      Donald Balfour, Assistant Superintendent of the District, acting in his official 

capacity, caused all pleadings, notices and other papers to be filed and served upon each 
Respondent pursuant to the provisions of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  All 
pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.      
 

2.     Respondents are employed by the District as permanent, probationary, intern, 

pre-intern, emergency permitted, waiver, and/or temporary certificated employees of the 
District. 

3.     On February 23, 2010, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, 
the Governing Board of the District (Board) issued a Resolution (agenda report #9.9) which 
approved the recommendation by the Superintendent that notice be given to Respondents that 
their services will not be required for the ensuing school year and stating the reasons for that 
recommendation.  On March 9, 2010, the Board issued a Supplemental Resolution (agenda 
#9.8) which added 3.72 positions to be eliminated.    

4.     On February 23, 2010, the Board issued a Resolution (agenda report #9.10) 

which adopted tie-breaking criteria.    

 

5.  On March 12, 2010, Respondents were given written notice of the 

recommendation that notice be given to them, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 
and 44955, that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year and stating the 
reasons for that recommendation.  

6.     

It was established that cause exists, within the meaning of Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955, for not reemploying Respondents for the ensuing school year for 
all of the reasons set forth below.  The District has decided that particular kinds of services of 
the District will be reduced or eliminated no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school 
year.  Specifically, the District decided to eliminate 187.72 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) 
positions in 33 separate categories.  The specific categories and number of positions for each 
category are indentified in exhibits 5 and 7, which are hereby incorporated by reference as if 
fully set forth herein.   

7.    The Board decided that it is necessary to decrease the number of certificated 

employees as a result of the reduction in services.  These services are “particular kinds of 
services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious, but rather, constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  The Board 

 

2

is faced with a budget shortfall whereby the District will incur a $50 million deficit within 
three years if it does not take action.   

8.     The reduction or discontinuation of these particular kinds of services is related 

to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  Due to the reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services, it is necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
of the District as determined by the Board.   This reduction is necessary because of budgetary 
issues.    

 
9.     The Board properly considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements 
and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees as of March 13, 2010.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen 
(1983) 144 Cal.App. 3d 627 at 636).   
 

10.     The District properly created its seniority list by determining the first date of 

paid service of each certificated employee and properly utilized reasonable “tie-breaker” 
criteria when necessary.   The District “skipped” over teachers who hold a full credential to 
serve in special education assignments.  Respondents did not challenge these “skips.”  
 

11.    At the conclusion of the hearing, many issues had still not been resolved.  
Thereafter, the District withdrew the “Notice of Recommendation That Services Will Be 
Terminated” and dismissed the Accusation as to a number of Respondents.  Those 
Respondents will be discussed below.  The 122 Respondents whose positions remain at issue 
are identified in exhibit 15, which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth 
herein.   
 
Tie Breaker Criteria 
 

12.    The District utilized reasonable tie-breaker criteria.  The District gave four 
points per credential for clear teaching or service credentials, two points per credential for 
preliminary teaching or service credentials, and one point for BCLAD authorization.  If ties 
were still not broken, the District then utilized a method whereby the last three numbers of an 
employee’s credential were used, the higher numbers receiving greater weight.  When the 
initial criteria were applied, they only resulted in breaking the tie in 4 of 44 cases.  Thus, in 
40 ties, the last three numbers were used to break the tie.  Respondents contend this 
establishes that the tie-breaker criteria is arbitrary.  However, the fact that few of the teachers 
have the additional qualifications that the District deems valuable does not establish that the 
criteria are arbitrary.  In almost all of these type of cases, there are ties that are not broken, 
and the various districts utilize some type of “lottery” or “coin-flip” to resolve the issue.   
 
Respondents Arostigue, Angulo, Palma, and Guagenti 
  

13.    The District acknowledges Patrica Angulo (Angulo) and Lisa Guagenti 

(Guagenti) should have received a layoff notice, but did not.  In order to remedy the 
situation, the District reasonably applied the “Corresponding Number Rule” (CNR) and also 

 

3

agreed to retain Christina Arostigue (Arostigue) and Amber Palma (Palma), the most senior 
teachers in Argulo’s and Guagenti’s teaching categories.  The District’s act of retaining 
Arostigue and Palma is proper.  Where one or more junior employee is inadvertently omitted 
from the layoff process, the accepted remedy is to apply the CNR and retain a similar 
number of the most senior teachers because those are the only teachers who would have been 
retained if the junior teachers had been properly given notice of layoff.  (Alexander v. Delano 
Joint Union High School Dist.  (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 573.)  
 
Other Teachers  
 

14.    After the hearing, the District rescinded its notice of layoff and dismissed the 

Accusation as to Sylvia Cabrales, Ethel Wade, Benjamin Martinez (Martinez), Patricia 
Wyatt, and Lorraine Abbass (Abbass).   
 

15.     None of the teachers described in Findings 13-14 are listed in exhibit 15, 

which is a list of the remaining 122 teacher Respondents at issue.   
 
Respondent Bridgette Polk 
 

16.    

In the District’s closing brief, it recognized that Martinez and Abbass had the 

right to bump into “Regular Education Economics” classes.  It was only established that 
there were two available positions to “bump” into.  Thus, Bridgette Polk, the more junior of 
the three does not have a position to bump into, even though she also holds a similar degree 
to Abbass and Martinez.   
 
Rerpondent Viraseni Wu 
 

17.    Viraseni Wu is the only nurse employed by the District. The District proposes 
to eliminate her position and to utilize outside vendors to meet it obligations under the law.  
There is no legal requirement that the District employ a school nurse, nor was it established 
that the District will be unable to meet its legal obligations by utilizing outside vendors. As 
such, the layoff is proper.   
 
Respondent Ruth Rodgiguez 
 

18.     Ruth Rodriguez testified that she has taken enough classes to qualify for an 

intern credential to teach special education, a “skipped” category.  However, she did not 
establish that she presently possesses said credential.  As such, she can not be skipped.   
 
Respondent Linda Mae George 
   

19.    Linda Mae George (George) contended that she should be retained to bump 

into the position held by Gabriela Camacho (Camacho), a teacher on special assignment 
(TOSA), namely activities director.  However, Camacho is being laid off from her activities 

 

4

director position and she is “bumping” into another position.  Thus, there is no position for 
George to “bump” into. 
Respondent Tran Nguyen 
 

20.    Tran Nguyen (Nguyen) holds a Clear Single Subject Chemistry credential.  It 

was not established that his credential authorizes him to teach middle school science, a 
positon Nguyen desires to “bump” into.   
 
Respondent David Oronoz 
 

21.     David Oronoz (Oronoz) wrote a grant proposal for federal funding that was 
awarded to the District for the 2008-2009 and 2010-2011 school years.  Oronoz is a school 
counselor.  He contended that his release would jeopardize the grant.  However, Oronoz did 
not establish that the grant money can not be used to pay other counselors.  Additionally, the 
District is allowed to determine how it will meet its legal obligations in the upcoming year.  
The instant layoff proceeding is not the proper venue to challenge the District’s plan to meet 
said obligations next year. 
 
The Regional Occupational Program (ROP) 
 

22.     Much evidence was presented on what type of credential(s) and/or experience 

is required to teach an ROP course.  These are courses that prepare students to enter a 
particular field, such as automotive repair or the culinary field.  It was established that a 
teacher needs to possess one of the following: a vocational trade and industry credential; a 
standard secondary industrial arts credential and industrial arts occupational subjects 8.1 
credential; a general secondary credential (related subject area major); or a single subject 
credential (industrial and technology education major or minor).  In addition to possessing 
one of these credentials, the teacher must also have satisfied one of the following options: 
(option 1) 1500 hours related paid or unpaid work experience . . . within the last three years 
or 3000 hours within the last five years; (option 2) minimum 180 hours of related subject-
specific training in the occupational area within the last three years or 360 hours within the 
last five years; or (option 3) successful teaching in the occupational area within the last three 
years plus a minimum of 90 hours of additional training of certification.   
 
Respondent Dorothy Jones 
  

23.     Dorothy Jones (Jones) possesses a Clear Single Subject credential in Home 

Economics.  However, Jones did not establish that she can satisfy option 1, 2, or 3 as 
discussed directly above.  Thus, she may not “bump” Joel Herrera (Herrera #1), who teaches 
“Culinary Arts”, an ROP class.   
 
Respondent George Luna    
 

24.     George Luna (Luna) is a vocational education automotive teacher.  He is being 

bumped by Joel L. Herrera (Herrera #2), a more senior teacher, who also holds a vocational 

 

5

education automotive credential.  Luna contended that the District did not determine if 
Herrera has satisfied option 1, 2, or 3, before considering Herrera for the ROP class Luna 
presently teaches.  Luna established through exhibit 12 that he has satisfied at least one of the 
required options.  On the other hand, Herrera is presently a secondary counselor whose 
position is being eliminated.  When considering whether Herrera #2 could bump Luna, the 
District only considered his credential, and not whether Herrera also satisfied option 1, 2, or 
3, as the District did in Jones’ situation.  As it was established that with any credential, a 
teacher must still satisfy either option 1, 2, or 3, so too must the District establish Herrera is 
competent and qualified to “bump” Luna.  The District did not establish that Herrera #2 is 
competent and qualified to “bump” Luna because it did not establish that Herrera #2 has 
satisfied one of the three required options.          
 
Respondent Natarajan Srinivasan   
 

25.     Natarajan Srinivasan did not testify, nor were the exhibits he offered admitted 

into evidence.  Thus, it was not established that his Clear Designated Subjects Full Time 
Vocational Education Teaching credential in the subject of Accounting Occupations, 
Computer Applications renders him competent and qualified to teach the ROP Banking 
course presently taught by a more junior teacher.   
 
Other Findings 
  

26.   As to all other arguments and contentions, they were not established with 

sufficient evidence or legal authority.   
 
  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 

 
1.     
44949 and 44955.   
      

Jurisdiction for these proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

 
3. 

 
4. 

2.    

 Each of the services set forth in Findings 5 and 6 is a particular kind of 

service which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and 
case law.   

The District’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither  

arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.   

Cause exists to reduce the District's teaching positions as described above and 
to give notice to the affected teachers pursuant to Education Code section 44955.  (Campbell 
v. Abbot (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796; Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 
689).  Based on the above Findings, including the preamble to this Proposed Decision, the 
names of the affected teachers, those as to whom final notices of layoff may be given, are as 
follows: 
 

 

6

All Respondent teachers listed in exhibit 15, with the exception of George Luna as to 

whom the Accusation is dismissed.   
 
 

ORDER 

 
Because of the reductions of services, the District may give notice to the teachers 
identified in Legal Conclusion No. 4 that their services will not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year. 
 
 
Dated: May  ___, 2010. 
                        
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

___________________________ 
CHRIS RUIZ 
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  

                         
 
                                    
                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

7

