BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE 
ANTIOCH UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
CONTRA COSTA COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
CERTAIN NAMED CERTIFICATED 
EMPLOYEES OF THE ANTIOCH UNIFIED 
SCHOOL DISTRICT REPRESENTING 175.9 
FULL TIME EQUIVALENT POSITIONS 
 
 
 
 

             Respondents. 

 

 

 
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

OAH No. 2010020460 

On April 21, 2010, in Antioch, Contra Costa County, California, Perry O. Johnson, 
Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California (OAH), 
heard this matter. 

 
Joshua A. Stevens, Esq., of Fagen Friedman and Fulfrost LLP, Attorneys at Law, 
70 Washington Street, Suite 205, Oakland, California 94607-3795, represented Suzanne 
Pheiffer, Human Resources Officer, Antioch Unified School District (the District). 

 

 
Dale L. Brodsky, Esq., of Beeson Tayer & Bodine, Attorneys at Law, 1404 Franklin 

On April 22, 2010, OAH received a letter, via telefacsimile transmission, that noted a 

Street, Fifth Floor, Oakland, California 94612, represented Respondents whose names appear 
on Attachment “A,” hereto.     
 
 
correction for the first date of paid service to September 2, 2003, by Respondent Lori 
Roemer-Chrobak, who offered testimony during the course of the proceeding.  The letter was 
marked as Exhibit “22.”  
 
 
record closed. 
 

On April 22, 2010, the parties were deemed to have submitted the matter and the 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matter 
 
 
Unified School District (the District), made and filed the Accusation in her official capacity 
with regard to the respondents to this matter. 

 On March 26, 2010, Suzanne Pfeiffer, Human Resources Officer, Antioch 

1. 

 

 

    1

2. 

On March 3, 2010, the District’s Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 

2009-2010-19.  That resolution recites that pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, it has become necessary for the District to reduce and/or to eliminate, as of the end of 
the 2010-2011 school year, particular kinds of services in the form of 175.9 full time 
equivalent (FTE) certificated employee positions as follows: 

Number of Full Time Equivalent (FTE) 
             Positions Eliminated  

 
Vice Principals 
 
 
Director, Curriculum  
Alternative Education Vice Principal 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Class Size Reduction  
 
Physical Education 
Computer  
 
Medical Terminology 
Industrial Technology 
 
Music   
Academic Literacy 
 
English Language Arts 
 

 
Particular Kinds of Services  
 
 
 
 
Administrative  
 
 
 
 
Teachers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special Education Teachers 
 
  
 
 
Other Certificated Employees 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Counselors 
 
 
Reform Facilitator Coaches   
 
Project Teachers 
       
 
 
 
 
3. 

 
Resource   
Special Day Class   
 
Adapted Physical Education  

Total 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

    2.0 
    1.0 
    1.0 

107.0 
    7.0 
  10.0 
    0.6 
    1.0 
    0.6 
    2.6 
    1.0 

    4.0 
    6.0 
    0.5 

    2.4 
    6.0 
  23.2 

175.9 

 On March 15, 2010, the District’s Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 

2009-2010-26.   That resolution recites that it has become necessary for the District to reduce 
and/or to eliminate, as of the end of the 2010-2011 school year, particular kinds of services in 
the form of nine certificated FTE administrative positions. 

Respondents to the proceeding are identified by name on the list attached 

 
4. 

hereto as Attachment “A”      
 

    2

 
6. 

 
7 

 
8. 

 
9. 

5. 

Respondents are employees of the District, who contest the proposed certified 

 
employee lay-off action.  Respondents are either probationary certificated employees or 
permanent (tenured) certificated employees with the District.     

The District’s Human Resources Officer’s written preliminary notice, dated 

March 12, 2010, to each respondent stated legally sufficient reasons of the District’s Board’s 
intent to eliminate the course or service as taught or performed by the subject respondent.   

Each Respondent timely requested in writing a hearing to determine whether 

or not cause exists for not reemploying each respondent for the ensuing school year.   

District’s Human Resources Officer’s timely served upon each respondent the 

Accusation, dated March 26, 2010, and related documents.  Each respondent filed timely 
notices of defense.   

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 

 

 

10.  At the hearing of this matter, the parties stipulated to several issues.  The 

 
11.  More than one year ago on February 11, 2009, the District’s Governing Board 

 
Stipulations 
 
 
stipulations are set out in the following Factual Findings 11 through 14.  
 
 
adopted Resolution No. 2008-2009-29, which was captioned “Determination of Seniority 
Among Certificated Employees (‘Tie Breaker Resolution’).”  That resolution prescribed 11 
criteria that are to be used to determine the order of termination of certificated employees 
who first rendered on the same date paid service to the District.  In accordance with the Tie 
Breaker Resolution, if a tie exists after the application of criterion 1 through criterion 11, 
such tie would be broken by use of a lottery whereby “numbers shall be drawn with the 
lowest number drawn winning the tie and [with the lottery] continuing until all remaining 
tied individuals are ranked in order.”  
 
 
Resolution No. 2008-2009-29 to eight individuals, who are currently in either a Resource 
teacher or a Special Day Class Mild/Moderate teacher assignment and who have a seniority 
date of August 20, 2009.  Those eight certificated employees are: David Backman; Jennifer 
Eichorn; David Hansen; Stacie Lucas; Michelle Ramsey-Levitt; Lana Rosing; Erin Schroeder 
and Tiffany Strickland.  Ms. Strickland was deemed the most senior of the eight individuals 
and she did not receive a layoff notice after the application of the tie-breaking criteria.  
 
 
discovered facts that require amendments to the seniority list that reflect changes to the first 
date of paid service to the District of certificated employees as follows: 
 
 

On March 10, 2010, the District applied the tie-breaking criteria in accordance with 

Since the date of issuance of accusations upon respondents, the District 

12. 

    3

Name of Certificated Employee 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Renata Ellmore 
Theresa Leonardy 
Michelle Reece 
Shelly Travers 
Zhenus Wahidi 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Erroneous Date  
 
 
8/27/04 
8/24/04 
8/30/05 
8/21/08 
8/29/06 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Corrected First Date of  
 
  
 
 
 
 

Paid Service   
8/23/04 
9/29/03 
9/02/04 
8/28/07 
9/26/05 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13. 

The District has rescinded the layoff notices as served on seven respondents 

14.  After cross-examination at the hearing of this matter, the parties stipulated the 

namely: James Antonich; Kevin Bain; Saxon Buchanan Brown; F. Joseph Horacek; Patricia 
Howell; Steven Kestner; and Sherri Welch.   By its withdrawal of the accusations, the 
District will retain the services of those seven individuals for the ensuing school year.   
 
 
District’s records would be changed for Respondent Kenneth Kent as previously appearing 
on the seniority list from August 27, 2004, to December1 2001.  As a consequence of the 
change of the seniority date, the layoff notice is rescinded and the accusation is withdrawn as 
to Respondent Kenneth Kent.  Accordingly, the District will retain the services of 
Respondent Kenneth Kent for the coming school year.  
 
Respondents’ Contentions 

i.  

 
Respondents’ Contentions, Generally 
 
15.   Respondents contend the District’s layoff action is procedurally defective and 

improper insofar as the prospective layoff of the subject credentialed employees rests upon 
an incomplete, and therefore inexact, “seniority report.”  Respondents argue that the 
District’s grouping of teachers only by first date of paid service to the District without any 
rationale scheme for the listing of names fails to provide the affected certificated employees 
with adequate information to assess their individual interests relative to other employees who 
share the same hire date.  Respondents advance that the District’s irregular seniority list does 
not fully account for seniority of the teachers affected by the proposed layoff in light of the 
District’s retention of credentialed employees who are junior in time, or equal in time, in 
service to respondents.   

  
Contentions of Individual Respondents 

16. 

ii. 
 
 
Respondents, such as Ms. Jean Nichols, who are being bumped from the 
independent studies program’s position, argue that the layoff action is improper as such 
teachers have invested great energy and resources to acquire unique skills to attain the level 
of competence now held by them.  Moreover, Respondents in the group of independent 
teachers assert that the District should be equitably estopped from dislodging them from their 

                                                           

1  At the time of the hearing, the parties had not agreed upon the precise date in December 2001 

that Respondent Kenneth Kent was first hired to provide paid services as a teacher in the District.  

    4

17. 

Respondents, such as Ms. Shannon Emerson, contend that the layoff action is 

current independent studies assignment because the District misled the teachers to pursue 
multiple subject credentials as opposed to allowing the teachers to earn a single subject 
credential in a high school oriented discipline that would have now precluded the layoff 
action to be executed against them.  Respondent Nicholas, therefore, argues that she should 
be “skipped” over other teachers even though holders of single subject credentials have 
greater seniority than she possesses.   
 
 
unwise and unjust because over the years specialized training has been completed by the 
subject sixth-grade teachers, who are now subject to the layoff action.  Respondent Emerson 
argues that the layoff action, which is seen as having “decimated [the] sixth-grade team,” 
will undo the progress that the teachers have made in improving math and English scores of 
the students, many of whom “live below the poverty line and some live in high crime, gang 
areas.” Respondents, through Ms. Emerson, argue that the proposed layoff action is in direct 
conflict with the mandate of the No Child Left Behind regulations and will adversely affect 
the school’s status as well as the District’s ability to follow the law.  
 
 
assigning him a position on the District’s seniority report.  He argues that his proper first date 
of paid service to the District should have been in August 2006 because he completed more 
than 75 percent of the school year as a temporary employee of the District. 
 
 
skipped her over more senior teachers because she completed most of the specialized training 
so as to teach courses in the alternative education program at the high school level.  She 
argues that the District has not shown that the teachers, albeit having greater seniority than 
she, who are bumping her do not possess the competence to teach students in the high school 
and adult studies alternative education programs.  Furthermore, Respondent Roemer-
Chrobak avers that the Board Resolution’s directive that calls for the reduction of “107 FTE 
Class Size Reduction Teachers” does not properly include her as a subject for the layoff 
action because she is not specially assigned to a specific classroom as an alternative 
education teacher but rather she interacts with students in one-to-one settings.  
 
Evidence from Respondents  
 

Respondent Joel Miner contends that the Human Resources Officer erred in 

Respondent Lori Roemer-Chrobak contends that the District should have 

19. 

18. 

Respondent Jean Nichols holds a teacher’s position in the Independent Study 

program at Prospect High School’s alternative education site.  Her first day of paid service to 
the District is August 29, 2006.  Respondent Jean Nichols possesses a multiple subject 
credential.  

 
20. 

 
In October 2004 Respondent Nichols began as an Independent Study teacher.  Her 

assignment causes her to devote her energies to aid “at risk” adult and teenager students who 
are in jeopardy of losing educational opportunities.   

 

    5

Although she has a professional preference to teach in the upper grades of high school 
and she has been aware that single subject credentials are ordinarily held by high school level 
teachers, when she came to the District absent an actual credential, Respondent Nichols was 
strongly encouraged to complete a course of teacher education that would have her earn a 
multiple subject credential.  Respondent Nichols argued, on behalf of own herself as well as 
three other similarly situated teachers, that teachers were prompted to compete the 
HOUSSED program or the EPSS classes after the No Child Left Behind program was 
introduced.  Respondent Nichols believes it to be “very unfair” for the District to take her 
from her desired teaching job at the high school level so as to teach at the fourth grade level 
because of her multiple subject credential, which she would not have pursued had District 
administrators not directed her to pursue.  

 
But the contentions advanced by Respondent Nichols were without merit as the 
District’s evidence showed that the Governing Board created no skipping criteria in order to 
retain junior teachers now working in the high school-level Independent Study program.  
And Respondent Nichols did not offer evidence from an administrator, or other responsible 
individual, who could corroborate her claim of having been prompted by District managers 
to complete the multiple subject credential training program.  Moreover as of the date of the 
hearing in this matter, Respondent Nichols was not classified as being “highly qualified” in 
all areas of Independent Studies to which she has been assigned to teach because she has not 
fulfilled all course requirements necessary for certification in that discipline.  

 
And Respondent Nichols provided no competent evidence that the District has 

retained any teacher junior to her for which Ms. Nichols possesses a credential 
and is currently competent to teach.  Nor did Respondent Nichols establish that the Human 
Resources Officer committed a procedural error in the initiation of the layoff action that 
adversely affects her teaching position with the District.   

 
21. 

Respondent Shannon Emerson is a physical education teacher at Antioch 

Middle School.  Her first day of paid service to the District is August 29, 2006.  Respondent 
Emerson possesses a multiple subject credential.  

  
Respondent Emerson has received special training to teach at the middle school that 

  
serves disadvantaged students.  She and her colleagues,2 who joined her in submitting a letter 
in support of her argument, were poignant in advancing that the District will lose valuable 
teacher assets with the proposed layoff action.  And as poignantly argued by Respondent 
Emerson, more likely than not the District may be faced with lower test scores from students 
because of the loss of several teachers who have not only been devoted to teach 
disadvantaged students but also who have received years of specialized training to cope with 
the difficulties of students who populate Antioch Middle School.  
 

                                                           
            2  Lisa Sammon, Dana Yzurdiaga, Dane Dewitt, Karen Rosen, Lisa Kelly, Peggy Shockley, Nancy 
Carlaw, Wolfgang Croskey, and Wendee Weiss. 

    6

But the contentions advanced by Respondent Emerson were without merit as the 
District’s evidence showed that the Governing Board has created no skipping criteria in order 
to retain junior teachers now working in the middle school level after having completed 
specialized training to meet the objectives of the No Child Left Behind regulations.     

 
And Respondent Emerson provided no competent evidence that the District has 

22. 

retained any teacher junior to her for which Ms. Emerson possesses a credential 
and is currently competent to teach.  Nor did Respondent Emerson establish that the Human 
Resources Officer committed a procedural error in the initiation of the layoff action that 
adversely affects her teaching position with the District. 
 
 
Respondent Joel Miner is a sixth grade teacher in mathematics and science 
classrooms at Dallas Ranch Middle School.  His first day of paid service to the District is 
August 28, 2007.  Respondent Miner possesses a multiple subject credential.  
 
 
Respondent Miner was not persuasive that the District is obligated to record his 
seniority date as dating back to August 2006, rather than the current date of August 28, 2007.    
 
 
District extended a temporary teacher contract to Respondent Miner for the 2007-2008 
school year. (In prior years, Respondent served as a substitute teacher and, for some years, he 
was an intern.)  For 2008-2009, the District hired him as a probationary teacher.  When the 
seniority list was created to determine teacher seniority for the instant layoff action, the 
District did grant Respondent Miner one year of service credit as a “prob zero” for a single 
preceding year where Respondent Miner performed services as a temporary employee over a 
span of more than 75 percent of the school year.  Hence Respondent Miner has a correct 
seniority date of August 28, 2007.  
 

Human Resources Officer Ms. Pheiffer, as a rebuttal witness, established that the 

And Respondent Miner provided no competent evidence that the District has retained 

23. 

Respondent Lori Roemer-Chrobak holds a teacher’s position in the 

any teacher junior to him for which Mr. Miner possesses a credential and is currently 
competent to teach.  Nor did Respondent Miner establish that the Human Resources Officer 
committed a procedural error in the initiation of the layoff action that adversely affects her 
teaching position with the District. 
 
 
Independent Study program at Prospect High School’s alternative education site.  Her first 
day of paid service to the District is September 2, 2003.  Respondent Roemer-Chrobak holds 
a multiple subject credential. 
 
 
Prospect High School since 2001.  At this time, she teaches ninth grade students through 
adult students.  Respondent Roemer-Chrobak has nearly completed a three-year course of 
study that has equipped her to provide alternative education and independent study courses to 
students who require unique teacher assistance.  

Respondent Roemer-Chrobak recalls that she has provided services to the students at 

 

    7

But the contentions advanced by Respondent Roemer-Chrobak were without merit as 

the District’s evidence showed that the Governing Board has created no skipping criteria in 
order to retain junior teachers now working at the high school level after having completed 
specialized training to meet the objectives of the Prospect High School alternative education 
program.     

 
And Respondent Roemer-Chrobak provided no competent evidence that the District 
has retained any teacher junior to her for which Ms. Roemer-Chrobak possesses a credential 
and is currently competent to teach.  Nor did Respondent Roemer-Chrobak establish that the 
Human Resources Officer committed a procedural error in the initiation of the layoff action 
that adversely affects her teaching position with the District. 
 
Acts by the District’s Human Resources Officer 

 
24.  Ms. Suzanne Pfeiffer, Human Resources Officer, for the District came to the 

hearing of this matter to provide credible and persuasive evidence. 

 

 
Ms. Pfeiffer established the District’s management rationally determined that the 
 
prospective elimination of particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year will 
best serve the objectives and mission of the District, as well as the welfare of the students 
served by the District.  The Human Resources Officer noted that an array of factors, 
including an impending financial plight for the District, serve as underpinnings for the 
necessity of the prospective reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services now 
offered by the District.  

 
Ms. Pfeiffer demonstrated that the District’s “seniority report” sets forth correct 
seniority dates for the respondents who will be affected by the layoff.  The District has plans 
for a rational rehire mechanism that will properly rank teachers through its application of tie-
breaking criteria.  Ms. Pfeiffer showed that respondents’ contentions, which advanced that 
the layoffs were flawed because of the current configuration of the District’s seniority list, 
were without merit.   

 
Ms. Pfeiffer offered evidence that a rational analysis was made for the elimination of 

107 “Class Size Reduction teachers” by the District’s personnel closely analyzing the 
credentials and existing assignments of less senior teachers who only hold multiple subject 
credentials as being subject to the layoff action.  Also the District’s personnel did not have 
the benefit of a Board resolution to skip junior teacher, who despite holding only a multiple 
subject credential also had received special training in independent study or alternative 
education or providing service to disadvantage students.  And Ms. Pfeiffer noted that the 
District’s Human Resources personnel calculated and estimated the prospective needs of the 
students as measured against prospective teacher staffing assets for the coming year.   

 
Ms. Pfeiffer described a retirement incentive program that may affect the ultimate 

layoff action.  The Board’s retirement offer entails a plan to include 60 potential retirees. But 
the potential loss of participating older teachers, who are sought for inclusion in the incentive 

    8

retirement program, was not computed into the current layoff action because the deadline for 
older teacher to accept the offer has not occurred.  

 
The Human Resources Officer in her official capacity was reasonable in her exercise 

 
of discretion in executing the procedures associated with the lay-offs of certificated 
employees required by the subject PKS resolution.  The Human Resources Officer, as the 
Superintendent’s designee, was neither arbitrary, capricious nor fraudulent in carrying out 
the directive of the Board’s Resolution No. 2009-2010-19.  
 
Ultimate Findings  

  

 

 
25.  No competent and credible evidence establishes that as a result of the proposed 
elimination of the full time equivalent positions respectively held by respondents, the District 
will retain any teacher who is junior to respondents to perform services for which 
respondents have been certificated or found to be competent to teach next school year. 

The decision of the District’s Board to eliminate or discontinue a total of 175.9 

FTE positions as specified in Resolution No. 2009-2010-19, including the positions held by 
each respondent, was neither arbitrary nor capricious.  Rather, the determination was within 
the proper exercise of the discretion bestowed by law upon the District.  

The District’s proposed elimination or discontinuation of the subject full time 

equivalent positions, including the positions respectively held by respondents, for the 
ensuing school year, is related to the welfare of the District and its overall student 
population.    
 
28. 

The Board determined that it will be necessary, due to the elimination of 

particular kinds of services, to decrease the number of teachers before the beginning of the 
next academic year.  The Human Resources Officer, as the Superintendent’s designee, 
lawfully directed the notification to respondents of the elimination of the certificated 
positions held by each respondent.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

44949 and 44955.    

The District provided all notices and other requirements of Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955.  This conclusion of law is made by reason of the matters set forth 
in Factual Findings 1 through 9. 

Evidence Code section 664 establishes a presumption that the action or official 

duties of a public entity, such as the District and its governing board, have been regularly 
performed.  Respondents offer no evidence to rebut the presumption that the District has 

 
26. 

 
27. 

 

 
1. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

    9

Judgments entered by a tribunal on the stipulation of the parties have the same 

properly performed actions related to the procedures that seek the non reemployment of 
respondents.  
  
 
4. 
 
effect as acts tried on the merits.  (John Siebel Associates v. Keele (1986) 188 Cal.App.3d 
560, 565.)  The District stipulates to withdraw the Accusation against the certificated 
employees named in Factual Findings 13 and 14.  The stipulations are binding on the parties. 
 
 
Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 cause exists to 
give respondents notice of the discontinuation of full-time equivalent positions in the 
particular kinds of services rendered by respondents, by reason of the matters set out in 
Factual Findings 25, 26 and 28.    

5. 

 
6.  

The discontinuation of the subject particular kinds of service provided by each 
respondent relates solely to the welfare of the District and its students within the meaning of 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, by reason of the matters in Factual Finding 27.   
 
RECOMMENDED ORDER 

1. 

The Accusations served on respondents are sustained, except that the 

 
 
accusations are dismissed as to Respondents James Antonich, Kevin Bain, Saxon Buchanan 
Brown, F. Joseph Horacek, Patricia Howell, Steven Kestner, Sherri Welch and Kenneth 
Kent.   
 
2.  Where preliminary layoff notices were not rescinded as determined above, 

final notice may be given to respondents that their respective services will not be required for 
the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of the particular kinds 
of services by the Antioch Unified School District.  
 
DATED:  April 30, 2010 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

_____________________ 
PERRY O. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
State of California 

 

    10

