BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
FRUITVALE SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF KERN, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
OAH No. 2010040177 

 
In The Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
CALLIE CLANAHAN; 
JACLYN DIAZ; 
MICHELLE ENGLISH, 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Peter C. Carton, Attorney at Law, represented the Kern High School District 

H. Stuart Waxman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on May 3, 2010, at the Kern High 
School District, Bakersfield, California. 
 
 
(District). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Ernest H. Tuttle III, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents.    

The matter was submitted on May 3, 2010. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

The Governing Board of the Fruitvale School District (Board) determined to 

 
 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers and other 
certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the 
competency and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be 
reduced or eliminated.   
 
/// 

1

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process 

 
involving review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in 
accordance with the requirements of the Education Code.  
  
  

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.  Dr. Carl F. Olsen is the Superintendent of the District. 

4.  The Superintendent of the District made and filed Accusations against each 

3.  Notice was served on all respondents by either personal service or certified 

 
 
 
2.  On or before March 15, 2010, the District served on each respondent a 
 
written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to respondents 
pursuant to Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be required 
for the next school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation and noted that 4.2 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions would be 
reduced and/or discontinued.   
 
 
mail.  Certificated employees timely requested, in writing, a hearing to determine if 
there is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.   
 
 
of the certificated employees who requested a hearing.  The Accusations, with 
required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense, were timely served 
on those certificated employees.   
 
 
desired a hearing.   
 
 
employees of the District. 
 
 
following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year: 
 
SERVICES 
 
 
Self-Contained Classroom 
Instruction, Grades K-6 
 
Occupational Therapist 
 
Total   
 

6.  Respondents in this proceeding are probationary or permanent certificated 

5.  A timely Notice of Defense was filed on behalf of those respondents who 

7.  On March 9, 2010, the Board took action to reduce or discontinue the 

NUMBER OF FULL-TIME
EQUIVALENT POSITIONS

4.2 

0.2 

4.0 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

8.  Subsequent to adoption of the Board’s Resolution, the District identified 

 
vacancies in School Year 2010-2011 due to retirements, release of temporary 
teachers, and resignations.  The District received one resignation on the morning of 
the hearing.  No resignation or retirement notices were received before March 15, 
2010.  The retiring teacher, who has a multiple subject credential will complete the 
current school year. 
 
9.  Board Resolution No. 0910-07 established tie-breaker criteria for 
 
determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid 
service on the same date.  It provided that the order of termination shall be based on 
the needs of the District. 
 
 
10.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 
dates (first date of paid service as a probationary employee), current assignments and 
locations, advanced degrees, credentials, and authorizations.  Credential and 
authorization data are obtained from the records of the County Office of Education, at 
which certificated employees must register such documents.   
 

11.  The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and 
“bumping” list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services 
being reduced.  In determining who would be laid off for each kind of service 
reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by the known 
vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  
The District then checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they 
could “bump” other less senior employees.   
 
 
12.  The District used information from its seniority list to apply the tie-
breaker criteria of the Board Resolution.  However, following the rescission of certain 
preliminary notices, no tie-breaker issues arose in connection with the layoff process.1
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 

 
 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 
 
2.  All of the identified services are particular kinds of services that could be 
 
reduced or discontinued under Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce 
or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services 
relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of 
Code section 44949. 
 
                                                 
 
the scope of this Decision. 

1 The tie breaker criteria could affect re-hire rights, but that is an issue beyond 

 

3

5.    No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

3.  A District may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code 
 
section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to 
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce 
services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because 
fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. 
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)   
 
4.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 
 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the 
Board directed be reduced or discontinued.   
 
 
services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
6.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, 
the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 
position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)   
 
7.  Respondents argued that the four self-contained classroom instruction FTE 
 
positions in the Board’s resolution should be reduced to two because of the retirement 
of a teacher holding a multiple subject credential.  The District received the teacher’s 
retirement notification on May 3, 2010, the morning of the hearing, and the teacher 
intends to finish the current school year.  The District need not consider any attrition 
occurring after the March 15 deadline for serving preliminary notices of layoff.  (San 
Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627.) 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

 

4

ORDER 

2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

 
 
1.  The Accusations against the respondents are sustained.  Notice may be 
given to the respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year because of reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
  
  
DATED:  May 5, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
H. STUART WAXMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

5

