 
BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
FAIRFIELD-SUISUN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SOLANO, CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES, 
 
                                                 Respondents. 

 
OAH No. 2010020965 
 

 
 
PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Sandra Woliver, Attorney at Law, Dannis, Woliver and Kelley, 71 Stevenson Street, 

This matter was heard before Diane Schneider, Administrative Law Judge, State of 
California, Office of Administrative Hearings, in Fairfield, California, on April 20, 2010. 
 
 
Nineteenth Floor, San Francisco, California, represented the Fairfield-Suisun Unified School 
District. 
 
 
David Weintraub and David Coleman, Attorneys at Law, Beeson, Tayer & Bodine, 
1404 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Oakland, California, represented all respondents listed in 
Attachment C. 
 

Respondent Jeffery A. Wurth was present at the hearing and represented himself. 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of respondents Diannah Cox, Barbara J. 

 
 
Guzzo, Staci A. Mitchell, Douglas A. Moore, Erika Murillo, Steven M. Phillips, Nathan E. 
Rose, Leslyn J. Skog, and Eileen E. Witt-Albedi. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

 
 
capacity as Superintendent of the Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District (district). 
 

Jacki Cottingim-Dias, Ph.D., made and filed the Accusations in her official 

2. 

On March 2, 2010, the district’s Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 21-

0910 (Revised), which sets forth the board’s determination that it will be necessary for the 
district to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2010-2011 school 
year, for a total of 207 certificated full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.   
 

 

1

3. 

All notices were timely and properly served.  All notices and other 

jurisdictional requirements contained in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 have 
been provided or satisfied.   

At the hearing, counsel entered into a written stipulation (Attachment F). 

The respondents represented by Mr. Weintraub and Mr. Coleman are 

identified in Attachment C.  The following respondents filed notices of defense but were 
neither present nor represented at the hearing: Diannah Cox, Barbara J. Guzzo, Staci A. 
Mitchell, Douglas A. Moore, Erika Murillo, Steven M. Phillips, Nathan E. Rose, Leslyn J. 
Skog, and Eileen E. Witt-Albedi. 
 

6. 

The list of respondents in this matter, as revised by the district on the day of 
the hearing, are identified in Attachment B.1  At the hearing, the district fully rescinded the 
layoff notices sent to the respondents listed on Attachment D, and partially rescinded the 
layoff notices sent to the respondents listed on Attachment E. 
 

7. 

 On February 29, 2010, the Governing Board of the Fairfield-Suisun Unified 
School District adopted Resolution No. 20-0910.  This resolution sets forth the criteria to be 
used to determine the order of termination of certificated employees for the 2010-2011 
school year who first rendered paid service to the district on the same date.  A point value is 
ascribed to each of these criteria.  If application of the criteria results in a tie, it is to be 
broken by use of a lottery. 

The district properly applied the criteria set forth in Resolution No. 20-0910 to 

 
8. 
respondents.   
 

Two respondents testified at the hearing.   

9. 
 
10.  Karen C. Zimmerman, a third grade teacher, has a technology certification 

relating to “smart boards.”  Ms. Zimmerman believes that the district should have retained 
her because she possesses special training in “smart board” technology.   

Jeffrey A. Wurth, a second grade teacher, turned in his application for a 

supplementary credential in English and Science.  He does not, however, presently hold such 
a credential because he did not complete all of the required paperwork.  He believes that the 
district should give him credit for possessing such a credential because he completed the 
coursework necessary to obtain the credential and paid a $55 credential fee.  Ronald K. 
Hawkins, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, testified that the district cannot give a 
teacher credit for a credential until he actually receives the credential.  When Mr. Wurth 
receives his credential, the district will take his credential into account in its rehiring process.   

 
4. 
 
5. 

 
11. 

 

                                                

1  Attachment B also identifies the positions that will be partially laid off.    

 

2

12. 

The frustration and disappointment expressed by Ms. Zimmerman and Mr. 

Wurth are understandable.  Their contentions, however, do not constitute a legal basis upon 
which to challenge their layoffs.   

The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 

 
12. 

district and of its pupils. 
 

13.  Any contentions raised by respondents and not discussed above are found to 

be without merit and are hereby rejected. 

 
14.  No junior employee is being retained to render a service that any of the 

 
respondents are certificated and competent to perform. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
 
The  services  identified  in  Attachment  A  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that 
may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision 
to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  complied  with  the  guidelines  set  forth  in 
Education  Code  section  44955.    The  board’s  decision  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious, 
and was a proper exercise of its discretion.   
  
Cause exists because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of 
 
services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents listed in 
Attachment B that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The 
cause relates to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of 
section 44949. 
 

2. 

ORDER 
 

Notice may be given to respondents listed in Attachment B that their services will not 

be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services.  Notice shall be given in reverse order of seniority. 
 
  
 Dated: _____________________ 
 
 

________________________________ 
DIANE SCHNEIDER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 
 
 
 

 

3

List of Attachments 
Attachment A: Revised PKS List 
Attachment B: Revised List of Respondents 
Attachment C: Respondent’s Represented by Mr. Weintraub and Mr. Coleman 
Attachment D: List of Full Rescissions  
Attachment E:  List of Partial Rescissions 
Attachment F: Stipulation between Counsel 
 

 

4

