BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
SOUTHERN KERN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF KERN, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

OAH No. 2010031173 

 
 

 
 

In the Matter of the Layoffs of: 
 
STEPHANIE EBELTOFT, et al., 
 
                                       Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard by Mark E. Harman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) of the 

 
 
Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 20, 2010, in Rosamond, 
California. 
 
 
District (District).  Lucas Oppenheim and Tamra M. Smith, Attorneys at Law, represented 
Stephanie Ebeltoft (Ebeltoft), Paul A. Grana (Grana), Michelle Hubkey (Hubkey), Cindy 
McNutt (McNutt), and Jessica Mountz (Mountz) (collectively, Respondents). 
  

Peter C. Carton, Attorney at Law, represented the Southern Kern Unified School 

The District decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and gave 
Respondents and other certificated District employees notice of its intent not to reemploy 
them for the 2010-2011 school year.  Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of 
whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received.  The matter was submitted for decision 

on April 20, 2010. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
1. 

2. 
 
3. 

The District operates four comprehensive schools and one alternative school 

 
for 3,400 students.  Rodney J. Van Norman is the Superintendent of the District.  He filed the 
Accusation in his official capacity.  James Johnson, Assistant Superintendent, and his staff 
were responsible for implementation of the technical aspects of the layoff. 
 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

On February 17, 2010, the Superintendent recommended to the Governing 
Board of the District (Governing Board) that it reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
services for the 2010-2011 school year and, for that reason, that it give notice to certain 
certificated employees that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  

On the same date, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 09-10-12 to reduce or 
discontinue the following services: 
 

 
PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES 

 
NO. OF FULL TIME 
EQUIVALENT 
(FTE) 
POSITIONS 
 

 

 

K-6 Self-Contained Classroom Instruction 
 
High School English Teaching Services 
 
High School Math Teaching Services 
 
High School Science Teaching Services 
 
High School Social Science Teaching Services 
 
Middle School Art Teaching Services 
 
Middle School Music/Choir Teaching Services 
 
Middle School Computers Teaching Services 
 
Administration 
 
School Psychologist 
 

          8 
 
          1 
 
          1 
 
          1 

          1 

 

 

 

 

             1 

                   1 

             1 
 
             1 
 
             1 
          _____ 
  
           17 

 
Total FTE Reduction 

 
 

4. 

Pursuant to this resolution, on or before March 15, 2010, the District served 
preliminary layoff notices, via personal service, to nine certificated employees, including 
Respondents, that the District’s Superintendent had recommended to the Governing Board 
that the District give notice to these employees that their services will not be required in the 
2010-2011 school year. 

Respondents, and Aida Ortiz, timely requested a hearing to determine if there 
is cause for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  Aida Ortiz withdrew her 
request for hearing on April 7, 2010. 

 
5. 

 

2 

 
7. 
 
8. 

 
10. 

 
12. 

6. 

The Superintendent caused the Accusations, dated March 25, 2010, and their 

related documents, to be filed and served upon each of the Respondents.  Respondents timely 
filed their Notices of Defense.  

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of 
services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955.1
 
9. 

The Governing Board took action to reduce the services set forth in factual 

finding number 3 primarily because of the State’s proposed reduction of funding for 
education.  The decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services is neither 
arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s discretion. 

The reduction or discontinuance of services set forth in factual finding number 

3 is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to 
decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board. 

 
11.  On February 17, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution 09-10-11, 
which includes criteria for determining the order of seniority of those employees with the 
same first date of paid service (tie-breaking criteria).  These tie-breaking criteria are based on 
the needs of the District and its students and included:  credentialing; authorizations to teach 
English learners; experience; special education needs; evaluations; training; and 
extracurricular activities.  The District applied these criteria to determine the relative order of 
seniority among employees who had the same seniority date. 

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

dates (first date of paid service), current assignments, and credentials.  The District used the 
seniority list to develop a proposed lay-off list of the least senior employees currently 
assigned to the various services being reduced.  In determining who would be laid off for 
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by 
the known vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of 
seniority.  The District then determined whether these employees held credentials in another 
area and were entitled to “bump” other employees. 

 
13a.  Respondents contend that the District has assumed a 30-to-1 student/teacher 

ratio in K-3 classrooms for the 2010-2011 school year, and that this assumption is 
incorporated in the analysis the District has used in determining the reductions in services 
and decrease in the number of District employees at the close of the current school year.  In 
Article XX of the current bargaining agreement between the District and its certificated 
employees, the District agreed to make every effort to adhere to the maximum of 25 students 
                                                
 
  

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

3 

per classroom (covered by class size reduction) in the K-3 level.  “Every effort is defined as a 
maximum of 1.25 students per class at a single grade level or subject at one site above the 
[25-student] class size limits.”  It is nearly certain that, following implementation of the 
layoffs as proposed by the District herein, and absent future modifications, class sizes will 
increase in the 2010-2011 school year.  Respondents maintain that this will violate the 
collective bargaining agreement and that, within several weeks after the first day of classes 
of the 2010-2011 school year, the District will be forced to open one or more additional 
classrooms for K-3 students.  In Respondents’ view, this will severely and substantially 
disrupt class continuity and the educational process for these students.  Hence, Respondents 
argue, without citing any case authority, that the proposed reduction in services and 
corresponding layoffs is not related to the welfare of the District and its pupils and cannot be 
sustained under section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), which states in pertinent part, that the ALJ 
must determine whether “the charges sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of 
the schools and the pupils thereof.” 

 
 13b.  The District prevails in this argument because it has established sufficient facts 

which reasonably support the actions that it is taking, i.e., the bleak outlook for the State’s 
finances necessitates a reduction in school services and a corresponding decrease in 
certificated employees.  Furthermore, the District’s proposed layoffs do not prevent the 
District from rehiring or recalling employees affected thereby if circumstances were to 
change before the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year.  The District also may renegotiate 
the bargaining agreement with the teachers.  Thus, Respondents’ arguments are not ripe and 
are merely speculative with regard to any particular outcome next fall. 

 
14a.  The District determined that Respondent Ebeltoft has a seniority date of 

October 13, 2009, which she disputes.  She currently teaches math and science in a core 
classroom to sixth graders at Tropico Middle School under a contract with the District that 
became effective October 13, 2009.  Her contract identifies her status as “Probationary Year 
Two.”  As of May 1, 2009, she has a preliminary multiple subject credential with an English 
language learner (ELL) authorization.  She has applied for supplemental authorization in 
mathematics, which is pending with the Commission on Teacher Credentialing. 

 
14b.  Respondent Ebeltoft was employed by the District for most of the 2007-2008 

school year, beginning on September 20, 2007, and for the entire 2008-2009 school year, 
teaching under an intern credential.2  The District classified her as a temporary employee 
                                                

2 Ebeltoft became employed as a Kindergarten classroom teacher on September 20, 
2007.  Her contract said she was an “Intern Classroom Teacher” and that her employment 
with the District would terminate on June 30, 2008.  The District notified Ebeltoft on 
February 26, 2008 that, as provided in the contract, her employment would end “not later 
than June 30, 2008.”  The District’s letter also cited section 44929.21, presumably in 
reference to notices of nonreelection normally provided to probationary employees whom the 
District does not intend to retain for the succeeding school year.  Ebeltoft was hired again for 
the entire 2008-2009 school year and taught a core self-contained ninth grade classroom in 
math, science, English, and history.  Her contract, by its terms, ended on June 30, 2009.  The 

4 

during those years of service apparently because she had less than a regular credential.  She 
argues that the District should have classified her as a probationary employee under the 
authority of Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City School District 
(2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260 (Bakersfield).  If she were reclassified as probationary for 
those years, her seniority date would move to September 20, 2007. 

 
14c.  The District did not rehire Ebeltoft at the beginning of the 2009-2010 school.  
When her 2008-2009 contract ended in June 2009, she returned to the District at the start of 
the 2009-2010 school year as a substitute teacher.  The District considers her first date of 
paid service in a probationary position as October 13, 2009, in part because, under her 
previous contracts, she did not hold a regular teaching credential.  Under the District’s 
policy, intern teachers are classified as temporary employees and awarded annual contracts.  
This allows the District each year to advertise their positions and attempt to recruit fully 
prepared teachers for their assignments and, having been unsuccessful, to certify that it had 
thereby exercised reasonable efforts, which the District maintains is legally required under 
state law.  Following this certification process, the District could then rehire qualified interns 
for the succeeding year.  Since temporary employees do not accrue seniority, if the District’s 
classification policy were deemed valid, the District correctly determined Ebeltoft’s seniority 
date.  The District, however, failed to establish that this process was used in connection with 
Ebeltoft’s prior positions.  Furthermore, Bakersfield explicitly rejected a similar argument, 
holding that persons holding less than a regular credential must in certain circumstances be 
classified as probationary and, as probationary employees, they are entitled to accrue 
seniority.  (Bakersfield, supra, 145 Cal.App.4th  at pp. 1300-1301.) 

 
14d.  Whether Ebeltoft prevails and receives a new seniority date, however, will 

have no impact on the relative order of termination in this proceeding.  Respondents Hubkey, 
McNutt, and Mountz are permanent employees, have clear multiple subject credentials, are 
higher than Ebeltoft on the seniority list, with seniority dates earlier than September 20, 
2007, and are teaching in K-6 classroom settings (Mountz is teaching ELL).  The District 
intends to layoff these employees, as well.  None of Ebeltoft’s circumstances provide her any 
additional priority in order to retain her position.  Since these facts do not change the order of 
termination in this proceeding, it is unnecessary to decide other issues Ebeltoft has raised. 

 
15a.  Respondent Grana is teaching two periods of band, two periods of music 
appreciation, and one period of choir at Rosamond High School.  He has a preliminary 
credential to teach music in K-12 classrooms.  Grana testified sincerely, and with pride, 
about the growth he has seen in the high school band program, and its participants, since he 
has been employed there.  He attributes this primarily to the fact that, by having both middle 
school and high school band programs, the District has offered students interested in music 
additional opportunities and incentives to pursue their interests.  Under the current layoff 
                                                                                                                                                       
District notified Ebeltoft on February 2, 2009, that the “employment contract and all 
employment with this District will expire automatically effective June 30, 2009.  This notice 
is also given under Education Code § 44929.21.”  (Exhibit F.) 

 

5 

scenario, the position of middle school music teacher will be eliminated, and the current 
middle school teacher, Mr. Ferrandini, will bump into Grana’s position.  Students will not 
begin to have a band experience until their freshman year in high school.  A beginning music 
class will have to be moved to the high school, further depleting opportunities for talented 
musicians to have worthwhile experiences in a band program. 

 
15b.  All of Grana’s arguments appear to be good ones for retaining a middle school 
music teacher, but the wisdom of the Governing Board’s decision to eliminate the position is 
not a proper issue for this proceeding.  As long as a decision to reduce or discontinue 
services is reasonable, the motivation is not open to challenge.  (Campbell Elementary 
Teachers Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796.) 

 
16. 

The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to Respondents to 

render a service which these Respondents are certificated and competent to render. 

 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

3. 

1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 7. 
 
 
that could be reduced or discontinued under section 44955. 
 
 
Cause exists for the District to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of 
services listed in factual finding number 3, which cause relates solely to the welfare of the 
District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949, as set forth in factual finding 
numbers 1 through 10. 
   
 
A. Grana, Michelle Hubkey, Cindy McNutt, and Jessica Mountz for the 2010-2011 school 
year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 
through 16 and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 3. 
 

Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondents Stephanie Ebeltoft, Paul 

4. 

ORDER 

The Accusation is sustained and the District may notify Respondents Stephanie 

 
 
Ebeltoft, Paul A. Grana, Michelle Hubkey, Cindy McNutt, and Jessica Mountz that their 
services will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular 
kinds of services. 
 
Dated: May ____, 2010 

 

 

_______________________________ 
MARK E. HARMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

6 

