BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
SAN MARCOS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Respondents Listed on Exhibit “A” 
 
 
 

 

OAH No. 2010030217 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Kerrie E. Taylor Esq., Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost LLP, represented the District. 

 
Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in San Marcos, California on April 21, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
except Respondent Nicholas Dwyer.   
 

Jon Y. Vanderpool, Esq., Tosdal Smith Steiner & Wax, represented all Respondents 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Respondent Nicholas Dwyer. 

The matter was submitted on April 21, 2010. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 
 
 
The Board of Education of the San Marcos Unified School District determined to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers for budgetary reasons.  
The decision was not related to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose 
services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.   

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 

review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” “skipping” and breaking ties between/among 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in accordance 
with the requirements of the Education Code.  

 
 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” (Respondents) are probationary or 

permanent certificated employees of the San Marcos Unified School District (District). 
 
 
No. 32-09/10 and thereby took action to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services, 

On March 8, 2010, the District’s Governing Board (Board) adopted Resolution 

2. 

 

1

 
 
 
 

 

 

commencing the 2010-2011 school year.  Further, the Board directed the Superintendent to 
send appropriate notice to all certificated employees of the District who would be laid off as 
a result of the reduction of the particular kinds of services. 
 

3. 

On March 9, 2010, Len Judd, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources and 

5. 

4. 

On March 2, 2010, Kevin D. Holt, the District’s Superintendent 

Respondents submitted a timely Request for Hearing to determine if there was 

Development (Assistant Superintendent) served permanent and probationary certificated 
employees with written notice that he recommended not to re-employ them in the 2010-2011 
school year and stated the reasons therefor.  In addition, the notice advised Respondents of 
the right to hearing, that the request for hearing must be delivered to the District’s office no 
later than March 18, 2010, and that the failure to request a hearing would constitute waiver of 
the right to a hearing.  
 
 
cause for not re-employing them for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
(Superintendent), made and filed an Accusation for lay-off of certificated employees.  He 
served each individual who submitted a Request for Hearing with an Accusation, Notice of 
Defense, Notice of Hearing and related materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
took action to reduce or eliminate the following particular kinds of certificated services 
commencing the 2010-2011 school year: 
 

On March 8, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 32-09/10 and thereby 

In response, Respondents submitted a timely Notice of Defense. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied. 

7. 

6. 

Type of Service 
Elementary Teaching 
English 
Life Science 
Math 
Social Science 
Physical Science 

FTE
28.0 
4.0 
        1.0 
2.0 
6.0 
0.2 

8. 

The District considered all positively assured attrition in determining the 

 
The proposed reductions totaled 41.2 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. 
 
 
actual number of final layoff notices to be delivered to its certificated employees that 
occurred prior to March 15, 2010. 
 
 
The Assistant Superintendent testified that there have been additional resignations or 
retirements in the District and that the District has not considered this attrition because there 
is concern that there may be further reductions from the State of California.  No evidence 
was offered to establish when the subsequent retirement or resignation occurred.  

 

2

Presumably, the attrition referred to by the Assistant Superintendent occurred after March 15, 
2010.  As such, the District need not consider positively assured attrition that occurs between 
the date of the preliminary notice and the final notice in determining the number of 
certificated employees to be reduced.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627, 631.)  
 

 

9. 

The Assistant Superintendent was responsible for implementing the technical 

aspects of the layoff.  The District developed a seniority list.  The seniority list for noticed 
certificated employees contained, among other matters, the teacher’s name, seniority date, 
credential type, English Language Certification (if any), supplemental authorization(s) (if 
any), assignment, site and application of tie-breaker criteria. 

 
The seniority date was based on the first date of paid service rendered in a 
probationary position.1  To assure the accuracy of the District’s information, the Assistant 
Superintendent notified certificated employees of seniority date, credentials and other data on 
file with the District and provided certificated employees an opportunity to verify, challenge 
or update this information.  The Assistant Superintendent testified that no employee reported 
an error in the information on file with the District.   

 
10. 

The Assistant Superintendent testified that the District intends to retain the 

most senior teacher who is certificated and competent to teach in the District’s Teen Parent 
Program and has experience teaching at risk-students.    

 
No particular credential is required to provide service in the Teen Parent Program.  
The California Commission on Teacher Credentialing requires that teachers in independent 
studies programs demonstrate subject matter competence in all core academic subjects that 
they teach.  Core academic subjects include Math, Science, History, Government, English 
and Geography.  Teachers can demonstrate competency by establishing that they are highly 
qualified in the subject area under the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB). 

 
Students who participate in the Parent Teen Program are mothers or fathers who have 
babies and may bring their children to school.  Typically, they are at risk for dropping out of 
school for different reasons; these students have the responsibilities of being a parent; some 
have deficiencies in high school credits; others have been out of school for a period of time; 
and, all are at different places on their schedule to graduation. 

 
The District identified Lori Hollis (Hollis) as the most senior teacher who satisfies its 
competency.  Her seniority date is August 13, 2007.  She holds a single subject credential in 
History and a supplemental authorization in Introduction to English.  She is highly qualified 
under NCLB in all core subject areas.  She has 15 years experience (12 years outside the 
District) teaching at risk students. 
 

                                                 
1  
 

Education Code section 44845 

 

3

Respondent Claudia Hernandez (Respondent Hernandez) asserts that she is competent 

to bump Hollis.  Her seniority date is August 9, 2007, and she holds a single subject social 
sciences credential; Respondent Hernandez is assigned to Twin Oaks High School and 
teaches in the District’s alternative education program.  She has been assigned to this site for 
three years.  Hernandez teaches Independent Studies, Social Science, Government, U.S. 
History, World History, Geography and Economics.  She is NCLB compliant (highly 
qualified) in all Social Studies.  She is not highly qualified in Math or English.  
 

The District established that it has a need for a teacher who is competent to teach in 

its Teen Parent Program.  Despite being senior to Hollis, Hernandez did not establish that she 
satisfies the District’s competency criteria to teach in the Teen Parent Program.  According 
to the evidence in the record, Hollis is the most senior certificated and competent teacher to 
teach in the Teen Parent Program.  Respondent Hernandez is not entitled to bump Hollis, and 
the District properly retained Hollis. 

Between the employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the 

same date, the Board determined their order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the 
District and its students.  The Board adopted specific criteria and provided clear instructions 
for implementation of the criteria.  The order of termination was based on the needs of the 
District and its students.   
 

12. 

In reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services, the services of no 

permanent employee may be terminated while retaining any employee with less seniority to 
render a service that said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 

13. 

The services that the District proposed to reduce were “particular kinds of 

services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  

 
The District’s reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services 
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
of the District as determined by the Board.  

 
15.  No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform 

 
services that any Respondent was certificated and competent to render. 

 
11. 

 
14. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied. 
 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 

4

 

 

2. 

3. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

The District need not consider positively assured attrition that occurs between 

 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
 
the date of the preliminary notice and the final notice in determining the number of 
certificated employees to be reduced.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627, 631.) 
 
 
Marcos Unified School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The 
cause for the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to 
the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  
 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the San 

4. 

5. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
continuing position that he/she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior 
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Lacy vs. 
Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 469.)  
 

 

6. 

The District has the discretion to determine whether teachers are certificated 
and competent to hold the position for which said teachers have been skipped and retained.  
(King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016)  Junior teachers may 
be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or 
capabilities that their more senior counterparts lack.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High 
School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 
v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831)   
 
 
perform a service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
the law and therefore rejected. 
 
 

All arguments not addressed herein are not supported by the evidence and/or 

No employee with less seniority than any Respondent is being retained to 

7. 

8. 

 

5

ORDER 

The Accusation served on Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” is sustained.  Notice 

shall be given to Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” before May 15, 2010 that their services 
will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
 
DATED: _________________________ 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
VALLERA J. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

6

SAN MARCOS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
RESPONDENTS 
EXHIBIT “A” 

 
1.  Altieri, Malia 
 
2.  Beiss, Heather 
 
3.  Bordonaro, Kirsten 
4.  Collier, Jamie 
 
5.  Contreras, Alyssa 
6.  Dwyer, Nicholas 
7.  Jeremy Ferebee 
8.  Fodor Delaney 
9.  Jennifer Gutierrez  
10. Hernandez, Claudia 
11. McLeod, Mara 
12. Medina, Kelly 
13. Murphy, Aarika 
14. Vasconcellos, Stephanie  
15. Walsh, Meghan 
16. Yoder, Allison 
  
 
  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

  
  

 

  
  
  
 

 
 
 
 

  
  

7

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

