BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
ROCKLIN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF PLACER 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 
 
AMY ADAM, et al., 
 
                                                        Respondents.
 
 

 
 
 
    OAH No. 2010020505 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Dian M. Vorters, State of 

 
 
California, Office of Administrative Hearings, on April 6 and 7, 2010, in Rocklin, California; 
and on April 14, 2010, in Sacramento, California. 
 

Michelle L. Cannon, Attorney at Law,1 represented complainant, Kevin Brown, 

Superintendent, Rocklin Unified School District. 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 14, 2010. 

Andrea Price, Attorney at Law,2 represented respondents.  (See Appendix A) 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
General Findings Concerning Statutory Requirements 
 
 
 

Respondents are certificated district employees. 

1. 

2. 

On March 3, 2010, the governing board of the district resolved to reduce or 

discontinue particular kinds of services.  To that end, the board adopted Resolution 09-10-23 
(Layoff Resolution).  Within the meaning of Code section 44955, the services are “particular 
kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce or discontinue 
these services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 

                                                

1 Michelle L. Cannon, Attorney at Law, 400 Capital Mall, 27th Floor, Sacramento, California  95814. 
 
2 Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, 1331 Garden Highway, Suite 300, Sacramento, California  95833. 
 

 
 

 

1

3. 

Not later than March 15, 2009, the superintendent of the school district caused 

5. 

4. 

A Notice of Intent to Dismiss was delivered to each respondent, either by 

The notice advised each respondent of the following: He or she had a right to a 

the governing board of the district and respondents to be notified in writing of his 
recommendation that preliminary notice be given respondents, pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955,3 that the district would not require their services for the 2010-
2011 school year.  The notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.  In recommending 
reductions in certificated staff, the superintendent considered the qualified condition of the 
district’s budget.  The district is expecting an approximate $800.00 per student budget 
reduction for the district’s 10,000 students.  The recommendation was not related to 
respondents’ performance as certificated employees. 
 
 
personal delivery or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, registered, postage 
prepaid, and addressed to respondents’ last known address. 
 
 
hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, he or she had to deliver a request for a hearing in 
writing to the person sending the notice.  The request had to be delivered by a specified date, 
which was a date that was not less than seven days after the notice of termination was 
served.4  And the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a 
hearing. 
 
Respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to determine whether 
 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  An accusation was timely 
served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice that, if they were going to request a 
hearing, they were required to file a notice of defense within five days after being served 
with the accusation.5  Respondents filed timely notices of defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
Positively Assured Attrition 
 
 
resignations and retirements which occur during the “computation period.”  (Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School Dist. (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831, 847.)  The district must “consider evidence of positively assured attrition, 
involuntary retirements for the [upcoming] school year which were known to the board when 
it made its preliminary determination on 15 March … and when it made its final 

The Board must allow for positively assured attrition such as voluntary 

6. 

7. 

                                                

3 All references to the Code are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 
 
4 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

5 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a notice 
of defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
termination cases, the notice of defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

 

2

determination on 15 May.”  (Lewin v. Bd. of Trustees of Pasadena Unified School Dist. 
(1976) 62 Cal.App.3d 977, 983.)  “A district is not required to consider certificated 
employees who have requested leaves of absence for the next school year in determining 
positively assured attrition occurring during the computation period.” (Italics in original; Id. 
at p. 848.) 
 
 
assured attrition which has occurred to date and additional attrition which may occur before 
the start of the 2010-2011 school year in reducing these services and but for the attrition 
already assured and the attrition anticipated would have found it necessary to reduce 
additional particular kinds of service. 
 

As set forth in the layoff resolution, the governing board considered all positively-

8. 

Charlotte Caldwell, the District’s personnel analyst, prepared and mailed 

notices of layoff on March 4, 2010.  As of that date, she had not received any information 
relevant to attrition.  She subsequently received one resignation and one retirement.  In 
response, the District “back-filled” the positions of two teachers who were on leave with two 
teachers from the layoff/rehire list.  The district served Notices of Rescission on two 
teachers, Michael Hannickel and Patricia Ornato.  As such, they are not respondents in this 
matter. 
 

9.  When a teacher is on leave of absence, their position is given the status they 

had before they went on leave.  They are entitled to return to like positions in the district, 
barring being identified as holding the particular kind of service named in the layoff 
resolution.  In fact, one teacher who was on leave, Heather Marziale, did receive a layoff 
notice.6  The district is required to consider resignations or retirements that occurred during 
the computation period.  The district properly accounted for the attrition by rescinding two 
layoff notices.  
 

10.  Of the 57 certificated employees who were served with valid notices of layoff 

and requested a hearing pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (b), nine 
individuals failed to return a Notice of Defense.  Two of the nine teachers, Timothy Farnan 
and Janice Johnson, retained counsel after failing to return a timely notice of defense.  
Neither Mr. Farnan nor Ms. Johnson were present at hearing and no challenge was made on 
their behalf.  As to all nine certificated employees who failed to return a Notice of Defense, 
the matter proceeded as a default pursuant to Government Code section 11520.  (Appendix 
A.)   
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                
 
Ms. Marziale received a layoff notice as her position as a self-contained K-6 teacher, was being eliminated. 

6 The two teachers who were on a one year leave of absence were Dillon Vaughan and Heather Marziale.  

 

3

Competency Criteria 
 

11. 

Layoff Resolution No. 09-10-23 includes competency criteria adopted by the 

Board, for use in implementing layoffs.  The competency criteria provision states: 
 

Whereas, the Board of Trustees has determined that with respect to this 
resolution and for purposes of potential displacement rights, 
competency shall mean, at minimum, possession of a preliminary, 
clear, professional clear, lifetime, or other full credential, and at least 
one semester actual teaching experience in the subject area in a 
comparable setting (K-6 self-contained; 7-12 departmentalized; 7-12 
alternative education; specialized elementary music, PE, ELD or 
VAPA programs) within the last five years.  Additionally, competency 
was defined to also mean that the teacher, when required, is qualified to 
teach the subject area under NCLB. 

12. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b) provides that no senior 

employee may be terminated while any less senior employee is retained to render a service 
which the more senior permanent employee is “certificated and competent” to render.  
“Competency” under subdivision (b) of section 44955 is different than the exception, 
commonly referred to as “skipping,” in subdivision (d)(1) of that section.  Education Code 
section 44955, subdivision (d), “recognizes a district may have special needs for personnel to 
teach a specific course of study that go beyond base qualifications.”  (Id. at p. 138.)   
 

13. 

Superintendent Kevin Brown testified that the competency language included 
in the Layoff Resolution, expressed the district’s desire to ensure that a teacher had at least 
taught the subject in a similar setting.  He stated it would be detrimental or a disservice to 
students to solely use seniority and not take other considerations into account.  The 
competency definition contained in the Layoff Resolution was created for layoff purposes 
only and is within the district’s discretion. 
 
Services the District Intends to Reduce or Discontinue 
 

14. 

The governing board of the district determined, in the Layoff Resolution, that 

because particular kinds of services were to be reduced or eliminated, it was necessary to 
decrease the number of permanent employees in the district by 77.65 full-time equivalents 
(FTE).  The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to reduce 
or discontinue are: 

 
Administrative Positions 
 
 
 

 
Assistant Principal, High School 
 
Program Specialist I, Prevention Programs  
  
Program Specialist II, Alt. Ed. 

 
   

 

 

 

 FTE 
 1.00 
 0.50 
 0.50 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

   
 
 
 
 
 

 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 4.10 
 4.00 

10.10 

  FTE 
  0.56 
  1.16 
  3.00 
35.00   

39.72 

FTE 
  2.50 
  2.50 
  2.50 
  2.50 
  0.67   

10.67 

FTE 
  4.50 
  6.00 
  2.50 
  1.50 
  0.83 
  1.00 
  0.83 

17.16 

77.65 F.T.E. 

 
  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
P.E. (1-6) 
 
VAPA (1-6) 
Music (1-6) 
 
Self Contained Classroom Teachers  
 
Elementary Total 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Middle School Total   

Nurse   
Counselor 

Admin and Support Total 

Language Arts 
 
Math 
 
 
Science 
History 
 
Home Economics 

Certificated Support Positions 
 
 

Middle School Positions 
 
 
 
 
 

Elementary School Positions 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total Full Time Equivalent Reduction =  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

High School Positions 
Language Arts 
 
 
Math 
 
 
Science 
 
 
Social Studies  
 
 
 
P.E. 
 
Home Economics 
 
Foreign Language: French 
 
 
 
 
High School Total 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

5

15. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), the governing 

Use of Tie-Breaking Criteria Based on the Current Needs of the District and Students 
 
 
board of the district established, in Resolution 09-10-21 (Tie-breaking Resolution), criteria 
for determining the order of termination as among employees who first rendered paid service 
on the same day.  The Board authorized the following tie-breaking criteria:7
 

Point Value 
 
3 points each 
2 points each 

Tie-Breaking Criteria 
Credentialing: 
Credential(s) 
Subject authorization(s) (NCLB compliant and subject currently taught 
in District) 
EL Authorization  
     1.  BCLAD 
Certificate(s) held 
     1.  National Board Certification 
     2.  GATE Certification 
 
Experience: 
Full time equivalent of credentialed public school experience 
     1.  Five to ten years 
     2.  11 years or more 
 
Education: 
Graduate Degrees 
     1.  Masters 
     2.  Doctorate 
 
Service: 
Extra Curricular Assignments as paid on the Extra Compensation Pay 
Schedule within the last two years. 
     1.  Year number one 
     2.  Year number two 
 
Lottery:   
If two or more certificated employees who first rendered paid probationary service on the 
same date still have the same ranking after application of points provided above, the ranking 
of such employees shall be determined by a lottery conducted by the Superintendent or 
designee, in the presence of the Rocklin Teachers’ Professional Association. 

2 points 
3 points 
1 point each 
 
 
 
 
 
2 points 
3 points 
 
 
 
1 point each 
2 points each 
 
 
 

1 point maximum 
1 point maximum 
 
 

                                                
 
Academic Development), a certificate; CLAD (Cross-cultural, Language and Academic Development); GATE 
(Gifted and Talented Education), an honors program for gifted students.   

7 NCLB (No Child Left Behind), a mandated program; BCLAD (Bilingual, Cross-cultural, Language and 

 

 

6

16. 

Skipping describes the process by which the district may deviate from the 

Bumping/Skipping/Seniority 
 
 
order of seniority when there is an identified need for a particular type of service, there is a 
junior employee who is uniquely qualified to provide that service or teach a subject, and 
there is no senior employee who is certificated and competent to provide the service.  The 
district employed skipping to achieve a proper list of employees to receive layoff notices.  
(Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).) 
 
 
employees who are more senior and who are competent to perform a particular kind of 
service or teach a particular subject.  The district employed bumping to achieve a proper list 
of employees to receive layoff notices. 
 
 
Among the teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority in the district 
gives a greater legal entitlement to a position.  Seniority is defined as the date upon which an 
employee first rendered paid services in a probationary position.  (Ed. Code, § 44845.) 
 

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school district.  

Bumping describes the process by which the district identifies those 

17. 

18. 

19. 

The governing board originally determined it was necessary to reduce 39.72 

“It [is] the districts obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine 
whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic 
layoff possess[es] the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned 
to another position.”  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 
137.)   
 
Issues affecting Layoffs at Elementary Level  
 
 
FTE Elementary Classroom Teaching Positions.  Complainant noted that no junior employee 
was retained when a senior employee competent to perform that particular kind of service 
was laid off.  The district implemented the reduction by first looking at the seniority chart 
and identifying which employees held relevant credentials.   
 
 
teacher, two K-6 visual and performing arts (VAPA) teachers, three K-6 music teachers, and 
35 K-6 self-contained classroom teachers.  The district rescinded the layoff notice to Michael 
Hannickel (1 FTE K-6 music teacher), pursuant to positively assured attrition.  (Factual 
Finding 8.)  Mr. Hannickel’s seniority date is August 29, 1973.  He holds a standard 
elementary/music major credential and a special CLAD authorization.  The district’s total 
reduction at the elementary level was 38.72 FTE teaching positions. 
 
 
 
 
 

The district mailed preliminary layoff notices to one K-6 physical education 

20. 

 

7

22. 

21. 

The district rescinded the layoff notice to Patricia Onorato (.5 FTE, 7/8 

The governing board determined it was necessary to reduce 10.67 FTE Middle 

Issues affecting Layoffs at the Middle School Level 
 
 
School Classroom Teaching Positions.  The two middle schools, Spring View and Granite 
Oaks, consist of grades seven and eight.  The District implemented the reduction in middle 
school teachers by first looking at the seniority chart and identifying which employees held 
relevant credentials.  Tie-breaking and lottery procedures were implemented as necessary 
between those employees who first rendered service on the same date. 
 
 
language arts/social studies teacher).  Ms. Onorato’s seniority date is August 16, 2007, which 
she shared with three other teachers.8  After receiving notice, Ms. Onorato requested to 
review her point tally.  An error was discovered in her social studies points and she was 
found to have 11 points.  She is retained to teach social studies for the 2010-2011 school year 
pursuant to positively assured attrition.  (Factual Finding 8.) 
 
 
Jason Knowles and Rosemarie Groth both teach 7/8 social studies, share the 
same seniority date of August 16, 2007, and both obtained ten points under the tie-breaking 
criteria.  A lottery was implemented as to them and Jason Knowles won.  Hence, he was 
retained for the 2010-2011 school year.   
 
 
seniority date of August 14, 2008, and both obtained ten points under the tie-breaking 
criteria.  A lottery was implemented as to them and Ms. Manibusan won. 
 
Issues affecting Layoffs at the High School Level 
 
 
School Classroom Teaching Positions.  The district implemented the reduction by first 
looking at the seniority chart and identifying which employees held relevant credentials. 
 

The governing board determined it was necessary to reduce 17.16 FTE High 

Regina Manibusan and Kerianne Reed both teach 7/8 PE, share the same 

23. 

25. 

24. 

 

26. 

Benjamin Barnholdt and Matthew Yamamoto were skipped.  Mr. Barnholdt 

has a seniority date of August 14, 2008.  He holds a professional clear single subject 
credential in English and teaches Broadcasting at Whitney High School.  Mr. Yamomoto has 
a seniority date of August 17, 2006.  He holds a preliminary single subject credential in 
physics, a special ELA authorization, and teaches physics at Whitney High School.  Both 
possess the special skills and experience needed by the district for the positions they hold, 
and are deemed reemployed for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
 

                                                
8 The four teachers who share a seniority date of August 16, 2007, are Paul Rettinhouse (12 tie-breaking 
 
points), Patricia Onorato (11 tie-breaking points), Jason Knowles (ten tie-breaking points), and Rosemarie Groth 
(ten tie-breaking points). 

 

8

27. 

The governing board determined it was necessary to reduce 2.0 FTE 

29.  Amanda Makis and Debra Hetrick are administrators (each representing 0.5 

Ms. Hetrick is a Program Specialist II and has a seniority date of July 1, 2006.  She 

28.  Manuel Rodriguez is the assistant principal at Whitney High School.  He will 

Ms. Makis is a Program Specialist I and has a seniority date of August 15, 2002.  She 

Issues affecting Layoffs of Administrative Positions 
 
 
Administrative Positions.  The district implemented the reduction by first looking at the 
seniority chart and identifying which employees held relevant credentials.  The district 
determined that two administrators were qualified to bump into K-6 classrooms. 
 
 
be retiring after the current school year.  The district will eliminate this position which 
represents 1.0 FTE. 
 
 
FTE).  Both positions will be eliminated.  Both are also qualified to bump into K-6 classroom 
teaching positions. 
 
 
holds a professional clear multiple subject/social science credential and a special CLAD 
authorization.  She is qualified to bump Mellyn Savage, who currently teaches fifth grade at 
Cobblestone Elementary.  Ms. Savage has a seniority date of August 14, 2009.  She holds a 
preliminary multiple subject credential and an ELA special authorization. 
 
 
holds professional clear administrative services and multiple subject credentials as well as a 
special LDS authorization.  The K-6 position into which Ms. Hetrick would bump is being 
eliminated.  Accordingly, she received a layoff notice for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Issues affecting Layoffs of Certificated Support Positions 
 
 
Certificated Support Positions consisting of guidance counselors and school nurses.  The 
district implemented the reduction of certificated support specialists by determining to layoff 
all four guidance counselors (4.0 FTE) and all five school nurses (4.10 FTE).  One of the five 
school nurses resigned and is not being replaced by the district.  The other four received 
layoff notices. 
 
 
positions represented all school nurses employed by the district.  He recognized that there are 
some services performed by school nurses that are mandated by law.  He disagreed with 
respondents’ contention that school nurses must be employed by the district.  He stated that 
the district can contract out for those services mandated to be performed by a school nurse, 
such as hearing and vision testing, administration of certain medications, and the drafting of 
student health maintenance plans.  The district is in the process of drafting and developing a 
plan in conjunction with surrounding districts.  Mr. Brown could not provide plan details but 
stated that the district would comply with state laws and regulations. 
 

Superintendent Brown testified that the 4.10 FTE reduction in school nursing 

The governing board determined it was necessary to reduce 8.10 FTE 

31. 

30. 

 

9

32. 

Education Code section 49426 defines a school nurse to be “a registered nurse 
 
currently licensed… and who has completed the additional educational requirements for, and 
possesses a current credential in, school nursing pursuant to Section 44877.”  Mandates 
relative to the provision of health care services in public education including the following: 
 
 

EC 49400 states:  “The governing board of any school district shall give 

a. 
diligent care to the health and physical development of students, and may employ 
properly certificated persons for the work.” 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

b. 
EC 49422, subd. (a) states:   “No physician, psychiatrist, oculist, dentist, dental 
hygienist, optometrist, otologist, podiatrist, audiologist, or nurse not employed in that 
capacity by the State Department of Health Services, shall be, nor shall any other 
person be, employed or permitted to supervise the health and physical development of 
pupils unless he or she holds a services credential with a specialization in health or a 
valid credential issued prior to the operative date of Section 25 of Chapter 557 of the 
Statutes of 1990.” 

EC 49427, subd. (a) states: “It is the intent of the Legislature that the 
c. 
governing board of each school district and each county superintendent of schools 
maintain fundamental school health services at a level that is adequate to accomplish 
all of the following: 

(1) Preserve pupils’ ability to learn. 

(2) Fulfill existing state requirements and policies regarding pupils' health. 

(3) Contain health care costs through preventive programs and education.” 

EC 49423, subd. (a) states:  “Notwithstanding Section 49422, any pupil who is 

d. 
required to take, during the regular schoolday, medication prescribed for him or her 
by a physician or surgeon, may be assisted by the school nurse or other designated 
school personnel or may carry and self-administer prescription auto-injectable 
epinephrine if the school district receives the appropriate written statements identified 
in subdivision (b).” 

EC 49452 states:  “The governing board of any school district shall, subject to 
e. 
Section 49451, provide for the testing of the sight and hearing of each pupil enrolled 
in the schools of the district. The test shall be adequate in nature and shall be given 
only by duly qualified supervisors of health employed by the district; or by 
certificated employees of the district or of the county superintendent of schools who 
possess the qualifications prescribed by the Commission for Teacher Preparation and 
Licensing; or by contract with an agency duly authorized to perform those services by 
the county superintendent of schools of the county in which the district is located, 
under guidelines established by the State Board of Education; or accredited schools or 
colleges of optometry, osteopathic medicine, or medicine.”  (Italics added.) 

10

EC 49452.5 mandates that school districts provide for scoliosis testing only by 
f. 
“qualified supervisors of health… or by school nurses employed by the district or the 
county superintendent of schools, or pursuant to contract with an agency authorized 
to perform these services by the county superintendent of schools of the county in 
which the district is located….”  EC 56324 provides that health assessments “shall be 
conducted by a credentialed school nurse or physician who is trained and prepared to 
assess cultural and ethnic factors appropriate to the pupil being assessed.”  (Italics 
added.) 

33. 

34.  Nancy Spradling is the executive director of the California School Nurses 

 
 
Betty DiRegolo is the district’s director of special education/programs.  She 
oversees school health services, including nurses.  Ms. DiRegolo agreed that nurses’ duties 
include some mandated services.  However, she stated that the district is not mandated to 
employ school nurses and that mandated services can be contracted out.  There is not 
currently a plan in place for provision of mandated health services if school nurses are 
eliminated.  Mandated services would be performed by school nurses who are not employed 
directly by the district.  The remaining services would be performed by properly trained staff.  
The district is currently working with the Board, seeking direction in finalizing a plan.  Ms. 
DiRegolo stated that the district’s nursing staff is very skilled and their elimination was 
driven solely by budget considerations. 
 
 
Association.  She clarified that school nurses are registered nurses with an additional school 
nurse credential.  She does not believe that unlicensed individuals who are trained by school 
nurses or physicians can administer Diastat, prepare student health plans, administer 
mandated screenings, or perform other mandated functions.  For instance, she does not 
believe that even an R.N. or licensed vocational nurse would be able to prepare individual 
student health plans or administer Diastat. 
 
 
nurses as a particular kind of service to be reduced.  Legally mandated nursing services can 
be provided in two different ways, by special contract or by full-time employees.  “As long 
as the required services will be provided, the district can properly change the manner of their 
provision and reduce or eliminate the existing particular kind of service used to provide 
them.”  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 640; Gallup v. 
Alta Loma School Dist. (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571, 1585-1586.)  As specifically stated in 
the Education Code, the district may contract with an agency to perform services mandated 
to be performed by a qualified supervisor of health or a credentialed school nurse.  Hence, 
the district my properly layoff 4.10 FTE credentialed nursing staff. 
 
Issues Related to Music Instruction 
 
 
Robin Richie and Amy Adam represent 2.0 FTE in K-6 music instruction.  Both received 
layoff notices.  Three music teachers at the middle and high school level were retained to 
provide music instruction who have less seniority than Ms. Richie and Ms. Adams.  The high 

The district reduced K-6 music instruction by 3.0 FTE.  Certificated teachers 

The district is facing a budget imbalance and as such has identified school 

35. 

36. 

 

 

11

37. 

The elementary music program does not have band or choir/choral programs.  

38.  Ms. Richie has a seniority date of August 15, 2002, and holds a professional 

school and middle school music programs were not the particular kinds of services identified 
in the layoff resolution.  
 
 
The district’s high school program includes instrumental instruction, marching band, 
symphonic band, pit band, and choir/choral.  Pit choir students perform at school musicals.  
The middle school program has band (instrumental, not marching), choir, and a “zero period” 
before school string program.  Middle school choir is an elective and students may be 
involuntarily assigned based on limitations in course selection.  The band and string 
programs are by choice.  At the middle and high school levels, beginning music is not a 
focus as most students start knowing how to play an instrument.  Performance expectations 
are highest at the high school level.  Students are expected to exhibit greater sophistication in 
identifying notes and reading scores.  Music instruction at the secondary level requires 
special skills, knowledge, and experience beyond that required at the elementary music 
instruction level.  Hence, competency criteria adopted in the Board resolution are appropriate 
for purposes of layoff. 
 
 
clear single subject music credential, and a special CLAD authorization.  She teaches 
elementary music at four sites:  Rocklin, Cobblestone, Sierra, and Ruhkala Elementary 
Schools.  Prior to the current school year, she conducted an after school music program in the 
Rocklin district for grades seven through 12.  The students performed on field trips to include 
bookstores and retirement homes.  From 2002 to 2005, she taught orchestra at Granite Oaks 
Middle School, a “zero period” before school program.  This was a “for credit” class and 
grades were given.  Students performed at various events including the Winter Concert, Back 
to School Concert, and Combined (district wide) Mega Concert.  Ms. Richie explained that 
her “zero period” instruction was in addition to her regular teaching contract.  The district 
paid her with “intervention/special funding.” 
 
 
Prior to coming to the district, Ms. Richie worked as a credentialed music teacher for 
18 years.  Her prior experience includes band/orchestra, strings, and choral instruction at the 
primary and secondary levels.  She taught band from 1998 through 2001 at St. Rose Junior 
High School.  Within the last five years, Ms. Richie has taught music at the middle and high 
school levels within the district.  Ms. Richie possesses extensive experience in music 
instruction including band direction, orchestra, and music theory.  She meets the competency 
criteria established in the Layoff Resolution, necessary to bump into a music instruction 
position at the middle school level.  She possesses the skills, training, and experience to teach 
in the district’s middle school music program.  She is certificated and competent to bump 
into the position held by Mr. Douglas; a less senior middle school music teacher.  (Factual 
Finding 39.)  As such, Ms. Richie was not a proper recipient of a layoff notice and the 
accusation as to her must be dismissed. 
 
 
 
 

 

12

39. 

Thomas Douglas has a seniority date of August 17, 2006.  He holds a clear 

40.  Ms. Adam has a seniority date of August 17, 2000, and holds professional 

41.  Kristopher Harper has a seniority date of August 17, 2005.  Mr. Harper holds a 

 
single subject music credential, a special CLAD authorization, and teaches 7/8 music at 
Spring View Middle School.  He works in collaboration with the high schools into which his 
students transfer.  Though less senior to Ms. Richie who is competent and qualified to teach 
music at the middle school level, he did not receive a layoff notice and is retained for the 
2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
clear single subject credentials in music and introduction to mathematics, and a special 
CLAD authorization.  She has taught string orchestra in the district at the elementary level 
for the last ten years.  Prior to coming to the district, she taught middle school band in the 
Penryn and Loomis School Districts (50 percent in each district) from 1992 to 2000.  She 
was assistant marching band director in Sacramento for eight years.  She has taught a college 
level methods class and has published several concert collection music books.  The published 
music is for various instruments for beginning level learners up through middle school 
learners.  Though Ms. Adam does possess extensive experience in music theory, music 
instruction, and band, she has not within the last five years taught at the middle or high 
school levels.  As such, she does not meet the competency criteria established in the Layoff 
Resolution, necessary to bump into a music instruction position at the middle or high school 
levels. 
 
 
clear single subject music credential and is the marching band director at Whitney High 
School.  He directs marching band (at half-time during football games), honor band (at 
various venues), and pep bands (at basket ball games).  Mr. Harper was hired with extensive 
experience in directing high school music departments including classroom instruction and 
marching band.  He must be able to multi-task within the core curriculum in order to meet 
the overlapping needs of students involved in different ensembles.  His responsibilities 
include teaching, standards assessments, drum core, flag corps (assisted by a flag coach), 
fundraising, after school practice, uniforms, Christmas Concert, attendance at all football 
games, and after school and Saturday practices.  The district has won 25 awards since he has 
been at Whitney High School.  Mr. Harper meets the competency criteria established in the 
Layoff Resolution.  He possesses the special skills, training, and experience necessary to 
meet the district’s music instruction needs at the high school level.  He is properly retained 
for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Ms. Hawkins’ seniority date is August 12, 2004.  She holds a clear single subject music 
credential and a special CLAD authorization.  She teaches music at Rocklin High School.  
Ms. Hawkins possessed choral experience upon hire.  She directs and is responsible for piano 
lab, marching band, music instruction, and flag corps (after school).  Ms. Hawkins meets the 
competency criteria established in the Layoff Resolution.  She possesses the special skills, 
training, and experience necessary to meet the district’s music instruction needs at the high 
school level.  She is properly retained for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

42.  Marideth Hawkins also has less seniority than Ms. Richie and Ms. Adams.  

 

13

44. 

43. 

Certificated teacher Regina Manibusan teaches physical education (PE) part-

Issues Related to Physical Education Instruction 
 
 
time at Granite Oaks Middle School.  She has a seniority date of August 14, 2008.  She holds 
a clear single subject credential in PE and a special CLAD authorization.  Michael Pappas 
teaches mathematics at Rocklin High School.  He also has a seniority date of August 14, 
2008.  He holds clear single subject PE and foundational mathematics credentials and a 
special ELA authorization.  He is in his second year as the junior varsity baseball coach at 
Rocklin High School.  Mr. Pappas has not taught PE within the last five school years.  As 
such, he does not meet the competency criteria established in the Layoff Resolution and is 
not qualified to bump into a PE teaching position.  The district properly did not apply tie-
breaking criteria to his situation. 9  
 
Issues Related to English Language Development Instruction 
 
 
Shari Anderson is the district’s English Learner Program Specialist.  The 
district operates a K-12 program for students learning English.  Non-English languages 
spoken by students in the district include Spanish, Punjabi, and Russian.  The district 
employs six itinerate ELD (English Language Development) teachers at the elementary 
school level (K-6).  The middle schools and high schools have similar programs with 
qualified ELD teachers.  At the start of each year, students are assessed for English 
deficiencies using the CELDT (California English Language Development Test).  CELDT 
subtests assess listening, speaking, reading, and writing abilities.  Results are grouped by 
levels ranging from one to five (beginner, early intermediate, intermediate, early advanced, 
advanced).  ELD teachers are assigned to provide English language instruction to students 
who score in ranges one, two or three.  Regular classroom teachers provide English 
instruction to students who score at levels four and five, who the district considers to be 
“reasonably fluent.” 
 
 
students out of their self-contained classrooms into a separate classroom to teach English.  
Level one students are pulled out three to four times per week.  Level two/three students are 
pulled out approximately two to three times per week.  Each session last 30 to 45 minutes.  
Students are grouped by language and grade level.  Group size varies from one to six 
learners.  Students are reassessed throughout the year and are released from the program 
once they have achieved a level of proficiency.   
 
 
curriculum.  Materials used in the regular language arts curriculum (Haughton/Mifflin) are 
appropriate for level four/five English learners, but do not meet ELD standards for level one, 

The program content must meet State of California standards including books and 

The ELD program operates as a “pull-out” program.  Teachers travel and pull 

45. 

9 It is noted that tie-breaking criteria were applied to Ms. Manibusan and Rebecca Reed, who both teach PE 

                                                
 
part-time (.50 FTE), at the middle school level, and share seniority date of August 14, 2008.  Ms. Manibusan 
prevailed after a lottery.  (Factual Finding 24.) 
 

 

14

47.  According to Ms. Anderson, the district took into account the needs of the 

46.  Ms. Anderson is involved in hiring ELD teachers.  She looks for teachers who 

two or three English learners.  Teachers in the ELD program attend special training including 
a two day customized training that covers pacing and development of lesson plans.  ELD 
teachers are trained in SDAIE (Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English), which 
Ms. Anderson described as a methodology or set of strategies that teachers employ to help 
English learners understand core subjects (such as social studies, science or literature). 
 
 
have experience teaching ELD and/or English learners, training, education (for example, a 
Masters in English Development), interest, and a passion to work with English learners.  If 
training is lacking, there is a significant learning curve.  Administering and scoring tests 
requires special training and is more demanding than what is required in a normal classroom.  
Professional development for ELD teachers includes ADEPT (A Developmental English 
Proficiency Test) training.  ADEPT can be provided by a trained teacher and does not have 
to be provided by a CLAD certified teacher.  CELDT training is required for CLAD certified 
teachers and was last conducted in May 2009.  Further, if a school has more than 20 English 
Learners, the school site must have an English learner committee.  ELD teachers are the 
facilitators at those meetings.   
 
 
district and the students.  She stated, “the goal of the ELD program is to teach our students 
English rapidly and efficiently so that we close the achievement gap.”  She believes that the 
transfer of regular classroom teachers into the ELD program would have a negative impact 
on the program.  The ELD teachers are going into their third year of experience.  
Transferring a teacher who has not volunteered for the position would be detrimental to them 
and the students.  ELD instruction is not a particular kind of service that the district has 
identified for reduction.   ELD instruction requires special skills, knowledge, and expertise 
which the district determined no multiple subject credentialed teacher with greater seniority 
possessed. 
 
 
the 2010-2011 school year.   They share a seniority date of August 16, 2007.  Ms. Moore 
holds a professional clear multiple subject credential and a special CLAD authorization.  Ms. 
Moore worked in a similar “pull-out” English learner program in Fairfield, prior to coming to 
Rocklin.  She provided intervention on a full-time basis.  She currently has two years, six 
months ELD teaching experience and three years CELDT experience.  Ms. Withers holds a 
clear multiple subject credential and a special CLAD authorization.  Ms. Withers came from 
a multi-languaged school population in Rancho Cordova where she had been trained on 
administering the CELDT.  She was required to teach English learners in their core 
classroom and has experience with the full range of State standards.  She currently has two 
years, six months ELD teaching experience. 
 
 
transferred into the ELD program from a self-contained fourth grade classroom assignment at 
the start of the 2009/2010 school year.  Her seniority date is August 12, 2004.  She holds a 
professional clear multiple subject/social science credential and a special CLAD 

48.  Amanda Withers and Shannon Moore are ELD teachers who were retained for 

49.  Marisa Williams was retained for the 2010-2011 school year.  Ms. Williams 

 

15

authorization.  She specifically sought to work with the district’s English learners.  She 
volunteered to audit ELD instruction and participate in the English learner Saturday and after 
school programs.  Since she missed the May 2009 CELDT training, this was provided by a 
retired district teacher who had attended a “train the trainer” course last year.  She has 
participated in other extensive customized training.  According to Ms. Anderson, a 
replication of this customized training would be too costly to provide whole scale.  Finally, 
competency criteria are not applicable to Ms. Williams because those criteria are for 
purposes of layoff, not new hires or special filled positions. 
 
 
Withers, Ms. Moore, and Ms. Williams, challenged the district’s determination that they 
were not competent to bump into an ELD teaching assignment.  Those employees and their 
seniority dates are:  Cathy Bardet (August 17, 2006), Kimberly Bay-Menacho (August 18, 
2006), James Cook (September 6, 2005), Lori Gin (August 16, 2007), Mary Gomes (August 
16, 2007), Deborahlyn Harding (November 27, 2006), Karen Janz (August 17, 2006), Lara 
Kikosicki (August 16, 2007), Kate Kirk (August 17, 2006), Lacey Spear (August 16, 2007), 
and Rebecca Vestal (August 17, 2006).  The parties entered into a stipulation as to these 
certificated teachers as follows: 
 

Eleven certificated elementary school teachers with more seniority than Ms. 

50. 

The individual respondents listed below all possess a multiple subject 
credential and a Cross  Cultural (CLAD) or some type of certification 
authorizing them to teach English Language Learners.   

A Multiple Subject credential and certification to teach English Language 
Learners are the only credentials and/or certifications required for the 
District’s English Language Development (ELD) positions. 

 
 
51.  Nine of the certificated teachers named in the stipulation testified at hearing.  
Collectively they possess varying degrees of expertise teaching English learners within self-
contained classrooms.  All had level 4/5 English learners in their classrooms to whom they 
provided core curriculum instruction.  Most had level 1 to 3 learners to whom they provided 
the majority of instruction collateral to “pull out” sessions.  None of those who testified had 
experience administering the CELDT or ADEPT assessments.  None had taught ELD in the 
district or received special training offered by the district to ELD instructors.  Most had not 
utilized SDAIE strategies.  As such, none of the employees named in the stipulation met the 
district’s competency definition as set forth in the layoff resolution.  The eleven teachers 
named in Factual Finding 50, were proper recipients of layoff notices. 
 
Issues Related to Alternative Education Instruction 
 
 
the continuation high school and independent study program.  Victory High School is 
attended by junior and senior high school students who have not shown success in a 
traditional school setting.  These students are usually credit deficient when they enter 
Victory.  Mr. Ilic described Victory students as “at risk kids” needing a lot of loving care. 

52.  Milisav Ilic is the principal of Alternative Education Programs.  He oversees 

 

 

16

Though Ms. Alstot has more seniority within the district, she has not previously 

Teachers must be sensitive to special issues and employ a medley of instructional 

 
strategies geared to meet challenging academic, social, and emotional needs.  Teachers must 
be flexible and capable of teaching varied subject matter.  They can be asked to go from 
language arts to science, speech and debate to journalism, history to physical education.  Mr. 
Ilic looks for this willingness during interviews.  He stated that Alternative Education 
experience is a must and every teacher he has hired has possessed it.  No teacher with greater 
seniority possessed the special skills, knowledge, and teaching experience to bump into the 
Alternative Education Program at Victory High School. 
 
 
53.  Katelyn Alstot teaches Language Arts at Whitney High School.  She has a 
seniority date of August 14, 2008.  She holds as preliminary single subject credential in 
English and psychology, and a special ELA authorization. 
 
 
Mary Abbott was retained to teach English at Victory High School where she has 
taught since August 2009.  Her seniority date is August 13, 2009.  Ms. Abbott was hired 
specifically as an alternative education teacher.  She came from a continuation school in a 
nearby district.  She holds a clear single subject credential in English and journalism, and a 
special CLAD authorization.  Ms. Abbott possesses the special skills, knowledge, and 
experience to teach in an alternative education program. 
 
 
taught in an alternative education program.  There was no evidence that she possesses the 
skills, training, and expertise to teach this challenging student population.  She does not meet 
the competency criteria established in the Layoff Resolution and as such, cannot bump into 
an English position at Victory High School. 
 
Issues Related to Seniority Dates 
 
 
the district.  Ms. Hargrove holds a clear single subject credential in biological 
sciences/chemistry and a special ELA authorization.  She teaches science at Whitney High 
School.  Ms. Hargrove first rendered paid service to the district on August 18, 2005, for the 
2005/2006 school year.  On April 20, 2006, she submitted a letter of resignation indicating 
her intent to move out of state.  On May 3, 2006, her resignation was accepted by the Board.  
Ms. Hargrove subsequently decided to stay in Rocklin.  On July 19, 2006, the Board acted to 
re-hire Ms. Hargrove for the 2006/2007 school year.  Her first date of paid service to the 
district for the 2006/2007 school year was August 17, 2006.  There was no actual 
interruption in her teaching services to the district.  There was an interruption in her 
employment status. 
 
 
employees.  In November 2008, respondent informed the district that there was an error in 
her seniority date of August 17, 2006, and that the correct date was August 18, 2005.  At that 
time, the district notified her by e-mail on December 4, 2008, that pursuant to Education 
Code 44848, her resignation triggered a re-setting of her first date of paid service.   

54.  Amanda Hargrove (aka Amanda McNamara) disputed her seniority date with 

The district mails annual verification of seniority and credentials to certificated 

55. 

 

17

56. 

Education Code section 44848 states that “when any certificated employee 

 
shall have resigned or been dismissed for cause and shall thereafter have been reemployed by 
the board, his date of employment shall be deemed to be the date on which he first accepted 
reemployment… or rendered paid service… after his reemployment.”  Since Ms. Hargrove 
resigned at the end o the 2005/2006 school year and was subsequently re-hired for the 
2006/2007 school year, her new seniority date is August 17, 2006. 
 
 
above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 
 

57.  Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 

and 44955.  All notices and jurisdictional prerequisites required by those sections were 
satisfied. 
 

2. 

The services the district seeks to eliminate in this matter, as set forth in Layoff 
Resolution 09-10-23, are the particular kinds of service that may be reduced or discontinued 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue these particular kinds of service was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a 
proper exercise of the board’s discretion.  Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, legal cause exists for the district to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of 
services set forth in the Layoff Resolution.  The reduction or discontinuance of these 
identified particular kinds of services relates solely to the welfare of the district and its 
pupils. 
 

3.  With the exception of Robin Richie, no certificated employee with less 

seniority than any respondent is being retained to render a service that any respondent is 
certificated and competent to render.  Legal cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955 to give respondents final notice that their services will not be required for 
2010-2011 school year. 
 

4. 

Robin Richie is certificated and competent to teach music at the middle school 

level.  She is senior to an employee being retained to teach in the middle school music 
program.  Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, the accusation as to Ms. Richie must 
be dismissed. (Factual Finding 38.) 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

The Rocklin Unified School District’s action to reduce or eliminate the 

particular kinds of services identified in Layoff Resolution 09-10-23, for the 2010-2011 
school year is AFFIRMED. 
 

 

 

 

18

2. 

The accusation as to Robin Richie is DISMISSED.  She is considered re-

employed for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

3. 

The Accusation against the remaining respondents is SUSTAINED.  The 

Rocklin Unified School District may give final notices to respondents, with the exception of 
Ms. Richie, that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Notices 
shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
 
DATED:  April 30, 2010 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
DIAN M. VORTERS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

19

Appendix A  
2010 Rocklin Unified School District – List of Respondents 
 
 
Name 
 
 
Amy Adam 
1 
Katelyn Alstot 
2 
Cathy Bardet 
3 
Kimberly Bay-Menacho 
4 
Nolan Bettleyon 
5 
Karlene Bittler 
6 
Jennifer Bradley 
7 
Nancy Bronte 
8 
Jody Ciesco 
9 
Susan Clarke 
10 
11  Caitlin Conheim 
James Cook 
12 
13  Elisabeth Davidson 
14  Cari Elcock 
15  Timothy Farnan 
16  Ann Feliz 
17 
18 
19  Lori Gin 
20  Mary Gomes  
Jennifer Hammond 
21 
22  Michael Hannickel 
23  Deborahlyn Harding 
24  Amanda Hargrove 
25  Nell Hildebrand 
26  K. Skott Hutton  
27  Whitney Isetta 
28  Karen Jansz 
29 
30  Natalie Jorgensen 
31  Lara Kikosicki 
32  Kelly King 
33  Kate Kirk 
34  Robert Klingensmith 
35  Valerie Kramer 
36  Carissa Kuehn 
37  Chaunte Martin 
 

Procedural Status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Did not return Notice of Defense 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Did not return Notice of Defense 
 
 
Did not return Notice of Defense 
 
 
 
Layoff notice rescinded 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Did not return Notice of Defense 
Did not return Notice of Defense 
 
 
 
 
Did not return Notice of Defense 
Did not return Notice of Defense 
 
 

Susan Firchau 
Patrick Gale 

Janice Johnson 

 

 

20

Patricia Onorato  

Name 
Jeremy Miller 

 
38 
39  Charise Montera 
40  Karen Montgomery 
41 
42  Cruz Ordonez 
43  Michael Pappas 
44  Alison Parrott 
45  Alicia Perkins 
46  Mary Ann Rau 
47  Kerianne Reed 
48  Robin Richie 
49  Holly Runsten 
50  Genevieve Sherman 
51  Lacey Spear 
52  Ryan Swarts 
53  April Taylor 
54  Rebecca Vestal 
Jeni Weeks 
55 
56  MaryAnn Younger 
57  Catherine Zanetti 

 
 

 

Procedural Status 
 
 
 
Layoff notice rescinded 
 
 
 
 
Did not return Notice of Defense 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Did not return Notice of Defense 

 

21

