 

 
 

BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ROHNERVILLE SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
          OAH No. 2010031901 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation 
Against: 
 
VINCENT ZINSELMEIR, 
VICTORIA PUMPKIN AND 
MELANIE DOWNING,  
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 

Administrative Law Judge Dianna L. Albini, State of California, Office of 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Eureka, California, on April 13, 2010.   
 

Stephen L. Hartsell, General Counsel, North Coast Schools Legal Consortium, 

represented Rohnerville School District (District). 

 

 
Respondents Vincent Zinselmeir, Victoria Pumpkin, and Melanie Downing 

represented themselves with the assistance of Paul Hagen, Attorney at Law, Bragg, Perlman, 
Russ, Stunich & Eads, LLP.   
 
 
 

On April 13, 2010, the record closed and the matter was submitted for decision. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
1. 

 
3. 

On April 2, 2010, Robert E. Williams, Ed. D., made the Accusation in his 

official capacity of Superintendent for the Rohnerville School District.   
 

2. 

Respondents Vincent Zinselmeir, Victoria Pumpkin, and Melanie Downing, 

certificated employees of the District, timely requested a hearing to determine whether or not 
cause exists for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.  

On March 11, 2010, the Superintendent presented the District’s Board of 

Trustees with a recommendation that the District give notice that particular kinds of services 
(PKS), then offered through the District, be reduced or eliminated by the District for the 

1 

 

 
 

ensuing school year (2010-2011).  

 
4. 

7. 

 
8. 

On March 12, 2010, the District’s Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 

10-12.  The resolution recites that, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, it 
has become necessary for the District to reduce or to eliminate, no later than the beginning of 
the 2010-2011 school year, particular kinds of services in the form of seven full-time 
equivalent (FTE) certificated positions by eliminating 1.0 FTE opportunity education teacher 
position and eliminating 6.0 FTE grade K-8 teacher positions. 
 

5. 

The written preliminary notice to each Respondent from the Superintendent 

states legally sufficient reasons for the Board’s intent to eliminate or reduce services.   
 

6. 

District’s Superintendent timely served upon each Respondent the Accusation, 

dated April 2, 2010, and related documents.  Each Respondent filed a timely notice of 
defense.  
 

It was stipulated at the hearing that all of the jurisdictional requirements of 

California Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 have been met. 

The only issue to be decided is the validity of the tie-breaking criteria for 
purposes of ranking the order of seniority and its proper application to the Respondents.  
Respondents hold multiple subject credentials, are CLAD certified and all share August 20, 
2003, as their first date of paid service.   
 

9. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), the Board established 

criteria for determining the order of termination as among employees who first rendered paid 
service on the same day as follows: 
 

Criteria Used 

Points 

A.  Credentials and experience to teach or 
serve in a particular service of need by the 
District.  Rating: +1 per credential 
B.  Credentials and experience to teach in a 
special categorical program (e.g., bilingual, 
special educational, CLAD, SDAIE). 
 
Rating:  +1 per credential, +1 per year of 

experience (ESL, etc.) 

C.  Years of experience previous to current 
employment as a full-time credentialed 
teacher in a probation/permanent K-12 
teaching. 
Rating: +1 per year. 

 

 

 

2 

 

 
 

D.  Number of supplementary authorization. 
Rating: +1 per supplementary authorization 
E.  Number of teaching and/or special 
service credentials. 
Rating:  +1 per credential 
F.  Earned degrees beyond the BA/BS level. 
Rating:  +1 per degree 
G.  Multiple language skills relevant to 
District need. 
Rating:  +1 for Spanish 
H.  Emergency vs. Preliminary vs. 
Clear/Life Credentials 
Rating:  +1 per emergency, +2 per 
preliminary, +3 per Clear/Life credential 
Total 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
11. 

Respondents Zinselmeir, Pumpkin and Downing share the same seniority date.  

12. 

Respondents Pumpkin and Downing contend that the criteria chosen by the Board 

Following application of the criteria, Respondent Zinselmeir was credited with 12 points and 
ranked number one.  Pumpkin and Downing were credited with seven points each.  In order to 
break the tie, a lottery was implemented and Downing won. 
 
 
are invalid because seven of the categories award points for the same credentials, certificates, 
and supplemental authorizations.  As a result, a teacher with more of these documents will 
always rank higher.  In addition, they argue that the criteria are invalid because there is no 
indication that the District requires employees with those credentials, which means that it has not 
been demonstrated that the criteria are related to the best interests of the students. 
 
Respondent Pumpkin further contends that she did not receive as many points as 
 
she should have.  She points out that the same criteria were used in the 2004 layoff proceedings.  
At that time, the former superintendent awarded her one point in category C (years of previous 
experience) and one point in category G (multiple language skills relevant to District need).  This 
year, she was not awarded those two points. 
 

13. 

The evidence submitted by Pumpkin did not establish she was entitled to receive an 

14. 

additional two points.  
 
 
In breaking ties, districts have broad discretion to determine the criteria used and 
to apply the criteria to individuals.  The only legal requirement is that they “determine the order 
of termination solely on the basis of the needs of the district and the students thereof.”  (Ed. 
Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)   It was not established that the District created or applied its tie-
breaking criteria in an arbitrary or capricious manner.  Accordingly, there is no basis to require 
the District to re-evaluate Respondent Pumpkin’s or Respondent Downing’s position on the 
seniority list. 
 

3 

 

 

 

 
 

15.  No permanent or probationary certificated employee with less seniority than 
Respondents is being retained to provide a service for which Respondents are credentialed 
and competent to render. 

The reduction or elimination of services is related to the welfare of the district 

 
16. 
and of its pupils. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services set forth 

in Finding 4, cause exists pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to 
Respondents Victoria Pumpkin, and Melanie Downing that their services will not be required 
or will be reduced for the 2010-2011 school year.  This cause solely relates to the welfare of 
the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
 
 
applied in an arbitrary or capricious manner.   
 

It was not established that the Board’s tie-breaking criteria were invalid or 

2. 

3. 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 11, cause does not exist as 

required by Education Code section 44955 to give notice of layoff to Respondent Vincent 
Zinselmeir.   
 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice may be given to Victoria Pumpkin and Melanie Downing that their 

services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 

The accusation against Respondent Vincent Zinselmeir is dismissed. 

DATED:  May 6, 2010 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

__________________________ 
DIANNA L. ALBINI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
1. 

2. 
 
 

 
 
 
 

4 

