 
 
 

 
 
 

 

BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE 
PARAMOUNT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
Certain Certificated Employees of the 
Paramount Unified School District, 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

 
 
OAH No. 2010030306 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, by Barbara J. Ginsberg, Attorney at Law, 

Erlinda G. Shrenger, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 30, 2010, at the Paramount Unified School 
District in Paramount, California. 
 
 
represented the School District. 
 
 
employees Enrique Andrade, Barbara Bowman, Heather Calvert, Karl Hemmerla, Carlos 
Juaregui, Jissell Juarez, Marcie Maldonado, Tyler Nguyen, Julie Ortiz, and Kimberly 
Valentin (collectively, Respondents).  All Respondents were present at the hearing. 
 
 
Cecile Kim, Elaine G. Lopez, Amy Naples, Yessenia Orozco, Kirsen Veith, Denise Besler, 
and Bonnie Slater 
 

Prior to the start of the hearing, the School District rescinded the layoff notices of 

Reich, Adell & Cvitan, by Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented certificated 

Evidence was received by stipulation, documents, and testimony.  The matter was 

submitted on April 30, 2010. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

David J. Verdugo is the Superintendent of the Paramount Unified School 

District (District).  Myrna Morales, Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, and her 
staff were responsible for implementation of the technical aspects of the layoff. 
 

1 

2. 

Respondents in this proceeding are probationary or permanent certificated 

employees of the District. 
 

3. 

On March 9, 2010, in Resolution 09-27, the Board of Education of the District 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14.0 
  2.0
16.0 

               FTE1 Reduction

Service 
 
K-5 Elementary Classroom Instruction 
 
K-5 TOSA Instructional Coach/Intervention Teacher 
 
TOTAL 

(Board) took action to reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of certificated 
services for the 2010-2011 school year: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further, in Resolution 09-27, the Board took action to reduce or discontinue the following 
particular kinds of categorically funded certificated services presently performed by 
temporary employees, for the 2010-2011 school year: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Service 
 
6-8 Math Instructional Coach/Intervention Teacher  
 
K-5 Itinerant Music Instruction - Special Funded 
 
 
JROTC Instruction 
 
6-8 Language Arts Instruction - Title I Funded 
High School Counselor Title I Funded 
 
 
K-5 Instructional Coach/Intervention Teacher 
 
     Limited English Proficient Funded 
 
 
TOTAL 

               FTE Reduction

1.0 
1.0 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0 

1.0
7.0 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. 

Resolution 09-27 established tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative 

seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  It 
provided that the order of termination shall be based on the needs of the District and its 
students in accordance with the type and subject matter of credentials and authorizations, 
salary step, and college degrees, majors, and credits. 
 

5. 

The Board was given notice of the Superintendent’s recommendation that 18 

employees, including all Respondents, be given notice that their services would not be 
required for the next school year and stating the reasons for that recommendation. 
 

6. 

On March 9, 2010, in Resolution 09-28, the Board took action to release all 

temporary certificated employees from their temporary assignments at the conclusion of the 
2009-2010 school year.  Resolution 09-28 notes that, although temporary certificated 
employees are not generally entitled to due process rights under Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955, the Superintendent recommended that, out of an abundance of caution, 
                                                 
 

1 FTE stands for full-time equivalent. 

2 

seven categorically funded temporary certificated employees potentially affected by the 
reduction in services identified in Resolution 09-27 be noticed and afforded an opportunity to 
request a hearing. 
 

7. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the District personally served on 18 certificated 

employees, including all Respondents, a written notice that it had been recommended that 
notice be given to them pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their 
services would not be required for the next school year.  Each written notice set forth the 
reasons for the recommendation and noted that the Board determined to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services. 
 

8. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the District personally served a written notice, 

as a precaution, on seven temporary certificated employees corresponding to the reduction in 
categorically funded certificated services identified in Resolution 09-27.  The District has 
released all temporary employees from employment at the end of the current school year. 
 

9. 

Fifteen employees, including all Respondents, timely requested in writing a 
hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school 
year.  Three employees who did not request a hearing -- Denise Besler, Bonnie Slater, and 
Larissa Tittle -- waived their right to a hearing and cannot contest the recommendation of 
their non-reemployment by the District.2  (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b).)  None of the seven 
temporary employees who were sent a precautionary notice filed a request for hearing.  
Consequently, they waived their right, if any, to request a hearing or participate in this 
proceeding.   
 

10. 

The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against the 15 employees who 

requested a hearing, including all Respondents.  The Accusations with required 
accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense were timely served on the 15 
employees, including all Respondents.  Notices of Defense were timely filed by the 15 
employees, including all Respondents. 
 

11. 

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

dates (first date of paid service), current assignments and locations, credentials and 
authorizations, and employment classification.  Prior to March 15, the District requested its 
employees to verify and update their information on file, including seniority date, 
credentials, and college degrees, which the employees did. 
 

12. 

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and "bumping" 

list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced.  
The District then determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another 
area and were entitled to "bump" other employees.  In determining who would be laid off for 
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by 
                                                 
 
Denise Besler and Bonnie Slater. 

2 As discussed in Factual Finding 15, the District has rescinded the layoff notices of 

3 

the known vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of 
seniority.  The District then checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they 
could “bump” other employees. 
 

13. 

The District used information from the seniority list to apply the tie-breaker 

criteria of Resolution 09-27. 
 

14. 

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations, and 

retirements in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its 
employees and in rescinding some of the notices. 
 

15.  After the preliminary layoff notices were delivered, the District determined 

that the seniority dates of certain employees needed to be adjusted, which would change the 
order of some employees on the seniority list.  On or about April 5, 2010, the District 
prepared a revised seniority list and notified the affected employees.  Based on the revised 
seniority list, the District performed another "bumping" and tiebreaker analysis and 
determined that the layoff notices to employees Cecile Kim, Elaine G. Lopez, Amy Naples, 
Yessenia Orozco, Kirsen Veith, Denise Besler, and Bonnie Slater, should be rescinded.  
Respondents are the remaining employees whose status in this proceeding was not affected 
by the adjusted seniority list. 
 

16.  As a result of rescinding the layoff notices described in Factual Finding 15, the 
District may implement only a 10.5 FTE reduction of services in K-5 Elementary Classroom 
Instruction.  (Exhibit 8.)  The Board had authorized, in Resolution 09-27, a reduction of 14.0 
FTE of this service.  
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 

 

44949 and 44955 were met. 
 

2. 

The services identified in Resolution 09-27 are particular kinds of services that 

could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s 
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, 
and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of 
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and students within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44949. 
 

3. 

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 

4 

4. 

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due 

to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District identified 
the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board directed 
be reduced or discontinued. 
 

5. 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render, except as set forth 
below. 
 

6. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Under Education Code 
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior 
teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior 
counterparts lack.  (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of 
Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) 
 

ORDER 
 

1. 

Notice may be given to employees occupying 10.5 full-time equivalent 

certificated positions in K-5 Elementary Classroom Instruction, and 2.0 full-time equivalent 
certificated positions in K-5 TOSA Instructional Coach/Intervention Teacher, that their 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction and 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 

 
2. 

Notice may be given to employees occupying 7.0 full-time equivalent 

certificated positions in categorically funded certificated services currently performed by 
temporary employees, that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year 
because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 

 
3.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

 
  
  

 
 

Dated: May ___, 2010 

___________________________ 
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

5 

