BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE 
REDLANDS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 

 

 
 

 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Involving 30 Credentialed Employees of the 
Redlands Unified School District, 

OAH No. 2010030267 
 

 
Respondents. 

      

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

Marianne Reinhold, Attorney at Law, represented 26 of the certificated employees 

Todd M. Robbins, Attorney at Law, and Mark Thompson, Attorney at Law, 

 
of California, heard this matter in Redlands, California, on April 6, 2010. 
 
 
represented the Redlands Unified School District. 
 
 
who were served with layoff notices in this proceeding. 
 
 
Peoples (who did not file a request for a hearing), or Kacy Winger (who did not file a 
request for a hearing). 
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 6, 2010. 

No appearance was made by or on behalf of Carita Dickson, Patricia Frink, Carman 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
The Redlands Unified School District 
 
 
Redlands, California.  The district serves the educational needs of the communities of 

The Redlands Unified School District (RUSD or the district) is located in 

1. 

 
1

RUSD employs approximately 1,100 certificated employees who provide services 

Redlands, Loma Linda, Mentone, Forest Falls and portions of San Bernardino and 
Highland.  RUSD provides educational services from kindergarten through grade 12.  The 
district’s current enrollment slightly exceeds 21,000 students.   
 
 
The district operates 15 elementary schools which serve students attending 
kindergarten through fifth grade.  Four middle schools serve students in grades six, seven 
and eight.  Students attending grades nine through twelve are served by three 
comprehensive high schools: Redlands High School, Redlands East Valley High School, 
and Citrus Valley High School.  An alternative high school setting exists at Orangewood 
High School.  The district also operates the Redlands Independent Study (RISE) Program. 
 
 
from kindergarten through grade 12, as well as other services and supports related to those 
students who attend traditional classes.  In addition, RUSD employs other certificated 
persons who provide educational services through the RISE Program, although these 
persons are employed on an hourly basis and their hours of employment fluctuate.  Persons 
providing services in the RISE program are usually retired school teachers and are not 
included in RUSD’s seniority list.1
 
 
  
 
governing board).  Lori Rhodes (Superintendent Rhodes), the Superintendent of Schools, is 
the Board’s Chief Executive Officer.  Sabine Robertson-Phillips (Assistant Superintendent 
Robertson-Phillips) is the district’s Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, and is 
Superintendent Rhodes’ designee in this layoff proceeding. 
 

The district is governed by an elected five-member Board of Education (the 

RUSD’s annual budget is approximately $155 million. 

2. 

 
                                                     
Notice is taken of RUSD’s website which describes the RISE Program as an individualized instructional 

1  
program with flexible scheduling that is aligned with state standards and district approved curriculum, an 
alternative to regular classroom instruction.  According to the website, participants in the RISE program may be 
working full-time to support themselves or their family, may be pregnant or parenting teens, may have verifiable 
physical or emotional problems, may be professional athletes, musicians, models, actors, etc., or may be credit 
deficient.  Participants in the RISE program must have the ability and motivation to participate in independent 
study, be working at or near grade level, have reliable transportation, have a strong support system at home, and 
must be responsible, self-motivated, English proficient, and have no serious learning disabilities.  According to 
the website, in a typical RISE program, students meet with a teacher once per week, receive all their classroom 
instruction for a week’s worth of work within their one weekly meeting time of one hour, may need to attend an 
additional math class and/or a science lab once per week, and may need to attend additional intervention classes 
(i.e., CAHSEE Review) during the week.  The website states that independent study is both difficult and time-
consuming. 

 

 
2

3. 

Proposition 13 limited the imposition of local property taxes and reduced a 

The economic layoff statutes found in the Education Code generally require the 

A school district cannot determine the level of state funding it will receive until the 

The Continuing Fiscal Crisis – Economic Layoffs 
 
 
major source of assured revenue for funding public education in California.  Since the 
passage of Proposition 13, public school districts have looked primarily to the State of 
California and to other governmental entities for funding.  
 
 
state budget is chaptered, an event usually occurring in late June, but sometimes taking 
much longer as has recently been the case.  Before then, the school district’s governing 
board must take steps to make certain that ends meet if the worst-case financial scenario 
develops.  
 
A school board’s obligation to balance its budget often requires that some teachers, 
 
administrators or other certificated employees be given preliminary layoff notices, warning 
them that their services will not be required for the next school year.  Under Education 
Code section 44949, these preliminary layoff notices must be given no later than March 15. 
 
 
retention of senior employees over more junior employees and the retention of permanent 
employees over probationary employees and other employees with less seniority.   
 
 
reverse order of seniority only if it can demonstrate that identifiable junior employees 
possess a credential, special training or experience necessary to teach a course of study or 
to provide services which more senior employees do not possess. 
 
The District’s Response 
 
 
governing boards and administrators of most other school districts) were acutely aware of 
the State of California’s continuing budget deficit and its crippling fiscal impact.  RUSD 
projected a budget deficit of about $21 million for the 2010-2011 school year.  As a result 
of the budgetary shortfall, Superintendent Rhodes prepared a recommendation which was 
presented to the governing board which outlined the reduction and elimination of particular 
kinds of services currently being provided by certificated employees.  
 
 
Superintendent Rhodes recommended to the governing board that the district notify certain 
certificated employees that their services would not be required in the 2010-11 school year 
and the reason for the recommended reduction in force. 

A public school district may deviate from the general rule requiring termination in 

In early 2010, RUSD’s governing board and administration (as well as the 

On February 23, 2010, under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, 

5. 

4. 

 

 
3

 
6. 

 

February 23, 2010, the governing board passed the following resolution: 
 
“BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE REDLANDS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
REDUCTION OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF CERTIFICATED SERVICES 

RESOLUTION NO. 40, 2009-10 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Redlands  Unified  School  District  has  determined 
that it is in the best interests of the District and the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof that 
the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  herein  must  be  reduced  or  discontinued  due  to  financial 
conditions; and 

WHEREAS, it is the opinion of the Board that because of the aforementioned reason, the 

number of certificated employees of the District must be reduced; and 

WHEREAS, this Board does not desire to reduce the services of regular certificated 

employees based upon reduction of average daily attendance during the past two years. 

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of Education of the Redlands 

Unified School District as follows: 

A. 

That the particular kinds of services set forth below be reduced or eliminated 
commencing in the 2010-2011 school year: 

46 

F.T.E. 

Elementary K-5 Teaching Services 

Counseling Services 

High School Math Teaching Services 

Educational Services Teacher on Assignment 
Services 

BTSA Support Provider Services 

Adult Education ESL Teaching Services 

Adult Education High School Diploma Teaching 
Services 

Adult Education Montero House Teaching Services 

Adult Education Counseling Services 

Adult Education Certified Nursing Assistant 
Instructor 

7 

4 

4 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

Adult Education Licensed Vocational Nursing 
Instructor Services 

.26 

F.T.E. 

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

67.26  F.T.E. 

 

 

B. 

The reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services, the corresponding number 
of certificated employees of the District shall be terminated pursuant to Education Code 

 
4

 
C. 

 
D. 

 
E. 

 
F. 

 
8. 

section 44955. 

That the reduction of certificated staff be achieved by the termination of regular 
employees and not by terminating temporary and substitute employees. 

That "competency" as described in Education Code section 44955(b) for the purposes 
of  bumping  shall  necessarily  include  possession  of  a  valid  credential  in  the  relevant 
subject matter area, "highly qualified" status under the No Child Left Behind Act, and 
an appropriate EL authorization (if required by the position). 

That, as between certificated employees with the same seniority date, the order of 
termination shall be determined solely by Board-adopted criteria. 

That the District Superintendent or designee is directed to initiate layoff procedures and 
give appropriate notice pursuant to Education Code sections 44955 and 44949.” 

 
Jurisdictional Matters 
 

7. 

On and before March 15, 2010, certificated employees were given written 
notice that the Superintendent of Schools had recommended to the governing board that 
their services be terminated at the conclusion of the current school year and that those 
services would not be needed for the upcoming 2010-11 school year.2  Each respondent 
was notified of the right to a hearing.  Each respondent who filed a request for a hearing 
was thereafter served with an accusation and other required jurisdictional documents.  

 
On April 6, 2010, the record in the administrative hearing was opened.  
Jurisdictional documents were presented.  A written stipulation was provided, sworn 
testimony was given, documentary evidence was received, closing arguments were given, 
the record was closed, and the matter was submitted. 
 
The Particular Kinds of Services 

The services identified in the governing board’s resolution were services the 

governing board could properly reduce or discontinue.  The reduction and elimination of 
those services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and the reduction and elimination of 
services was a matter within the board’s discretion.  Before issuing preliminary layoff 
notices, the district’s administrative staff considered all known positive attrition including 
resignations, retirements and probationary non-reelects to determine the number of layoff 

 
                                                     
The district sought fewer FTEs in this layoff proceeding than were originally authorized by the 

2  
governing board as a result of positions becoming available when many certificated employees retired under a 
supplemental retirement plan that was recently offered. 

 

 

 
5

notices that needed to be issued.  No particular kinds of services were lowered to levels 
below those levels mandated by state or federal law.  

The Seniority List 

 

 
9. 

 
RUSD maintained a seniority list.  An employee’s seniority date was based 
on the employee’s first date of paid service with the district in a probationary position.3  
The list included a reference/seniority number, the employees name, the seniority date, the 
employee’s assignment, the credential(s) the employee held, the employee’s English 
learner (EL) authorization, if any, and district notes related to that employee’s right to 
“bump” a more junior employee.   
 
 
In order to prepare the seniority list, Assistant Superintendent Robertson-Phillips 
consulted district employment records, referenced the board’s resolution, referenced the 
board’s tie-breaking criteria, and determined whether an employee’s credential authorized 
that employee to teach certain subjects and whether the employee was “competent” within 
the meaning of the board’s resolution.  Assistant Superintendent Robertson-Phillips 
prepared a tie-breaking matrix by which persons having the same date of hire were ranked.  
Assistant Superintendent Robertson-Phillips prepared a “bump analysis” to supplement the 
comments regarding bumping and to establish the district’s methodology in bumping. 
 
 
There were no temporary employees or substitute employees involved in this 
layoff proceeding.  The use of tie-breaking criteria to determine the order of layoff between 
employees having the same seniority date was utilized.  RUSD did not skip an 
appropriately credentialed and NCLB highly qualified junior employee into a position that 
was held by a more senior employee even if the senior employee was not NCLB highly 
qualified; however, more senior non NCLB highly qualified employees who were subject 
to this layoff proceeding were not given bumping preference over more junior teachers 
who had attained NCLB highly qualified status.  
 
Denying Bumping Preference to NCLB Highly Qualified Employees 
 
 
include in its “competency” definition an employee’s NCLB highly qualified status4 and 

11.  An issue in this layoff proceeding was the governing board’s decision to 

10. 

 
                                                     
Education Code section 44845 provides:  “Every probationary or permanent employee employed after 

3  
June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a 
probationary position.” 

NCLB highly qualified status may be obtained in a variety of ways.  For elementary school teachers, an 

4  
applicant must pass a multiple subjects examination approved by the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (CCTC) or (if the teacher is “not new” to the profession) by completing California's High Objective 
Uniform State Standard of Evaluation (HOUSSE).  For middle school and high school teachers, core academic 

 
6

 

 

the application of that status in bumping.  The district’s use of an employee’s NCLB highly 
qualified status did not involve an arbitrary or capricious standard, but was an objective 
measure of an employee’s competence.  The policy that precluded a non NCLB highly 
qualified employee from bumping into an existing position and the granting of bumping 
rights to a more junior employee who attained NCLB highly qualified status involved the 
consideration of both seniority and competence, and the evidence established that 
implementation of that policy was in the best interests of the district and the students.  The 
No Child Left Behind Act5 remains the law.  
 

The district’s use of NCLB compliance in its bumping policy fell squarely within a 
governing board’s discretion to make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that 
employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications 
entitle them to render.   
 
Core Assignments 
 
 
preliminary layoff notices held appropriate credentials and authorizations necessary to 
bump into positions that were being retained by more junior employees.   
 
 
Most elementary schools, regardless of the grade level configuration, are organized 
around a self-contained classroom where all, or most, subjects are taught to the same group 
of children by a single teacher.  Most elementary school teachers hold a Ryan Multiple 
Subject Teaching Credential, which permits an individual to teach multiple subjects to 
students in a self-contained classroom.  

12.  Another issue involved whether several middle school teachers who received 

 
                                                                                                                                                                          

competence may be established by passing a subject matter examination approved by the CCTC in each subject 
taught, or by coursework, i.e., in each core area taught the applicant must complete a CCTC approved subject 
matter program, or major, or major equivalent, (32 semester units or the equivalent) or a graduate degree, or 
National Board Certification in the core area, or completion of HOUSSE.  

The No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 is a United States Act of Congress that was originally proposed 

 
5  
by the administration of President George W. Bush immediately after taking office. The bill, shepherded through 
the Senate by the late Senator Ted Kennedy, one of the bill's sponsors, received overwhelming bipartisan support 
in Congress.  NCLB involved federal legislation that enacted theories of standards-based education reform, based 
on the belief that setting high standards and establishing measurable goals can improve individual outcomes in 
education.  NCLB requires states to develop assessments in basic skills to be given to all students in certain 
grades to enable those states to receive federal funding. The Act does not assert a national achievement standard; 
standards are set by each individual state.   

 

 

A significant provision of NCLB requires that all K-12 teachers of core content areas must demonstrate 

that they are ‘highly qualified’ by the close of the 2005-06 school year.  NCLB identifies the core content areas as 
English/language arts, mathematics, science, geography, civics, government, economics, foreign language and the 
arts (music, theatre, dance and visual arts).  Teachers of English language learners, special education teachers and 
public school teachers in programs for neglected and delinquent students who provide core content instruction 
must also demonstrate that they meet the ‘highly qualified’ standard.  

 
7

Within the middle school and junior high school milieu, a “core assignment” exists.  

Middle schools and junior high schools6 provide a transition from the elementary 

 
 
school’s self-contained classroom model to the departmentalized programs offered in high 
schools.  As a result, middle schools and junior high schools may incorporate features not 
generally present at the elementary school or high school levels, and some authorizations to 
teach middle school are unique.  
 
If a middle or junior high school program is arranged so that one teacher provides 
 
instruction in several subjects, it is a self-contained classroom and that middle school or 
junior high school teacher must have a multiple subject credential that authorizes that 
service.  But, when a middle school or a junior high school teacher teaches just one subject 
to several groups of students, he or she needs to have a credential that authorizes the 
teaching the specific subject in a departmentalized setting.  
 
 
A core assignment is defined in Education Code section 44258.1.  It involves a middle 
school or junior high school teacher providing instruction in a self-contained classroom 
where he or she teaches two or more subjects for two or more periods per day to the same 
group of pupils, and, in addition, teaches any of those subjects to a separate group of pupils 
at the same grade level for an additional period or periods, provided that the additional 
period or periods do not exceed one-half of the teacher’s total assignment.  
  
 
Most high schools have departmentalized classes.  Most high school teachers hold a 
single subject teaching credential.  With a single subject teaching credential, a teacher may 
teach any class within the broad single subject area listed on the credentialing document. 
 
Caleb Rothe (Rothe) graduated from Cal Poly Pomona in Computer Science.  
 
Rothe took “very few” units in English and has somewhere between 20 to 30 units in Math.  
Rothe is a tenured RUSD employee with a seniority date of September 6, 2007.  Rothe now 
teaches a 6th grade core assignment (two periods of Math, with the remainder in English) in 
a single classroom to several groups of students each day.  He had a similar arrangement 
his first year of teaching at RUSD, when he taught 7th grade English and Social Studies in a 
core assignment, and in his second year of teaching at RUSD, when he taught 7th grade 
English and remedial English in core assignments.  Rothe holds a preliminary multiple 
subject teaching credential and supplemental authorizations in Math and Computer 
Science.  While he is NCLB compliant in multiple subjects, he is not NCLB compliant in 
the core content areas of Math or English, and he cannot, under the district’s bumping 
criteria, bump into a single subject classroom where Math or English is taught.   
 

13. 

 
                                                     
Middle schools are defined as schools that most frequently include grades six through eight but may 

6  
have any combination of grades five through eight.  Junior high schools often also include grade nine. 

 

 
8

14.  Melissa Anderson (Anderson) is a tenured RUSD employee with a seniority 

Rothe established that he was senior to Jeffrey Martinez (Martinez), a probationary 

 
teacher with seniority date July 1, 2009, and to Jennifer Vadnais (Vadnais), a first year 
probationary teacher with a seniority date of August 10, 2009, each of whom teaches a 
single subject of Math; Rothe did not establish he enjoyed “competence” under the board’s 
resolution to bump into their positions.  Martinez and Vadnais hold single subject teaching 
credentials in Math and are NCLB compliant; Rothe does not hold a single subject teaching 
credential and is not NCLB compliant in Math.  
 
 
date of August 13, 2007.  Anderson now teaches a 6th grade core assignment (Math and 
Science classes).  While Anderson has always taught a 6th grade core assignment involving 
Math and Science during the traditional school year during her employment at RUSD, she 
also taught exit examination English during two RUSD summer school sessions.  Anderson 
holds a multiple subject teaching credential with a special authorization in English.  She 
has completed approximately 25 units of English.  Anderson does not hold HOUSSE 
certification in English and while she is NCLB compliant in multiple subjects, she is not 
NCLB compliant in any specific academic core content area. 
 
 
Anderson established that she was senior to Laura Whitehurst (Whitehurst), a 
probationary teacher with seniority date August 13, 2007, and that she was senior to Katie 
Baker (Baker), an intern with a seniority date of March 18, 2008, each of whom teaches 
Math in grades 9 through 12 and each of whom is being retained by RUSD.  Anderson did 
not establish that she enjoyed sufficient “competence” under the board’s bumping criteria 
to move into their positions.  Whitehurst and Baker hold single subject teaching credentials 
in English and are capable of teaching grades 9 through 12; Whitehurst and Baker are 
NCLB compliant by reason of passing NCLB competency examinations; Anderson does 
not have NCBL compliance in English and while she is authorized to teach in 9th grade 
English by reason of her special authorization, she is not certificated to teach English in 
grades 10 through 12.  For each of these reasons, Anderson cannot bump into Baker and 
Whitehurst’s positions.  
 
 
15.  Margaret Jenner (Jenner) is a tenured RUSD employee with a seniority date 
of August 13, 2007.  Anderson now teaches a 6th grade core assignment (Math and Science 
classes).  Jenner holds HOUSSE certification in multiple subjects as a result of her vast 
teaching experience and as a result of having been awarded that certification by the Colton 
Unified School District before she applied to RUSD for employment and by RUSD during 
her first semester of teaching at RUSD.  Jenner has completed at least 20 units of English, 
but not 32.  She is not NCLB compliant in any area core area other than multiple subject.   

 
Like Anderson, Jenner established that she was senior to Whitehurst and Baker.  

 
Like Anderson, Jenner could not establish that she enjoyed sufficient “competence” under 
the board’s bumping criteria to bump into their positions.  Jenner cannot assume the 
positions held by Whitehurst or Baker for all these reasons Anderson cannot bump into 
those positions.  

 

 
9

 
The Layoff Procedure 
 
The governing board resolved to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of 
 
services provided by RUSD teachers and other certificated employees.  This decision was 
not related to the competency or dedication of the employees whose services were 
proposed to be discontinued.   
 

16. 

The district’s administrative staff initiated and followed a systematic procedure for 

identifying employees directly affected by the governing board’s reduction and elimination 
of particular kinds of services.  Careful evaluation of each employee’s seniority date, 
credential, qualifications and competence under the board’s bumping criteria preceded the 
determination of what bumping rights, if any, an employee had. 
 
 
The determination that non-NCLB employees should not be allowed to bump less 
senior NCLB compliant teachers in filling a vacant position was lawful, reasonable and in 
the best interest of the district and its students.  Likewise, the determination that employees 
without proper authorization should not be permitted to teach a departmentalized subject 
was lawful, reasonable and in the best interest of the district and its students.   
 
 
which a more senior employee was certificated, competent and qualified to render. 

No junior credentialed employee was retained by the district to provide services 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Statutory Authority  
 
 

1. 

Education Code section 44944 provides in part: 
 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing 
board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year . . . the 
governing board and the employee shall be given written notice by the 
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been 
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons 
therefor . . . 
 
(b) 
The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying him or her for the ensuing year . . .  If an employee fails to request a 
hearing on or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his 
or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . . 

 
10

 
 

 

In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the proceeding shall be 

 
(c) 
conducted and a decision made in accordance with . . . the Government Code and 
the governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency therein, except 
that all of the following shall apply: 
 
 
five days after service upon him or her of the accusation and he or she shall be 
notified of this five-day period for filing in the accusation. 

The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any, within 

(1) 

 

 
(3) 

. . . 

The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge who 

 
shall prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a determination as 
to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof.  The proposed decision shall be prepared for the 
governing board and shall contain a determination as to the sufficiency of the cause 
and a recommendation as to disposition.  However, the governing board shall make 
the final determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and disposition.  None of 
the findings, recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed 
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding on the governing 
board.  Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or 
governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the 
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.  Copies of the proposed decision 
shall be submitted to the governing board and to the employee on or before May 7 
of the year in which the proceeding is commenced. . . .”  
 
2. 
 
“(a)  No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes 
other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 
44947, inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her 
position for cause other than as specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
(b)  Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued 
not later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in the 
opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary . . . to 
decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board 
may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the 
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close 
of the school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while 
any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to 

Education Code section 44955 provides in part: 

 

 
11

 

render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 
render.  
 

. . . 
 

. . . 

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the 
basis of needs of the district and the students thereof . . .   
 

 
(c) 
Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 15th of May  
. . . and services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in 
which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with the 
provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or 
probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided 
for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school 
year. 
 
The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner 
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and 
qualifications entitle them to render.  However, prior to assigning or reassigning any 
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught, 
and for which he or she does not have a teaching credential or which is not within 
the employee’s major area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the 
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter competency test 
in the appropriate subject. 
 
(d)  Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following 
reasons: 
 
 
specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services 
credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a 
school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, which 
others with more seniority do not possess. . . .” 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 

(1) 

 

 

 
12

Jurisdiction 
 
3. 

 

 
4. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were 
satisfied as to all respondent employees who were identified in Exhibit 1 to the accusation.   

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services 

5. 

A school board’s decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of 

The intent of the Education Code is to leave to a school board the discretion 

 
service is not tied in with any statistical computation.  Where a governing board determines 
to discontinue or reduce a particular kind of service, it is within the discretion of the board 
to determine the amount by which it will reduce a particular kind of service as long as a 
district does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose Teachers 
Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) 
 
Competence 
 
 
of determining whether in addition to possessing seniority an employee is also “certificated 
and competent” to be employed in a vacant position.  The term “competent” in this regard 
relates to an individual’s specific skills or qualifications including academic background, 
training, credentials, and experience, but does not include evidence related to on-the-job 
performance.  (Forker v. Board of Trustees (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)  In addition 
to seniority, the only limitation in placing a teacher in a vacant position is that the teacher 
selected be “certificated and competent” to render the service required by the vacant 
position.  Among employees who meet this threshold limitation, there is no room in the 
statutory scheme for comparative evaluation. (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 
Cal.3d 294, 299.)  An employee holding a special credential or needed skill, if such 
credentials or competence are not shared by a more senior employee, may be retained 
though it results in termination of a senior employee.  (Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze 
(1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.) 
 
Seniority and Bumping  
 
 
subdivision (b), in part, as follows:  “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services 
of no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while . . . 
any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.”  Essentially this language provides 
“bumping” rights for senior certificated and competent employees and “skipping” authority 
allowing a school district to retain junior employees who are certificated and competent to 
render services which more senior employees are not.  Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 

Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff statute, provides in 

6. 

 

 
13

provides an exception to subdivision (b) where a district demonstrates specific need for 
personnel to teach a specific course of study and that a junior certificated employee has 
special training and experience necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated 
employee does not possess.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 
127, 134-135.)  
 
7. 

 
determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an 
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to 
be assigned to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at 136-137.) 
 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to 

9. 

8. 

Assistant Superintendent Robertson-Phillips’ testimony established that 

The district’s competency standard related to NCLB compliance as applied 
to bumping was reasonable and its identification of persons subject to layoff and retention 
in this proceeding was in accordance with the provisions of the Education Code. 
 
The RISE Program 
 
 
RUSD treats RISE certificated employees in the same fashion as temporary teachers are 
treated – the employees may be hired and dismissed without the formalities required for 
probationary and permanent employees and their continuing employment status is 
dependent upon the continuation of the RISE program.  Since these temporary employees 
are not RUSD probationary employees (indeed, most RISE employees are retired teachers), 
their service does not count toward their acquisition of permanent status.  RISE employees 
are not included in the district’s seniority list.  A Vice Principal in charge of the RISE 
program, rather than Assistant Superintendent Robertson-Phillips, hired these individuals 
and scheduled their services as necessary.  Assistant Superintendent Robertson-Phillips 
testified that while the RISE program was not a categorically funded project, it is far more 
likely than not that the RISE program conducted under a contract with a private or public 
agency; there was no evidence to the contrary.  Thus, the RUSD was authorized to employ 
these persons on a temporary basis under Education Code section 44909.7
 

10. 

The Education Code’s complex and somewhat rigid classification scheme is 
intended to limit rather than to enlarge the power of school districts to classify teachers as 
temporary employees.  The statutory scheme represents the delicate balancing necessary to 
accommodate students’ need for education, teachers’ need for job security, and school 
boards’ need for flexibility in evaluating and hiring employees.  The Legislature has 
restricted the flexibility of a school district in the continued use of temporary employees to 
prevent the benefits resulting from employment security for teachers to the district’s 

 
                                                     
Education Code section 44852 provides: “Nothing in this code shall be construed as prohibiting the 

7  
employment of persons in positions requiring certification qualifications for less than a full school year in 
temporary schools or classes.” 

 

 
14

administrative needs of a district.  The Legislature has prevented the arbitrary dismissal of 
employees with positions of a settled and continuing nature, i.e., permanent and 
probationary teachers, by requiring notice and hearing before termination.  Substitute and 
temporary teachers, on the other hand, fill the short range needs of a school district and 
may be summarily released absent an infringement of constitutional or contractual rights.  
Because the substitute and temporary classifications are not guaranteed procedural due 
process by statute, they are narrowly defined by the Legislature, and should be strictly 
interpreted. (Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Ass’n v. Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006) 
145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1280-1281.)  
 
 
does not authorize any respondent in this layoff proceeding to assume the temporary 
employment of a RISE employee.  If any respondent to this proceeding believes that the 
district’s operation of the RISE program involves an unfair labor practice, a right to redress 
may exist in some venue other than before the Office of Administrative Hearings and in 
something other than a layoff proceeding.  The remedy for an alleged unfair labor practice 
does not require, as was suggested in this matter, the invalidation of this proceeding and the 
restoration of all respondents’ employment with RUSD.  
 
Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees 

This layoff proceeding does not have jurisdiction over RISE employees and 

11. 

 
12.  As a result of the governing board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of 

service, cause exists under the Education Code for the district to give notice to those 
respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment will be terminated at the 
close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed by the district for 
the 2010-11 school year. 

 
Determination 
 
13. 

The charges set forth in the accusation were sustained by the preponderance 
 
of the evidence and were related to the welfare of the Redlands Unified School District and 
the pupils thereof.  RUSD’s administrative staff made necessary assignments and 
reassignments in such a manner that the most senior employees were retained to render 
services which their seniority and qualifications entitled them to render.  No employee with 
less seniority than any respondent will be retained to render a service which any respondent 
is certificated, competent and qualified to render.   

 

 
This determination is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 
 
 

 

 
15

RECOMMENDATION 

 
It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the following persons that 

their employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their 
services will not be needed for the 2010-2011 school year:  Melissa Anderson, Claudia 
Brown, Carly Burrows, Lisa Cohen, Hilary Craw, Raylene Crawley, Sara Desist, Carita 
Dickson, Danielle Elgan, Michael Falgout, Scott Ferguson, Patricia Frink, Andrea 
Haendiges, Margaret Jenner, Jennifer Martinez, Yolanda Martinez, John Mendoza, Elaine 
Pahia, Carman Peoples, Theodore Perkins, Georgina Pinto, Patricia Ramirez, Caleb Rothe, 
Janell Searle, Lindsey Sexton, Megan Spring, Nicole Steinhaus, Heather Stinson, Benjamin 
Washburn, and Kacy Winger.  

DATED:  ____________ 

 
 
 
  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 
JAMES AHLER  
Administrative Law Judge 

 

 

 

 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
16

