BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
KELSEYVILLE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
OAH No. 2010031380 

 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
ROCHELLE BELL, KERRY BRAIDER, 
HEATHER CARTER, CHERYL MOSTIN, 
EVA SCOTT, AND CHERIE SEELY, 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 
 

 

 

Joseph C. Kinkade, Attorney at Law, Lozano Smith, represented complainant David 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 
Administrative Law Judge Melissa G. Crowell, State of California, Office of 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Kelseyville, California, on April 28, 2010. 
 
 
McQueen, Superintendent of the Kelseyville Unified School District. 
 
 
 
 
 

James D. Allen, Attorney at Law, represented respondents. 

The matter was submitted for decision on April 28, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

3. 

1. 

2. 

David McQueen made and filed the accusation in his official capacity as 

Respondents Rochelle Bell, Kerry Braider, Heather Carter, Cheryl Mostin, 

 
 
Superintendent of the Kelseyville Unified School District. 
 
 
Eva Scott and Cherie Seely are certificated employees of the district. 
 
 
44955 have been met in this proceeding.   
 
 
On March 9, 2010, the Board of Trustees of the district adopted Resolution 
No. 09/10-13.  The board resolved to reduce or discontinue the following services for the 
2010-2011 school year:   
 
 
 

All of the jurisdictional requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 

4. 

 

1

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
6. 

 
7. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1.  Eliminate the equivalent of two (2) full-time Middle School Positions: 

 

1 Section 6th Grade P.E. 
 
2 Sections 7th Grade Science 
 
 
 
2 Sections 7th Grade Math    
2 Sections 7th Grade English 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Eliminate the equivalent of three (3) full-time High School Positions: 

2 Sections 7th Grade History 
2 Sections 7th & 8th Grade    
Electives 
1 Section 8th Grade English 
1 Section 8th Grade History 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

1 Section of Music 
2 Sections of CAHSEE Support 
2 Sections of Cooking  
1 Section of ROP Pastry/Dessert 
1 Section ROP Culinary Arts 
 
1 Section Advanced Art 
 
1 Section Art   

 

 

1 Section Driver’s Education  
1 Section French II-IV 
2 Sections Woods 
1 Section ROP Turf & Landscape 
2 Sections ROP Construction  
1 Section Work Experience 
1 Section Trigonometry 

3.  Eliminate the equivalent of five and one-half (5 1/2) full-time equivalent  
Elementary School Positions. 

4.  Eliminate the equivalent of one (1) full-time Counselor Position. 

The total full-time equivalent certificated positions reduced or eliminated by the resolution is 
11.5.  
 
 
reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  None of the 
reductions is for a mandated service.  

The services set forth above are particular kinds of services that may be 

5. 

All known attrition was taken into consideration prior to the issuance of the 

March 15 notices to respondents.  

Eva Scott holds a clear multiple subject credential and is assigned to Mount 
Vista Middle School.  The district has given respondent Scott a seniority date of November 
9, 2001, which corresponds with her first date of paid service as a certificated employee in a 
probationary position.  

 
Respondent Scott was a classified employee of the district prior to obtaining her 
teaching credential.  She was employed in the capacity as an Instructional Aide and as a 
Health Aide.  Her first date of paid service as a classified employee of the district was 
November 16, 1995.  The board accepted Scott’s resignation from her classified position on 
October 11, 2001, with an October 31, 2001 effective date of the resignation. 

2

Scott testified that there was no break in time from her employment as a classified 

employee and that as a certificated employee.  This is not accurate.  There was a break in her 
employment with the district of nine days, the time between the effective date of her 
resignation as a classified employee and the date of her employment as a certificated 
employee.  

Respondent Mostin holds a clear multiple subject credential and a single 

subject credential in physical education.  She has a seniority date of August 27, 2001, and is 
assigned to Kelseyville Elementary School.   

 
Mostin shares the same seniority date with other certificated employees who hold 

elementary school positions.  As required by Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), 
the district applied its tie-breaking criteria1 to this group of teachers to determine the order of 
termination.  Respondent Mostin was one of three teachers in this group to receive a layoff 
notice. 
 
One of the tie-breaking criterion is the ability to speak Spanish, which warrants one 

point.  Mostin did not receive credit for being able to speak Spanish because she did not 
notify the district of this ability until after she received her layoff notice.  Mostin concedes 
that the order of termination would not alter were she given one point for her ability to speak 
Spanish.  She believes this may be important, however, in determining her rank order for 
rehiring.  

 
The tie-breaking criteria was applied to the group of teachers who share the 2001 
seniority date before the March 15 notices were issued by the district.  The district did not err 
in failing to give Mostin credit for something which was not brought to its attention prior to 
March 15.  Mostin’s rehire rights are not a matter to be considered in this proceeding.  

It was not established by competent evidence that the district noticed more 

teachers for layoff than necessary to effectuate the reduction in services set forth in the 
board’s resolution.  

 
10.  Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed 

above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 

 
11.  No permanent or probationary certificated employee with less seniority than a 
respondent is being retained to provide a service for which a respondent is credentialed and 
competent to render.  
 

12. 

The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 

district and of its pupils.   

 
8. 

 
9. 

 
 

                                                 
 

1  The tie-breaking criteria are set forth in Board Policy 4115. 

 

3

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
 
Respondent Scott argues that she should be entitled to tack on her years of 
employment as a classified employee to give her an earlier seniority date as a certificated 
employee of the district.  This contention is without merit.  Education Code section 44845 
provides that a certificated employee is deemed to be employed on the date he or she first 
renders paid service in a probationary position.  The seniority date given to Scott complies 
with this provision.   
 
 
section provides in relevant part:   
 

Respondent Scott’s reliance on Education Code section 44064 is misplaced.  This 

If an employee of a school district . . . employed in a position in 
the classified service is assigned to a position in the same 
district requiring certification qualifications, the employee shall 
retain all sick leave, vacation, and other rights and benefits 
accumulated by the employee at the time he or she is assigned to 
a position requiring certification qualifications.  All seniority 
and permanency rights shall be secured to the employee during 
the period of time he or she occupies a position in the 
certificated service. . . . 
 
(Italics added.) 
 
Education Code section 44064 does not apply to respondent Scott because she was not 
assigned to a certificated position while she was a classified employee.  Respondent Scott 
resigned from her position in the classified service and was hired into a position requiring 
certification qualifications.  But even if this section were found to be applicable to 
respondent Scott, it would not allow her to tack on her years of service as a classified 
employee to her seniority as a certificated employee.  Section 44064 clearly states that 
seniority rights are secured only during the period of time the certificated position is 
occupied.  The district correctly assigned respondent Scott a seniority date that matches her 
first date of paid service as a certificated employee.  
 
 
in Finding 4, cause exists pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to 
respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  This 
cause solely relates to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44949. 

Because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services set forth 

2. 

 

4

ORDER 
 

Notice may be given to respondents Rochelle Bell, Kerry Braider, Heather Carter, 
 
Cheryl Mostin, Eva Scott and Cherie Seely, that their services will not be required for the 
2010-2011 school year.  

 

 
DATED: _________________________ 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
MELISSA G. CROWELL 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

 

5

