BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
BEARDSLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF KERN, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
ARIANNE R. NEWMAN, 
 
 

Respondent. 

 

 

     
OAH No.  2010031645 
     
    
     
 
 

 
PROPOSED DECISION 

Peter C. Carton, Attorney at Law, represented the Beardsley School District 

This matter came on regularly for hearing on April 7, 2010, in Bakersfield, 

 
 
California, before H. Stuart Waxman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, State of California. 
 
 
(District). 
 
 
Newman (Respondent). 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 7, 2010. 

Paul A. Welchans, Attorney at Law, represented Respondent, Arianne R. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

The Governing Board of the Beardsley School District (Board) determined to 

 
 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers and other 
certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the 
competency and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be 
reduced or eliminated.   

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process 

involving review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in 
accordance with the requirements of the Education Code.  

 
 

 
/// 
 

 

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 
1.  Paul Miller made and filed the Accusation in his official capacity as 

2.  Respondent is a probationary certificated District employee. 

5.  The Assistant Superintendent made and filed an Accusation against 

4.  Respondent timely submitted a written request for a hearing to determine if 

 
Assistant Superintendent of the Beardsley School District (District). 
 
 
 
3.  On or before March 15, 2010, the District personally served on each 
 
respondent a written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to each 
respondent, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that his/her 
services would not be required for the next school year (Notice of Recommendation 
Not to Reemploy).  Each written notice set forth a reason for the recommendation and 
noted that the Board had passed a Resolution (Board Resolution Number 6) reducing 
the certificated staff. 
 
 
there is cause for not reemploying her for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
Respondent as the sole certificated employee who requested a hearing.  The 
Accusation, with required accompanying documents and a blank Notice of Defense, 
were timely served on Respondent. 
 
 
section 11506, was timely filed on Respondent’s behalf.   
 
 
7.  Board Resolution Number 7, adopted on February 9, 2010, established tie-
breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who 
first rendered paid service on the same date.  It provided that the order of termination 
shall be based on the needs of the District and its students. 
 
 
dates (first date of paid service), current assignments and locations, advanced degrees, 
credentials, and authorizations.  Credential and authorization data are obtained from 
the records of the County Office of Education, at which certificated employees must 
register such documents. 
 
 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

8.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

6.  On March 26, 2010, a Notice of Defense, pursuant to Government Code 

9.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 

 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

1 

2 

0.5 

0.56 

Full-Time Equivalent

10.  On February 9, 2010, the Board took action to reduce or discontinue the 

11.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform 

 
following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year: 
 
Particular Kind of Service 
 
Self-Contained Classroom 
Instruction, K-6 
 
Mild/Moderate 
 
P.E. Teacher   
 
Departmentalized Instruction, 
Junior High, 7-8: 
 
Music   
 
Mild/Moderate 
 
Total   
 
 
any services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 
12.  The eliminated services were “particular kinds of services” that could be 
 
reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The 
Superintendent’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services 
was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  
 
 
the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees of the District as determined by the Board.   
 
 
employee of the District, that she should have been classified as a probationary 
employee, and that Respondent should have been higher on the seniority list than Ms. 
Zubia because Respondent had an earlier first date of paid service.  Respondent based 
that claim on the testimony of Diane Coble, the District’s secretary who is responsible 
for the District’s personnel matters. 
 
/// 
 
/// 

13.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to 

14.  Respondent argued that Kelly Zubia was misclassified as a permanent 

9.06 

 

 

 

3

15.  Ms. Coble testified on direct examination that Ms. Zubia was hired by the 

16.  Respondent also argued that her first date of paid service to the District, as 

 
District in November 2006, resigned in summer 2008, and returned to the District 
after the beginning of the 2008-2009 school year, but within 39 months of her 
resignation.  Respondent argued that the District failed to prove that Ms. Zubia taught 
more than 75 percent of the 2007-2008 school year and therefore, she is not entitled to 
the protection of Education Code section 44931.  However, on cross-examination, 
Ms. Coble corrected her earlier testimony by stating that Ms. Zubia began her work 
with the District in November 2005, not November 2006.  That testimony was both 
uncontroverted and credible.  Ms. Zubia was correctly classified as a permanent 
employee. 
 
 
reflected on the District’s seniority list, is incorrect.  She attended an orientation on 
August 7, 2008, at the request of the District, and that she was paid for her time and 
service at the orientation.     
 
 
duties on the last day of each month.  Payments for services other than regular 
teaching duties, such as those for attending an orientation, were paid on the 15th of 
each month.  Respondent was paid on September 15, 2008, for her attendance at the 
orientation.  The warrant covered only the amount paid for the orientation.  Her 
regular salary for the previous month was not included in that warrant.   
 
 
District is August 14, 2008, the date reflected on the District’s seniority list.  
Respondent attended the orientation before her contract went into effect, and she did 
so voluntarily.  Attendance at the orientation was not required by the District.  The 
District correctly determined Respondent’s first date of paid service to be August 14, 
2008.  Cause does not exist to adjust her first date of paid service on the seniority list. 
 
 

17.  The District typically issued paychecks to its teachers for regular teaching 

18.  The first date of paid service reflected on Respondent’s contract with the 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 

2.  The services identified in Board Resolution Number 6 are particular kinds 

 
 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 
 
 
of services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for 
the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s 
schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
 
///  

 

4

3.  A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall 
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board 
of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)  
  
4.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 
 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the 
Board directed be reduced or discontinued.   
 
 
services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
  
 
6.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, 
the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 
position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) 
 
 

5.    No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

ORDER 

2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

 
 
1.  The Accusations against the respondents are sustained.  Notice may be 
given to the respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year because of reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
  
  
DATED:  April 12, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
H. STUART WAXMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

5

