BEFORE THE 
ORANGE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusations Against:   
 
     Certificated Employees  
 
By 
     Orange County Department of Education. 
 
 
 

 
 
OAH Case No. 2010020986  
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Respondents Julie Lynn Ames, Michael A. Kashdan, Cheryl Ann Stoltz and John M. 

Complainant Orange County Superintendent of Schools was represented by Anthony 

 
 
This matter was heard by David B. Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, on April 21, 2010, at Costa Mesa, California.  Oral, documentary, 
and stipulated evidence and written arguments were received and oral arguments heard, and 
the matter was submitted for decision on April 21, 2010. 
 
Parties and Representation
 
 
P. De Marco and Cathie L. Fields, Attorneys at Law.  
 
 
Wells (who is a licensed attorney), were present and represented themselves.  Respondent 
Christine Hall was present and was represented by Dean W. Hall, Attorney at Law.   
 
 
Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law.   Complainant objected to the inclusion of any employees 
who did not submit a Notice of Defense, but allowed such employees to offer evidence on 
the subject of why no Notice of Defense was submitted.  No such evidence was offered.  The 
objection was sustained before the conclusion of the hearing. 
 
 
However, upon further review of the evidence, it is found that Complainant did not 
submit evidence of which Respondents of the thirty identified in the Accusation (Exhibit 5) 
had submitted Notices of Defense.  (Although a document was prepared with this 
information, it was neither marked for identification nor received in evidence.)  Therefore, 
the order sustaining the objection is not supported by the evidence and IS HEREBY 
VACATED.  The objection is OVERRULED. 
 
 

Twenty-one employees, including some who are Respondents, were represented by 

Mr. Perez represented the following employees, determined to be Respondents (“*” 
 
indicates those employees present at the hearing): Adams, James*; Clark, Adriana Angulo; 
Garten, Marcia E.*; Gramling, Sharon A.; Gruber, Linda F.*; Juarez, Martin*; Keir, Susan 
S.*; Kriskey, Jacqueline Anderson; Lester, Lewis Lee*; Mahoney, Jennifer Lynn; Nguyen, 
Raphael H.*; Rainis, Michael J.*; Ramirez, Monica*; Roman, Michael Danny; Salio, 
Elizabeth Anne*; Schegetz, Mary F.*; Springston, Julie Lowell*; and Walsh, Judith M.*  
 
Mr. Perez also purported to represent Barrientos, Eric*; Francis, Dina*; and Ramirez, 
 
Ruth*.  However, the evidence supports the inference that these employees did not submit a 
Request for Hearing after being served with the preliminary layoff notice.1  Under Education 
Code section 44949, subdivision (b), if an employee served with a preliminary layoff notice 
does not submit a request for a hearing, the “failure to do so shall constitute his or her waiver 
of his or her right to a hearing.”  Therefore, these three employees are not Respondents in 
this matter. 
 
 
Alvarez, Erica; Newkirk, Jose James*; Schiller, Shanti Sioux; Shelley, Dawn Dilberto; 
Vorck, Charles Kurt; and Wellikson, Noah D. 
 

Other Respondents who were not represented by Mr. Perez are: Adams, Tanya G.*;  

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.  On March 17, 2010, the Accusation was made and filed by Nina Boyd in her 

 
 
official capacity as Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources and Support Services 
(Assistant Superintendent) of the Orange County Department of Education (Department) and 
as a designee of the Orange County Superintendent of Schools.   
 

2.  Respondents are permanent, probationary or temporary certificated employees of 

3.  Through its Special Schools Division, the Department provides special education 

the Department.   
 
 
and services to students with special needs, including students who are severely disabled, 
deaf and hard-of-hearing, visually impaired, and autistic.  School districts in Orange County 
refer their students to the Department when the school districts choose not to provide 
services to them.  The Department bills the school districts for its services for the students.   
Through its ACCESS Division (Alternative, Community, and Correctional Education 
Schools and Services), the Department provides alternative educational programs to students 
in the county juvenile detention center and camps, group homes, and day homes.  These 
students are referred to the Department by schools, courts, and the juvenile justice system.  
The Department employs teachers for both the Special Schools Division and ACCESS 
Division; teachers may be assigned to teach at county and regional sites as well at school 

                                                 
1 Thirty Respondents are identified in the Accusation.  It is inferred that these 
 
Respondents each submitted a Request for Hearing after being served with the preliminary 
layoff notice.  Neither Barrientos, Francis nor Ramirez is included. 

 

2

5.  On February 16, 2010, pursuant to Education Code sections 1294, 44949, and 

4.  For the 2010-2011 school year, the Department projects that it will have a budget 

districts.   The Department receives funding for its services from the State of California, and 
also from other school Districts with which it contracts to provide educational services. 
 
 
shortfall of approximately $10.3 million in the Special Schools and ACCESS Divisions.    
The budget shortfall is a result, in part, of uncertainty in enrollment due to decisions or plans 
of school districts not to refer students to the Department’s Special Schools and ACCESS 
Divisions.   In addition, the Department anticipates that it will receive less state funding in 
the future due to the budget problems of the government of the State of California.   Due to 
these budget shortfalls for the next school year, the Department has determined that it must 
reduce expenditures in the Special Schools and ACCESS Divisions and must do so by 
terminating the employment of administrative personnel, temporary teachers, and permanent 
and probationary employees. 
 
 
44955, the Deputy Superintendent as an authorized designee of the Orange County 
Superintendent of Schools (Superintendent) determined that, because the Department has or 
will have insufficient revenue to maintain the current levels of its programs, it is necessary to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services which are now being rendered by 
certificated personnel no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year.  The 
Superintendent also found that the reduction or discontinuance of these particular kinds of 
services will result in the termination, reassignment, and displacement of probationary and/or 
permanent certificated employees.   
 
6.  On February 16, 2010, the Superintendent resolved that particular kinds of services 
 
must be discontinued or reduced by the following 35.00 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

TYPE OF PROGRAM 
Administrative
Principal 
 
Assistant Principal 
Psychologist   
 
           
Classroom Teaching - Special Schools 
SDC/Severely Handicapped  
SDC/Deaf & Hard of Hearing 
SDC/Oral Deaf 
 
 
 
Classroom Teaching — ACCESS 
Contract Learning Classes 
Day School Classes   
Institutions Day School 
Special Education 
U.C.I.   

12.0 
6.0 
2.0 
2.0  
2.0 

9.0 
1.0 
1.0 

2.0 
3.0 
1.0 

FTE  

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

  
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

3

 

The Superintendent further resolved that, because of the reduction or 

 
discontinuance in particular kinds of services, it is necessary to terminate no later than the 
beginning of the 2010-2011 school year, probationary and/or permanent certificated 
employees equal in number to the positions affected and services reduced or discontinued.  
The Superintendent resolved that his designated representative send appropriate notices to all 
employees “possibly affected by virtue of the reduction and elimination of particular kinds of 
service.”  The Superintendent also adopted tiebreaking criteria to be used in determining the 
order of termination or layoff of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the 
Department on the same date or have the same first date of service.   
 
7.  On February 22, 2010, the Superintendent further found that the Department has 
 
employed temporary certificated employees or teachers and that the resolution to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services is related to the justifications for employing 
temporary employees.  The Superintendent determined that the resolution to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services “is related to the loss or potential loss of revenue 
limit funding and of certain categorical or specially-funded programs, the possibility of 
probationary and permanent employees returning from leaves of absence, and other 
considerations that relate directly to the justifications for employment of temporary 
certificated employees.”  The Superintendent thus determined that one temporary certificated 
employee must be released from his temporary assignment to effectuate the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
provisions of Education Code sections 1294, 44949, and 44955, written notices were given 
by the Assistant Superintendent as designee of the Superintendent by personal service or 
certified mail to Respondents, who are permanent or probationary employees of the 
Department, that the Superintendent had recommended that their services will not be 
required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year and the reasons for this action.  The written 
notices included the resolutions of the Superintendent to reduce and/or discontinue certain 
services or programs in the Department, the list of particular certificated services to be 
reduced or eliminated, tie-breaking criteria, pertinent sections of the California Education 
Code, and a request for hearing.   Respondents requested a hearing to determine if there is 
cause for not re-employing them for the ensuing school year.    
 
 
9.  On March 1, 2010, pursuant to the resolutions of the Superintendent and the 
provisions of Education Code sections 1294, 44949, and 44955, written notice was given by 
the Assistant Superintendent as designee of the Superintendent to Respondent James Lee 
Adams who is a temporary certificated employee, that the Superintendent had recommended 
that his services will not be required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year and that, as a 
temporary certificated employee, he may be released from employment without a hearing.  
The written notice included the resolutions of the Superintendent to reduce and/or 
discontinue certain services or programs of the Department, the list of particular certificated 
services to be reduced or eliminated, tie-breaking criteria, pertinent sections of the California 
Education Code, and a request for hearing.  The Department further notified Respondent 
James Lee Adams that if he claimed that he could not be released from employment without 

8.  On March 1, 2010, pursuant to the resolutions of the Superintendent and the 

 

4

10.  The Department’s notices dated March 1, 2010, were sufficient in providing 

a hearing, he was required to submit a request for hearing, attend the layoff proceeding, and 
present evidence at the hearing that he was entitled to participate in the hearing.  Respondent 
James Lee Adams requested a hearing to determine if there is cause for not re-employing 
him for the ensuing school year.   
 
 
notice to Respondents under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  Respondents were 
not prejudiced by errors in the notice, if any, with respect to the description of their current 
assignments, home addresses, or any other matters.   No claims were raised in the hearing 
that the notices were, in fact, deficient in any respect. 
 
 
11.  On or about March 17, 2010, the Department served Respondents with an 
Accusation, Statement to Respondent, copies of Education Code sections 1294, 44949, and 
44955, Government Code sections 11500, 11505, 11506, 11507.5-11507.7, 11509, and 
11520, Notice of Defense form, and Notice of Hearing.   The evidence was that nineteen 
Respondents filed notices of defense, requesting a hearing to determine if there is cause not 
to employ them for the ensuing school year, but did not establish the names of those nineteen 
Respondents.  It is inferred that some of the Respondents filed notices of defense.  In 
addition, the Department invited any Respondents who did not file notices of defense to 
participate in the noticed hearing.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met 
by the parties.    
 
 
12.  The services set forth in Finding 6 above are particular kinds of services which 
may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The 
determination of the Superintendent of the Department to reduce or discontinue these 
services is within the sound discretion of the Department, related to the welfare of the 
Department and its students, and not arbitrary or capricious.   The Department will continue 
to provide services mandated by law although in a different manner in some areas and plans 
to re-employ Respondents whose services are reduced or discontinued in the event that 
services or programs are reinstated due to sufficient funding.  The Department will terminate 
temporary certificated employees before permanent or probationary certificated employees 
and plans to terminate the employment of classified employees as well.   
 
 
death, temporary attrition, and/or reassignment of individual employees within the 
Department.   Further, the Department implemented retirement incentives to mitigate the 
layoff of certificated employees. 
 
14.  The Department prepared a Seniority Report of Certificated Employees (Exhibit 
 
6) that contains information about seniority and hire dates, credentials, assignments, and job 
locations.  Said information was obtained from the Department’s database and personnel 
files, and was updated after soliciting additional information from certificated employees.  
The Department also prepared a Certificated Layoff Analysis (Exhibit 7) using personnel 
information and documentation verified by the Human Resources office.   Thereupon, the 
Department used the Seniority List and Certificated Layoff Analysis to developed a proposed 

13.  The Department considered all known personnel changes due to resignations, 

 

5

layoff list (Exhibit 8) of the least senior certificated employees assigned to the services being 
reduced or discontinued and developed a bumping chart as well (Exhibit 9). 
 

Individual Respondents 

17.  Elizabeth M. Desloge will be skipped for the benefit of the PIES program, an 

18.  Julie Lowell Springston is a permanent certificated employee with a seniority 

 
 
15.  Certain Respondents have had adjustments made to their seniority dates.  Other 
Respondents have raised claims in the proceeding.  Also, the Department has determined to 
remove or “skip” certain certificated employees, presently employed in specific identified 
programs, from the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.   
 
16.  Cora B. Lee, the sole teacher in the visually-handicapped program for elementary 
 
students, has a seniority date of October 24, 2005.  She has specialty training and experience 
and will be skipped inasmuch as she is needed to teach due to the expected enrollment of 
students next year in the visually-handicapped program.   
 
 
interagency support program for parents and their infants and toddlers.  Desloge, who has a 
seniority date of August 1, 2006, has specialty training as well as experience working with 
infants and she is the most senior of certificated employees for the program.   
 
 
date of January 10, 2005, who teaches in the ACCESS Division in a contract learning 
position at Pacific Coast High School.  This program is designed to meet the requirements of 
the University of California regarding non-site-based independent study schools (Exhibit 12), 
including that the teacher has been certified as a Highly Qualified Teacher under the federal 
No Child Left Behind Act (20 U.S.C. sections 6311(g)(2) and 6319).  Springston is Highly 
Qualified to teach English, German and Spanish and she is the most senior of certificated 
employees with the experience required for the program. 
 
 
19.  Marcia Garten is a permanent certificated employee with a seniority date of April 
27, 2004, who also teaches in the ACCESS Division in a contract learning position at Pacific 
Coast High School.  She is a Highly Qualified Teacher who teaches earth science and 
biological science.  There is no more senior certificated employee with the experience 
required for the program. 
 
20.  Shanti Sioux Schiller is a permanent certificated employee with a seniority date 
 
of June 3, 2003, who also teaches in the ACCESS Division in a contract learning position at 
Pacific Coast High School.  She is a Highly Qualified Teacher who teaches social science 
and introductory science.  There is no more senior certificated employee with the experience 
required for the program. 
 
 
21.  Julie Lynn Ames is a contract learning teacher in the ACCESS Division and 
holds a clear multiple subject teaching credential.  She started with the Department as a 
secretary in 1996 and later became a para-educator.  She started working as a substitute 
teacher in 2001.  The Department changed her seniority date of March 15, 2004, to January 

 

6

8, 2004.   She asserts that her seniority date should be no later than July 1, 2003, when she 
worked as a long-term substitute.  Ames worked as a long term substitute for the months of 
July and August 2003, then worked as a day-to-day substitute from September 2003 until 
January 2004, when she began working in a vacant position and was offered, and accepted, a 
probationary contract.  Also in the period from September 2003 until January 2004, she 
worked one hour per day as a classified employee.  Ames contends that, as she was a 
substitute for more than 75 percent of the 2003/2004 school year, she is entitled to credit 
towards her seniority dating from her first day in that position.  However, the evidence is that 
she was a long term substitute for two of the six months preceding her acceptance of her 
probationary contract.  Under these circumstances, there is insufficient evidence to further 
adjust her seniority date.  Ames’ other contentions, set forth in her brief (Exhibit A), are 
either not supported by the evidence or the law, and are rejected. 
 
 
22.  The Department proposes to skip the following employees assigned to the 
Sunburst Academy: Carol Jean Drellack, seniority date January 21, 2004; Judith M. Walsh, 
seniority date January 20, 2004; Raphael H. Nguyen, seniority date December 15, 2003; 
Mary F. Shegetz, seniority date September 2, 2003; and Tanya G. Adams, seniority date 
January 27, 2003.  The Sunburst Academy is a program for the National Guard in which 
candidates for service, who shortly later become cadets, are involved in a program on base 
that consists of educational “cycles.”  Each cycle has a two-week orientation at the beginning 
and two 10-week semesters.  The teachers undertake special training before each cycle, some 
of which is one week long and sometimes longer, sometimes on base and sometimes in 
Washington, D.C., or other remote locales.  The teacher training before each cycle builds 
upon the training given in the prior cycle.  There are presently nine teachers in the program.  
Nguyen has been in the program for two years and has undergone training for four cycles.  
Walsh started at Sunburst in September 2009 and received one week of training to start, and 
another week in October.  In January 2010 she took a two-week training course.  The 
program has experienced a high turnover in teachers, up to 80 percent in the last few years, 
in part as a result of prior layoffs. The U.S. Military Department complained to the 
Department (Exhibit 14) about the turnover, as it increased its costs of training teachers and 
endangered the status of the program.   
 
 
23.  Three Respondents testified that they each had taught at Sunburst Academy in the 
past for a period of three months (one of the two semesters in a cycle) and had taken the first 
required teacher training course.  They are: Michael J. Rainis, seniority date March 17, 2003; 
Martin Juarez, seniority date March 17, 2003; and Ruth Ann Ramirez, seniority date May 7, 
2003.  Each testified that they were willing to be reassigned to Sunburst Academy for the 
period of time (thirty-nine months) covering the rehire rights of more senior employees who 
would be laid off in this proceeding.   
 
 
24.  Although the experience of these three Respondents would lessen the training 
costs for teachers in the program, it would nevertheless require them to attend additional 
training that many of the present employees have already received.  Further, if they were 
reassigned there would be an increase in the very teacher turnover that was the subject of 
concern by the Military Department.  The evidence supports the Department’s decision to 

 

7

skip Carol Jean Drelack, Judith M. Walsh, Raphael H. Nguyen, Mary F. Shegetz and Tanya 
G. Adams. 
 
25.  Respondent Christine Hall is an ACCESS Division teacher at the Juvenile Court 
 
School.  She holds a professional clear single subject teaching credential.  The Department 
has determined her seniority date to be January 20, 2004, and proposes to displace, or bump, 
her with Craig P. Wilson, seniority date November 16, 2001, whose position as a contract 
learning alternative education teacher is being eliminated.  For the present school year Hall 
has served as a Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA), an assignment outside of the 
classroom providing services needed by the Department.  A TOSA assignment is not 
considered a course or course of instruction and is filled by the Department based upon need, 
interview and assignment.  Further, Hall has served as School Improvement Coordinator, a 
position paid for by federal Title 1 funds.  Among her duties are participation in the School 
Site Counsel and management of the requirements of WASC, the Western Accreditation of 
Schools and Colleges.  Hall was also involved in programs relating to standardized testing 
such as the California High School Exit Exam (CAHSEE) and other mandated testing.  In her 
brief (Exhibit B), Hall contends, among other things, that her special training, experience and 
skills should cause the Department to skip her in this proceeding.  Skipping is a process, 
under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), wherein a school district may 
choose to demonstrate a specific need and that an employee has the special training and 
experience to meet that need.  However, the statute does not require a school district to do so.  
Rather, it is within the school district’s discretion to determine if it wishes to skip a service 
and an employee.  As applied here, Hall cannot force the Department to skip her.  Hall’s 
other contentions, set forth in her brief, are either not supported by the evidence or the law, 
and are rejected.  Hall may receive notice that her services will not be required for the 
ensuing school year pursuant to the current reduction of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
Court School.  His seniority date is August 16, 2004, and he holds a professional clear 
multiple subject credential in cross-cultural language and academic development and general 
subjects.  Wells’ contentions, set forth in his brief (Exhibit C), are either not supported by the 
evidence or the law, and are rejected.  His employment may be terminated pursuant to the 
present reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.   
 
 
program at the Juvenile Court School.  She holds a clear single subject credential in music 
and the Department has assigned her a seniority date of August 11, 2003.  She contends that, 
if the Department counts day-to-day substitute teaching towards seniority, she worked at 
least two years prior with no time off.  She also contends that her seniority date should be 
July 1, 2003, based on being in a long term substitute position for a year before she was 
offered a probationary position on July 1, 2004.  Her claim is not persuasive, for she did not 
establish the specific details of her employment.  Under these circumstances, her seniority 
date will remain as determined by the Department and she may be given notice that her 
services will not be needed for the ensuing school year. 
 

27.  Respondent Cheryl Ann Stoltz is a teacher in the ACCESS alternative education 

26.  Respondent John M. Wells is a certificated teacher at the Department’s Juvenile 

 

8

28.  Respondent Lewis Lester, IV, was initially assigned a seniority date of August 

 
27, 2007.  The Department agrees that this should be corrected to October 16, 2006, when he 
moved from being a day-to-day substitute into a vacant position.  As a result, Lester’s status 
would change from probationary to permanent.  Based on his increased seniority, he should 
not have received a layoff notice and he will be retained by the Department.  Also, 
Respondent Linda Gruber would move into Lester’s place and would be laid off as one of the 
FTE reductions in the ACCESS special education program. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing 

Pursuant to the foregoing findings of fact, the Administrative Law Judge makes the 

1.  Education Code2 section 44949, subdivision (a), states in pertinent part: 

 
2.  Section 44955 provides, in pertinent part:   

 
 
following determination of issues: 
 
 
 
 
board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year for the reasons 
specified in Section 44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given written 
notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been 
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.”  
 
 
 
 
“(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes other 
than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, 
and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as 
specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
 
later than the beginning of the following school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the 
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these 
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing 
board may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the 
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the 
school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee 
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or 
any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render. . . .  
  
 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of 
needs of the district and the students thereof.  Upon the request of any employee whose order 
of termination is so determined, the governing board shall furnish . . . a statement of the 
                                                 
 

“(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not 

“As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 

2 All citations are to the Education Code. 

 

9

 

“(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 

“The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner 

“(c)  [S]ervices of such employees shall be shall be terminated in the reverse order in 

“(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a 

specific criteria used in determining the order of termination and the application of the 
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other employees in the group. . . .  
  
 
which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with Sections 44844 
and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices 
and a right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed 
reemployed for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications 
entitle them to render. . . .  
 
 
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons:  
 
 
course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee has special training and 
experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, 
which others with more seniority do not possess.” 
 
3.  Sections 44949 and 44955 establish jurisdiction for this proceeding, and the notice 
 
and jurisdictional requirements set forth therein were met.  (Factual Findings 1 through 11.) 
  
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
  
5.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the Department due 
 
to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the Department’s schools and 
students within the meaning of section 44949.  (Factual Findings 1 through 14.) 
 
 
(San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Campbell v. Abbott (1978) 
Cal.App.3d 796; Zalac v. Governing Board of the Ferndale Unified School District (2002) 98 
Cal.App.4th 838.) 
 
 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior teachers may be 

6.  The services at issue are particular kinds of services subject to layoff proceedings.  

7.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

4.  A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

 

10

given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or 
capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High 
School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. 
Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) 
 
 
8.  Cause exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955 to reduce by 35.00 full-time 
equivalent positions the concomitant number of certificated employees of the Department 
due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.   With respect to those 
Respondents whose employment have been found to be terminable by the Department and 
any other certificated employees who received notices but did not request a hearing, the 
causes set forth in the Accusations relate solely to the welfare of the Department's schools 
and students within the meaning of section 44949.   

 
 
9.  There is no certificated probationary or permanent employee with less seniority 
than any one of Respondents who is being retained by the Department for the 2010-2011 
school year to render services which any one of Respondents is certificated and competent to 
render.  
 
 
the Department, based on Finding 28 above.    
 

10.  Cause does not exist to release Respondent Lewis Lester from employment with 

ORDER 

WHEREFORE, the Administrative Law Judge makes the following Order:  

1.  The Department may give notice to Respondents, and each of them, including 

2.  Before giving notice to Respondents and the other certificated employees who did 

 
 
 
 
temporary certificated employees and certificated employees who did not request a hearing, 
except for Lewis Lester, IV, in the inverse order of seniority that their services will not be 
required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code section 44955.   
 
 
not request a hearing, the Department shall determine and take into account positively 
assured attrition among certificated employees in deciding how many and when certificated 
employees should be terminated before the ensuing 2010-2011 school year.   
 
 
 
Dated:   April 26, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

DAVID B. ROSENMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

11

