BEFORE THE 
SUPERINTENDENT OF  
THE AMADOR COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE AMADOR 
COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION, 
 

 
 

Respondents.

OAH No. 2010030966 

 
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 
This matter was heard before Karen J. Brandt, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), 
Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, in Jackson, California, on 
May 10, 2010. 
 

Ben Hance, Attorney at Law, represented the Amador County Office of Education 

(ACOE). 
 

Thomas J. Driscoll, Jr., Attorney at Law, represented the respondents listed on 

Attachment A hereto (represented respondents).  Respondent David Holman represented 
himself and was not represented by Mr. Driscoll. 
 

On May 10, 2010, ACOE and the represented respondents agreed to the Joint 

Stipulations, as defined below. 
 
 

 
Represented Respondents 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

At the commencement of the hearing, ACOE and the represented respondents 
notified the ALJ that they had agreed to the Joint Stipulations, and that the Joint Stipulations 
would result in a settlement of the matters set forth in ACOE’s Accusation dated April 5, 
2010 (Accusation), a copy of which is attached as Attachment B hereto, with respect to the 
represented respondents. 
 
 
 

1 

2. 

ACOE and the represented respondents stipulate and agree as follows: 

a.  The matters set forth in paragraphs I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VIII (subject to 
the other Joint Stipulations) and IX of the Accusation are true and 
correct. 

b.  ACOE shall rescind 0.5 FTE of the preliminary layoff notice issued to 

respondent Sheila Bonito with respect to the Visual Impairment 
teaching services provided by Ms. Bonito. 

c.  ACOE shall reclassify respondent Pamela Radmilovic as a permanent 
employee of ACOE.  Ms. Radmilovic’s seniority date shall remain 
August 9, 2005. 

d.  ACOE shall treat respondent Kari Koche as having an earlier seniority 
date than respondent Ambren Neville for all purposes associated with 
this reduction in force and their respective reemployment rights 
associated therewith, as applicable. 

e.  Respondent Robert Lynch is the most junior certificated employee of 
ACOE providing County Community School teaching services. 

f.  Respondent Rosalyn Vermeulen is the most junior certificated 

employee of ACOE providing Speech Language Hearing teaching 
services. 

g.  ACOE shall rescind the preliminary layoff notice issued to respondent 

Paul Neville. 

The joint stipulations set forth above in this Finding 2 are referred to herein as the 

“Joint Stipulations.” 
 
David Holman 
 

3. 

Nina Neville, Director of Personnel of ACOE, credibly testified that ACOE 
had properly and timely served Mr. Holman, among others, with all notices required under 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  Included among these notices was a Notice of 
Layoff Hearing, dated March 30, 2010, which stated that the hearing would be held on May 
10, 2010, at 9:30 a.m.  Mr. Holman did not appear at the hearing.  Because Mr. Holman did 
not appear at the hearing on May 10, 2010, this matter proceeded as a default against him 
under Government Code section 11520. 
 

4. 

Ms. Neville further testified that ACOE had properly and timely served Mr. 

Holman, among others, with a Statement to Respondents, dated March 30, 2010, pursuant to 
Government Code section 11505, which stated that unless a written request to contest the 

2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

charges was delivered to the Superintendent of ACOE (County Superintendent) within five 
days of the date of the Accusation and such Statement to Respondents were personally 
served or mailed to said respondent, the County Superintendent may proceed upon the 
Accusation without a hearing.  The County Superintendent did not received a Notice of 
Defense from Mr. Holman.  Because Mr. Holman did not serve a Notice of Defense upon the 
County Superintendent, Mr. Holman has waived his right to a hearing to determine if there is 
cause for not reemploying him for the ensuing year pursuant to Government Code section 
11506, subdivision (c). 
 
Extension of Statutory Deadlines 
 

5. 

The hearing of this matter was continued from its originally scheduled date of 

April 1, 2010 to May 10, 2010 by OAH Order dated March 25, 2010 pursuant to 
Government Code section 11524.  Pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision 
(e), the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) of such section which occur on or after the date of 
granting the continuance and the date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Education Code 
section 44955 which occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be extended for a 
period of time equal to the continuance.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

ACOE has complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in 

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 
 

2. 

The services identified in Resolution No. 09/2010-06COE, dated February 24, 

2010, of the County Superintendent are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or 
eliminated under Education Code section 44955.  The County Superintendent’s decision to 
reduce or eliminate the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of his discretion. 
 

3. 

Cause exists to reduce certificated employees of ACOE due to the reduction or 

elimination of particular kinds of services and/or due to a decline in the average daily 
attendance in all schools of the Amador County Unified School District for the first six 
months in which school was in session for the current school year of 2009-2010 below that 
of the corresponding period of the first six months of one or both of the comparison school 
years. 
 

4. 

The reduction or elimination of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
schools and pupils of the schools served by ACOE within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44949. 
 

5. 

Subject to giving effect to the agreements set forth in the Joint Stipulations, no 
junior employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services that a more senior respondent 
is certificated and competent to render.   

3 

 

 

6. 

Cause exists to give notice to the represented respondents consistent with the 

agreements set forth in the Joint Stipulations and to Mr. Holman. 
 

7. 

This matter shall proceed as a default against Mr. Holman under Government 

Code section 11520. 
 

8. 

Mr. Holman has waived his right to a hearing to determine if there is cause for 

not reemploying him for the ensuing year pursuant to Government Code section 11506, 
subdivision (c), due to his failure to serve a notice of defense upon the County 
Superintendent. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

The County Superintendent shall adopt the Joint Stipulations reached by 

ACOE and the represented respondents.  The County Superintendent may, if he so chooses, 
adopt the Joint Stipulations by implication via his adoption of this Proposed Decision in the 
form submitted to the County Superintendent. 
 

2. 

Notice may be given to the represented respondents that their services will be 

reduced or will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year, consistent with the Joint 
Stipulations.  Notice may be given to Mr. Holman that his services will be reduced or will 
not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Notice will be given in inverse order of 
seniority. 
 

3. 

Copies of this Proposed Decision shall be submitted to the County 
Superintendent and to the employee(s) on or before June 2, 2010 pursuant to Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (c).  Notice of termination of services shall be given before June 
11, 2010 pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c). 
 
 
 
DATED: May 28, 2010 

_______________________________ 
KAREN J. BRANDT 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

4 

 

 

BEFORE THE  
SUPERINTENDENT OF  
THE AMADOR COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

ATTACHMENT A 

LIST OF REPRESENTED RESPONDENTS 

SHEILA BONITO  
KARI KOCHE 
ROBERT LYNCH 
AMBREN NEVILLE 

PAUL NEVILLE 
PAMELA RADMILOVIC 
TERI WILT 
MARC YONAN 

 

A-1 

BEFORE THE  
SUPERINTENDENT OF  
THE AMADOR COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

ATTACHMENT B 

ACCUSATION 

[Attached] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B-1 

