BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE 
ALVORD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Involving 158 Certificated Employees of the 
Alvord Unified School District under Board 
Resolution No. 28, 
 
 

          Respondents. 

 

 

 
 
OAH No. 2010030305 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 

John W. Dietrich and Paul Z. McGlocklin, Attorneys at Law, represented the Alvord 

 
 
California, heard this matter in Riverside, California, on April 22, 2010. 
 
 
Unified School District. 
 
 
hearing who were identified in Exhibit A.  She was assisted by Dan Bartlett, Regional 
Uniserv Staff, California Teachers Association. 
 
 
 

Respondent Hugh Jackman Wood represented himself.  
 
The matter was submitted on April 22, 2010. 

Elizabeth Garfield, Attorney at Law, represented all respondents who appeared at the 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
The Alvord Unified School District 

 
1. 

The Alvord Unified School District (AUSD or the district) was established in 
1896.  Its boundaries include the western portion of the City of Riverside, the eastern portion 
of the city of Corona and unincorporated areas of Riverside County.  The district serves the 
educational needs of approximately 20,000 students from Kindergarten through 12th grade, as 
well as providing preschool and adult education programs. 

  
AUSD operates 14 elementary schools, four middle schools, two comprehensive high 

schools, and two alternative education programs.  The district currently employs about 1,800     

1

individuals, more than 900 of whom are certificated employees.  AUSD’s projected annual 
budget for the 2010-2011 school year is approximately $140 million, about 87 per cent of 
which will pay employee salaries and benefits.  

 
2. 

3. 

The district is governed by an elected five-member Board of Education (the 

Proposition 13, a constitutional amendment that was passed in 1978, limited 

A school district cannot determine the level of funding it will receive until the state 

 
governing board).  Dr. Wendel Tucker, Superintendent of Schools, is AUSD’s Chief 
Executive Officer.  Craig Wells is the Assistant Superintendent of Personnel.  He is assisted 
by an experienced administrative staff including Leah Armstrong, the Assistant Director of 
Certificated Human Resources.   
 
The Fiscal Crisis – Economic Layoffs 
 
 
local property taxes and reduced a major source of assured revenue for public education.  
After Proposition 13 was implemented, public school districts have looked to the State of 
California and to other governmental entities for funding.  
 
 
budget is chaptered, an event usually occurring each year around July but sometimes taking 
place much later.  A school board’s obligation to balance its budget sometimes requires that 
some teachers, administrators or other certificated employees be given preliminary layoff 
notices, warning them that their services will not be required for the next school year.  Under 
Education Code section 44949, these preliminary layoff notices must be given no later than 
March 15. 
 
 
retention of senior certificated employees over more junior employees, and the retention of 
permanent employees over probationary employees and others with less seniority.  A public 
school district may deviate from the general rule requiring termination in reverse order of 
seniority only if it can demonstrate that identifiable junior employees possess credentials, 
special training or experience necessary to provide services that more senior employees do 
not possess, a process known as “skipping.”  A teacher whose position has been eliminated 
in the layoff process is entitled displace a more junior employee and to occupy the junior 
employee’s position upon the employee’s showing that he or she has the credentials and 
competence to provide the services being provided by a retained junior employee, a process 
known as “bumping.”. 
 
The District’s Response 
 
 
AUSD’s administration became aware of California’s continuing budget problems and the 
probable limitation upon the district’s funding for the 2010-2011 school year.  After AUSD 
projected a budget deficit of about $13 million for the 2010-2011 school year, Assistant 
Superintendent Wells and AUSD’s staff prepared a recommendation to reduce or eliminate 
particular kinds of services currently being provided to help cover a portion of the budget 
shortfall.  A specific recommendation was provided to Dr. Tucker who, in turn, made a 

The economic layoff statutes found in the Education Code generally require the 

During the course of the 2009-2010 school year, the governing board and 

4. 

 

2

recommendation to the governing board that particular kinds of services be reduced or 
eliminated in the 2010-2011 school year and that the employees impacted by this 
recommendation be given appropriate notice.   
 
 
governing board’s consideration thereof, the board adopted Resolution No. 28 which related 
to the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 
 

On February 18, 2010, following Dr. Tucker’s recommendation and the 

5. 

RESOLUTION No. 28 stated: 

“WHEREAS, the Board of Education of the Alvord Unified School District 

has determined that the particular kinds of services set forth herein must be reduced or 
discontinued; and 

 
WHEREAS, it is the opinion of the Board that because of the aforementioned 

reason, it is in the best interest of the District that the number of certificated 
employees of the District must be reduced; and 

 
WHEREAS, this Board does not desire to reduce the services of regular 
certificated employees based solely upon reduction of average daily attendance during 
the past two years; and 

 
WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a significant population of 

English language learners with specialized educational needs, a specific and 
compelling need exists to retain certificated employees who have Bilingual 
Crosscultural Language and Academic Development (“BCLAD”), Crosscultural 
Language and Academic Development (“CLAD”) or other equivalent English 
Language Learner Authorization (but not emergency authorizations) and the special 
training and experience that comes therewith; and 

 
WHEREAS, Education Code section 44955(d) authorizes this Board to deviate 
from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for the above reason, if 
necessary;  

 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of Education of the 

Alvord Unified School District as follows:  

 
A. 

That the particular kinds of services set forth below be reduced or 

eliminated commencing in the 2010-2011 school year: 

 

 

3

Elementary Teacher 
Middle School Core Teacher 
Middle School History Teacher 
Middle School Self Contained Teacher 
Middle School Math Teacher 
Middle School Physical Education Teacher 
Middle School English Teacher 
Middle School Leadership/ASB 
Middle School Life Science Teacher 
Middle School Physical Science Teacher 
Middle School Music Teacher 
Middle School Computer Literacy Teacher 
Middle School Art Teacher 
High School English Teacher 
High School  Math Teacher 
High School Social Science Teacher 
High School Earth Science Teacher 
High School Art Teacher 
High School Freshman Seminar/Focus Teacher 
High School Foreign Language Spanish Teacher 
High School Foreign Language French Teacher 
High School Physical Education Teacher 
High School Agriculture Teacher 
High School Credit Recovery 
High School Independent Study 1 Teacher 
On Campus Intervention/Suspension Teacher 
Counselor 
Librarian 
Nurse 
TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

88 
12 
1  
1 
3 
2 
3 
.4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
7 
4 
4 
1 
2 
1.8 
1 
1 
2 
1 
.2 
1 
2 
5 
3 
2 

F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 
153.4  F.T.E. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

That due to the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services, the 
corresponding number of certificated employees of the District shall be 
terminated pursuant to Education Code section 44955. 

That the reduction of certificated staff be achieved by the termination of 
regular employees and not by terminating temporary and substitute employees. 

That ‘competency’ as described in Education Code section 44955(b), for the 
purposes of bumping, shall necessarily include: (1) possession of a valid 
credential or authorization in the subject matter area; (2) Highly Qualified  
status as authorized by the No Child Left Behind Act; (3) an appropriate 
authorization or possession of a BCLAD, CLAD or other equivalent English 
Language Learner Authorization (but not emergency authorizations) to the 
extent required by the position;  and (4) unique training and experience 
possessed by the employee to be bumped that are necessary and relevant to the  
position to be filled.  

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

E. 

F. 

 
8. 

That, as between certificated employees with the same seniority date, the order 
of termination shall be determined solely by Board-adopted criteria. 

That the District Superintendent or designee is directed to initiate layoff 
procedures and give appropriate notice pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44955 and 44949. 

PASSED AND ADOPTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Education of 
the Alvord Unified School District held on February 18, 2010.” 

6. 

The governing board’s adoption of Resolution No. 28 was in the best interest 

 
 
of the district, its schools and its students.  The decision to reduce particular kinds of services 
was a direct result of California’s continuing fiscal crisis, the probable reduction in AUSD’s 
funding for the 2010-2011 school year, AUSD’s obligation to submit a balanced budget to 
the County Board of Education, and the drastic repercussions for the district’s failure to do so 
including the taking over of the district’s operations by other governmental entities.   
 
The Reduction in Force and the Issuing of Preliminary Layoff Notices 
 

7. 

The particular kinds of services identified in the governing board’s resolution 

were the kinds of services the governing board was authorized to reduce and discontinue.  The 
board’s resolution to reduce and eliminate certain services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, 
and the reduction and elimination of the particular kinds of services identified in Resolution 
No. 28 was squarely within the governing board’s sound discretion.  No particular kind of 
service was reduced to a level below that mandated by federal or state law.   

The governing board defined “competency” for the purposes of bumping under 
the Education Code to necessarily include: possession of a valid credential or authorization in 
the subject matter area; highly qualified status as authorized by the No Child Left Behind Act; 
an appropriate authorization or possession of a BCLAD, CLAD or another equivalent English 
Language Learner Authorization (but not emergency authorizations) to the extent required by 
the position;  and unique training and experience possessed by an employee necessary and 
relevant to the  position to be filled.  The governing board’s definition of “competency” did not 
provide relative preference for a BCLAD authorization over a CLAD authorization or any 
other EL authorization, although no preference was given to emergency authorizations.   

 
9.  With regard to skipping, the resolution stated that the governing board had 

determined that due to a significant population of English language learners with specialized 
educational needs, there was a specific and compelling need to retain certificated employees 
who had Bilingual Crosscultural Language and Academic Development (“BCLAD”), 
Crosscultural Language and Academic Development (“CLAD”) or other equivalent English 
Language Learner Authorization (but not emergency authorizations) and the special training 
and experience that comes therewith.  Again, the board’s resolution did not provide for the 
relative preference of a BCLAD employee over a CLAD employee or any employee holding 
another equivalent English Language Learner authorization for skipping purposes. 
 

 

 

5

11. 

10.  Assistant Superintendent Wells established that the district made assignments 

 
based upon an employee’s seniority and upon an employee’s possession of appropriate 
authorizations, credentials and competency for the assignment.   
 
In accordance with Resolution No. 28, AUSD staff issued preliminary layoff 
 
notices to the most junior employees holding those positions that were subject to reduction 
and elimination.  In doing so, AUSD skipped nine junior employees holding BCAD 
certifications over more senior employees who held CLAD certifications who were not 
administrators, Special Education Teachers, or employees holding assignments as teachers 
on special assignment or project specialist/instructional coaches.  Nor did the district displace 
any teachers on special assignment (TOSAs) or project specialist/instructional coaches with 
more senior employees who held the same credentials but who were not currently serving as 
TOSAs or project specialist/instructional coaches.   

 
AUSD served more layoff notices than the total number of reductions of full time 

equivalent positions to ensure that there was a sufficient number of layoff notices in place to 
cover any changes in the seniority list and to accommodate for any other exigency.   
 

Before the district issued the preliminary layoff notices, administrative staff 
considered all known positive attrition including resignations, retirements and probationary 
non-reelects existing before March 15.   
  
Jurisdictional Matters 
 
 
12.  On and before March 15, 2010, those AUSD certificated employees whose 
employment might be impacted by Resolution No. 28 were served with written notice that 
the superintendent had recommended that their services be terminated at the conclusion of 
the current school year and that their services would not be needed for the upcoming 2010-
2011 school year.  Each employee receiving notice was advised of the right to a hearing.  
Sixteen employees who were served with the preliminary layoff notice did not request a 
hearing, and they are not respondents in this proceeding.  Each employee who requested a 
hearing was thereafter served with an accusation packet.  The 158 permanent and 
probationary employees who requested hearings are the respondents in this reduction in force 
proceeding.  
 

13.  On April 22, 2010, the record in the administrative hearing was opened.  
Attorneys John W. Dietrich and Paul Z. McGlocklin appeared on behalf of the district.  
Attorney Elizabeth Garfield appeared on behalf of most of the respondents who were present 
at the hearing.  Dan Bartlett, Regional Uniserv Staff, California Teachers Association, 
assisted Ms. Garfield.  Respondent Hugh Jackman Wood represented himself. The district’s 
attorney gave an opening statement.  Ms. Garfield and Mr. Wood waived the presentation of 
opening statements.  Jurisdictional documents were presented, sworn testimony was 
provided, documentary evidence was introduced, and several stipulations were reached.   

 
The major issues in this reduction in force proceeding involved the district’s attempt 

to provide holders of BCLAD authorizations with skipping preference over employees 

 

6

holding other EL authorizations including CLAD authorizations, and the district’s refusal to 
permit senior employees who were not serving as TOSAs or project specialists/instructional 
coaches to bump into those positions.  Other factual and legal issues specific to seniority, 
promissory and equitable estoppel, the effect of filing of credentials after March 15, and 
holding certification in other districts were presented. 

 
Following the taking of evidence and the presentation of closing arguments, the 

record was closed and the matter was submitted. 

 

The Seniority List, First Date of Paid Service, and the Implementation of Resolution No. 28 

 
14.  AUSD maintains a district wide certificated employee seniority list, a 
 
continuously evolving schedule that sets forth each employee’s seniority number (ranked in 
order from the most senior to the most junior employee), the employee’s name, seniority date 
(based on the employee’s first paid date of probationary service with the district), the 
employee’s status (tenured, second year probation, first year probation), the employee’s 
current assignment, a description of the credentials held by the employee, the school site 
where the employee most recently provided service, and the status of the employee’s EL 
authorization, if any.  The seniority list is compiled from information obtained from an 
employee’s personnel file, data provided by the employee, information obtained from the 
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, and relevant material provided by others.  
The seniority list is modified when new employees are hired and when current employees 
retire, resign or otherwise become separated from district employment.  The seniority list is 
corrected and updated when new information becomes available.  

 
15.  AUSD attempts to ensure that each employee’s seniority date is based upon the 

The district staff revised the seniority list based upon the information it received after 

Sometimes establishing an employee’s actual first date of paid probationary service was 

 
employee’s first date of paid service in a probationary position within the district.1  In December 
2009, the district sent notices to all school sites requesting that certificated employees review the 
district’s seniority list and advise the administrative staff of any errors in the seniority list or of 
the acquisition of any new credentials or of any changes in the employee’s status.   
 
 
December 2009 and was able to verify.   
 
 
complicated by such matters as previous service in a long-term substitute or temporary 
assignment or by the employee attending training sessions occurring before the formal school 
year began.  An effort was made to resolve disputes.   
 
16.  After issuing the preliminary notices, 22 certificated employees opted to take an 
 
early retirement through a retirement incentive program that the district offered. Twenty one of 
                                                
1   
 
 
 
 

“Every probationary or permanent employee employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been 
employed on the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.” 

Education Code section 44845 provides: 

 

7

17.  According to Assistant Director Thompson, no employee providing Special 

It was stipulated that the accusations filed against Brianna Chavez-Monroe, Amanda 

In filling the vacancies created by the retirements, the district overlooked employee Jill 

the vacated positions were filled with the most senior employees who were certificated and 
qualified to fill the vacancies resulting from the retirements.   
 
 
Davis, Deserae Devlin, Jennifer Doiron, Faith Johnson, Samuel Jones III, Christine Ledesma, 
Endelia Medina, Monica Meurer, Tonya Miller, Paul Oeser III, Heidi Powers, Sara Rodriguez, 
Danielle Romain, Michael Sanchez, Everton Souza, Julie Stanfield, Nadia Templeton, Rachel 
Thurman, Andrea Viniguerra, and Teresa Wilson were properly dismissed because these 
employees were the most senior employees who were certificated and qualified to fill the 
vacancies resulting from the retirements.   
 
 
Heinz (seniority number 585), a tenured elementary school teacher with a seniority date of 
December 2, 2002.  Heinz holds a clear multiple subject teaching credential and a CLAD 
authorization.   
 
 
The parties stipulated that Jull Heinz was entitled to occupy the remaining vacancy 
resulting from the retirement of an elementary school teacher and that the accusation filed 
against her should be dismissed.     
 
The Retention of Special Education Teachers 
 
 
Education services was given a preliminary layoff notice in this proceeding even though other 
employees with more seniority (but without Special Education credentials) received such layoff 
notices.   
 
 
credentials and permits.   
 
The BCLAD/CLAD Skipping Issue 
 
 
subdivision (d), does not require a written board resolution, the district must nevertheless 
demonstrate a specific need for junior personnel to teach a specific course2 or course of study3 
and the district must demonstrate that the junior employee being skipped possesses special 
training or experience necessary to teach that course or course of study which others with more 
seniority do not possess.   
 
 
retain employees who were fluent in Spanish and other foreign languages, argued that the 
                                                
2  
knowledge, usually provided on a semester, year or prescribed length-of-time basis.” 
 
3  
courses, studies, or related activities.”  

 
18.  While skipping a junior employee under Education Code section 449555, 

There was no objection to the district’s retention of persons holding Special Education 

Education Code section 51015 defines “course of study” as “the planned content of a series of classes, 

Education Code section 51016 defines “course” as “an instruction unit of an area or field of organized 

Through the testimony of Assistant Superintendent Wells, the district asserted the need to 

 

 

8

19. 

BCLAD certificate was an objective manner by which the district could measure an employee’s 
fluency and teaching ability in a language other than English, and claimed that skipping 
employees with BCLAD certifications over employees with CLAD certifications and other EL 
authorizations was a valid exercise of the district’s discretion and was in the best interest of the 
district and its students.  Assistant Director Armstrong created a “bump analysis” in which 
employees who held BCLAD certifications were skipped over those who did not.  Assistant 
Director Armstrong testified that she did not include BCLAD holders in the bump analysis based 
upon her understanding of the right of BCLAD holders to retain their employment over more 
senior employees.  Deputy Armstrong testified she reached this conclusion following her review 
of the board’s bumping criteria, in which BCLAD certifications were mentioned before CLAD 
certifications, and based upon what she was told by Assistant Superintendent Wells.       
 
 
The district has 8,496 English Learners whose primary language is Spanish, 173 
English Learners whose primary language is Vietnamese, 49 English Learners whose primary 
language is Rumanian, 44 English Learners whose primary language is Arabic, and about 150 
other English Learners who have other primary languages.  The district does not offer any 
classes in which content instruction is provided in a student’s primary language.   Instead, the 
district has immersion classes in which content instruction is delivered in the English language.   
 
 
The CLAD (Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Development) credential issued by 
the Commission on Teacher Credentialing authorizes instruction of English Learners to promote 
the effective and efficient acquiring of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills of EL 
students.  Instruction is authorized in English under the CLAD credential.       
 
 
issued by the Commission on Teacher Credentialing also authorizes instruction for EL students 
within the scope of the CLAD authorization but the BCLAD additionally authorizes content 
instruction for EL students in a subject area delivered in the student’s primary language.  
Obtaining a BCLAD credential requires the completion of additional coursework and passing an 
examination.   
 
 
and instruct in the student’s primary language than holders of a CLAD certificate or other EL 
authorizations, and that retaining the services of holders of BCLAD certifications would enhance 
instruction within the classrooms. While the district’s assumptions were not particularly 
unreasonable in theory, the district did not conduct any investigation to determine if its 
assumptions were factually based.  
 
 
student’s primary language, which would require a BCLAD certification.  The district had no 
intention of providing any EL student with content instruction in the student’s primary language 
for the 2010-2011 school year.    
 

 
No teacher within the district provides content instruction to any EL student in the 

The BCLAD (Bilingual, Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development) credential 

The district assumed that holders of a BCLAD credential were better able to speak, write 

 

As a result of the district’s decision to skip employees holding BCLAD 

certificates over more senior employees holding CLAD certificates, Stephanie Bradley, 
Audrey Popoff, Cara Sweeney, Guy Harrell, Yvette Haskins, Kelli Seibert, Tiffany Star 

 

9

Ferreira, Jessica Cassese, and Lilia Roney were displaced by junior employees holding 
BCLAD certificates.  The preliminary layoff notices issued to these more senior respondents 
should be rescinded and the accusations filed against them should be dismissed for the 
reasons set forth in paragraph 20. 

 
20. 

The district failed to establish that the BCLAD certification will be used in a 

 
course or a course of study, as is required by Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d).  
The district’s attempt to provide retention priority to the holders of BCLAD certifications over 
their more senior counterparts who hold CLAD certifications or other EL authorizations should 
be denied. 
 
TOSAS and Project Specialist/Instructional Coaches 
 

21.  AUSD did not displace any TOSAs or project specialist/instructional coaches 

with more senior employees who held the same credentials as employees providing TOSA or 
project specialist services but who were not currently serving within the district as TOSAs or 
project specialist/instructional coaches.   

 
Counsel for respondents argued that the district had, in essence, improperly skipped 

these individuals and that more senior employees who possessed the credentials, training and 
experience necessary to fill the TOSA and project specialist/instructional coach positions 
should be entitled to bump their more junior counterparts.   
 

Joi Huben has been employed by the district for 24 years.  Huben is currently the 

district’s Coordinator of State and Federal Programs.  Huben established that AUSD is in its 
third years as an NCLB improvement district and that the district is required to meet certain 
standards.   

 
Huben established that TOSAs and project specialist/instructional coaches are a 
critical component in meeting the improvement plan imposed upon the district.  TOSAs and 
project specialists were all classroom teachers before they began their current assignments.  
The nine TOSAs currently serving within the district have specific content experience and 
they provide support to project specialists and to schools within the district.  The 15 project 
specialists/instructional coaches currently serving within the district are assigned to specific 
school sites where they provide support.  The TOSAs and project specialists/instructional 
coaches provide a particular kind of service for which there was no reduction in force; they 
do not provide instruction in a specific course or course of study.   

 
Huben established that the TOSAs and project specialists currently holding these 

positions had a level of experience and a specific degree before they were assigned to these 
positions (TOSAs had to have a minimum of five years experience in the classroom and were 
required to hold a master’s degree; project specialists had to have at least three years 
experience in the classroom and were required to hold a bachelor’s degree in a particular 
subject).  After their assignment, these TOSAs and project specialists received a great deal of 
unique, specialized training in a variety of areas (such as cognitive coaching, READ 180, 
Snagit and Adobe computer resources, Earobics training, Step Up to Writing, Mathematics, 

 

10

ELL training of teachers, ELL strategies, and reading language arts) at great expense to the 
district.  In addition to this specialized training, and just as important, the current TOSAs and 
project specialists met three hours each week during the 2009-2010 school year where 
additional training occurred.  In addition, each employee currently providing service as a 
TOSA or as a project specialist must complete annual training. 

 
22.  Kristy Orona-Ramirez, who received a preliminary layoff notice in her 

capacity as a core language arts/history teacher at Wells Middle School, argued that she 
should be able to bump into a project specialist position.  Orona-Ramirez has a seniority date 
of August 24, 2006.  Her curriculum vitae indicated that she had 12 years of classroom 
experience, that she had one year of project specialist experience, that she had seven years of 
GATE classroom differentiation, that she had nine years experience in the Governor’s 
Reading Program & Mathematics Program training, that she was trained at the UCLA 
Algebra Academy, that she was a master teacher, that she maintains an outstanding room 
environment, that she had Title 1 and Categorical Fund experience, that she is a published 
author of children’s literature and poetry, that she was a teacher consultant, that she was a 
California State Test site coordinator, that she is a consultant at the Inland Area Writing 
Project, and that she serves as an Adjunct Professor of Education at Whittier College.  
Orona-Ramirez holds a master’s degree in Education and Leadership.  She holds CLAD 
authorization and is NCLB highly qualified in her area.   

 
Orona-Ramirez testified that she served as a project specialist in her first year of 
employment at Loma Vista Middle School, that she received appropriate training before 
taking that assignment, that she received training during the assignment, that she coached 
teachers in her capacity as a project specialist, that she left the position of project specialist to 
return to the classroom, and that since making that decision she has taken training “in 
different programs” which she considered to be equivalent if not better than the training 
provided to those who currently occupy TOSA and project specialist positions.  Orona-
Ramirez has more seniority than some of the individuals who occupy project specialist 
positions, and she testified that she would return to a project specialist position if she were 
able to do so.  No one from the district spoke with Orona-Ramirez concerning her 
qualifications and training to hold a project specialist position before the layoff notices were 
served.  On cross-examination, Orona-Ramirez conceded that she did not have the same 
training that was given to AUSD project specialists in the 2009-2010 school year.  

 
23. 

Stacey Steele is a tenured employee with a seniority date of July 2, 2004.  She 

holds a clear multiple subject teaching credential, a CLAD authorization, and is NCLB 
highly qualified.  She holds a master’s degree in Education.  Steele teaches second grade at 
Philip M. Stokoe Elementary School.      

   
Steele testified that she served as a project specialist in both the 2005-2006 and 2006-

2007 school years, before she returned to classroom teaching.  Steele testified that she 
completed various modules required to hold the project specialist position, that she had 
completed 119.5 hours of specialized training related to the project specialist position and 
that not every project specialist currently holding that position has completed 270 hours of 
specialist training as Huben implied.  Steele testified that she had performed all of the 

 

11

24.  Huben’s credible testimony established that the training that the TOSAs and 

essential functions required of a project specialist.  Even though she did not have the training 
given to employees currently holding TOSA and project specialist positions in the 2009-2010 
school year (she had elected to return to the classroom and was unable to receive that 
training), Steele believed she was competent to hold a project specialist position and that she 
was entitled to bump a more junior employee holding such a position. 
 
 
the project specialists received in the 2009-2010 was unique and that it was critical to the 
holding of the position of a TOSA or a project specialist for the 2010-2011 school year.  
There can be no dispute about the competency of Orona-Ramirez and Steele to continue in 
the capacity as classroom teachers; however, they failed to establish that they received the 
unique training acquired by TOSAs and to project specialists in the 2009-2010 school year, 
training that is vital and relevant to holding such positions in the 2010-2011 school year.  
Neither of these highly talented respondents established her right to bump a more junior 
employee currently holding a TOSA or project specialist/instructional coach position. 

25. 

Other Matters 
 
 
discovered, it was determined that respondent Hugh Jackman Wood possessed the seniority 
and competence to bump employee Donald Phengsi whose services were being retained.   
 

There was an error in the tie-breaker analysis and, when that error was 

It was stipulated by all parties that the preliminary layoff notice served on Wood 

26. 

 The district improperly retained the services of Teresa Corbett.  Corbett’s 

should be withdrawn and that the accusation filed against Wood should be dismissed. 
 
 
seniority date is August 23, 2007.  Corbett is a tenured employee who holds a preliminary 
single subject Spanish credential.  Corbett teaches ELD at La Sierra High School.  The 
Spanish credential is not required to teach ELD, which is a particular course of study.  
Corbett was not served with a preliminary layoff notice. 
 
 
Debora Griffin’s seniority date is January 3, 2006.  She, too, is a tenured employee.  
Griffin holds a clear English single subject credential.  Griffin teaches English and ELD at 
Norte Vista High School.  Griffin was improperly served with a layoff notice because she 
was more senior than Griffin and she was qualified and competent to teach ELD under her 
English credential and, in fact, had been doing so. 
 
 
accusation should be dismissed.  
 
 
Lynne Vasquez’s seniority date is January 6, 2006.  She teaches first grade at 
Twin Hill Elementary School.  She is a tenured employee who holds a clear multiple subject 
teaching credential.  Vasquez is intern eligible in Special Education.  Before Vasquez 
obtained her teaching credential, she worked as a classified employee in Special Education 
programs for nearly two decades. 
 

The preliminary layoff notice served on Griffin should be withdrawn and the 

27. 

 

12

In March 2009, Vasquez received a preliminary layoff notice advising her that her 

 
services would not be required for the 2009-2010 school year.  She observed that employees 
who held Special Education credentials were not being laid off.  In May 2009, Vasquez 
enrolled in a Special Education credential program at Chapman University.  In May 2009, 
Vasquez received final notice that her services would not be required for the 2009-2010 
school year.  Four days later, Vasquez received notification that her employment with the 
district as an elementary school teacher was reinstated.  Vasquez decided to continue her 
effort to obtain a Special Education credential to better avoid the possibility of a layoff in the 
future.  She continued her studies at Chapman University.    
 

Before January 10, 2010, Vasquez submitted evidence to the district that she was 
intern eligible, a credential status indicating that she was capable of accepting an offer of 
employment in a Special Education program as an intern.  Once Vasquez accepted an offer 
of employment and paid the required filing fee to the Commission on Teacher Credentialing, 
her credential status would change from that of being intern eligible to that of being a Special 
Education intern.  

 
 
In January 2010, Vasquez learned of a Special Education teaching position opening at 
Loma Vista Middle School.  She considered taking the position to clear her intern credential, 
but she was reluctant to do so because that would require her to abandon her first grade class.  
Vasquez spoke with her principal, Emily Devor, about her situation.  Devor said she would 
make some calls.  Devor later told Vasquez that she had a conversation with Assistant 
Superintendent Wells who told Devor that being intern eligible gave Vasquez the same 
bumping rights as any other Special Education teacher.  Vasquez did not confirm this 
statement with Assistant Superintendent Wells.  Vasquez decided to remain in her first grade 
assignment.  She did not make application for the Special Education position at Loma Vista.  
She did not pay the required fee to the Commission on Teacher Credentialing.   
 

In February 2010, after Vasquez learned that she might receive a layoff notice, Devor 

In March 2010, Vasquez received a preliminary layoff notice.  The district did not 

sent an email to Assistant Superintendent Wells.  With regard to her previous conversation 
with Assistant Superintendent Wells, Devore’s email stated in part, “You shared, which I 
shared with her, although there are no promises, her Intern status is the same as a Special 
Education credential when it comes to teacher placement on the seniority/bumping list.  With 
this information, she took faith in the system and made the decision to stay at Twinhill to 
provide consistency for her 1st grade students.”   
 
 
send layoff notices to any of the 26 credentialed employees with less seniority than Vasquez 
who provide Special Education services.  Five of those 26 employees hold intern credentials.    
 
 
required to establish promissory estoppel or equitable estoppel sufficient to rescind the 
preliminary layoff notice that was served on Vasquez.  It is clear from Devor’s February 
2010 email that Assistant Superintendent Wells did not make any specific promises, and 
certainly he made no promises directly to Vasquez.  It was clear from Vasquez’s testimony 

A preponderance of the evidence did not support the reasonable reliance element 

 

13

that she relied on a favorable hearsay interpretation provided to her by her principal, but not 
on anything that a person in a position of ultimate authority said about her situation. 
 
 
who holds a clear multiple subject teaching credential and a CLAD authorization.   Reyes 
teaches third grade at Orrenmaa Elementary School.   
 

28.  Daniel Reyes’ seniority date is September 30, 2005.  He is a tenured employee 

Before March 15, 2010, Reyes visited Assistant Director Armstrong to determine if 

he possessed sufficient History credits to qualify for a supplemental authorization in History.  
He was told that he did.  Reyes submitted the paperwork necessary to receive a supplemental 
authorization to the district before March 15, but he did not visit the district office to sign the 
final paperwork until March 16, 2010, nor did Reyes pay the fee required to obtain his 
supplemental authorization until then.   

 
If Reyes held a supplemental authorization in History on or before March 15, 2010, 

then he could have bumped Richard Dean, a tenured employee who teaches U. S. History 
and whose seniority date is more recent than that of Reyes. 

 
The district requires that all updated credentialing information be in proper form and 

be on file with the district on or before March 15 because that is the last date the district is 
entitled to serve preliminary layoff notices.  If information is not in proper form and on file 
with the district by that date, then the district cannot issue a preliminary layoff notice to a 
less senior employee whose position might be taken by a more senior employee with a new 
credential.  The district’s position in this regard is reasonable. 

 
The district’s issuance of a preliminary layoff notice to Reyes was lawful under all the 

circumstances.  Reyes did not establish that he had the seniority and had his supplemental 
authorization on file with the district on March 15, 2010, which was necessary for Reyes to 
displace a more junior employee. 

 
29.  Guy Harrell has a seniority date of October 24, 2003.  He holds a clear 
multiple subject teaching credential, CLAD certification and is NCLB highly qualified.  He 
works in the adult education program.  Harrell provides services to an extremely challenging 
group of students in an independent studies program.   

 
Harrell argued that the governing board should not have eliminated his position 

because of the special value his program provides within the educational community. 

 
The services Harrell provides are a particular kind of service that the board was 
authorized to reduce or discontinue.  Harrell established that his program is unique and 
valuable.  It was not established, however, that the board engaged in fraud or bad faith in 
deciding to discontinue that program.  And, Harrell did not identify any position into which 
he could bump as a result of his seniority or qualifications. The district’s issuance of a 
preliminary layoff notice to Harrell was lawful had the BCLAD skipping been proper; 
however, the skipping was improper and Harrell’s services will be retained because he had 
been wrongly displaced by a more junior employee who held a BCLAD authorization.    

 

14

30. 

Tracy Putnam has a seniority date of July 1, 2004.  She is a tenured teacher 

who holds a clear credential in Agricultural Science.  She does not hold NCLB highly 
qualified status in Biology at AUSD, but she claimed that she obtained that status during her 
previous employment at Coalinga Huron Unified School District where she received a High 
Objective Uniform State Standard of Evaluation (HOUSSE) certificate.4   Based upon her 
previous holding of a HOUSSE certificate, Putnam believed she could bump more junior 
employees teaching Biology or Earth Science in middle schools. 
 

Putnam’s HOUSSE certification was not filed with the district on or before March 15, 

2010.  The district requires that all updated credentialing information be in proper form and 
on file with the district by March 15 because that is the last date the district is entitled to 
serve preliminary layoff notices.  If information is not in proper form and on file with the 
district by that date, then the district cannot issue a preliminary layoff notice to a less senior 
employee whose position might be taken by a more senior employee.  The district’s position 
in this regard is reasonable. 

 
The district’s issuance of a preliminary layoff notice to Putnam was lawful under all 

the circumstances. 

 
 
31.  Arianna Hovde has a seniority date of July 29, 2005.  She is a tenured teacher 
who holds a multiple subject teaching credential.  She teaches Kindergarten.  Hovde reported 
to her classroom on July 1, 2005.  She was not required to do so under her employment 
contract with the district and she was not paid to do so.  Her first required date in the 
classroom under her employment contract with the district was on July 29, 2005.  Hovde 
wondered if her actual seniority date should be July 1, 2005. 
 

Hovde’s first paid date of probationary service was on July 29, 2005, which is her 

correct seniority date. 

 
32.  Gina Spier has a seniority date of August 23, 2007.  She is a tenured teacher 

who holds a preliminary credential in English and a preliminary credential in Social 
Sciences.  She teaches Language Arts and History at Villegas Middle School where she 
provides 0.8 FTE in a position she shares with employee Mary Newell, who has a seniority 
date of August 24, 2006.  Newell currently provides the remaining 0.2 FTE as an English 
teacher.  Newell was bumped into another position by reason of her seniority and credentials. 

 
Spier did not establish that the district’s issuance of a preliminary layoff notice to her 

was improper or unlawful under all the circumstances.  Nor did Spier establish her right to 
bump into a position being held by a more junior employee by reason of her seniority and 
credentials. 

  

                                                
4   
NCLB federal law requires a one-time demonstration of competence in each core academic subject taught 
(or in multiple subjects for elementary teachers).  Requirements differ for “New” and “Not New” teachers.  NCLB 
law defines core academic subjects as:  English, reading/language arts, mathematics, science, foreign languages, 
civics/government, economics, arts, history, and geography.   
 

 

15

33.  Michelle Milano has a seniority date of July 2, 2004.  She is a tenured 
elementary school teacher who holds a clear multiple services teaching credential and CLAD 
certification.  Milano contacted the district on March 17, after she received a preliminary 
layoff notice, to determine if she had sufficient English credits to obtain a supplemental 
authorization in English.  She was told that she had sufficient credits.  Had Milano obtained a 
supplemental authorization in English and had she filed it with the district by March 15, she 
would have been senior to 12 employees who services are being retained. 
 

The district’s issuance of a preliminary layoff notice to Milano was lawful under all 
the circumstances.  Milano did not establish that her seniority and credentials permit her to 
bump into an existing position held by a more junior employee. 
 

34. 

Carolyn Cordova has a seniority date of July 1, 2005.  She is a tenured 
elementary school teacher with a clear multiple subject teaching credential, a master’s 
degree, and CLAD certification.  She worked from July 7, 2004, to March 31, 2006, as a 
long-term substitute teacher, and then worked in a different classroom for another teacher as 
a long-term substitute teacher from April 1, 2005 through the end of the school session in 
July 2005.  Cordova asserted the right to a seniority date of July 7, 2004, as a result of having 
worked more than 75 percent of the school days in the 2004-2005 school year as a long-term 
substitute teacher. 

 
The statute on which Cordova relied (Education Code section 44918) only applies 

when a substitute fills a vacancy of one year duration created by the absence of one 
permanent teacher and it does not apply to a one year vacancy which results from the 
aggregate of several teachers being absent for shorter periods.5   

 
The district’s determination that Cordova’s seniority date was July 1, 2005, was 

correct. 
 

35. 

Jeri Wilson has a seniority date of September 30, 2005.  She is a tenured 

elementary school teacher who holds a clear multiple subject teaching credential.  Wilson 
served as a substitute teacher from August 2005 through September 30, 2005, and was then 
hired to serve the remainder of the year.  Wilson wondered if her seniority date should be set 
on her first day of substitute employment in August 2005. 

 
Wilson did not serve more than 75 percent of the school year in a long-term substitute 

 
capacity in a probationary position.  Her first date of service in a paid probationary position 
was on September 30, 2005. 
 
 
correct. 
 

The district’s determination that Wilson’s seniority date was September 30, 2005, was 

                                                
5  
Cal.App.3d 35, 44. 

Centinela Valley Secondary Teachers Assn. v. Centinela Valley Union High Sch. Dist. (1974) 37 

 

16

36. 

Sarah Baker has a seniority date of July 1, 2005.  She is a tenured elementary 

school teacher with a clear multiple subject teaching credential.  Baker also holds a 
supplemental authorization in English, but it was not on file with the district on March 15, 
2010.  On March 14, 2010 (a Sunday), Baker emailed the district and advised of her 
possession of a supplemental authorization in English, but she did not finalize the paperwork 
required to hold that authorization “until six or seven days later.”      

 
The district’s determination that information must be in proper form and on file with 

the district by March 15 to be considered in the layoff process is reasonable for all the 
reasons previously stated. 

 
The district’s issuance of a preliminary layoff notice to Baker was lawful under all the 

circumstances.  Baker did not establish that her seniority and credentials permit her to bump 
into an existing position held by a more junior employee. 

 
37. 

Terrence Beezley has a seniority date of September 10, 2007.  He is a tenured 
employee.  He holds a CLAD authorization.  Beezley also holds supplemental authorizations 
in Physical Education, Health, and English.  He described himself as “an overachiever.”  
Beezley testified that he helped found the district’s alternative education program, where he 
is currently one of four social science teachers.   

 
Beezley argued that his unique teaching skills and his many authorizations entitled 

him to retain his employment, particularly since the district has expressed a desire to 
preserve the employment of the most competent individuals. 

 
The district’s issuance of a preliminary layoff notice to Beezley was lawful under all 

the circumstances.  Beezley was one of the three least senior high school social science 
teachers identified for layoff.  High school social science was a particular kind of service 
subject to reduction under the governing board’s resolution.  The district did not misidentify 
Beezley.  Nor did Beezley establish that his seniority and credentials permitted him to bump 
into an existing position held by a more junior employee.  Beezley did not establish that his 
position in the alternative education program shielded him from the layoff process. 
 
Ultimate Conclusions Regarding AUSD’s Layoff 
 
38.  AUSD’s governing board resolved to reduce and discontinue particular kinds 
 
of services being provided by certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  The governing 
board’s decision was not related to the competency or dedication of any of the employees 
whose services were proposed to be reduced and discontinued.  The board’s determination 
that it was necessary to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of services was lawful, 
reasonable, and ultimately in the best interest of the district, its schools and its students.   
 

The district’s administrative staff initiated and followed a systematic procedure for 
identifying those employees who were directly affected by the governing board’s reduction 
in force resolution.  Adjustments were made to the seniority list where indicated until the day 
before the layoff proceeding.  A careful evaluation was made to determine each employee’s 

 

17

seniority date, credentials and authorizations, and qualifications in making determinations 
about what bumping rights, if any, an employee had.    The evidence does not support the 
modification any employee’s seniority date in the district’s seniority list on the date decisions 
were made relating to layoffs.   

 
The district’s effort to skip more junior employees who held BCLAD authorizations 

over more senior employees who held CLAD authorizations and other valid English 
Language Learner authorizations (other than emergency authorizations) was improper and 
the preliminary layoff notices issued to the nine most senior employees who were improperly 
displaced as a result of this effort to skip the BCLAD holders should be withdrawn and the 
accusations against them should be dismissed.  When this rescission is accomplished, no 
junior credentialed employee will be retained by the district to provide services which a more 
senior employee is certificated, competent and qualified to render. 

 
 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Statutory Authority  
 
 
 

1. 

Education Code section 44944 provides in part: 

(b) 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the 
governing board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year . . . 
the governing board and the employee shall be given written notice by the 
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been recommended 
that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor . . . 
 
 
The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for 
not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year . . . If an employee fails to request a 
hearing on or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his 
or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . . 
 
 
shall be conducted and a decision made in accordance with . . . the Government Code 
and the governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency therein, except 
that all of the following shall apply: 
 
   
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation and he or she shall be 
notified of this five-day period for filing in the accusation. 

In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the proceeding 

The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any, 

(1) 

(c) 

 

 

 
  
who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a 
determination as to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related to the 

The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge 

(3) 

. . . 

18

 

 

welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be prepared 
for the governing board and shall contain a determination as to the sufficiency of the 
cause and a recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing board shall 
make the final determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and disposition. None 
of the findings, recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed 
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding on the governing 
board.  Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or 
governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the 
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.  Copies of the proposed decision shall 
be submitted to the governing board and to the employee on or before May 7 of the 
year in which the proceeding is commenced. . . .”  

Education Code section 44955 provides in part: 

(b)  Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 

“(a)  No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 

2. 
 
 
causes other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 
44947, inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her 
position for cause other than as specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in 
the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary . . . 
to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board 
may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the 
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close 
of the school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to 
render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 
render.  

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 

 
same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the 
basis of needs of the district and the students thereof . . .   
 

(c) 

Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 15th of 

 
 
May . . . and services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the 
order in which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with 
the provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or 
probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for 
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year. 
 

 
. . . 
 

. . . 

19

 
 

 

(d) 

 The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner 
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and 
qualifications entitle them to render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any 
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught, 
and for which he or she does not have a teaching credential or which is not within the 
employee’s major area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the 
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter competency test 
in the appropriate subject. 
 
 
Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following 
reasons: 
 
 
a specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services 
credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a 
school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, which 
others with more seniority do not possess. 
 
 
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.” 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach 

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 

(2) 

(1) 

 

 

4. 

3. 

A school board’s decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service 

 
Jurisdiction 
 
Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 
 
44955.  All notices and other jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were 
satisfied as to all respondent employees identified herein.   
 
The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
is not tied in with any statistical computation.  Where a governing board determines to 
discontinue or reduce a particular kind of service, it is within the board’s discretion to 
determine the amount by which it will reduce a particular kind of service as long as the 
district does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. 
v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) 
 
Competence 
 
 
The intent of the Education Code is to leave to a school board the discretion of 
determining whether in addition to possessing seniority an employee is also “certificated and 
competent” to be employed in a vacant position.  The term “competent” in this regard relates 
to an individual’s specific skills or qualifications including academic background, training, 
credentials, and experience, but does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance.  
(Forker v. Board of Trustees (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)  In addition to seniority, the 

5. 

 

20

6. 

The Statutory Scheme 

Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff statute, provides in 

Essentially this language provides “bumping” rights for senior certificated and 

only limitation in placing a teacher in a vacant position is that the teacher selected be 
“certificated and competent” to render the service required by the vacant position.  Among 
employees who meet this threshold limitation, there is no room in the statutory scheme for 
comparative evaluation. (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299.)  An 
employee holding a special credential or needed skill, if such credentials or competence are 
not shared by a more senior employee, may be retained though it results in termination of a 
senior employee.  (Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.) 
 
Seniority, Bumping, and Skipping  
 
 
 
 
subdivision (b), in part, as follows: “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of 
no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while . . . any 
other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.”  
 
 
competent employees, and “skipping” authority to retain junior employees who are 
certificated and competent to render services which more senior employees are not.  
Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to subdivision (b) where a district 
demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study and that a junior 
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course that 
the senior certificated employee does not possess.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. 
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.)  School districts have broad discretion in defining 
positions within the district and establishing requirements for employment.  This discretion 
encompasses determining the training and experience necessary for particular positions.  
Similarly, school districts have the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that 
will be eliminated, even though a service continues to be performed or provided in a different 
manner by the district.  (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 
Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) 
 
 
 
 
determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an 
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be 
assigned to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra. at 136-137.) 
 
 
 
 
its specific “needs” and there is nothing in the statute that requires such needs to be 
evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job descriptions, or program requirements. 
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra. at 138.) 

Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 expressly allows a district to demonstrate 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to 

Bumping 

Skipping 

8. 

7. 

 

21

 

9. 

Education Code section 44845 provides that seniority is determined by the 

11.  Under Education Code section 44917, governing boards must “classify as 

Seniority 
 
 
date a certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”   
Information Filed with AUSD after March 15, 2010 
 
 
10.  A school district must issue and serve preliminary layoff notices no later than 
March 15.  Before then, a district must consider all information on file that assists the district 
in making assignments and reassignments based on seniority and qualifications.  After March 
15, the district has no authority to issue a layoff notice to an employee who has become 
junior by reason of another employee’s filing of proof of additional qualifications.  Thus, a 
credential filed with a district after March 15 cannot be the basis for bumping. (Degener v. 
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689, 698.) 
 
Substitute and Temporary Service 
 
 
substitute employees those persons employed in positions requiring certification 
qualifications, to fill positions of regularly employed persons absent from service.”  Under 
Education Code section 44953, substitute employees may be dismissed at any time at the 
pleasure of the board.  As noted in California Teachers Ass’n v. Vallejo City Unified School 
Dist. (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135, 144-145 and Balen v. Peralta Junior College District 
(1974) 11 Cal.3d 821, 826, substitute and temporary teachers fill the short range needs of a 
school district and may be summarily released. 
 
 
position may be credited retroactively as probationary employment.  Thus, a certificated 
employee working in a temporary position as a long-term replacement teacher under 
Education Code section 44920 or in a categorically funded position under Education Code 
section 44909 may accrue credit toward permanent status under certain circumstances 
described in Education Code sections 44909, 44917, 44918 or 44920.   
 
 
substitute teachers and day-to-day substitute teachers.  Education Code section 44918 makes 
this distinction: 
 

In specific situations, an employee’s position in something other than a probationary 

The Education Code recognizes two distinct types of substitute teachers: long-term 

“(a) Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary employee, who 
serves during one school year for at least 75 percent of the number of days the regular 
schools of the district were maintained in that school year and has performed the 
duties normally required of a certificated employee of the school district, shall be 
deemed to have served a complete school year as a probationary employee if 
employed as a probationary employee for the following school year. 

 
(b) Any such employee shall be reemployed for the following school year to 
fill any vacant positions in the school district unless the employee has been released 
pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 44954. 

 

22

 
(c) If an employee was released pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 44954 

and has nevertheless been retained as a temporary or substitute employee by the 
district for two consecutive years and that employee has served for at least 75 percent 
of the number of days the regular schools of the district were maintained in each 
school year and has performed the duties normally required of a certificated employee 
of the school district, that employee shall receive first priority if the district fills a 
vacant position, at the grade level at which the employee served during either of the 
two years, for the subsequent school year. In the case of a departmentalized program, 
the employee shall have taught in the subject matter in which the vacant position 
occurs. 
 
(d) Those employees classified as substitutes, and who are employed to serve 

in an on-call status to replace absent regular employees on a day-to-day basis shall not 
be entitled to the benefits of this section. 

 
(e) Permanent and probationary employees subjected to a reduction in force 

pursuant to Section 44955 shall, during the period of preferred right to reappointment, 
have prior rights to any vacant position in which they are qualified to serve superior 
to those rights hereunder afforded to temporary and substitute personnel who have 
become probationary employees pursuant to this section. 

 
(f) This section shall not apply to any school district in which the average daily 

attendance is in excess of 400,000.” 
 
Centinela Valley Secondary Teachers Assn. v. Centinela Valley Union High Sch. Dist. 

(1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 35 considered the case of a substitute teacher who provided a full 
year’s substitute teaching service for two different teachers at the same school.  The case 
involved the application of a nearly identical predecessor statue (Education Code section 
13336.5) to Education Code section 44918.  In reaching its conclusion, the court held:  

  
“In this context we are of the opinion that the statute in question and in particular the 
phrase ‘who teaches . . . any class or classes which would have been taught by one 
person absent from service . . .’ was intended to apply to the situation where a 
substitute teacher replaces one and the same permanent teacher for an entire school 
year regardless of particular class assignments.  Stated another way, the statute only 
applies when a substitute fills a vacancy in teacher complement of one year duration, 
created by the absence of one permanent teacher and does not apply to a one year 
vacancy which results from the aggregate of several teachers being absent for shorter 
periods.  This interpretation preserves administrative discretion while affording fair 
treatment of substitutes and thus achieves what we presume to be the overall objective 
of the statute.”  (Ibid., at page 44.) 

 

 
 
 
 

 

23

12. 

Promissory estoppel is a doctrine which employs equitable principles to satisfy 

Estoppel 
 
 
the requirement that consideration must be given in exchange for the promise sought to be 
enforced.  A promise which the promisor should reasonably expect to induce action or 
forbearance on the part of the promisee or a third person and which does induce such action 
or forbearance is binding if injustice can be avoided only by enforcement of the promise.  To 
be binding, the promise must be clear and unambiguous.  (Cotta v. City and County of San 
Francisco (2007) 157 Cal.App.4th 1550, 1566.)  The elements of a promissory estoppel 
claim are: (1) a promise clear and unambiguous in its terms; (2) reliance by the party to 
whom the promise is made; (3) the reliance must be both reasonable and foreseeable; and (4) 
the party asserting the estoppel must be injured by his reliance.”  (US Ecology, Inc. v. State 
of California (2005) 129 Cal.App.4th 887, 901.)   
 
Promissory estoppel is based on a promise; equitable estoppel is based on 
 
misrepresentation of an existing fact.  The doctrine of equitable estoppel is based on the 
theory that a party who by his declarations or conduct misleads another to his prejudice 
should be estopped from obtaining the benefits of his misconduct. The required elements for 
an equitable estoppel are: (1) the party to be estopped must be apprised of the facts; (2) the 
party to be estopped must intend his or her conduct shall be acted upon, or must so act that 
the party asserting the estoppel had a right to believe it was so intended; (3) the other party 
must be ignorant of the true state of facts; and (4) the other party must rely upon the conduct 
to his or her injury.  It is well settled that the estoppel doctrine is applicable to government 
entities where justice and right require it.  (Cotta v. City and County of San Francisco, supra, 
at 1566-1567.) 
 
 
of promissory estoppel or equitable estoppel. 
 
Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees 
 

No respondent established reasonable reliance sufficient to invoke either the doctrine 

13.  As a result of the governing board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of 

service being provided by certificated employees, cause exists under the Education Code for 
the district to give notice to those respondents who are identified hereafter that their 
employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services 
will not be needed by the district for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Determination 
 
 
the evidence and related to the welfare of the Alvord Unified School District and the students 
thereof.   AUSD’s administrative staff made assignments and reassignments under 
Resolution No. 28 in such a manner that the most senior employees were retained to render 
services which their seniority and qualifications entitled them to render, except as otherwise 
noted herein.  No employee with less seniority than any respondent will be retained to render 
a service which any respondent is certificated, competent and qualified to render.  

The charges set forth in the accusation were sustained by a preponderance of 

14. 

 

24

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

This determination is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

It is recommended that the preliminary layoff notices issued to Stephanie Bradley, 

Jessica Cassese, Brianna Chavez-Monroe, Amanda Davis, Deserae Devlin, Jennifer Doiron, 
Deborah Griffin, Guy Harrell, Yvette Haskins, Jill Heinz, Faith Johnson, Samuel Jones III, 
Christine Ledesma, Endelia Medina, Monica Meurer, Tonya Miller, Paul Oeser III, Audrey 
Popoff, Heidi Powers, Sara Rodriguez, Danielle Romain, Lilia Roney, Michael Sanchez, 
Kelli Seibert, Everton Souza, Julie Stanfield, Tiffany Star Ferreira, Cara Sweeney, Nadia 
Templeton, Rachel Thurman, Andrea Viniguerra, Teresa Wilson, and Hugh Jackman Wood 
be rescinded and that the accusations filed against them be dismissed. 
 

 
It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the remaining respondents 
who were served with preliminary layoff notices that their employment will be terminated at 
the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed for the 2010-
2011 school year:  

 

 
 
Dated: May 4, 2010. 
 

 
 
________________________________ 
JAMES AHLER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

25

