BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ORLAND UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
OAH No. 2010031649 

In the Matter of the Non-
Reemployment/Reduction in Force of:  
 
 
GUILLERMINA ALFARO 
SUSAN ANDERSON 
RYAN BATEMAN 
KATIE BOLES 
ALLISON BORGES 
TERESA DAVIS 
AMY FISH 
ALFONZO GONZALES 
STACEY LASAGNA 
ZANDI-LIN LAWRENCE 
TIBERIU MARINESCU 
JAN MATHEWS 
EMILY MULLINS 
MELISSA RABURN 
LORENA RAYGOZA 
MATTHEW SCHUMANN 
CHERYL TUATO’O 
JAYMEE VUE 
 
                                               Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Rebecca M. Westmore, Administrative Law Judge, Office 

Paul Boylan, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of the Orland Unified School 

 
 
of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 27, 2010, in Orland, California. 
 
 
District. 
 
 
present throughout the hearing. 
 

Lesley Beth Curtis, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of all respondents, who were 

1

 
 
 

 
 

 

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for 

 
decision on April 27, 2010. 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1.     Christian von Kleist is the Superintendent of Orland Unified School District 
(District).  Armand G. Brett, M.Ed., is the Assistant Superintendent of the District.  Their 
actions and the actions of the District’s Governing Board (Board) were taken in their official 
capacities. 
 

2.     Respondents are permanent or probationary certificated employees of the 

District. 
 

3.     On February 25, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 7-09/10 (Resolution), 
entitled “Resolution to Decrease the Number of Certificated Employees Due To a Reduction in 
Particular Kinds of Services.”  Pursuant to the Resolution, the Board determined that it was 
necessary and in the best interest of the District to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of 
services (PKS) and to decrease a corresponding number of certificated District employees not 
later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year.  The Board also adopted “tie-breaking” 
criteria to be used in determining the order of termination of certificated employees who first 
rendered paid service to the District on the same date. 
 

4.     The Board directed Superintendent von Kleist to send appropriate notices to all 

employees whose services will be terminated by virtue of the PKS reductions and eliminations.  
The PKS reductions and eliminations are based solely upon economic reasons, and are not 
related to the skills, abilities or work performance of the affected teachers.   
 

5.     Pursuant to the Resolution, the Board resolved to reduce 20.5 full-time 

equivalent (FTE) positions. 
 

6.     On or before March 15, 2010, in accordance with the Resolution, and pursuant 

to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the District served notice on respondents 
advising that their services would not be reduced or would not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year.  Respondents timely filed Requests for Hearing to determine if there is cause for 
not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.   
 

7.     On March 29, 2010, Superintendent von Kleist made and filed Accusations 

against respondents.  Respondents timely filed Notices of Defense to the Accusations.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

2

District’s Layoff Procedures 
 

8.     The District maintains a Certificated Seniority List (Seniority List) which 
contains data obtained from the District’s records and its employees, including, but not limited 
to, employees’ names, hire dates, status, school sites, assignments, credentials, and 
authorizations. 
 

9.     Laura Holderfield has been the District’s Business Manager for eight years.  She 
is responsible for all state reporting; budget preparation and analysis; attendance; management 
roles for accounts receivable and payable; and payroll.  At hearing, Ms. Holderfield asserted 
that the decision to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services was based on a projected 
$2.6 million revenue deficit for the 2010-2011 school year.  Ms. Holderfield stated that all 
positively-assured attrition, including four retirements, were “factored in” to the Board’s 
decision to reduce or eliminate 20.5 FTE positions in the District.   
 
Discussion 
 
The District has opted to use reserve funds, which may include medical funds, to 
 
rehire teachers and to effectuate this layoff procedure.  To that end, the District entered into the 
following stipulations with respondents.  The District agreed to rescind the preliminary layoff 
notices served on the following respondents: 
 
 
 

10. 

 
 

11. 

The following respondents agreed to accept their preliminary layoff notices:1

Katie Boles 
Allison Borges 
Amy Fish 
Jan Mathews 
Lorena Raygoza 
Jaymee Vue 

Guillermina Alfaro 
Susan Anderson 
Ryan Bateman 
Teresa Davis 
Alfonzo Gonzales 
Stacey Lasagna 
Zandi-Lin Lawrence 
Tiberiu Marinescu 
Emily Mullins 
Melissa Raburn 
Matthew Schumann 
Cheryl Tuato’o 
                                                 

 
 
 

 

1 All preliminary layoff notices were for 1.00 FTE positions, except Susan Anderson who accepted her 

preliminary layoff notice for 0.50 FTE of her District Nurse position. 

3

12. 

The District agreed to identify and prepare a list of all certificated employees, 

 
including those identified in Factual Finding 11, who are entitled to be rehired for up to 39 
months beginning in June 2010 (Rehire List).  The District will prepare and email to the 
certificated employees on the Rehire List, a list of all positions available in the District.  All 
certificated employees on the Rehire List who receive the email listing the available positions 
may, within two weeks of the email, express their interest in the position.  Failure to do so does 
not preclude the certificated employee from responding to subsequent email listings of 
available positions in the District for up to 39 months beginning in June 2010.   
 
 
respondent was notified for that reduction, and the librarian will be given a 1.00 FTE teaching 
position for the 2010-2011 school year.  Respondents do not raise any issues as to how the  
District chooses to provide library services for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 

The PKS reduction included a 0.50 FTE District Library Media position.  No 

13. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The District employees who received notices that their services would not be 

 
 
required in the 2010-2011 school year are not being laid off for reasons related to their ability 
or performance. 
 

2. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
proposed reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and the preliminary notice of 
layoff served on respondents are factually and legally appropriate.  The District has met its 
burden.  The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next school year is an 
appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955.  As stated in San Jose 
Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of particular 
kinds of services on the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that section, and, 
“in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section 
44955 is the only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.”  
The District must be solvent to provide educational services and cost savings are necessary to 
resolve its financial crisis.  The Board’s decision to reduce particular kinds of services was a 
proper exercise of its discretion.  In addition, all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth 
in Education Code sections 44944 and 44945 were met. The notices sent to respondents indicate 
the statutory basis for the reduction of services and adequately describe the particular kinds of 
services to be reduced, and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due process.  
(Ibid., at p. 627; see also, Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831; Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838; and Degener v. 
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4

3. 

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular 

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another manner. (Gallup 
v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California Teachers Association v. Board of 
Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)  A school board may reduce 
services within the meaning of the statute either by determining that a certain type of service 
shall not be performed at all or by reducing the number of district employees who perform 
such services.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 
64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the 
reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools 
and pupils within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
 
matter. 
 
 

The parties’ stipulations, by their terms, resolve all outstanding issues in this 

4. 

RECOMMENDATION 

Final Notices may be given to the respondents identified in Factual Finding 11 that their 

services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction and 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
 
DATED:  May 5, 2010 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
REBECCA M. WESTMORE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

5

