BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD  
TEMECULA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
   Respondents listed in Appendices A and B. 
 
 

    OAH No. 2010011030 
 
 

Jon Y. Vanderpool, Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax, represented the respondents listed 

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

Melanie A. Petersen, Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost LLP represented the Temecula 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
of California, heard this matter in Temecula, California on April 12, 2010. 
 
 
Valley Unified School District. 
 
 
in Appendix A to this Proposed Decision. 
 
 
this Proposed Decision. 
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 12, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

No appearance was made by or on behalf of the respondents listed in Appendix B to 

1. 

 
General Findings 
 
 
Chris Cordner, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources of the Temecula 
Valley Unified School District, made and filed the accusations dated March 5, 2010 in his 
official capacity as the designee of Carol A. Leigthy, Ed.D., Superintendent of the District.  
 
 
 

Respondents1 are certificated employees of the district. 

2. 

Initially, 168 individuals were named as respondents.  However, through attrition, the failure to request a 

                                                 
1  
hearing or otherwise, the number of respondents had by the conclusion of the hearing been reduced to the 116 
individuals identified below in Appendices A and B.  Unless otherwise indicated, all references to respondents in 
this Proposed Decision are to these 116 individuals.   

 

1

3. 

In early 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, 

the district notified the governing board of the district of its recommendation to reduce or 
discontinue services for the upcoming school year. 
 

4. 

On February 23, 2010, the governing board adopted Resolution No. 2009-

10/19, determining that it would be necessary to reduce particular kinds of services at the end 
of the current school year.  The Governing Board determined that the particular kinds of 
services that must be reduced for the 2010-2011 school year were the following full time 
equivalent (FTE) positions: 
 

Particular Kind of Service 

 

 

 

Full-Time Equivalent

 

 

 

102.6 
3 

 
 

 
 

 
 

K-6th Grade Teacher   
K-12th Grade P.E. Teacher 
K-12th Grade Special Education – Adaptive P.E.   0.6 
6th-8th Grade Social Science/History Teacher 
1 
6th-8th Grade Home Economics Teacher 
1 
6th-8th Grade Math Teacher   
2 
 
6th-8th Grade English Teacher 
1 
 
9th-12th Grade Math Teacher              
7 
9th-12th Grade English Teacher                               10 
9th-12th Grade Biological Science Teacher   
3 
10th-12th Grade Chemistry Teacher   
1 
 
9th-12th Grade Social Science/History Teacher 
4 
9th-12th Grade Health Teacher 
1 
9th-12th Grade Industrial Arts Teacher 
0.6 
9th-12th Grade Spanish Teacher 
1 
6th-12th Grade Counselor 
10 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

The proposed reductions totaled 148.8 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.  

 

a. 

5. 

The Governing Board further determined in Resolution No. 2009-10/19 that it 

 
 
would be necessary to retain certificated employees who possess special training and 
competency that other certificated employees with more seniority might not possess, to wit:  
 
Certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service in 
 
special education, including intern specialist, who are presently assigned within the scope of 
that credential, and who will be assigned within the scope of that credential for the 2010-
2011 school year. 
 
 
world languages ASL, French and P.E. with Dance Authorization, who are presently 
assigned within the scope of that credential, and who will be assigned within the scope of 
that credential for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

Certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service in 

b. 

 

2

 

 

c. 

d. 

Certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service as a 

Certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service as a 

 
Special Education program Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA) assigned to Special 
Education Department or Autism Specialist programs who are presently assigned within the 
scope of that credential, and who will be assigned as a TOSA within the scope of that 
credential for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA) assigned as a part-time 60% TOSA to the EETT 
grant implementation program who are presently assigned within the scope of that credential, 
and who will be assigned as a 60% TOSA within the scope of that credential for the 2010-
2011 school year. 
 
 
currently assigned to administrative positions, and who will be assigned to administrative 
positions for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

Certificated personnel who possess administrative credentials who are 

e. 

 

The board’s skipping criteria were neither arbitrary nor capricious, but reflected a 

reasonable exercise of its discretion. 
 

6. 

The governing board directed the superintendent to determine which 

7. 

employees’ services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of the 
reduction of the aforementioned particular kinds of services.  The governing board further 
directed the superintendent to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the 
district who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services.  
 
 
reduce services by 148.8 FTE positions, the district continued to evaluate personnel needs in 
the district.  Since the governing board’s action, after taking into consideration upcoming 
positively assured attrition, resignations, and retirements, the district has now determined it 
can meet its fiscal needs by reducing services by a total of 138.8 FTE positions for the 2010-
2011 school year. 
 

Subsequent to the action the governing board took on February 23, 2010, to 

8. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district timely served on respondents a 

written notice that the superintendent had recommended, and that the governing board had 
determined, that their services would not be required for the upcoming school year.  The 
notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation and determination.  The notice advised 
respondents of their right to a hearing, and those respondents each had to deliver a request 
for a hearing in writing to the person sending the notice of termination by a specific date, 
which date was more than seven days after the notice of termination was served.  
 

The recommendation and determination that respondents be terminated from 

employment was not related to their competency as teachers.  
 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district timely served on respondents an accusation.   

 

 

3

9. 

Respondents timely filed written requests for hearing and notices of defense.  

The district timely served respondents with a notice of hearing.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional 
requirements were met. 
 

10. 

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of the 

13. 

12. 

11. 

The board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements and 

The services the governing board addressed in Resolution No. 2009/10-19 

district. 
 
 
were “particular kinds of services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning 
of Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these 
particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise 
of discretion. 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
welfare of the district and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as 
determined by the governing board. 
 
 
requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees. 
 
 
the 148.8 FTE positions the governing board resolved to eliminate.  This was due to three 
factors:  (i) Some of the teachers in question worked on a part-time basis; (ii) the district had 
not yet heard back from teachers who had been on a leave of absence as to whether they 
planned to return to the district; and (iii) anticipated bumping issues.  The district took great 
care in attempting to determine the likelihood that particular individuals in particular 
assignments would or might reasonably be subject to layoff.  The district’s issuance of 168 
termination notices was based on its careful and reasonable assessment, constituted a proper 
exercise of its discretion, and was neither arbitrary nor capricious. 
 
 
services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 

15.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any 

Initially, 168 certificated employees received layoff notices in connection with 

14. 

 

4

16. 

From time to time and on a year-to-year basis, the district has pursuant to 

Findings as to Specific Certificated Employees2
 
 
Education Code section 442633 given special authorization to certain certificated employees 
to teach subjects outside the scope of their credentials.  Such authorization may be given to 
individuals who during their undergraduate studies completed a specified number of 
academic units in the subject area of their special district authorization (e.g., 12 semester 
units or six upper division classes, in order to qualify for special authorization to teach a 
subject at the middle school level).  Site administrators grant such authorization based on the 
specific teaching needs of the particular school in a given academic year.  The district does 
not know and cannot predict which such authorizations may be needed for future school 
years. 
 
 
concerns relating to special district authorization.  Woods and Hilton, who both hold 
supplementary authorizations, expressed concern that more senior colleagues who did not 
hold supplementary authorizations, but who did hold special district authorizations, were 
retained while they themselves were designated for lay off.  Woods, Hilton and Hajdu all 
stated that the district never advised them that they could possibly qualify for special district 
authorization, and/or that, had they been so informed and been given an opportunity,  they 
would have sought to qualify for it. 
 
 
regard to special authorizations were neither arbitrary nor capricious, but instead constituted 
a proper exercise of its discretion.  Especially to the extent respondents in essence question 
the district’s potential decisions as to what if any special authorizations to grant in the 

While the concerns of these teachers are understandable, the district’s actions with 

Respondent Timothy Woods, Andrew Hajdu, and Jacqueline Hilton are expressed 

                                                 
2  
In respondents’ joint notice of defense, questions were raised with regard to the proposed layoff of certain 
named employees whom the district ultimately decided not to layoff, to wit, Ronnie Plottner, Danny Garcia, Nicole 
Lombardi-Riesen, Amber Lane, Richard Salcedo, Michelle Balland.  These allegations are therefore moot.   
 

In respondents’ joint notice of defense, it was asserted that Tara Fry and Erin O’Sullivan were improperly 

slated for layoff, when a more junior teacher, Lesliane Bouchard, was retained.  Fry and O’Sullivan teach 
elementary school, but have supplementary authorizations in English.  Bouchard teaches middle school language 
arts, so respondents’ position was deemed to be that Fry or O’Sullivan should have been permitted to bump the more 
junior Bouchard.  However, no contentions were made on behalf of Fry or O’Sullivan at the hearing, and neither 
employee testified.  Respondents’ initial assertions that Fry and O’Sullivan were improperly slated for layoff are 
deemed withdrawn.  Further, a review of the district’s seniority list reflects that neither Fry nor O’Sullivan has 
NCLB certification in English, whereas Bouchard does.  This would appear to explain why the district did not 
permit Fry or O’Sullivan to bump Bouchard, and why respondents withdrew their challenge as to those two 
employees. 
 
3  
be assigned, with his or her consent, to teach a single subject class in which he or she has 18 semester hours of 
coursework or nine semester hours of upper division or graduate coursework or a multiple subject class if he or she 
holds at least 60 semester hours equally distributed among the 10 areas of a diversified major set forth in Section 
44314. A three-semester-unit variance in any of the required 10 areas may be allowed. The governing board of the 
school district by resolution shall provide specific authorization for the assignment. The authorization of the 
governing board shall remain valid for one year and may be renewed annually.” 
 

Education Code section 44263 provides, “A teacher licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article may 

 

5

18. 

Timothy Woods teaches middle school physical education (P.E.)  He 

upcoming school year, it would be inappropriate for the administrative law judge to prejudge 
such matters so as effectively to limit in advance the discretion of district administrators to 
make decisions on the basis of future (and thus yet unknown) circumstances. 
 
17.  Derek Heid teaches English and drama at Temecula Valley High School.  He 
 
is one of the district’s most junior secondary English teachers and thus was properly noticed 
for layoff.  Heid expressed concern as to the future of the drama program at Temecula Valley 
High School if he is laid off.  He also noted that the drama program generates revenue for the 
district, and that the revenue for the current school year substantially surpasses that of recent 
prior years.  Heid’s genuine concern for the strength of the drama program and the welfare of 
his students was very evident from his testimony.  However, pursuant to California 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CCTC) guidelines, any teacher with a single subject 
English credential may teach drama, and a special authorization to teach drama does not 
exist.  Accordingly, the district’s issuance of a lay off notice to Heid was neither arbitrary nor 
capricious, but instead constituted a proper exercise of its discretion. 
 
 
expressed concern that at least five P.E. teachers, though not he himself, have given up their 
preparation period in order to teach an extra class (for a total of six teaching periods instead 
of five), and as a result receive additional compensation.  Woods stated that if the district did 
not permit these five or more teachers to give up their preparation time and teach an extra 
period, the savings achieved would permit the employment of an additional P.E. teacher, i.e., 
one less teacher would have to be laid off. 
 
 
Woods also expressed concern about the district’s decision to exempt from lay off 
P.E. teachers with a supplementary authorization in dance.  Woods himself does not hold 
such an authorization, but does teach dance as a unit in his P.E. classes.  In enthusiastic, 
uniquely colorful fashion, Woods stated that if given an opportunity to teach dance classes, 
“I would teach the heck out of it.”  Woods’ sincerity and his commitment to teaching were 
evident during his testimony, but the board’s exemption of persons with a special 
authorization in dance was nonetheless neither arbitrary nor capricious but instead 
constituted a proper exercise of its discretion.  The district explained, for example, that 
having individuals with a special dance authorization to teach dance classes qualifies those 
classes to meet fine arts college entrance requirements. 
 
 
disturbed high school students.  Reska is a nationally board-certified counselor, who holds 
not only a bachelor’s degree in social work but also a master’s degree in counseling.  Reska 
expressed concern that if the district lays off ten of its 40 counselors, the student counselor 
ratio would increase from 500:1 to about 600:1.  He also expressed concern that special 
education teachers were given exemptions from lay off, but not counselors like himself who 
work with special education students.  Though a PPS (pupil personnel services) credential 
authorizes any counselor to work with emotionally disturbed students, Reska questioned 
whether counselors lacking his experience could work effectively with that group.  Reska did 
not identify any credentialed counselors with less seniority than he whom the district intends 
to retain next year.  

19.  David Reska is the district’s only counselor who works with emotionally 

 

6

The concerns of Reska and Daley are understandable.  However, the district’s 

20.  Derren Drago teaches Spanish at Temecula Valley Charter School.5  He 

Gretchen Daley works in the district, servicing students at nine sites as a special 
 
education counselor.  She conducts personal social counseling for special education students 
who may, inter alia, be emotionally disturbed, autistic, or behaviorally challenged.  Daley 
expressed concern about the district’s decision to exempt from layoff certain special 
education personnel (TOSAs assigned to autism specialist programs) and not counselors such 
as herself.  Daley testified as to her specialized training to deal with emotionally disturbed 
and fragile students. 
 
 
exemption of certain special education teachers and not counselors who work with 
emotionally disturbed and other fragile students was neither arbitrary nor capricious, but 
instead constituted a proper exercise of its discretion.  The district explained, for example, 
that it has experienced difficulty retaining special education teachers, and that accordingly it 
has historically exempted that group from layoff.  Further, and in contrast to credentials 
available to teachers, a special education credential is not available to counselors; instead the 
PPS credential applies to all school counselors, whether they work with the traditional 
student population or, instead, with special education students.4   
 
 
testified that the charter school mandates use of a special Spanish-teaching program, using 
the TPRS (teaching proficiency through reading and storytelling) method.  He stated that few 
teachers are familiar with this relatively new method, and he expressed concern whether a 
more senior district Spanish teacher would be able to teach Spanish effectively at the charter 
school. 
 
 
charter school employees from lay off, including more specifically those teaching foreign 
languages, was neither arbitrary nor capricious, but instead constituted a proper exercise of 
its discretion. 
 
 
21.  Debra Tarantino teaches fifth grade at a district elementary school.  She is 
currently being trained to provide EETT (enhancing education through technology) services.  
She stated that the district’s $940,000 grant for this program involved a two-year 
commitment, the first year of which involves training of EETT personnel (such as Tarantino) 
and the second year of which constitutes implementation of the program in the classroom.  
Tarantino expressed concern that if she and others who are presently being trained in EETT 
are laid off, then the district will have to start over training new personnel.  Tarantino also 
expressed concern that her EETT trainer falls within the EETT exemption, but (again) not 
trainees such as herself. 

Drago’s concerns are understandable.  However, the district’s decision not to exempt 

In respondents’ joint notice of defense, it was asserted that another counselor, Matthew Razukas, was 

                                                 
4  
improperly denied the right to bump less senior individuals.  No specific individuals were named.  No contentions 
were made on behalf of Razukas at the hearing, and he did not testify.  Respondents’ initial assertions with regard to 
Razukas are deemed withdrawn.     
 
5  
 

All employees of the charter school are district employees; only the administrator is not.   

 

7

23. 

22. 

Susan Myers is scheduled for lay off, but testified that she believes the tie-

Tarantino’s concerns are understandable.  However, the district’s decision to exempt 

 
certain but not all EETT personnel was neither arbitrary nor capricious, but instead 
constituted a proper exercise of its discretion.6
 
Jean Brown teaches home economics at Temecula Valley High School.  She is 
 
not directly impacted by the layoff, since the only home economics position slated for layoff 
is at the middle school level.  However, she is subject to lay off via bumping by a more 
senior middle school teacher.  Brown testified that her enrollment numbers are strong and 
that she is building up the high school home economics program.  She also felt it would be 
appropriate for the middle school teacher to be placed at the only district high school that has 
just one home economics teacher. 
 
 
Brown’s concerns are understandable.  However, the district properly determined that 
Brown could be bumped by a more senior middle school teacher.  The district’s decision not 
to redeploy its teachers to create a balance of two home economics teachers at each high 
school was neither arbitrary nor capricious, but instead constituted a proper exercise of its 
discretion. 
 
 
breaker criteria were improperly applied to her.  Specifically, she believes that she should be 
given four tiebreaker points based on her eligibility to receive an administrator’s credential.  
She explained that she took and passed a school leaders licensure assessment and is thus 
presently eligible to receive this credential, and has not received it only because it is only 
granted to individuals who are in fact administrators. 
 
Even if Myers were granted the four additional tiebreaker points, she would still be 
 
subject to lay off in this proceeding.  However, in order to provide possible guidance to the 
parties for the future, eligibility for a credential is distinct from actual possession of the 
credential.  The district’s decision to award tie-breaker points only for “each valid clear or 
preliminary credential on file” (emphasis added) was neither arbitrary nor capricious, but 
instead constituted a proper exercise of its discretion.  Accordingly, Myers is not entitled to 
the additional four tie-breaker points. 
 
 
was employed by the district from 2002 to 2006 on a half-time basis.  She resigned her 
district employment in June 2006.  She was reemployed by the district in August 2007 on a 
substitute basis, and under a regular contract as of November 26, 2007.  The break in 
Hilton’s employment precludes granting her her original seniority date.  Instead, the district 
properly determined her seniority date to be November 26, 2007. 
 
 
new teacher orientation before the 2006-2007 school year began.  Attendance at the 
orientation was voluntary.  Though under the collective bargaining agreement new teachers 

25.  Kim Ferrera was assigned a seniority date of August 16, 2006.  She attended a 

Jacqueline Hilton was assigned a seniority date of November 26, 2007.  She 

24. 

                                                 
6  
sufficient seniority that she would not in any event have been laid off. 

Further, the EETT exemption issue is moot, since the only employee who would have been skipped had 

 

8

were paid a stipend if they chose to attend the orientation, program was not part of the 
employees’ regular 185-day contract year.  Thus, attendance at the orientation did not 
constitute a first day of paid service with the district within the meaning of section 44845, 
and the district properly assigned Ferrera an August 16, 2006 seniority date. 
 
 
Tiffany Aptaker was assigned a seniority date of July 16, 2007.  She served as 
a long-term substitute from April 30 to June 16, 2007.  Since she did not serve as a substitute 
teacher on 75 percent of the school days during the 2006-2007 school year, the district 
properly excluded the period of her long-term substitute service from her seniority date. 
 
 

26. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied 
as to all respondents. 
 

2. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 

3. 

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in 

with any statistical computation.  It is within the governing authority’s discretion to 
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued 
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose 
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)  A school district has wide 
discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or 
so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of 
law.  (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 
318, 322.) 
 

4. 

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district 

and establishing requirements for employment.  This discretion encompasses determining the 
training and experience necessary for particular positions.  Similarly, school districts have 
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a 
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.  
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) 
 

5. 

Pursuant to section 44995, a senior teacher whose position is discontinued has 
the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to 
fill.  In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is 
filling that position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  
Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 

 

9

possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Santa 
Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified 
School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843; Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. 
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.) 
 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine 

6. 

Education Code section 44931 does not affect this conclusion.  That section provides 

whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic 
layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned 
to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at 136-137.) 
 
 
If a certificated employee resigns and is thereafter reemployed, her date of 
employment is normally—and with exceptions inapplicable here—deemed by Education 
Code section 44848 to be the date of reemployment.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen 
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 641.)7
 
 
that when a permanent certificated employee resigns, and then is reemployed within 39 
months, the district shall “disregarding the break in service, classify him or her as, and 
restore to him or her all of the rights, benefits and burdens of, a permanent employee, except 
as otherwise provided in this code.”  (emphasis added).  While section 44931 refers in 
general terms to “rights, benefits, and burdens,” section 44848 more specifically addresses 
the date of reemployment.  As such, reemployment rights are “otherwise provided in this 
code” and constitute an exception to section 44931. 
 
 
“to have been employed on the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a 
probationary position.” 
 
 
classified as a substitute or temporary employee, who serves during one school year for at 
least 75 percent of the number of days the regular schools of the district were maintained in 
that school year and has performed the duties normally required of a certificated employee of 
the school district, shall be deemed to have served a complete school year as a probationary 
employee if employed as a probationary employee for the following school year.” 
 
 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44845, certificated employees are deemed 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44918, subdivision (a), “an employee 

7. 

8. 

                                                 
7  
 

Section 44848 provides:  

“When any certificated employee shall have resigned or been dismissed for cause and shall thereafter have 
been reemployed by the board, his date of employment shall be deemed to be the date on which he first 
accepted reemployment (if reemployed before July 1, 1947) or rendered paid service (if reemployed after 
June 30, 1947) after his reemployment.  When an employee's services are terminated for lack of enrollment 
or discontinuance of service or are otherwise interrupted in a manner declared by law not to constitute a 
break in service, his original order of employment shall stand.” 
 

 

10

9. 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the 
 
Temecula Valley Unified School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
services.  The cause for the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services 
related solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  A preponderance of the 
evidence sustained the charges set forth in the accusation.  It is recommended that the Board 
give the respondents identified in Appendices A and B notice before May 15, 2010, that their 
services are no longer required by the District. 
 
 

ORDER 

The accusations served on all respondents identified in Appendices A and B are 

 
 
sustained.  Notice shall be given to these respondents before May 15, 2010, that their 
services will not be required for the upcoming school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular services as indicated. 
 
 
 
DATED:  ______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
DONALD P. COLE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

11

Appendix A 
 

1.    Acosta, Omar 
2.    Aptaker, Tiffany 
3.    Barnett, Kandera 
4.    Beato, Dennis 
5.    Benham, Dane 
6.    Bonaventura, Annette 
7.    Bonaventura, John 
8.    Brown, Jean 
9.    Brown, Jodie 
10.   Burlingham, Eric 
11.   Burnett, Eric 
12.   Burns, Tamara 
13.   Caster, Darren 
14.   Castro, Juan 
15.   Chavez, Jennifer 
16.   Constein, Troy 
17.   Cooper, Laura 
18.   Crabtree, Vicki 
19.   Cruz, Alexander 
20.   Cueva, Angela 
21.   Cunningham, Amber 
22.   Daley, Gretchen 
23.   Davis, Therese 
24.   DeLa Cruz, Noel 
25.   DeLa Cruz, Patrick 
26.   Denny, Kassie 
27.   Drago, Darren 
28.   Duncan, Brian 
29.   Easley, Andrea 
30.   Egus, Tanya 
31.   Eliaba, Jolene 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40.  Garcia, Rachel 
41.  Garrison, Casey 
42.  Giaquinto, Michelle 
43.  Gradstein, Kelly 

Ellinger, Cristin 
Farmer, Kristin 
Ferns, Sheryl 
Ferrera, Kim 
Forhane, Donald 
Foster, Emily 
Fry, Tara 
Fuhrman, Tammie 

 

12

Lippe, Colleen 
Lytle, Linda 

Jackson, Tonia 
Janis, Heidi 

44.  Grover, Sonja 
45.  Hagenbuch, Tanya 
46.  Hajdu, Andrew 
47.  Harris, James 
48.  Heeren, Bridget 
49 
Heid, Derek 
50.  Hernandez, Darcy 
51.  Hickey, Robert 
52.  Hilton, Jacqueline 
53.  Hoden, Heather 
54.  Hudson, Kyle 
55.  Hunter, Stephanie 
56. 
57. 
58.  Kanow, Carynn 
59.  Key, Heather 
60.  Khoyi, Shahrzad 
61.  Knight, Michael 
62. 
63. 
64.  Marble, Zsanna 
65.  Mason, Lindsey 
66.  Matzke, Theresa 
67.  Mills, Alan 
68.  Moore, Evan 
69.  Moore, Keith 
70.  Morales, Kristan 
71.  Morel, Christopher 
72.  Morrison, Creighton 
73.  Moser, Megan 
74.  Mowrer, Donald 
75.  Myers, Susan 
76.  Newton, Dana 
77.  Nielsen, Russ 
78.  O’Connor, Caroline 
79.  O’Sullivan, Erin 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 

Palmer, Anna 
Paul, Tarvinder 
Pinckard, Jim 
Pruett, Randall 
Rascon, Ashley 
Rasmussen, Ashley 
Razukas, Matthew 
Reska, David 
Salcido, Luz 
Santone, John 

 

13

Scholz, Jennifer 
Scofield, Linda 
Simon, Felicia 
Skumawitz, Jennifer 
Sosa, David 
Stevens, Michelle 
Stone, Nicole 
Strandberg, Sarah 
Sumner, Jennifer 
Tapley, Anna 

90. 
91. 
92. 
93. 
94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 
98. 
99. 
100.  Taratino, Debra 
101.  Thyfault, Wendy 
102.  Townley, Meagan 
103.  Trierweiler, Emily 
104.  Natalie, Waddell 
105.  Weeg, Robert 
106.  Wells, Jessica 
107.  Werts, Nga 
108.  Winger, Craig 
109.  Woods, Meagan 
110.  Woods, Timothy 

 

14

Appendix B 

 
1.  Arrieta, Shannon 
2.  Fenny III, James 
3.  Fox, Andrew 
4.  Larrabee, Diana 
5.  Olin, Christine 
6.  Pickup, Angela  

 
 

 

 

15

