BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE PASADENA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

     OAH Case No. 2010020636 
 
 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certificated Employees of the Pasadena  
Unified School District, 
 
                               Respondents. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
The hearing in the above-captioned matter was held on April 19 and 20, 2010, 
at Altadena, California.  Joseph D. Montoya, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office 
of Administrative Hearings (OAH), presided.  Complainant was represented by Amy 
R. Levine, Dannis, Woliver, Kelly.  Joe C. Hopkins represented respondents Cloda 
Jones and Dawn Mays.  Jean Shin and Joshua Adams, Rothner, Seagall, Greenstone 
&  Leheny, represented the Respondents listed on Attachment A, incorporated by 
reference hereto.  Respondents Sharon Teich, Sharron March, Amy McGuiness, and 
Natasha Mitchnick appeared and represented themselves.1   
 
Oral and documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard, but 
 
the record was held open until April 30, 2010, so that the parties could file written 
briefs on various issues.2  Those briefs were timely received, and are identified for the 
record as follows:  Respondents Mays and Jones brief entitled “Final Argument in re: 
Cloda Jones and Dawn Mays” is identified as Exhibit M.  The District’s Brief entitled 
Closing Brief re Psychologists is identified as Exhibit 26.  Jones’ and Mays’ Reply to 
PUSD’s Closing Brief is identified as Exhibit N.  The letter brief from the District 
regarding the Jones and Mays Reply Brief, constituting an objection to the Reply 
                                                
1   Complainant asserted that Respondent Mitchnick was not properly a 
 
respondent because she did not file a notice of defense, although she appears on the 
Amended List of Respondents filed by Complainant with OAH, upon which 
Attachment B is  based.  The issue of her status is addressed within this proposed 
decision.   
 
2   Because the issues raised by Jones and Mays differed substantially from the 
 
issues raised by the other respondents, briefing on those issues, pertaining to skipping, 
was scheduled for a date earlier than April 30.  The parties were authorized to use a 
letter format in closing briefs, and to file them by FAX transmission.  In some cases 
originals have been marked; received stamps indicating a later date of receipt are not 
controlling, as the FAX copies were timely received.    

As noted, the District objected to the Reply Brief filed on behalf of Jones and 

Brief is identified as Exhibit 27.  Ms. Shin’s post-hearing brief, in letter format, is  
identified as Exhibit E.  The District’s Closing Brief is identified as Exhibit 28.  
 
Two briefs submitted at the outset of the hearing were not marked for 
 
identification.  Therefore, the District’s Brief re Race-Based Evidence is identified as 
Exhibit 29, and the brief entitled Contentions of Respondents Cloda Jones and Dawn 
Mays is identified as Exhibit O. 
 
 
Mays, correctly noting that the parties were not authorized to file reply briefs.  The 
District’s objection is well taken, especially given the point made by its counsel that 
she was at that time engaged in completing her closing argument regarding the rights 
of the other 163 teachers exposed to lay off in this proceeding, and, as important, the 
District’s rights in the matter.  Therefore, consideration was not given to the 
arguments set out in Exhibit N. 
   
 
Law Judge hereby makes his factual findings, legal conclusions, and order, as 
follows. 
 
 

The case was submitted for decision on April 30, 2010.  The Administrative 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
Jurisdiction and the Parties: 
 
1.  Complainant Edwin Diaz filed and maintained the Accusation3 and 
 
Amended Accusation in the above-captioned matter while acting in his official 
capacity as Superintendent of the Pasadena Unified School District (District).    
 
 
2.  The persons listed on Attachment B hereto, incorporated herein by 
reference, are certificated employees of the District and are Respondents in this case.  
However, persons not identified on that list, but represented by Ms. Shin, shall also be 
deemed Respondents in the case, as are Ms. Mitchnick and any persons appearing on 
Attachment B who appeared at the hearing.  Further, Karin Smith, for whom the 
Amended Accusation was generated, does not appear on the Districts “Amended List 
of Respondents,” which document was attached to the Amended Accusation, Exhibit 
                                                
3 The term “accusation” refers to a type of pleading utilized under the 
 
Administrative Procedure Act, Government Code sections 11500 and 11503; that 
statutory scheme governs the hearing procedures in this case.  The Respondents are 
not “accused” in the every-day sense of that word; they have done nothing wrong, and 
all appear to be dedicated professionals.  It might be said that they are simply accused 
of not having enough seniority or other qualifications to retain their positions with the 
District in the face of a resolution to reduce positions.     
 

 

2

10 in the proceeding.  Attachment B is based on that document.  As noted below, 
there is also some uncertainty as to how many people received preliminary notices of 
the District’s intent to lay them off.   
 

3. 

(A)  On March 9, 2010, the Governing Board of the District adopted  

Resolution number 2,073 entitled “Resolution to Decrease the Number of Certificated 
Employees Due to a Reduction in Particular Kinds of Services” (Reduction 
Resolution). The purpose of the Reduction Resolution was to reduce and discontinue 
particular kinds of certificated services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 
school year.  Specifically, the resolution requires the reductions of 165.6 “FTE”—Full 
Time Equivalents—by reducing various types of services.  This decision was based 
on financial concerns as the District faces a budget shortfall of some 23 million 
dollars in the next school year.    

(B)  The FTEs that the Board determined to reduce are described in the 

  6.5 
76.0 
  6.0 

  3.0 

  1.0 
  5.0 
  5.0 
  2.6 
  1.0  

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
  
 
 
 

 
Reduction Resolution, as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Secondary (6-12) Counselors 
Classroom Teachers (K-6) 
 
Secondary School Librarians 
High School English Teachers 
(Blair, Muir, Marshall, PHS) 
High School Math Teachers 
(Blair, Muir, Marshall, PHS) 
  
Middle School English 
 
Middle School Math   
 
 
Nurses  
 
Nurse (months) 
 
 
  (Reduce from 11 months to 10) 
Resource Teachers (Non-special education) 
 
  LDRT’s, CRT’s, (TOSO I’s) 
 
 
IB Coordinator TOSA I 
 
Special Education TOSA II   
 
BTSA Support Provider TOSA II 
GATE TOSA II 
 
Language Assessment & Development TOSA II 
 
 
LEARNS TOSA II 
 
Math Coaches  
 
 
Resource Specialists   
Music Teachers 
 
 
Physical Education Teachers 
 
Social Studies Teachers 
 
 
French Teachers 
 
School Psychologists  
 
Assistant Principals   

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

3

 19.0 
     .5                                                                   
   1.0 
   1.0 
   1.0 
   1.0 
   2.0 
   4.0 
   6.0 
   3.2 
   3.0 
    3.0 
    2.0 
    5.8 
    2.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

165.6 

 [¶] . . . [¶] 

    1.0 
    4.0 

TOTAL FTE TO BE REDUCED:   

5.  The skipping criteria adopted with the Reduction Resolution most relevant 

Executive Director Secondary Education 
Certificated Coordinators 

 C.  Current, valid authorization in mathematics based on a major 
  in mathematics and/or successful completion of all three levels of  
  the CSET in mathematics, and service in the District as a math  
  teacher for at least the past five years. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Set forth in the Reduction Resolution is a further resolution adopting 
criteria that the District could use to deviate from terminating certificated employees 
in order of seniority, a process commonly known as “skipping.”  According to the 
resolution, such deviation could be “based on a specific need for personnel who 
possess special training, experience, and/or competency to teach specific course or 
courses of study or to provide specific services, which others with more seniority do 
not possess, . . .”  (Ex. 1, p. 3.)   
 
 
to this proceeding are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.  On the same day that the Board adopted the Reduction Resolution, it 
 
adopted tie-breaking criteria, to determine the order of seniority in cases where more 
than one teacher shared the same seniority date.  (Ex. 16.)  Among the criteria were 

G.  Demonstrated fluency in speaking, writing and translating  
Vietnamese, Farsi, Armenian or Spanish within PPS School  
 Psychology. “ 

 E.  Authorization to instruct English Language Learners as demon- 
 rated by: 

1.  Possession of a . .  . Cross-cultural Language Academic 
 Development Certificate (CLAD) by March 8, 2010, and 

2.  Possession of a current, valid credential to serve in a  
classroom setting (including resource classes) 

(Exhibit 1, p. 3.) 

  [¶] . . . [¶]  

[¶] . . . [¶] 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

4

number of years of experience as a probationary or permanent employee in a public 
school district, number of credentials and certificates, Highly Qualified status, and 
advanced degrees.  Any ties remaining after those criteria were applied were to be 
broken by a lottery.   
 

7.  The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are particular 

10. 

(A)  On or about March 10, 2010, each Respondent, and other 

9.  The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of 

kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 
44955.4   
 
 
8.  The decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious, but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s discretion 
given the uncertainty regarding the state budget and the District’s financial resources.  
  
 
the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of 
certificated employees as determined by the Board. 
 
 
certificated teachers were given written notice that pursuant to sections 44949 and 
44955, their services would not be required in the 2010-2011 school year (preliminary 
notices).  One additional teacher, Karin R. Smith, was given such notice on March 12, 
2010.  A total of 213 certificated employees received preliminary notices, constituting 
the persons identified in the District’s Exhibit 4 and Ms. Smith.5   Respondents 
requested a hearing, and thereafter each was served with an Accusation and other 
documents pertaining to the hearing process.  Each Respondent filed a notice of 
defense. 
 
 
Elizabeth Klinger, Jose Trejo, Louis Brinker, Maria Stemwell, Christine McQuinn, 
Kathryn Wolford, Robert Marrufo, Lucia De La Paz Garcia, and those respondents 
shall be dismissed from this proceeding.   
 
 
(C)  Three persons who participated in the hearing are shown as not 
having filed a notice of defense.  They are school psychologists, Jones, Mays, and 
                                                
 
 
 
rightly points out that 212 are listed on Exhibit 4, the “Amended List of Individuals 
Who Were Sent Notice Packet.”  Ms. Karin Smith—the person whose reduction 
necessitated the amended accusation—is not shown on Exhibit 4.  What became of 
the other seven people who Mr. Miller believes were noticed, or if they were noticed, 
and if so who they might be, can not be readily determined from this record, and the 
District must be bound by its Exhibits 3 (notice to Smith) and 4.    
 

5   Mr. Miller testified that 220 notices were served.  However, Ms. Shin 

(B)  During the hearing, the District rescinded its preliminary notices to 

4   All further statutory references are to the Education Code.  

  

 

 

5

 

 

(E)  All jurisdictional requirements have been met.   

(D)  Although Mr. Hopkins appeared for Jones and Mays, he submitted 

Mitchnick.  Ms. Mitchnick testified at the hearing that she had requested a hearing, 
but did not receive an accusation.  The District records showed she had been served, 
but she testified that she moved from that address in January 2010.  She attested that 
she had learned about the hearing when she came to the facility where it was being 
held on an errand.  Ms. Mitchnick was credible in all her testimony, in terms of her 
demeanor and the content of the testimony, whether on the issue of why she did not 
file a notice of defense, or as to the substantive issues.   
 
 
no evidence on their behalves as to why they did not submit a notice of defense.  To 
be sure, the OAH file contains a letter to OAH, by Mr. Hopkins, informing OAH that 
he represented Ms. Mays and Ms. Jones.  That letter was dated April 8, 2010, and 
copied to Complainant’s counsel, Ms. Levine; it was sent three days after the notice 
of defense was due.  Correspondence in the OAH file from Complainant’s counsel, 
dated April 12, shows that Mr. Hopkins participated in a pre-hearing conference with 
Ms. Levine and Ms. Shin, and he made a motion to continue the case, which was 
denied.   In responding to that motion April 15, no mention was made of the failure of 
Jones and Mays to file a notice of defense.6   
  
 
 
The Seniority List: 
 
 
11.  In the course of the reduction in force process, the District created a 
seniority list.   That seniority list took into account a number of factors, including first 
date of paid service and the tie-breaking criteria. 
   
 
Respondent Gina Sorensen-Hernandez should be September 4, 2007, and that she is a 
permanent teacher.  However, no effort was made to apply tie-break criteria to set her 
seniority against the numerous other teachers holding that same seniority date.  
 
 
(B)  On the day of the hearing, an adjustment had to be made to the 
seniority list, which created a three-way tie among Ruth Several, Melanie Go, and 
Merina Esperza.  Because they were tied after all other tie breaking criteria had been 
utilized, a lottery was held during a break in the hearing, and it was established that 
among the three, Ms. Several would be senior, followed by Ms. Go, and then Ms. 
Esparza, the most junior.   
 
// 
 
                                                
 
record as Exhibit P.   
   

6   Notice is taken of the correspondence, copies of which are made part of the 

(A)  During the hearing, it was stipulated that the seniority date of 

 12. 

 

 

6

13. 

 
Statistics Pertaining to “English Learners:” 

The District’s Efforts To Skip Some School Psychologists: 
 
 
 
 
12.  As set forth in Factual Finding 5, the District developed skipping criteria 
for school psychologists, calling for retention of those who “demonstrated fluency in 
speaking, writing and translating Vietnamese, Farsi, Armenian or Spanish within PPS 
[Pupil Personnel Services] School Psychology.”  (Ex. 1, p. 2.)  Based on such, the 
District sought to skip several junior psychologists, including a probationary 
psychologist.   
 
 
(A) The District has a large number of “English Learner” (EL) students 
among its students, especially those speaking Spanish.  According to a survey of such 
ELs, 4,160 students reported having a primary language other than English.  Ninety 
per cent of that group reported Spanish as their primary language.7  Four per cent, or 
147, spoke Armenian.  The next largest group—71—claimed Korean as a primary 
language; they constituted 2 per cent of the ELs.  The remaining four percent of the 
EL students spoke more than 20 different languages, as diverse as Turkish, Urdu, 
Hungarian, and French.  (Ex. 5, p. 1 at section III.)    
 
 
through 2 each had a relatively high number, from 600 to 662 per grade.  Thus, it is 
likely that every class has at least one English Learner student.   
 
 
who claim Vietnamese as their primary language.  Only 4 speak Farsi.  Together, 
those 17 students make up less than one-half of one per cent of the EL students.  On 
the other hand, 8 students speak French, 22 speak Mandarin, and 29 speak 
Phillipino/Tagolog.  Indeed, as many students speak Hungarian as those who speak 
Vietnamese, and more claim Arabic as their primary language than do those who 
claim Farsi.  (Ex. 5, p. 2.)   
 
 
 
 
certificated employee identified, Arthur C. Jackson, has no seniority date listed, 
although a note next to his name describes him as having a life credential as a 
psychologist and counselor.8  Mr. Jackson can not be located in the alphabetical 

14.  The EL survey, Exhibit 5, establishes that there are only 13 EL students 

15.  A list of the school psychologists is found in Exhibit 7.  The first 

( B)  Every school in the District had EL students, and grades K 

 The School Psychologists—Seniority and Language Skills

: 

 

7   This amounted to 3,759 students in both elementary and secondary classes, 

                                                
 
with two-thirds of the group being elementary students.   (Ex. 5, p. 2.)   
 
8   The date “00/00/00” is set out in the seniority date column for this 
 
individual.  Because the list is written in descending order of seniority, Jackson’s 

 

7

17.  The District served preliminary notices on Mr. To, Ms. Marvel, Ms. Mays, 

seniority list, part of Exhibit 14.  No notice was sent to him, and his presence on 
Exhibit 7, essentially a seniority list for the psychologists, is a cipher.   
 
16.  The most junior psychologist listed, Ms. Roberson, is shown as temporary 
 
until June 30, 2010, and the District made clear that she would not be re-elected.  That 
accounts for 1 of the 5.8 FTE to be reduced in the ranks of school psychologists.    
 
 
Ms. Goldstein, Ms. Jaimes, Ms. Mitchnick, Ms. Kramer, and Ms. Harris, who are the 
eight most junior psychologists.  It should be noted that Ms. Harris holds a .8 FTE 
position.  The District did not serve Mr. Peinado, the next most junior, but it did serve 
Ms. Jones, who holds the same seniority date as Mr. Peinado (8/27/02).  Ms. Enriquez 
and Ms. Toledo were skipped, but Mr. Acosta was served with a notice; his seniority 
date is August 28, 1995, which is senior to that of Enriquez and Toledo, and he is 
sixth overall in terms of seniority.   The four most senior psychologists (excluding 
Arthur Jackson) did not receive notice; they are Ms. Marxmiller, Ms. Klijian, Ms. 
Kasparian, and Ms. Alvarez.  Those five teachers have seniority dates between 1992 
and 1995.   
 
 
18.  Three of the psychologists who were served a preliminary notice did not 
request a hearing: To, Harris, and Acosta.  Some who requested a hearing are shown 
as not having filed a notice of defense, those being Jones, Mays, Goldstein, Jaimes, 
Mitchnick, Kramer, and Harris.  However, it should be noted that the list of those 
filing a notice of defense (Ex. 11) and the list of those who did not submit one (Ex. 
12) contain some anomalies:  Ms. Mitchnick, who acknowledged not serving a notice, 
appears on neither list.  Neither does Ms. Goldstein, Ms. Jaimes, Ms. Kramer, and 
Ms. Harris.  Hence, the evidence shows that they did, and did not, file notices of 
defense.  Ms. Jones and Ms. Mays, represented by Mr. Hopkins, appear on the list of 
those who did not file a request for hearing, though Mr. Hopkins appearance indicates 
they wished to participate.   
 
 
several of the psychologists that it had sent preliminary notices, those persons being 
To, Goldstein, Sorja, Kramer, Pienado, Enriquez, and Toledo. However, the record 
does not establish that the notices have been rescinded prior to or during the hearing.  
Ms. James testified that some “precautionary notices” were served on some of the 
psychologists, and it is inferred that such would be to Kramer, To, and Goldstein. 
 
 
four languages set out in the skipping criteria (Spanish, Armenian, Farsi, or 
Vietnamese), Ms. James testified that she reviewed the employees’ files.  Many had, 
upon applying for a position, answered a question on the job application about 
                                                                                                                                            
placement at the top of the list implies the most seniority, but that can not be 
established.   

19.  In the course of the hearing, the District staff stated that it had skipped 

(A)  In order to determine which psychologists could speak one of the 

20. 

 

8

 

(B)  The other step to determine who could speak one of the four 

21.  There is no evidence that any of the persons proposed for skipping have 

whether they spoke another language.  Those psychologists who the District would 
skip answered that query in the affirmative.  Those that stated they could speak 
another language identified it on the job application. 
 
 
languages in the skip criteria was an inquiry by Ms. James to a person assigned to the 
psychology unit.  That employee, Ms. Knedel, told Ms. James who could speak what 
languages.  During her testimony, it became clear that Ms. James did not fully  
understand what Ms. Knedel’s job with the psychology unit was, but she understood 
the person to have worked with the District for many years.  There is no evidence that 
Ms. Knedel is qualified in any way to determine if someone is fluent in “speaking, 
writing and translating” any language, let alone the four listed on the skip criteria.  It 
is plain from her testimony that Ms. James is not; she took no steps to personally 
examine the matter, and her knowledge of what the psychology staff actually did was 
quite limited.9      
 
 
been tested in any way regarding their abilities.  There is no evidence that these 
teachers are fluent in any languages in terms of reading or writing the languages, yet 
the ability to fluently read and write the languages is part of the skipping criteria.  At 
bottom, the only evidence that the persons to be skipped can speak one of the four 
languages is their own statements, made in the past when they were trying to obtain a 
position, coupled with the assertions of a staff person whose role within the 
psychology department was not established.  There has been no “demonstration” of 
fluency.10  
 
 
(A)  It was not demonstrated by the District that having psychologists 
who spoke Vietnamese and Farsi was necessary to provide psychological services.  
As acknowledged in Complainant’s closing brief regarding the school psychologists, 
there are no Farsi or Vietnamese speaking students in the special education system.  
(Ex.26, p. 2, lines 13-17.)  Indeed, there are a total of 17 students in the entire District 
                                                
 
was being drawn into speculation.   
 
 
demonstrated their ability, but there is no evidence that he has any knowledge of their 
skills other than what he heard from Ms. James.  It must be noted that the job 
applications themselves likely do not constitute official records within the meaning of 
section 1280 of the Evidence Code, in that the writing was made, apparently, by 
prospective employees of the District, and not by an employee acting in the scope of 
their duties, and there is no evidence to support the trustworthiness of such 
documents.  The statements by Ms. Knedel, not themselves records, hardly qualify 
either.    
 

9   At one point the ALJ had to cut off testimony by Ms. James because she 

10   During his testimony Mr. Miller stated that those to be skipped 

22. 

 

9

 

 

(C)  When questioned by the ALJ as to whether the skipping criteria 

(B)  Ms. James, in her testimony did not know, but assumed, that if the 

who claim EL status based on Farsi and Vietnamese being the primary languages.  
While the District contends that the EL students, by definition, are not fluent in 
English, it is not clear from Exhibit 5 that such students are without any capacity in 
English either. 
 
 
psychology staff needed to deal with a student who spoke one of the 25 foreign 
languages not covered in the skip criteria, that a translator would be hired, or perhaps 
a psychologist who spoke the language would be contracted for.  Ms. Mitchnick 
testified that she was unaware of a situation where the psychologists had been 
required to obtain the assistance of a translator from outside the District; she has 
worked for the District as a psychologist for nearly six years.  There was no evidence 
that the staff had ever been unable to serve the needs of any the fourteen students who 
claim Farsi as their primary language, let alone the four who claim Vietnamese.11    
 
 
had been based on the District’s needs, or what the psychology staff could provide in 
terms of language skills, Ms. James testified that it “was a little of both” or words to 
that effect.   
 
 
23.  Ms. Mitchnick stated she speaks some Spanish, “enough to get by” in 
many circumstances, but when necessary either pairs up with one of the Spanish 
speaking staff, or turns the matter entirely over to them.  This was an admission that 
she is not fluent in Spanish.  The attorney for Mays and Jones implied that they could 
speak Spanish, and had simply decided not to volunteer that information when hired, 
and in his written contentions, Exhibit O, he made various claims, but neither of those 
Respondents testified to any of those matters.  Thus, it can not be said that they 
demonstrated the ability to speak, write and translate another language. 
 
 
24.  There is no evidence that would support a finding that the District’s 
actions in attempting to retain teachers who spoke the four languages listed in the skip 
criteria discriminated in any way against the two African-American Respondents, 
Jones and Mays, that such was in some way racially biased against those employees, 
or  African-American children.  Nor was it established that the District legally could 
have adopted skip criteria that would retain one or more African-American school 
psychologists to meet the alleged needs of its African-American students to have an 
African-American psychologist to relate to; indeed, Complainant offered authority for 
that proposition that it would be illegal to do so.   
 
 
25.  As also set forth in the Legal Conclusions, it has not been demonstrated 
that there is a specific need for psychologists who can speak Farsi and Vietnamese.  
Furthermore, it has not been demonstrated that any of the school psychologists have 
                                                
 
with English.   

11   And, there is no information as to how much facility such students have 

 

10

28.  It was established that Respondent Edward Messler is senior to Sam 

27.  It was established that Respondent Marjorie Keith was senior to another 

26.  In all the circumstances, To, a probationary employee, can not be retained 

fluency in speaking, writing and translating any foreign language.  In an of itself, 
bilingual skills could support skip criteria, but in this particular case, on this particular 
record, the need for some of the language skills has not been demonstrated, and 
whether any school psychologist has such skills has not been demonstrated.  Nor has 
racial discrimination been demonstrated.   
 
 
because he could speak to four of the District’s non-special education students.  
Regardless of the skipping criteria, Ms. Marvel and Respondent Mays would be laid 
off, as they are the next most junior psychologists.  Ms. Kramer and Ms. Jaimes, who 
received precautionary notices must be laid off as they are next lowest in seniority, 
but Ms. Jaimes, the more senior of these two, should be laid off as to .8 FTE. 
 
Findings Regarding the Contentions of Other Certificated Employees: 
 
 
teacher, Camyrin Sharp, who was being retained by the District, and it was 
established that Ms. Keith is credentialed and competent to fill Ms. Sharp’s position.  
Therefore, as stated by the ALJ at the hearing, Ms. Sharp can not be laid off and must 
be dismissed from the case.   
 
 
Vanis, who is not being laid off.  Both hold a Mild-Moderate credential so that they 
can teach special education classes.  In addition, Mr. Messler holds a single subject 
social studies credential.  Mr. Miller acknowledged in his testimony that both teachers 
are credentialed to teach the same special education students, and that Mr. Messler is 
credentialed and competent to take the position held by Mr. Vanis.  (The seniority list 
indicates Vanis is teaching in a mild-moderate assignment.)  The position held by Mr. 
Vanis was not subject to the skipping criteria.  Therefore, Respondent Messler can not 
be laid off while Mr. Vanis is retained.   
 
29.  The District served Respondent Dana English, number 1069 on the 
 
seniority list (seniority date 9/2/08) but skipped Mr. Guinto, number 1152 on the list 
(seniority date 9/8/09).  Mr. Guinto was skipped pursuant to the skipping criteria 
because he is credentialed to teach severely handicapped children.   However, Ms. 
English holds the same credential.  When questioned as to why the senior teacher, 
Ms. English, received notice, Mr. Miller was unable to shed light on the matter.  In 
the circumstances, it must be found that a junior teacher is being retained to fill a 
position that Respondent Dana English is credentialed and qualified to fill, and thus 
she may not be laid off.12   
                                                
12   The skipping criteria for those with credentials to teach the severely 
 
handicapped also refer to the teacher being highly qualified.  On the skipping chart, 
Exhibit 17, Respondent English received a point for NCLB, implying that she is 
highly qualified and thus meeting the skipping criteria. 

 

11

 

 

30. 

(A)  District staff applied tie-breaking criteria to a number of 

(C)  However, two of the teachers on that the tie-break list were not 

(B)  Ten teachers had nine points, and they were then ranked by lottery, 

 
 
elementary teachers who shared the seniority date of September 6, 2005; this 
amounted to 34 elementary teachers.  The teachers received points under the formula 
laid out in the tie-break criteria.  Where that failed to resolve the matter, the lottery 
was used.  Thus, for example, Respondent Cid had 20 tie break points, and was the 
most senior of all.  One teacher had 18 points, another 16, but three teachers had 15 
points and were then ranked by a lottery.    
 
 
with Respondent Kimberly Sibbrel being the most senior of that group, and 
Respondent Candace Montesanti being the most junior.  (See Ex. 17, p. 1.)   
 
 
given layoff notices.  Those two are Linda H. Chang and Laura Cambrelen.13  They 
are not listed on Exhibit 4, which Complainant put in evidence as the “Amended List 
of Persons Who Were Sent Notice Packet.”   Likewise, they are not listed on the 
Amended List of Respondents, which is attached to the Accusation and Amended 
Accusation and referenced therein.  Nor are they listed on Exhibit 8, which is the list 
of those who did not request a hearing; the fact they did not appear there indicates that 
the District did not expect them to request a hearing since they were not noticed.14   
 
 
she can not be laid off.  Neither can Ms. Linda Chang, who was not noticed, not 
served with an accusation making her a party to this proceeding, and not listed on 
Exhibit 13 as a teacher to receive a final lay off notice.  Both of these teachers are 
permanent teachers, and thus can not be terminated by a notice of non-reelection.  
There is no evidence that they were skipped for some reason.  The most obvious 
criteria, holding a CLAD, does not distinguish them from any other elementary 
teacher; the tie-break list shows that all 34 have a CLAD.15  
 

(D)  Plainly, if Ms. Cambrellen did not receive a preliminary notice, 

 

13 Ms.  Cambrelen was one of three teachers who had 10 tie break points, and 

                                                                                                                                            
 
 
was the most senior of the three with that many points.   
 
14 However, for some reason, Ms. Cambrelen is listed on Exhibit 13, the 
 
District’s proposed list of those to receive final lay off notices.  She is also listed on 
the list of persons not filing a notice of defense, but one would not be necessary if she 
was not, as the record shows, served with a preliminary notice.     
 
15   On cross examination, Mr. Miller, the District’s Director of Human 
 
Resources, was asked why Ms. Chang had not been notice for layoff, and he could not 
provide an explanation.  He was not asked about Ms. Cambrelen.    

 

12

 

 

(E)  The District gave notices to, and received requests for hearing from 

(F)  In these circumstances, the following Respondents who are senior 

31.  Sara Dickerson contested her seniority date, providing testimony to the 

 
all the other persons listed on Exhibit 17 who are senior to Ms. Chang, except Ms. 
Cambrelen, who received no notice.     
 
 
to Ms. Chang would be laid off while she is retained to perform elementary school 
teaching:  Carmen Cid, Lillian De Groof, Dana Hunt, Jennifer Gahlmann, Jennifer 
Graves, John Newall, Matthew Brooks, Corrine Badertscher, Lauren Mayo, Christine 
Mitchell, and Kimberly Sibbrel.  Those teachers must be dismissed from the 
proceeding to avoid a violation of section 44955, subdivision (b).          
 
 
effect that she had served as a substitute teacher prior to October 1, 2006, her 
seniority date.  However, she was unable to provide details that would establish her 
claim, although she did recall working part of 2005 as a short term substitute, and 
only the first six months of 2006 as a “long term” substitute.  Insufficient evidence 
was provided to establish that her seniority date should change by reason of her right 
to “tack” some teaching time to her probationary period.   
 
 
32.  Cynthia Macias (formerly Cynthia Renteria) objected to her seniority date 
of April 1, 2007, and her status as a probationary teacher.  She attested to working as 
a long term substitute in the 2006-2007 school year, and that she obtained her intern 
multiple subject credential on January 8, 2007; she described her credential as a 
“university intern” credential.  According to District records, she became a 
probationary employee beginning on April 1, 2007, when she received a contract that 
classed her as a “1st year prob intern” which contract stated an effective date of April 
1, 2007.  (Ex. 23.)  However, regardless of whether or not she could “tack” a year of 
substitute service in front of her probationary tenure, she did not establish that she 
worked 75 per cent of the prior school year in a substitute or temporary position. 
 
 
permanent employee with a seniority date of September 5, 2006.  She asserted that 
she was employed in the 2005-2006 school year, for the entire year, as a third grade 
teacher, and that such time was as a temporary teacher, which time should have been 
tacked to her probation period.  Complainant asserts she started the 2006-2007 school 
year as a temporary employee, received a probationary contract in December 2006, 
and then was given retroactive credit back to September 5, 2006, and that such is the 
correct seniority date.  It provided testimony to the effect that she could not have 
previously been a temporary teacher because she had an emergency credential, and 
that they would not hire such a person as a temporary teacher.  Respondent testified 
she taught the 2005-2006 school year on an internship and emergency credential. 
 
 
effective September 5, 2006, for employment as a first year probationary employee.  
(Ex. 24.)  While it was executed by Respondent Robles on December 18, 2006, the 

(B)   Respondent Robles and the District executed a contract, made 

(A)  Arlene Robles is number 919 on the seniority list, shown as a 

33. 

  

 

13

 

 

 

(E)  That the District may have “given probationary credit” to 

(D)  A District employee, Ms. Munoz, testified that a review of the 

signature of the Director of Certificated and Classified Personnel is dated September 
26, 2006. 
 
(C)  Two “Certificated Personnel Assignment Order(s)” were received 
 
as part of Exhibit 24.  One, dated December 20, 2006, states that there is a change in 
Respondent Robles’s status to probationary status, from a temporary position; under 
the remarks section of section number 2, it states the reason as “preliminary 
credential.”  An earlier Assignment Order, dated August 29, 2006, states at the line 
for “remarks/replaces,” “temporary contract.”  This tends to support the 
Complainant’s contention that Respondent started the 2006 school year as a 
temporary employee.  
 
 
Respondent’s file showed that Respondent accepted a “long term substitute 
assignment at Loma Alta School” on or about August 26, 2005.  (See Closing Brief, 
Ex. 28, at p. 8, lines 13-14.)16  This corroborates Respondent’s testimony that she 
served the entire 2005-2006 school year in the same third grade class room.   
 
 
Respondent for the first part of the 2006-2007 school year does not foreclose the 
matter.  As noted in the Closing Brief, absent statutory mandate, “the position of the 
teacher is created and fixed by the terms of the contract of employment,” and by the 
contract, drafted by the District and signed by it in September 2006, Respondent was 
a probationary teacher beginning on September 5, 2006.  (Ex.28, p. 5, citing Rutley v. 
Belmont Elementary Sch. Dist. (1973) 31 Cal.App.3d 702, 705.)  Respondent, under 
the contract, was not a temporary employee in the fall of 2006, she was probationary.   
 
 
(F)  It is undisputed that Respondent worked the entire 2005-2006 
school year as a third grade teacher, a long term substitute.  Under section 44918, 
subdivision (a), she is entitled to treat that year as a probationary term, which would 
advance her seniority date to the date she provided during her cross-examination, 
September 6, 2005.17  Subdivision (d) of that statute is not applicable given the 
admission by Ms. Munoz of Respondent’s status as a long-term substitute.  The claim 
                                                
16  The quote of this testimony is of some interest given the District’s position 
 
that it does not utilize what are known as “long term” substitutes.  (I.e., Closing Brief, 
Ex. 28, p. 3, lines 13-14 [“ . . . the evidence showed all substitutes employed by the 
District are day-to-day substitutes”]; id., p. 4 [distinction between day-to-day and long 
term substitutes is only a payroll distinction].)   
 
 
a seniority date of August 26, as Respondent did testify to attending new teacher 
training before the 2005 school year.  However, because nearly four pages of the 
seniority list show teachers with a seniority date of September 6, 2005, it is inferred 
that such was indeed the first day of school in 2005.   

17   Ms. Munoz’s testimony, described in Factual Finding 33(D), could support 

 

 

14

 

 
34. 

(A)  Respondent Ella Farinas disputed her seniority date, of February 5, 

35.  Respondent Kelly Lynn Oxley was not skipped on the basis of holding a 

that the substitute time can not be credited under section 44918 because Respondent 
held an emergency credential is not supported by the statute, which only refers to the 
job classification, and not the nature of the credential.  Further, it is now quite settled 
that a teacher’s job classification—temporary, substitute, or probationary—is not 
controlled by the teacher’s credential.  
 
 
2007.  She attested that she had been hired as probationary in September 2006, but 
that the District had put off executing her contract.  She offered as corroboration an e-
mail between a District staff person and the President of the Respondent’s union, 
where the staff person, Ms. Shakoor, seemingly agrees with Respondent’s analysis.  
 
 
(B)  The written probationary contract between the parties states the 
effective date is February 5, 2007; it was signed by the parties the next day.  In the 
circumstances, the written contract must control, absent more compelling evidence.  It 
should be noted that Exhibit A, the e-mail, references Respondent as serving 
continuously from September 2006, “first as a long-term sub,” which is as supportive 
of the District’s position, even if the statement by the District staff person might not 
be.  Such ambiguity can not change the language of the contract.   
 
 
CLAD.  She had submitted paperwork in 2005, to the Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (CTC) and the District.  For reasons not completely clear, the CLAD 
did not issue at that time.  However, on March 11, 2010, the CTC informed 
Respondent that her CLAD was “granted and approved . . . on 3-11-2010.  It will be 
dated 2-1-10.”  (Exhibit B.)   Respondent provided that documentation to the District 
on March 15, 2010, the date deemed to be the cut-off date for submitting credentials 
under case law.  Under the circumstances, she must be found to have had a CLAD 
that must be considered in any skipping or bumping.  
 
 
date should change, in light of the District’s documents showing that she was initially 
hired in 2006 as a substitute teacher. 
 
 
employee rather than a probationary employee.  In either event, the District shows his 
seniority date as September 2, 2003, he worked as a probationary employee not 
earning tenure for several years.  Ms. Munoz produced a salary card for Mr. Barrow, 
which she explained showed he did not start his second year of tenure-earning service 
until September 2009, so that he would not become permanent until September 2010.  
 
 
separate entries marked “1st yr. Prob. Tchr.”  It also shows an entry for “2nd yr. Prob. 
Tchr.; that is clearly shown for the 2009-2010 school year.  What is ambiguous is the 
time period for the first two positions as a first year probationary teacher.  While the 

36.  Ms. Winkler was unable to provide sufficient evidence that her seniority 

(A)  Respondent Orrin Barrow asserted that he should be a permanent 

(B)  The salary card, Exhibit 22, shows, in the position column, two 

37. 

 

 

15

 

 

 

38.  Several employees were noticed for lay off because they did not have their 

(E)  It appears that Mr. Barrow’s seniority will protect him from lay off 

year 2007-2008 is clearly shown as a prob. 0 position, one of the first year positions, 
shown as 10 months, is marked “6-1-08 [to] 07-08” and the next first year position, 
also shown as 10 months, is marked “9-2-08 [to] 08-09.”   
 
 
(C)  At bottom, the salary card shows that Mr. Barrow served three 
separate 10 month positions at Marshall in a probationary capacity; whatever the 
ambiguity in the “effective dates” column, the District also shows three full school 
years of probationary service.  As such, Respondent Barrow must be deemed a 
permanent employee with a seniority date of September 2, 2003.   
 
(D)  Respondent testified that he has passed the CSET in math, which 
 
creates skipping protection for math teachers.  While Mr. Miller did not gainsay that 
testimony, he also testified that Mr. Barrow’s testimony was the first time he had 
heard of it; the District’s records as of March 15, 2010, did not reveal passage of that 
exam.  In these circumstances, Respondent Barrow would not be able to protect 
himself with that skip criteria.   
 
 
in this case due to his relatively high seniority date and he may not be laid off.   
 
 
CLAD as of the dates of the preliminary notices.  The testimony of Respondents 
Tiech, March, Mulder, and Green are unavailing on this point.  As the District 
showed, it has routinely put teachers on notice that they must obtain this important 
certificate.  The District’s testimony on this point is credited.  Some of these 
Respondents had emergency CLAD credentials, and let them expire.  Unlike Ms. 
Oxley, Mr. Mulder could not show that the CTC had acted on his application before 
March 15.  His testimony and documentation to the effect that District staff said that 
he would be taken off the lay off list, because his university had issued an “R-19 
letter,” was insufficient.  He does not have the credential at this time.  Mr. Grey, who 
purportedly relied on representations that he did not need a CLAD, can not be 
protected with that reliance given the evidence of prior notice and the reality that over 
3,000 students speak Spanish.    
 
 
39.  Mr. Parekh was unable to establish that he met the Board’s skip criteria 
pertaining to math teachers.  While he is plainly well-educated and experienced, the 
fact that he has not completed the CSET, in all parts, must work against him in this 
case. 
 
 
evidence to refute the District’s records regarding their seniority dates.   
 
41.  No other Respondent was able to demonstrate that their job classification, 
 
seniority date, credentials, or qualifications were incorrectly asserted by the District.   
 

40.  Respondents Grey and Deschamp were unable to provide sufficient 

 

16

42.  With the changes and adjustments that will flow from the dismissals 
 
called for above (i.e., the dismissal of those elementary school teachers senior to Ms. 
Chang), it can be found that no certificated employee junior to any Respondent was 
retained by the District to render a service for which a Respondent was certificated 
and qualified to render. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2.   

(A)  A District may reduce a particular kind of service (PKS) within the 

1.  Jurisdiction was established to proceed in this matter, pursuant to sections 

 
Legal Conclusions of General Application: 
 
 
44949 and 44955, based on Factual Findings 1 through 10(E). 
 
 
meaning of section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type 
of service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may 
‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent 
because fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)   The Court of 
Appeal has made clear that a PKS reduction does not have to lead to less classrooms 
or classes; laying off some teachers amounts to a proper reduction.  (Zalac v. 
Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 853-85; 
see also San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 631, 637 
[reduction of classroom teaching can be a reduction of a PKS; as long as there is a 
change in the method of teaching or in a particular kind of service in teaching a 
particular subject any amount in excess of the statutory minimum may be reduced]; 
California Teachers Assn. v. Board of Trustees (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)   
 
 
within the meaning of section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue 
the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise 
of its discretion given the fiscal problems it faces. Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and 
pupils within the meaning of section 44949.  This Legal Conclusion is based on 
Factual Findings 1 through 9 and the foregoing authorities. 
 
 
transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 
position.  (§ 44955, subd. (b); Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 
Cal.3d 469.)  At the same time, junior teachers may be given retention priority over 
senior teachers—may be “skipped” in favor of that senior employee—if a district 
demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or to provide a 
specific service, and if it is demonstrated that the junior employee has special training 
or experience necessary to teach that course or provide that pupil service.  (§ 44955, 

(A)  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to 

(B)  The services to be discontinued are particular kinds of services 

3. 

 

 

17

 

4. 

(B)  However, the rejection of testimony does not create evidence 

(A)  It is settled that the trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony 

subd. (d); Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 
399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Bd. of Santa 
Clara Unified School Dist. (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) 
 
 
of a witness and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part 
accepted.”  (Stevens v. Parke Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.)  The trier of fact 
may also “reject part of the testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, 
and combine the accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the 
testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected material.”  
(Id. at 67-68, quoting from Neverov v. Caldwell (1958) 161 Cal. App.2d 762, 767.)  
Further, the fact finder may reject the testimony of a witness, even an expert, although 
not contradicted.  (Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon (1971) 3 Cal.3d  875, 890.)  
And, the testimony of “one credible witness may constitute substantial evidence”, 
including a single expert witness.  (Kearl v. Board of Medical Quality Assurance, 
supra, 189 Cal.App.3d at 1052.) 
 
 
contrary to that which is deemed untrustworthy.  Disbelief does not create affirmative 
evidence to the contrary of that which is discarded.  “The fact that a jury may 
disbelieve the testimony of a witness who testifies to the negative of an issue does not 
of itself furnish any evidence in support of the affirmative of that issue, and does not 
warrant a finding in the affirmative thereof unless there is other evidence in the case 
to support such affirmative.”  (Hutchinson v. Contractors’ State License Bd (1956) 
143 Cal.App. 2d 628, 632-633, quoting Marovich v. Central California Traction Co. 
(1923) 191 Cal. 295, 304.)   
 
 
(C)  Discrepancies in a witness’s testimony, or between that witness’s 
testimony and that of others does not necessarily mean that the testimony should be 
discredited.  (Wilson v. State Personnel Bd. (1976) 58 Cal App.3d 865, 879.) 
 
(D)  It should be remembered that “on the cold record a witness may be 
 
clear, concise, direct, unimpeached, uncontradicted—but on a face to face evaluation, 
so exude insincerity as to render his credibility factor nil. Another witness may 
fumble, bumble, be unsure, uncertain, contradict himself, and on the basis of a written 
transcript be hardly worthy of belief. But one who sees, hears and observes him may 
be convinced of his honesty, his integrity, his reliability."  (Wilson v. State Personnel 
Board (1976) 58 CA3d 865, at 877-878, quoting Meiner v. Ford Motor Co. (1971) 17 
Cal.App.3d 127, 140.) 
 
 
concludes that Respondents Mitchnick, Jones, and Mays were entitled to a hearing.  
Ms. Mitchnick did not receive the accusation because she had moved, and the District 
provided no evidence that she was obligated to notify the District of any address 
change; it did not show she was within the provisions of section 11505, subdivision 

5.  Pursuant to Government Code section 11520, subdivision (b), the ALJ 

 

 

 

18

(c), of the Government Code.  While section 44949, subdivision (d), of the Education 
Code provides that “notice” at a last known address is effective, an accusation is more 
than a mere notice.  As to Respondent’s Jones and Mays, their attorney gave notice of 
his appearance on April 8, no more than three days after a notice of defense was due.  
There was no evidence that counsel put him on notice that his clients were deemed to 
have waived their rights to a hearing; instead, the tone of the letters, Exhibit O, would 
lull him into complacency.  In all the circumstances, disregarding any default is in the 
interests of justice.   
 
Legal Conclusions Pertaining to the Skipping of Junior School Psychologists: 
 
 
6.  As generally discussed in Legal Conclusion 3, one way that a school 
district may deviate from seniority is through skipping, which is governed by Section 
44955, subdivision (d).  That subdivision states: 
 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach 
a specific course or course of study, or to provide services 
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either 
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that 
the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide 
those services, which others with more seniority do not possess. 
     
(A)  Thus, the Legislature established four justifications for a skipping 

7. 

 
over a junior employee and terminating a senior employee instead.  First, a district 
may skip over a junior teacher and terminate a senior teacher if “the district 
demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of 
study.”  Second, a district may skip if “the district demonstrates a specific need for 
personnel . . . to provide the services authorized by a services credential with a 
specialization in . . . pupil personnel services.”  Third, a district may skip if “the 
district demonstrates a specific need for personnel . . . to provide the services 
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in . . . health for a school 
nurse.”  Fourth, a district may skip to maintain or achieve “compliance with 
constitutional requirements related to equal protection . . . .”  (§44955, subd. (d).)   
 
 
employee who would be skipped has special training and experience necessary to 
provide the instruction or service in question.   
 
  
8.  A school district may not create other justifications for skipping.  The only 
permissible justifications are the four listed in Code section 44955, subdivision (d).  
Creation of other justifications for skipping would deprive teachers of their seniority 
rights.  Here, the District must look to the second of the four statutory justifications, 
that is, it must “demonstrate” a specific need for personnel to provide services 
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in pupil personnel services, 

(B)  Furthermore, a district must demonstrate that the certificated 

 

 

19

10. 

(A)  That the statute, and the Board’s skip criteria, utilize the word 

and it must demonstrate that those it would skip have special training and experience 
necessary to provide the service in question.  It has failed to demonstrate either.   
 
9.   It appears that the school psychologists, holding PPS credentials, fit that 
 
category of those providing services.  It is less than clear that they must be bilingual 
to do so, especially give the fact that approximately 30 languages appear in the 
English Learner survey.  Neither Ms. James nor Ms. Mitchnick could point to any 
occasion where the District had actually had to contract for a translator or 
psychologist who spoke one of the languages, though it is fair to say they have been 
able to avoid that because some staff—not particularly identified—have been able to 
assist Ms. Mitchnick when she has dealt with someone who spoke Spanish.     
 
 
“demonstrate” is of some import.  The word is not defined in the Education Code, but 
used in that Code in other contexts.  For example, Section 44830, subdivision (b), 
provides that no district shall hire a teacher in the capacity designated in their 
credential unless that person “has demonstrated basic skills proficiency as provided in 
section 44252.2 or is exempted . . . .”  Section 44242.2 requires the passage of a test.  
And, even the CTC can not issue or renew a credential without the applicant 
“demonstrating” proficiency in basic skills by passing tests required by other statutes.  
(§44252, subd. (b).  See also, § 44252.7, subd. (a) [applicants for children’s center 
instructional permit must demonstrate proficiency by passing tests or proving certain 
college degrees].)   
 
 
means “to teach by exhibition of samples; to derive from admitted premises by steps 
of reasoning which admit of no doubt;  to prove indubitably.  (Citation omitted.)  To 
show or prove value or merits by operation.  (Citation omitted.)”  (Black’s Law Dict. 
(4th ed. 1968), p. 519, col. 1.)   Webster’s defines the term as “1:  to show clearly.  
2a: to prove or make clear by reasoning or evidence. B:  to illustrate and explain esp. 
with many examples.  3: To show or prove to a customer.”  (Webster’s Seventh New 
Collegiate Dict.  (1965), p. 220, col. 1.)   
 
 
“show[n] clearly” or in a way that admits of no doubt, that it is necessary for its 
psychologists to possess any language, other than Spanish, to provide school 
psychologist services; such as not been “prove[n] indubitably.”  Just as important, 
Complainant has not demonstrated that any of the psychologists can speak, translate, 
and write a language besides English with the fluency called for in the skipping 
criteria.  Certainly, there is no evidence of fluency in writing the languages, and 
reliance on a years-old job application and the opinion of a staff person with no 
obvious qualifications does not support the conclusion of fluency even in speaking the 
languages. 
 

(B)  According to Black’s Law Dictionary, the word “demonstrate” 

(C)  It can not be found or concluded that the Complainant has 

 

 

 

 

20

12.  In these circumstances, To, Marvel, Mays, and Goldstein must be laid off 

11.  The primary and controlling issue in these proceedings is seniority; 
 
skipping is an exception to the general rule.  To create an exception from seniority so 
that junior staff would be retained on the chance they might have to speak to one of 
17 students in the District would do violence to the seniority principal.  It must be 
concluded that a need for psychologists who speak Farsi and Vietnamese has not been 
demonstrated, and it must be concluded that it has not been demonstrated that any of 
the junior psychologists proposed for retention are fluent in the speaking, writing and 
translation of any foreign language.  To uphold the bulk of the skipping criteria, or the 
manner in which it would be applied would constitute an abuse of discretion.  Based 
on all the foregoing, including Factual Findings 5 and 12 through 26, the 
psychologists must be terminated in order of inverse seniority.   
 
 
before any of the more senior psychologists, and along with the release of the 
temporary, Ms. Roberson, this accounts for 5 of the 5.8 FTE to be released.  Ms. 
Jaimes, the next most junior psychologist, must have her position reduced by .8 FTE.  
Respondents Mitchnick, Kramer, Harris, and Cloda Jones, who received preliminary 
notices, must be dismissed.   
 
Legal Conclusions Pertaining to Other Claims: 
 
13.  Respondents Keith, Edward Messler, English, Cid, DeGroof, Hunt, 
 
Gahlman, Graves, Newall, Brooks, Badertscher, Mayo, Christine Mitchell, and 
Sibbrel all established that they were senior to, and credentialed and qualified to 
perform the assignments of teachers junior to them, who had been retained by the 
District.  The District did not establish grounds to skip such junior employees.  
Pursuant to section 44955, these Respondents must be dismissed from this 
proceeding.  This Conclusion is based on Factual Findings 27 through 30(F) 
 
 
14.  Respondent Arlene Robles must be deemed a permanent employee with a 
seniority date of September 6, 2005, pursuant to section 44918, subdivision (a), based 
on Factual Findings 33(A) through (F).  As noted in the Findings, the type of 
credential she held does not control her job classification; those holding emergency or 
intern credentials may still be probationary teachers.  (California Teachers Ass’n v. 
Governing Bd. Of Golden Valley Unified School Dist., (2002) 98 Cal. App. 4th 369; 
Welch v. Oakland Unified School District (2001) 91 Cal. App.4th 1421.)  Likewise, 
whether the District calls her a day-to-day substitute does not control either; it is what 
her job actually is.  In Eureka Teacher’s Assn. v. Board of Education (1988) 202 
Cal.App.3d 469, 473, it was held that a teacher’s reemployment rights were not 
dependant on a teacher’s formal classification as either a day-to-day or long term 
substitute, as section 44918 does not recognize that distinction.  Instead, the issue was 
whether the teacher was in an “on-call” status to replace employees on a daily basis, 
which she, like Ms. Robles, was not.  Here Ms. Robles served the entire year in a 
third grade classroom.  Thus, she may not be laid off if any probationary or other 

 

21

16.  The seniority date of Respondent Gina Sorensen-Hernandez is modified to 

junior employee is otherwise retained for a position which she is certificated and 
qualified to render.   
 
15.  Respondent Kelly Oxley was entitled to be skipped because she received a 
 
CLAD effective prior to March 15, 2010, and the District had notice of it on that date, 
based on Factual Finding 35.  As noted in the Findings, March 15 has, for years, been 
treated as the cut-off date for having a credential that may be considered in the lay off 
process.  (Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689, 698-699.)   
 
 
September 4, 2007, and she is to be classed as a permanent teacher pursuant to 
stipulation and Factual Finding 12(A).  Respondents Ruth Several, Melanie Go, and 
Merina Esperza shall retain their seniority dates of September 5, 2006, each ranked 
with 8 tie break points, with Ms. Several the most senior, followed by Ms. Go, and 
then Ms. Esparza, the junior, based on Factual Finding 12(B).   
 
 
17.  Mr. Barrow is a permanent employee with a seniority date of September 
2, 2003, based on Factual Finding 37, and section 44929.21, subdivision (b).  Given 
his seniority as a permanent employee, he must be dismissed from this proceeding.   
 
 
employee or that they should have been skipped, based on the foregoing rules, and 
Factual Findings 38 through 42.      
 
 

  18.  No Respondent established that they had the right to bump a junior 

ORDER 

 
 
1.  The following Respondents are dismissed from this proceeding and they 
shall not be laid off:  Orrin Barrow, Corrine Badertscher, Louis Brinker, Matthew 
Brooks, Carmen Cid, Lucia De La Paz Garcia, Dana English, Jennifer Gahlmann, 
Jennifer Graves, Lillian De Groof, Lisa Harris, Dana Hunt, Cloda Jones, Marjorie 
Keith, Elizabeth Klinger, Neda Kramer, Natasha Mitchnick, Robert Marrufo, Lauren 
Mayo, Christine McQuinn, Edward Messler, Christine Mitchell, John Newall, Maria 
Stemwell, Kimberly Sibbrel, Jose Trejo, and Kathryn Wolford. 
 
 
 
 
Go, Esperza, and Robles must be modified consistent with the findings set forth 
above.   
 
 
on the District’s records, with seniority dates consistent with the findings above.   
 

4.  Respondents Barrow and Robles are to be shown as permanent employees 

3  The seniority dates of respondents Sorensen-Hernandez, Several, Melanie 

2.  Sonia Jaimes position shall be laid off to the extent of .8 FTE.   

 

22

_______________________________ 
Joseph D. Montoya 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

5.  Ms. Robles may only be laid off if she is junior to other permanent 

6.  All other persons receiving preliminary notices may be laid off in 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
certificated employees of the same credentials and qualifications.   
 
 
compliance with the reduction resolution, in inverse seniority.   
 
May 7, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

23

ATTACHMENT A TO PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
Noemi Acosta 
Christopher J. Akel 
Nichole Diana Anderson 
Martha Arevalo 
Natalie Arutunian 
Kelly Ann Atkatz 
Brooke Autry 
Corrine Elaine Badertscher 
Charel Erin Bailey 
Orrin L. Barrow 
Cynthia Ann Beale 
Elizabeth Ann Beaumont 
Christina L. Berendt 
Melinda E Bernabe 
Michael F. Birnbryer 
Siri R Boothby 
Emily Elizabeth Brink 
Louis A. Brinker 
Matthew Edward Brooks 
Roland Bynum 
Harmony J. Cano 
Jeffrey A. Cerveny 
Carmen Maria Cid 
Patrick E. Compton 
Arlin Arely Cornejo 
Kimberly M. Cuadra 
Scott R. Dayman 
Lucia De La Paz Garcia 
Hilary S De Wolfe 
Lillian Degroof 
Rowelyn G. M. Dela Cruz 
Raul F. Delgado 
Andrew Jon Delscamp 
Sara J Dickerson 
Sandra Dondalski 
Amber Douglas 
Hilarie Anne Dyson 
Deidra G Edwards 
Dana M English 
Jacqueline A Equite 
Merina Esparza 
Ella Farinas 

 

24

Agnesa Freelove 
Jennifer E Gahlmann 
Antonette M. Garcia 
Alison L Garfinkel 
Monique K Garza 
Luisa Geiger 
Zsolt S. Girba 
Madelyn Michell Gittens 
Melanie Go 
Dawn L Goldenberg 
Jacqueline Gonzalez 
Kristine K Gonzales 
Jennifer J Graves 
Roger Hilton Gray 
Gary T Green 
Tania Guadalupe Heredia 
Weston T. Hester 
Iris Yu-Jung Huang Hao 
Dana Denise Hunt 
Mercedes Ibarra 
Jennifer M. Ikari 
Joyce Cecelia Jacques 
Sheila Marie Jakobsen 
William C. Jenkins 
Dana Renee Jones 
Ani Karapetyan 
Marjorie Ruth Keith 
Joseph Kelly 
Elizabeth L. Klinger 
Deborah Garcia Kostich 
Bryan Jonathan Lantz 
Hanh Thuan Le 
Priscila Leon-Didion 
Lindsay D Lewis 
Keleen R. Lewkewich 
Christy Lim 
Erica Civitate Linares 
Marion K Lo 
Marjorie Marie Lott 
Cynthia Loraine Macias 
Jeffrey Ara Maljian 
Armenui Manasarian 
Robert Marrufo 
Chaneika T Martin 
Julie Aurelia Martinez 

 

25

Christine M Mc Quinn 
Christine A. Mclaughlin 
Michael R. Mcneely 
Edward Jennings Messler 
Karyn Messler 
Melissa B. Meyer 
Sheila Anne Miller 
Andrea Nicole Mills 
Kenneth Miralles 
Christine Simone Mitchell 
Candace M Montesanti 
Katrina Lynn Moore 
Stephen Scott Mulder 
Jana Marie Munoz 
Erin D Musick 
Laureen Nadirah C Nayo 
Stephanie Ann Nef 
John Allan Newell 
Karen H Oien 
Tricia Michelle Oliver 
Irad Orduna 
Erin Shannon Otoole-Delawari 
Kelley Lynn Oxley 
Laura Ann Palmer 
Bharatchandra M Parekh 
Esther June Park 
Sabrina V. Passanante 
Elaine Pehlivanos 
Melquiades C Renteria 
Madeline Ribeiro 
Karin Robinson Smith 
Arlene Robles 
Rene Rodriguez 
Monica L Salas 
Diane M Salson 
Linda C Saucedo 
Benita L Scheckel 
Wendy Elizabeth Self 
Veronica Serrano 
Ruth J Several 
Christine L Shannon 
Kimberly Michelle Sibbrel 
Gina Sorensen-Hernandez 
Kristin Stafford 
Janus E. Stechel 

 

26

Maria Catherine Stemwell 
Stacey L Sue 
Lisa Tamiko Takemura 
Hideyuki Tanaka 
Olga V Torres 
Martha L Gonzalez Tovar 
Jose E. Trejo 
Michelle Turnbaugh 
Janice Ruth Vargas 
Keisha Denise Wallace 
Lewis R Watson 
Laura J Williams 
Stacy Ruth Williams 
Kimberly D Winckler 
Kathryn Jean Wolford 
Cherie A. Wood 
Veronica Yepez 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

27

ATTACHMENT B TO PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
Noemi Acosta 
Christopher J. Akel 
Nichole Diana Anderson 
Martha Arevalo 
Natalie Arutunian 
Kelly Ann Atkatz 
Brooke Autry 
Corrine Elaine Badertscher 
Charel Erin Bailey 
Orrin L. Barrow 
Cynthia Ann Beale 
Elizabeth Ann Beaumont 
Christina L. Berendt 
Melinda E Bernabe 
Michael F. Birnbryer 
Siri R Boothby 
Emily Elizabeth Brink 
Louis A. Brinker 
Matthew Edward Brooks 
Roland Bynum 
Harmony J. Cano 
Jeffrey A. Cerveny 
Carmen Maria Cid 
Patrick E. Compton 
Arlin Arely Cornejo 
Kimberly M. Cuadra 
Scott R. Dayman 
Lucia De La Paz Garcia 
Hilary S De Wolfe 
Lillian Degroof 
Rowelyn G. M. Dela Cruz 
Raul F. Delgado 
Andrew Jon Delscamp 
Sara J Dickerson 
Sandra Dondalski 
Amber Douglas 
Hilarie Anne Dyson 
Deidra G Edwards 
Dana M English 
Jacqueline A Equite 
Merina Esparza 
Ella Farinas 

 

28

Agnesa Freelove 
Jennifer E Gahlmann 
Antonette M. Garcia 
Alison L Garfinkel 
Monique K Garza 
Luisa Geiger 
Zsolt S. Girba 
Madelyn Michell Gittens 
Melanie Go 
Dawn L Goldenberg 
Jacqueline Gonzalez 
Kristine K Gonzales 
Jennifer J Graves 
Roger Hilton Gray 
Gary T Green 
Tania Guadalupe Heredia 
Weston T. Hester 
Iris Yu-Jung Huang Hao 
Dana Denise Hunt 
Mercedes Ibarra 
Jennifer M. Ikari 
Joyce Cecelia Jacques 
Sheila Marie Jakobsen 
William C. Jenkins 
Dana Renee Jones 
Ani Karapetyan 
Marjorie Ruth Keith 
Joseph Kelly 
Elizabeth L. Klinger 
Deborah Garcia Kostich 
Bryan Jonathan Lantz 
Hanh Thuan Le 
Priscila Leon-Didion 
Lindsay D Lewis 
Keleen R. Lewkewich 
Christy Lim 
Erica Civitate Linares 
Marion K Lo 
Marjorie Marie Lott 
Cynthia Loraine Macias 
Jeffrey Ara Maljian 
Armenui Manasarian 
Robert Marrufo 
Chaneika T Martin 
Julie Aurelia Martinez 

 

29

Christine M Mc Quinn 
Christine A. Mclaughlin 
Michael R. Mcneely 
Edward Jennings Messler 
Karyn Messler 
Melissa B. Meyer 
Sheila Anne Miller 
Andrea Nicole Mills 
Kenneth Miralles 
Christine Simone Mitchell 
Candace M Montesanti 
Katrina Lynn Moore 
Stephen Scott Mulder 
Jana Marie Munoz 
Erin D Musick 
Laureen Nadirah C Nayo 
Stephanie Ann Nef 
John Allan Newell 
Karen H Oien 
Tricia Michelle Oliver 
Irad Orduna 
Erin Shannon Otoole-Delawari 
Kelley Lynn Oxley 
Laura Ann Palmer 
Bharatchandra M Parekh 
Esther June Park 
Sabrina V. Passanante 
Elaine Pehlivanos 
Melquiades C Renteria 
Madeline Ribeiro 
Karin Robinson Smith 
Arlene Robles 
Rene Rodriguez 
Monica L Salas 
Diane M Salson 
Linda C Saucedo 
Benita L Scheckel 
Wendy Elizabeth Self 
Veronica Serrano 
Ruth J Several 
Christine L Shannon 
Kimberly Michelle Sibbrel 
Gina Sorensen-Hernandez 
Kristin Stafford 
Janus E. Stechel 

 

30

Maria Catherine Stemwell 
Stacey L Sue 
Lisa Tamiko Takemura 
Hideyuki Tanaka 
Olga V Torres 
Martha L Gonzalez Tovar 
Jose E. Trejo 
Michelle Turnbaugh 
Janice Ruth Vargas 
Keisha Denise Wallace 
Lewis R Watson 
Laura J Williams 
Stacy Ruth Williams 
Kimberly D Winckler 
Kathryn Jean Wolford 
Cherie A. Wood 
Veronica Yepez 
 
 
 
 
 

 

31

