BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE ANAHEIM CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 
 

     OAH Case No. 2010030554 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certificated Employees of the Anaheim City 
School District, 
 
                                             Respondents. 
 
 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
heard this matter on April 30, 2010, in Anaheim, California. 
 

Chris Ruiz, Administrative Law Judge with the Office of Administrative Hearings, 

Cathie L. Fields, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

Henry Willis, Attorney at Law, Schwartz, Steinsapir, Dorhmann, and Sommers,  

represented the Anaheim City School District (ACSD). 
 
 
represented all Respondents listed in exhibit 16 and that exhibit is hereby incorporated by 
reference as if fully set forth herein.   
 
 
closing brief which was marked as exhibit A and ACSD submitted a closing brief which was 
marked as exhibit 17.   
 

The matter was submitted on April 30, 2010.  Thereafter, Respondents submitted a 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

On or about March 8, 2010, by resolution number 2009-10/28 (resolution), the 

The resolution included a listing by type and full-time equivalent (FTE) of 

 
 
Board adopted the Superintendent’s recommendation to reduce or discontinue particular 
kinds of services provided by ACSD, effective the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
those positions (157.219 FTE) which the Board resolved to reduce or eliminate no later than 
the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
included a list and description of the criteria used by ACSD to determine the order of 
termination of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to ACSD on the same 
date.  The Board further adopted resolution number 2009-10/29 regarding non-reelection of 
temporary certificated employees. 

The Board adopted another resolution (resolution number 2009-10/26) that 

3. 

 

1

7. 

6. 

4. 

5. 

On or about March 9, 2010, ACSD served written notice on certain 

The written notices described directly above included a request for hearing 

The certificated employees who were served with the Accusation and related 

ACSD’s Assistant Superintendent filed and timely served the individuals who 

 
probationary and permanent certificated employees, pursuant to the direction of the Board, 
that they would not be reemployed in the ensuing school year. 
 
 
form that, if returned to ACSD by March 19, 2010, would constitute a hearing request.  
ACSD served 44 probationary and permanent teachers with preliminary layoff noties, and 
also served 89 temporary employees with same.  Of the 44 teachers, 15 requested a hearing.  
Of the 89 temporary employees, 9 requested a hearing.  After some modifications, because 
some respondents withdrew their request for hearing, or did not subsequently file a Notice of 
Defense, the only remaining Respondents at issue are listed in exhibit 16.  
 
 
submitted a request for hearing form with an Accusation, Notice of Defense, Notice of 
Hearing, and related materials.  The Accusation and related materials served on each 
Respondent included the Notice of Hearing, which noticed the instant hearing.  The 
Accusation included a form, that if returned by a date certain, would constitute a Notice of 
Defense. 
 
 
materials were identified as Respondents.  (See exhibit 16, “List of Respondents”)  However, 
the Board pled and argued at hearing that those individuals listed in exhibit 16 as 
“Temporary (Precautionary) Respondents” were only provided with all jurisdictional 
documents in this proceeding as a precaution to enable them to participate and exercise 
arguable rights in this matter.  ACSD argued that the temporary employees are not entitled to 
participate in this proceeding.  ACSD requests an order in conformance with its position that 
it may non-re-elect these temporary employees separately and independently from the instant 
process, a process meant solely for its probationary and permanent employees. 
 
 
Some of the temporary employees are employed in categorically funded 
positions, pursuant to Education Code section 44909.  Other temporary employees are 
employed pursuant to Education Code section 44920. 
 
 
not related to their professionalism and dedication as teachers. 
 
 
services that the Board directed to be reduced or discontinued. 
 
 
The services at issue were “particular kinds of services” that could be reduced 
or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision 
to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but 
constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 

10.  ACSD identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of 

The recommendation that Respondents be terminated from employment was 

11. 

8. 

9. 

 

2

12. 

13. 

15. 

14. 

Respondent Karen Hernandez (Hernandez) contended that ACSD has 

In cases where individual Respondents shared a first date of paid service, 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 

 
welfare of ACSD and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of ACSD, as 
determined by the Board because of a budget shortfall. 
 
 
The Board considered all known attrition, including resignations, retirements, 
and requests for transfer, in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees.   
 
 
ACSD was required to apply the tie-breaker criteria approved by the Board.  The Board’s 
resolution number 2009-10/26 established tie breaker criteria that were fair and reasonable.  
ACSD applied those tie-breaker criteria fairly and appropriately. 
 
 
inappropriately classified her as a temporary employees for too long.  Hernandez failed to 
present evidence that would shield her from layoff.  She is not a probationary or permanent 
employee.   
 
 
are employed in positions that require part of their day to be spent performing services 
funded by “class size reduction” (CSR), a categorically funded program.  Both signed 
temporary employment contracts for the present school year, as did all temporary employees.  
It was established that these employees are in categorically funded positions, and thus should 
be treated as temporary employees.  While it was established that the district does not always 
segregate categorical funds into specific categorical fund catagories, it was not established 
that categorical funds and general funds are commingled.  Thus, Schnee v. Alameda Unified 
School District (2004) 125 Cal.App.4th 555, is inapplicable.  Further, Zalac v. Governing 
Board of Ferndale Unified School District (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 851, concluded that 
CSR qualifies as a categorically funded program.   
 
 
that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 

17.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

16.  Hernandez and Respondent Christine Sato (Sato), also a temporary employee, 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

The parties met all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in 

 
 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
 
kinds of services, as set forth in ACSD’s resolution number 2009-10/28 for the 2010-2011 
school year, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, as set forth in Factual 
Findings 1-17, and Legal Conclusions 1, and 3-17. 
 
 

Cause exists to sustain ACSD’s action to reduce or discontinue particular 

 

 

3

[¶] . . . [¶] 

Education Code section 44955 states, in pertinent part: 

3. 
 
 
 
 
(b)  Whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year, or . . . 
when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have become 
necessary by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of 
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate the 
services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated 
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the 
school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section 
while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is 
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and 
competent to render. 
 
 
 
 
Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 
15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and services of such 
employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in which they were 
employed. 
 
 
a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which their 
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. 
 
4. 

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such 

Education Code section 44949 states, in pertinent part: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(c) 

(a) 

No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice 

 
by the governing board that his or her services will not be required for the 
ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section 44955, the governing board 
and the employee shall be given written notice by the superintendent of the 
district or his or her designee, or in the case of a district which has no 
superintendent by the clerk or secretary of the governing board, that it has 
been recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the 
reasons therefor. 
 
 
 
 
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. 
 

The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(b) 

4

 
 

 

(c) 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the 
 
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in accordance with 
Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 
of the Government Code and the governing board shall have all the power 
granted to an agency therein, except that all of the following shall apply: 
 
 
 
 
who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a 
determination as to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related 
to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  The proposed decision 
shall be prepared for the governing board and shall contain a determination as 
to the sufficiency of the cause and a recommendation as to disposition.  
However, the governing board shall make the final determination as to the 
sufficiency of the cause and disposition. 

The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge 

(3) 

5. 

Education Code section 44920 states, in pertinent part: 

The governing board of a school district may employ as a teacher, for a 

 
complete school year . . . any person holding appropriate certification 
documents, and may classify such person as a temporary employee.  The 
employment of such persons shall be based upon the need for additional 
certificated employees during a particular semester or year because a 
certificated employee has been granted leave for a semester or year, or is 
experiencing long-term illness, and shall be limited, in number of persons so 
employed, to that need, as determined by the governing board. 

6. 

Education Code section 44909 states, in pertinent part: 

 
The governing board of any school district may employ persons 
possessing an appropriate credential as certificated employees in programs and 
projects to perform services conducted under contract with public or private 
agencies, or categorically funded projects which are not required by federal or 
state statutes.  The terms and conditions under which such persons are 
employed shall be mutually agreed upon by the employee and the governing 
board and such agreement shall be reduced to writing.  Service pursuant to this 
section shall not be included in computing the service required as a 
prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a permanent 
employee unless (1) such person has served pursuant to this section for at least 
75 percent of the number of days the regular schools of the district by which 
he is employed are maintained and (2) such person is subsequently employed 
as a probationary employee in a position requiring certification qualifications.  
Such persons may be employed for periods which are less than a full school 
year and may be terminated at the expiration of the contract or specially 

5

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

Whenever any certificated employee in the regular educational program 

funded project without regard to other requirements of this code respecting the 
termination of probationary or permanent employees other than Section 44918. 
 
 
is assigned to a categorically funded project not required by federal or state 
statute and the district employs an additional credentialed person to replace 
that certificated employee, the replacement certificated employee shall be 
subject the provisions of Section 44918. 

8. 

7. 

The services identified in the Board’s resolution are particular kinds of 

ACSD identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of 

 
 
services that the Board can reduce or discontinue under Education Code section 44955.  The 
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was not arbitrary or 
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of ACSD’s schools and pupils within 
the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
 
 
services that the Board directed to be reduced or discontinued. 
 
 
section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to 
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are 
made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 
Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) 
 
 
Code section 44909, are temporary employees that can be dismissed without the requirement 
of this hearing. 
 

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code 

Categorically funded Respondents, those employed pursuant to Education 

10. 

9. 

11. 

There is no question that Respondents employed pursuant to Education Code 

section 44920 are temporary employees and can be dismissed without a right to participate in 
this proceeding.  As to those Respondents, ACSD may take action to dismiss them as the law 
allows regarding temporary employees. 

 
12.  A review of case law finds that other categorically funded teachers have been 

treated like temporary employees.  (Zalac v. Ferndale Unified School District (2002) 98 
Cal.App.4th 838, 840-841 [a kindergarten teacher’s first two years of employment was as a 
temporary employee in a categorically funded program pursuant to Education Code section 
44909].)  In Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City School District 
(2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, the Court of Appeal found that teachers in categorically funded 
positions “are treated in much the same way [as temporary employees] in that they may be 
dismissed without the formalities required for probationary and permanent employees in the 
event the program expires or is terminated, and their service does not count toward acquiring 
permanent status (unless they are reemployed the following year in a probationary position).”  

 

6

The Bakersfield court, citing Zalac, noted the purpose of Education Code section 44909 was 
“‘to prevent a person from acquiring probationary status solely through teaching in a 
categorically funded program.  This permits the hiring of qualified persons for categorically 
funded programs of undetermined duration without incurring responsibility to grant tenured 
status based on such teaching services alone.’  [Citation.]  The section ‘was intended to give 
school districts flexibility in the operation of special educational programs to supplement 
their regular program and to relieve them from having a surplus of probationary or 
permanent teachers when project funds are terminated or cut back.’  [Citation.]”  (Bakersfield 
Elementary Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City School District, supra, 145 Cal.App.4th 
1260, 1286.)  To characterize categorically funded Respondents as probationary employees 
here would go against that purpose.  (See also Haase v. San Diego Community College 
District (1980) 113 Cal.App.3d 913 [a certificated employee in a categorically funded 
position in a community college district not found to be a probationary employee].) 
 

13. 

Furthermore, in Education Code section 44909, the Legislature directed 

categorically funded employees to be subject to the provisions of Education Code section 
44918, but “without regard to other requirements of this code respecting the termination of 
probationary or permanent employees.”  This direction provides further support for the 
conclusion reached here, that categorically funded employees may be treated as temporary 
employees. 
 

14. 

Thus, ACSD may dismiss its temporary employees, including those 

categorically funded pursuant to Education Code section 44909, in the manner the law allows 
for temporary employees.  It is noted that ACSD served its temporary employees with the 
jurisdictional documents and provided them the opportunity to participate in the instant 
hearing.  Those temporary employees participated in the hearing to the fullest extent 
possible, as if probationary employees.  Had the Administrative Law Judge concluded that 
categorically funded Respondents were probationary, they would have been entitled to the 
hearing that was had and in which they participated. 

 
15.  Nevertheless, ACSD established cause to not reemploy all noticed 

Respondents for the ensuing school year and Respondents did not establish facts or sufficient 
legal argument to the contrary. 

 
16.  Hernandez and Sato contended that they work in CSR positions, a 
categorically funded program, and that the District is required to segregate CSR funds in 
order to categorize their positions as “categorically funded.”  ACSD contended that even 
though it does not segregate said funds, it is not required to do so and that the State allows 
flexibility in categorically funded positions and that the funding may even be utilized for 
different catagories than initially intended.  For the reasons stated in Factual Finding 16, 
Hernandez and Sato may be treated as temporary employees.   

 
17.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

 
that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 

 

7

 
 

 

ORDER 
 

Notice may be given to those Respondents, identified as temporary employees 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

1. 

2. 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
CHRIS RUIZ 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
Notice may be given to Respondents listed in exhibit 16, as required by law, 
that their services will be terminated at the close of the 2009-2010 academic year.  Notice 
shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
 
in exhibt 16, as provided for by law for temporary employees, that their services will be 
terminated at the close of the 2009-2010 academic year. 
 
 
Dated:  May ___, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8

