BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
ELK GROVE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SACRAMENTO 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE ELK GROVE 
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
                                                   Respondents. 
 
 

 
 
   
OAH No. 2010020832 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Stephen J. Smith, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

 
 
of California heard this matter in Elk Grove, California on April 19, 20, 22 and 23, 2010.   
 
 
Glen De Graw, Associate Superintendent for Human Resources and Brandon 
Krueger, Director of Certificated Personnel, appeared as the official representatives of the 
Elk Grove Unified School District (District), all of whom were represented by Karen M. 
Rezendes, Attorney at Law, Dulcinea A. Grantham, Attorney at Law and Leah Won, 
Attorney at Law, all of Lozano Smith, Attorneys at Law. 
 
 
Eugene Huguenin, Jr., Attorney at Law, represented all certificated District employees 
receiving a preliminary notice that their services would not be required for the upcoming 
school year and who requested a hearing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Margaret Geddes, Attorney at Law, of Beeson, Tayer and Bodine, Attorneys, and A. 

The matter was submitted on April 23, 2010. 

Annette Stringer appeared in pro per.  

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.    All respondents subject to this action are, and at all times relevant to this 

 
 
Decision were, certificated employees of the District.  All respondents save one were 
represented by counsel identified above. 
 

2. 

On or just before March 2, 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 

 
44949 and 44955, Steven M. Ladd, Ed.D., Superintendent of the District notified the 
Governing Board of the District (the Board) in writing of his recommendation that certain 
particular kinds of services would have to be reduced or eliminated for the upcoming school 
year.  The Superintendent’s notice specified the particular kinds of services to be reduced or 
eliminated, as set forth in detail below.   
 

3. 

The Superintendent also notified the Board that a corresponding number of 

certificated employees of the District would have to be laid off to effectuate the reduction or 
elimination of the enumerated particular kinds of services.  The Superintendent notified the 
Board that certain respondent certificated employees of the District had been identified as 
persons to whom notice should be given that their services would not be required for the 
ensuing school year. 
 

4. 

The recommendation that respondents’ services for the District would not be 

required for the upcoming school year was not related to their skills, abilities or 
competencies as teachers.   
 

5. 

On March 2, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 42, which resolved to 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
Services 

Number of Full-Time 
Equivalent Positions 

follow the Superintendent’s recommendation to reduce 546.1 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) of 
particular kinds of services now being offered by the District.  The Resolution authorized and 
directed the Superintendent to give notice to a corresponding number of certificated 
employees of the District that their services would not be required for the upcoming school 
year in order to effectuate the reduction.  Resolution No. 42 authorized the elimination of the 
following services now offered in the District: 
 
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   

 
Vice Principal—Elementary (K-8 Year-Round) 
 
Vice Principal—Middle School 
 
Vice Principal—High School 
District Athletic/Facilities Utilization Coordinator  
Director of Adult and Community Education 
 
Program Administrator – Adult and Community Education 
2.0 
Director of Instructional Support 
Program Specialist – Curriculum/Professional Learning  2.0  
Program Specialist – Preschool 
Instructional Coach – Preschool 
Preschool Teacher 
Elementary Teacher (K-3 Class Size Reduction) 
K-6 Resource Teacher (Computer Lab) 
 
Technology Integration Support Specialist   
 
9th Grade Class Size Reduction 
 
Counselor - Secondary (AB 1802) 

1.0 
2.0 
FTE 
FTE 
4.0       FTE 
2.0       FTE 
24.8  FTE 
257.0  FTE  
39.0  FTE 
FTE 
2.0 
14.10  FTE 
16.0  FTE 

14.5  FTE 
10.0   FTE 
 
1.0     FTE 
 

1.  
2. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 

12.0   FTE 

FTE 
FTE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
1.0     FTE 

37.7  FTE 
24.5  FTE 
4.0 
FTE 
16.5  FTE 
4.0 
FTE 
10.4  FTE 

16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Counselor – High School 
Counselor – Middle School   
Alternative Education Counselor 
Librarians – High School 
Vocational Education Specialist 
Academic Intervention Teacher 
Adult Education Teacher:  
a. CalSAFE Services for  
Parenting Teens and Their Children 
b. One Stop Career Center  
c. Parent Participation Preschool 
d. Even Start Family Literacy 
e. Adult Basic/Adult Secondary Education/ESL 
f. Adult Basic/Adult Secondary Education   
 
 
g. ESL 
 
h. ESL/Family Literacy 
 
 
i. Career Technical Education 
 
j. Adults in Correctional Facilities 
k. WIA II/English Literacy & Civics Education 
l. Department of Human Assistance 
 
ROP Instructor: 
 
a. Applied Natural Science 
 
b. Industrial Technology 
c. Business Technology 
 
d. Public & Human Services  
 
e. Health Sciences 
f. Computer Technology 
 
g. Performing & Visual Arts  

   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Total Full Time Equivalent reduction 
 
TIMELY SERVICE OF PRELIMINARY NOTICES OF LAYOFF 
 
 
number of respondents affected by the reduction or elimination of PKS identified in 
Resolution No. 42, and caused each to be timely served with a written Notice of Intention to 
Dismiss (Preliminary Notice of Layoff).  The parties stipulated the District timely served all 
affected respondents with Preliminary Notices of Layoff.  The District served 760 
certificated employees with such Preliminary Notices.  Respondents receiving a preliminary 
notice of layoff are listed in Attachment A to this Decision.  
LONG-TERM SUBSTITUTES AND TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES RELEASED 
 

1.3  
1.3  
3.5  
 
1.0       FTE 
2.0 
FTE 
FTE 
0.2 
1.0       FTE 
1.7  
 
FTE 
8.8 
3.0       FTE 
1.3 
FTE 
 
2.3 
4.5 
3.8 
1.6 
1.5 
1.1 
3.7 

The Associate Superintendent and his staff identified the corresponding 

FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FTE 

6. 

 

 

 

7. 

The Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 47 on March 2, 2010.  In 

Resolution No. 47, The Governing Board determined to non-reelect all long-term substitute 
teachers and to release all certificated employees teaching pursuant to temporary teaching 

 

3

       545.1    FTE 

contracts effective at the end of the current school year.  Resolution No. 47 directed the 
Superintendent or his designee to identify each of the certificated employees working in the 
District who were working pursuant to long term substitute or temporary teaching contracts, 
and submit a listing of the employees to the Governing Board for attachment to the 
Resolution.  Resolution No. 47 directed the Superintendent or his designee to notify each 
certificated employee identified and listed on the attachment to Resolution No. 47 that they 
would be released from service for the District effective at the end of the 2009/2010 school 
year.  The Associate Superintendent and his staff identified all long term substitutes and 
temporary employees serving in the District and compiled the list of their names for 
attachment to Resolution No. 47.  There were 110 total certificated employees so identified 
and affected by the nonreelection of long term substitutes or termination of temporary 
teaching contracts. 
 
PRECAUTIONARY NOTICES OF LAYOFF 
 

8. 

In response to Resolution No. 47, and by direction of the Superintendent, the 

9. 

Associate Superintendent caused each respondent identified as serving as a certificated 
employee working under a temporary contract to be served with a written Precautionary 
Notice of Intention to Dismiss (precautionary notice of layoff) on March 9, 2010.  There 
were 57 precautionary notices of layoff served on certificated employees of the District 
employed under temporary contracts. 
 
RELEASE AND REASSIGNMENT OF CERTIFICATED ADMINISTRATORS 
 
 
Resolution No. 44 authorized the Superintendent or his designee to notify certain certificated 
administrators serving in the District in administrative capacities who were identified in an 
attachment to the Resolution that they will be released from their present administrative 
assignments for the upcoming 2010- 2011 school year, effective June 30, 2010.  There were 
34 FTE of certificated employees serving in administrator positions affected by this 
Resolution. 
 
ADDITIONAL RELEASE AND REASSIGNMENT OF CERTIFICATED ADMINISTRATORS   
 

The Governing Board also adopted Resolution No. 44 on March 2, 2010.  

10. 

The Governing Board also adopted Resolution No. 54 on March 8, 2010.  

Resolution No. 54 authorized the Superintendent or his designee to notify additional 
certificated administrators serving in the District in administrative capacities who were 
identified in an attachment to Resolution No. 54 that they will be released from their present 
administrative assignments for the upcoming 2010- 2011 school year, effective June 30, 
2010, and that they would be reassigned to different positions for the upcoming school year.  
There were 11 FTE of certificated employees serving in administrator positions affected by 
Resolution No. 54.   
 

11. 

Resolutions Nos. 44 and 54 also provided that some of the released certificated 
administrators could and would be reassigned to a classroom teaching position for the 2010- 

 

4

2011 school year, in accordance with Education Code section 44951.  The release and 
reassignment of certificated administrators was available to some of the certificated 
administrators who had retained seniority rights and were able to “bump”, i.e., be reassigned 
to classroom teaching, displacing less senior certificated employees with similar credentials 
and competencies.   
 
 
being released or being able to bump back into a classroom assignment.   
 
PRELIMINARY AND PRECAUTIONARY NOTICES OF LAYOFF CONTENTS   
 

There was no issue identified with respect to any certificated administrator 

12. 

13. 

The written preliminary and precautionary notices of layoff advised 

respondents of the Superintendent’s recommendation to the Board that their services would 
not be required for the upcoming school year.  The preliminary and precautionary notices set 
forth the reasons for the recommendation, and had attached the following: a copy of either 
Resolution 42 or 47, as appropriate; a copy of the list of the PKS the Board has determined to 
reduce or eliminate as set forth in resolution number 42; a blank copy of a Request for a 
Hearing; and copies of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  The precautionary 
notices also added a list of those District employees receiving a precautionary notice. 
 
SERVICE OF PRELIMINARY AND RPECAUTIONARY NOTICES AND RESPONSES 
JURISDICTIONAL REQUIREMENTS LEADING TO EVIDENTIARY HEARING 
 

14.  As set forth above, a total of 760 certificated employees were served with 

preliminary notices of layoff.  A total of 57 temporary employees were served with 
precautionary notices of layoff.  The parties stipulated that all preliminary and precautionary 
notices of layoff were timely served. 
 

15.  A total of 661 certificated employees who were timely served with a 

preliminary notice of layoff filed a Request for Hearing with the District.  Four of those 
filing Requests for Hearing failed to file timely.  A total of 20 certificated employees who 
were timely served with a precautionary notice of layoff timely filed a Notice of Hearing 
with the District.  The parties stipulated that those certificated employees who failed to 
timely file a Request for Hearing with the District after having been timely served with a 
preliminary or precautionary notice of layoff had waived their right to an evidentiary hearing 
on whether cause exists for them to not be reemployed in the upcoming school year, and that 
those persons were not entitled to a hearing. 
 

16.  Glen De Graw, acting in his official capacity only as Associate Superintendent 

for Human Resources (the Associate Superintendent) for the District made and filed the 
Accusations.  The parties stipulated that the Accusations were timely served upon each 
respondent who filed a Request for a Hearing (below).  It was not disputed that the Assistant 
Superintendent was duly delegated and authorized by the Superintendent of the District to 
make the Accusations and issue the notices set forth in this Decision.  The District served the 
Accusations upon the 657 certificated employees who had timely filed Requests for Hearing 

 

5

17.  A total of 597 certificated employees who had been served preliminary notices 

after having received preliminary notices of layoff.  The District also prepared Accusations 
and caused the Accusations to be timely served upon the 20 certificated employees who had 
timely filed Requests for Hearing after having received precautionary notices of layoff. 
 
 
of layoff and who were served Accusations timely filed Notices of Defense to the 
Accusations.  A total of 60 certificated employees who were served preliminary notices of 
layoff failed to timely file Notices of Defense to the Accusations they had received.  A total 
of 15 certificated employees who had been served precautionary notices of layoff and who 
were served Accusations timely filed Notices of Defense to the Accusations.  A total of five 
certificated employees who were served preliminary notices of layoff failed to timely file 
Notices of Defense to the Accusations they had received.  Those employees who were timely 
served Accusations but who failed to timely file Notices of Defense to the Accusations 
waived their right to an evidentiary hearing. 
 
MR. CANNELORA 
 
18.  Mr. Cannelora is a counselor serving in the District.  He was served a 
 
preliminary notice of layoff.  Mr. Cannelora failed to timely file a Request for a Hearing with 
the District.  Accordingly, he was not served an Accusation.  A Notice of Defense was filed 
on his behalf by counsel for the Association on April 5, 2010.  The Notice of Defense was 
ineffective to preserve Mr. Cannelora’s right to an evidentiary hearing due to his failure to 
file a Request for a Hearing with the District.   
 
 
and he was present to the extent he chose to be during the proceedings.  He offered no 
evidence regarding his failure to file a Request for a Hearing with the District in response to 
having been served with a preliminary notice of layoff.  He was not entitled to participate 
further in the evidentiary hearing.  His testimony in all other respects was therefore 
disregarded.  Even had it been considered, the seniority date claim he raised was untimely 
and was uncorroborated with any documentation.      
 

19.  Nevertheless, Mr. Cannelora was permitted to testify at the evidentiary hearing 

20. 

The parties stipulated that all prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.  
There was no issue raised regarding timeliness of response or the right to a hearing for those 
employees who were served preliminary or precautionary notices of layoff and who failed to 
timely file a Request for Hearing or a Notice of Defense.  
 
RESCISSION OF PRECAUTIONARY NOTICES OF LAYOFF 
 
 
21.  At the close of the evidentiary hearing and before closing statements, the 
parties stipulated that there were no claims pending regarding status or seniority dates among 
those 15 certificated employees who have been teaching under temporary employment 
contracts in this past school year and who had been served with precautionary notices of 
layoff.  Based upon this stipulation, the District rescinded the 15 remaining precautionary 
notices of layoff.   

 

6

RESCISSIONS OF PRELIMINARY NOTICES IN 12 ROUNDS 
 

22. 

Just prior to the commencement of the evidentiary hearing on April 19, 2010, 

and from time to time as the District gathered evidence or circumstances appeared 
warranting such action, the District moved to withdraw the preliminary notices of layoff 
served on certain certificated employees.  Throughout the proceedings, the District rescinded 
preliminary notices on 12 separate occasions, including a last round of rescissions that took 
place on the last day of the hearing.  Many of the rescissions were the product of the 
adoption and acceptance of an Early Retirement Incentive Plan (the Plan) by the Governing 
Board for certain senior certificated employees, freeing up positions that could be filled in 
the upcoming school year by certificated employees who had received preliminary notices of 
layoff. 
 

23. 

In the sixth round of rescissions, starting in the afternoon of the second day of 
the evidentiary hearing, the District began rescinding preliminary notices of layoff issued to  
certain employees due to finalization of the Plan, and acceptance of the Plan and early 
retirement by certain District employees not named here.  The District also announced 
additional rescissions in the areas of Social Sciences and Counselors that were the result of 
the Plan, as well as other rescissions not related to the Plan in later rounds.   
 
RESCISSIONS “ON THE FLY” BASED UPON VALID CLAIMS BY INDIVIDUAL 
RESPONDENTS 
 

24. 

Some of the District’s rescissions unrelated to the Plan were made in response 

to individual respondents presenting testimony and documentation regarding their 
credentials, certifications or seniority date claims that the District was able to confirm and 
verify during the proceedings.  The District’s team of counsel and representatives did not 
hesitate to rescind preliminary notices of layoff that had been issued to individual 
respondents upon receipt of credible and reliable evidence that a mistake had been made with 
respect to any individual respondent who made a credible claim.   
 

25. 

By the same token, the District declined to rescind where such claims were not 

supported with credible, reliable evidence supporting a claim that a legal or factual mistake 
had been made with respect to any claiming respondent regarding seniority dates, credentials, 
certifications, authorizations, tie breaking points awarded, or assignments. 
 
TOTAL RESCISSONS FROM ALL CAUSES 
 

26. 

Following the 12 rounds of such rescissions, preliminary notices of layoff 

issued to 317 certificated employees had been rescinded.  The final list of such rescissions, in 
alphabetical order, effective as of the close of the evidentiary hearing, is attached to this 
Decision as Exhibit B. 
 
EFFECT OF RESCISSIONS ON RESOLUTION NO. 42 PKS REDUCTIONS 
/ELIMINATIONS  

 

7

27.  During the course of the evidentiary hearing, the District restored some 
services slated for elimination or reduction in Resolution No. 42 due to rescissions.  During 
the hearing, preliminary notices of layoff were rescinded to certain respondents serving as 
counselors in the District.  The rescissions were effectuated in order to restore 29.0 FTE of 
Counselors.  The rescissions and restorations of 29.0 FTE of Counselors had the effect of 
reducing the total number of FTEs slated for elimination or reduction by Resolution No. 42 
to 516.1 FTE. 
 
SKIPPING 
 

28. 

The Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 46 on March 2, 2010.  
Resolution No. 46 is entitled, “Resolution to Determine Criteria for Deviation from 
Terminating a Certificated Employee In Order of Seniority (“Skipping Criteria”).  Resolution 
No. 46 (the Skipping Resolution) cited Education Code section 44955 as authority for the 
District to deviate from the strict termination requirements for certificated employees based 
upon seniority, contending the District has identified a specific need for personnel to teach 
specific course or courses of study, and certain certificated employees have special training 
and experience necessary to teach that course or courses of study that others with more 
seniority do not possess. 
 

29. 

The Skipping Resolution set forth three types of courses of study where the 
District has identified special needs for trained and credentialed certificated personnel that 
the District identified should be skipped for the purposes of this layoff: 
 

A.  Individuals who are fully credentialed to serve in special education assignments; 
B.  Individuals who are fully credentialed to serve in secondary schools classrooms 

C.  Individuals who are fully credentialed to serve in secondary schools classrooms in 

mathematics assignments; and 

physical sciences assignments. 

30. 

The Skipping Resolution defined “fully credentialed” for the purposes of 

skipping in the secondary mathematics and physical sciences groups to mean “an employee 
who possesses a preliminary, clear or internship credential.” 
 
RESOLUTION OF SKIPPING ISSUES GENERALLY 
 

31. 

There was no issue regarding any respondent with respect to the skipping of 

employees with special education credentials.  The one respondent with a potential issue was 
resolved by a correction made by the District’s counsel during the proceedings. 
 

32.  Mindful of potential objections by certain groups of potential respondents to 

the skipping of fully credentialed secondary mathematics and physical sciences teachers, the 
District preempted the issue by determining to give full bumping rights to any senior 
respondent who believed he or she could teach one of the assignments for which a junior 
employee was being skipped.  Some of the more senior employees did have bumping rights 

 

 

8

and were permitted to bump a skipped junior employee.  Since the junior employee being 
bumped had not been given a preliminary notice of layoff, both the skipped junior employee 
and the more senior employee who successfully bumped the more junior employee were 
retained. 
 

33. 

Throughout these proceedings, respondents complained that the District 
“overnoticed” this matter, giving preliminary notices of layoff to far more certificated 
employees than were reflected by the reduction or elimination of the PKS set forth in 
Resolution No. 42.  This claim was based upon respondents’ contention that the layoff 
process was defective and unnecessarily complex, and that such layoffs require an 
approximately a one to one correspondence between the FTEs of the PKS being reduced or 
eliminated, and the number of certificated employees receiving preliminary notices.   
 

34. 

These contentions, if followed, could lead to unanticipated consequences 

materially adverse to the larger group of respondents.  If approximate one to one 
correspondence is required, the District could find itself in a considerable financial bind with 
respect to matters such as giving employees more senior to those being skipped full rights to 
exercise a bump upon an employee being skipped, if warranted under the circumstances.  
The District could have easily found itself significantly under noticed, had there been an 
unexpectedly large number of successful bumps of those skipped and not noticed, especially 
if all 37 respondents claimed to have been improperly skipped had been found to have any 
merit (below).  The District could have found itself being required to reemploy numerous 
certificated employees for the upcoming school year for which it had no funding and no 
budget.  Had this ploy succeeded, respondents who were inadvertently retained would have 
been retained at the expense of some of their more senior peers who were not, creating an 
evident conflict between groups of respondents.   
 

35. 

Further, this sort of eventuality was precisely what the District was planning to 

protect against by issuing the number of preliminary notices it did, for if the District is 
required to retain employees for which it has no budget and no funding, the District will end 
up “in the red” and will wind up under fiscal management by the County Office, all with 
potential continuing jeopardy to a much larger segment of certificated employees’ jobs when 
the inevitable next rounds of even more severe cuts are required to rebalance the budget.  It is 
important to recall that the sort of prognostication required of the District must all occur 
before March 15, and more likely before March 1, and much uncertainty and guesswork is 
necessarily incumbent in the process of determining how many notices to issue.  
Respondents’ contentions assume a much higher level of precision than is practically 
available at the time the District is required to make unchangeable decisions.   
 

36. 

In addition, respondents’ contentions are both short sighted and contrary to the 
best interests of the larger group of certificated employees of the District in an effort to bring 
an untoward benefit to a few.  In order to save a few positions at any cost, the jobs of a 
potentially much larger group of certificated employees are potentially jeopardized.  The 
contentions create a rather evident conflict with the District’s Governing Board’s outspoken 
goal of avoiding being a captive of fiscal oversight by the County Office of Education fiscal 

 

9

manager.  If the District is required to reemploy persons for which it had no funds in the 
upcoming school year due to more retentions than expected and fewer preliminary notices of 
layoffs outstanding to cover those contingencies, deeper and more profound cuts, likely 
externally imposed, are sure to follow, potentially harming a much larger group of 
employees. 
 
THE ACTUAL SKIPPING CONFLCITS 
 

37. 

The conflict with the Skipping Resolution arose with respect to groups of more 

senior respondents not skipped who are possessed of Multiple Subjects (MS) credentials 
and/or credentials with supplemental authorizations or District approvals to teach in 
mathematics or physical sciences.  The Associate Superintendent explained in his testimony 
that the District adopted the Skipping Resolution because the District has identified a need 
for teachers credentialed and capable of teaching advanced mathematics such as Algebra II, 
Math Analysis and Calculus, and for Chemistry and Physics, as well as Honors and AP 
sections of these advanced subjects, at the Senior High School, grades 10-12.  In order to 
maintain the maximum flexibility possible for the District to assign and reassign personnel to 
staff all mathematics and physical sciences assignments at all grade levels 7-12, the District 
sought to skip the certificated employees in the District credentialed and competent to teach 
mathematics or physical sciences at all grade levels in middle and high school.   
 

38. 

There was no dispute that all the employees identified as subject to being 

skipped in the Skipping Resolution are credentialed and competent to teach mathematics or 
physical sciences at all grade levels 7-12.  Those more senior employees who are teaching 
mathematics or physical sciences who were not possessed of the credentials identified in the 
Skipping Resolution were served preliminary notices of layoff because none of these 
respondents are certificated or competent to teach mathematics or physical sciences at the 
senior high school level, grades 10-12, due to lack of an appropriate credential authorizing 
them to do so.  It was not disputed that possession of a MS credential with a supplemental 
authorization or District approval in mathematics or physical science does not authorize the 
credential holder to teach mathematics or physical science at the senior high school level of 
grades 10-12.  Even so, if the senior respondent being laid off could demonstrate that he or 
she was properly credentialed to teach mathematics or physical science across the whole 
spectrum of grades 7-12, that respondent was permitted to bump a more junior employee 
who had been skipped, and both were retained.  
 

39. 

Following all exercises of rights to bump, there was no evidence that any 
remaining respondent more senior to those employees who had been skipped due to the 
application of the Skipping Resolution had the appropriate credentials and competencies that 
would authorize them to teach mathematics or physical science at all grade levels 7-12.  
Some of these more senior employees receiving notices are teaching lower levels of 
mathematics and earth and life sciences at the middle schools in the District.  In particular, 
some of these employees are teaching in a “bridge” program in seventh to ninth grade 
classrooms and are teaching algebra and geometry, and earth and general physical sciences.  
The focus of the attack on the Skipping Resolution focused on this group of employees 

 

10

teaching bridge mathematics and/or physical sciences at the middle school level pursuant to a 
MS credential plus a supplemental authorization.  None of these respondents teaching bridge 
mathematics and/or physical sciences are credentialed to be able to teach mathematics or 
physical sciences at grades 10-12. 
 
THE 37 SINGLE SUBJECT SKIPS 
 

40. 

Respondents contend that the District inherently set up a seniority conflict that 

resulted in 37 respondents who are possessed of Single Subject credentials in mathematics 
and physical sciences being retained who are teaching at middle schools but who are junior 
to 37 more senior persons being laid off who are senior and who are able to teach at middle 
schools due to their credentials.  Respondents produced a spread sheet copied in part from 
the District’s Seniority List spread sheet identifying the 37 individuals being allegedly 
improperly retained.  The 37 affected respondents who were impacted by the application of 
the Skipping Resolution contended the skipping was unlawful, unfair, arbitrary and 
capricious, and a violation of Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (d).  
Nothing of the sort is accurate.   
 

41. 

The contention is based upon incomplete information (the spreadsheet 
identifying the 37 persons allegedly improperly skipped omits considerable pertinent 
information, such as those person’s credentials and competencies) and assumes the 
contended conclusion to be true in order to make the contention.  The contention requires  
assuming true that the District lacks discretion to retain junior employees with larger breadth 
of credentials over more senior employees with more limited credentials to serve in 
specifically targeted and narrowly drawn areas the District has identified as special needs 
areas.  As pointed out here, the assumption is inaccurate.  Assuming as correct this incorrect 
conclusion regarding the District’s lawful discretion leads then to respondent’s intermediate 
assertion that the District is retaining 37 more junior employees with larger breadth of 
credentials to teach in middle school classrooms where the more senior employees are indeed 
credentialed to teach.   

 
42. 

The contention is also flawed in that it requires one to assume as true a fact not 

proved or proveable; that these 37 junior teachers with larger breadth of credentials being 
skipped will all be staffing middle schools classrooms that respondents could teach in, as 
opposed to staffing senior high school calculus, physics, chemistry or algebra II classrooms 
where the more senior respondents are indisputably not credentialed to teach.  The point of 
the Skipping Resolution is to provide the District the maximum ability to staff across the 
broadest spectrum of mathematics and physical sciences offerings as District resources 
shrink; the junior employees can do this, respondents cannot.  No one knows what the 
District’s assignments will look like for the upcoming school year yet, and with a huge 
number of employees taking early retirement, enrollment upheavals and this action, it is a 
fair bet staffing will look a good deal different in the upcoming school year than in this one.  
Respondent’s contention assumes assignments in middle schools classrooms, particularly 
“bridge” will be exactly as they were in this most recent school year.  That is anything but a 
safe assumption.   

 

11

43. 

The District is not required at this stage of the proceedings to commit itself to 

any particular allocation of personnel to assignments for the upcoming school year.  The 
seniority requirements for such staffing do not disappear with the completion of this action 
and the District is still bound by those mandates.  But one of those seniority rules has an 
exception for specifically and narrowly defined District needs, set forth in section 44955, 
which permits the District to do precisely what it did here with the 37 respondents who do 
not have breadth of credentials that would have enabled them to teach the targeted subjects in 
any 7-12 classroom in the District that would have resulted in them being skipped.   
 

44. 

The Skipping Resolution was carefully and narrowly drafted, sought to 
prioritize special District needs in a fashion that provides the District with the broadest 
possible flexibility in staffing classes that are indisputably mandated by law, and focused 
upon retaining a group of persons possessed of special additional training and experience 
reflected in their credentials that permit them to teach both the lower levels of mathematics 
and physical sciences taught by the complaining respondents, as well as the much more 
advanced offerings at the high school level respondents are indisputably not credentialed to 
teach.   
 

45. 

In addition, the District offered all of these more senior respondents being 

displaced by the application of the Skipping Resolution the opportunity to bump any junior 
skipped employee, if that more senior respondent could demonstrate he or she had the 
credentials and competencies that would permit the more senior respondent to staff a 
mathematics or physical science class, regardless of grade level.  The District also credited 
these respondents with points for their additional authorizations for the purposes of breaking 
ties. 
 

46. 

Finally, the contentions suggest the District is obtaining some sort of benefit 
from ridding itself of more senior teachers with less breadth of credentials than those junior 
persons being skipped.  It was plainly evident that this process is painful for the District, and 
some very adept, skillful and rather competent persons are subject to preliminary notices of 
layoff, which is costing the District some very skilled employees.  For example, Ms. Wilson 
and Ms. Reynolds, both “bridge” teachers, one in physical science and one in mathematics, 
are both subject to layoff, having been subjected to lay off when junior employees with 
broader credentials were skipped pursuant to the Skipping Resolution.  Both testified and 
presented themselves as very pleasant, dedicated and committed persons, innovative in their 
delivery of services at difficult grade levels in the middle schools.  It is impossible to believe 
that the District is obtaining any benefit in having to lay off employees like these. 
 

47. 

In the Skipping Resolution, the District lawfully exercised its discretion to 
retain a more junior group of employees who were credentialed to staff a mathematics or 
physical science class at any grade level 7-12, over an equal sized group of more senior 
employees who are significantly more limited in the classes they can staff, and are unable to 

 

12

fill an assignment at a senior high school.1  There is nothing arbitrary, capricious, unfair or 
unlawful about drawing such a distinction, and section 44955 specifically provides school 
district governing boards such discretion and authority, provided a correlation, such as was 
successfully demonstrated here, is made between the District’s needs and the more junior 
group of employees being skipped and retained.  The Skipping Resolution is a reasonable, 
lawful, prudent and carefully drawn exercise of the District’s discretion, and there is no legal 
flaw with it, either in concept or as actually implemented. 
 
TIE BREAKING 
 

48.  On March 2, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 43, to 
determine criteria to be applied to break ties between groups of certificated employees who 
have identical first days of paid service to the District (seniority dates).  Pursuant to 
provisions of Education Code section 44955, the Board determined, as reflected in 
Resolution No. 43, certain District needs that should be prioritized between groups of 
employees with identical seniority dates.  The Governing Board determined, for the 2010-
2011 school year only, that the needs of the District and its students would be best met by 
establishing a point system to be applied to give priority to individual employees with 
identical seniority dates who have attained education, training, degrees, credentials and 
authorizations that were prioritized by the Governing Board.  In Resolution No. 43, a point 
scoring system was set up for use in ordering seniority within groups of employees with 
identical seniority dates, and, in the event that two or more employees with identical 
seniority dates remain tied after the application of the point system, seniority would be 
determined by lottery.  The point scoring system was as follows: 
 

A.  Multiple and Single Subject Credentials: Rating +1 per credential; 

 
Supplemental and Subject Matter Authorizations that authorize the employee 
to teach a subject matter different from that authorized on the underlying 
credential:  Rating: +1 per authorization. 
Earned degrees beyond the BA/BS level: Rating +1 per credential; and 

B. 

C. 

D. 

Earned English Language Authorization:  Rating +1 per authorization 

In the event that common day hires have equal qualifications based on 
application of the above criteria, the District will then break ties by utilizing a 
lottery.   

                                                 
1 Alexander v. Delano Unified School District (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 571-2; Alexander v. Board of Trustees 
(1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567;  Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399. 

13

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

49.  Numerous  respondents sought to challenge the Tie-Breaking Criteria during 

GENERAL CHALLENGES TO TIE BREAKING CRITERIA THE BOARD VALUED 
 
 
the hearing.  These respondents were of the opinion that the Tie-Breaking Criteria 
established by the Governing Board in Resolution No. 43 for earning points to break ties 
failed to consider skills, services, and experiences these respondents felt were either ignored 
or undervalued, or both.  These respondents contend that changes to the Tie-Breaking 
Criteria should be ordered as part of these proceedings in order to have these additional 
factors recognized and weighted appropriately.   
 

50. 

The establishment of the Tie-Breaking Criteria set forth in Resolution No. 43 

was the result of a deliberative process following presentation and hearings before the 
Governing Board, and a decision made by the Board after consideration and deliberation.  
The result of this deliberative process is the expression of the Governing Board’s priorities 
for the District for the upcoming school year only, reflected in the selection and weighting of 
the criteria.  The selection of some and not other criteria, and the relative weighting of such 
criteria are matters entirely within the discretion of the Board.  There is no jurisdiction here 
to bring challenges to the Tie Breaking Criteria reflected in Resolution No. 43 in these 
proceedings.  Such challenges, and any changes deemed necessary, or not, remain matters 
within the exclusive province of the Board and may not be raised or disturbed here.   
 
INFORMATION REGARDING CREDENTIALS, CERTIFICATIONS, AUTHORIZATIONS, 
DEGREES AND SENIORITY DATES SOUGHT BY DISTRICT 
 
The instant matter represents the District’s third annual consecutive layoff 
 
proceeding, following many years of being essentially exempt due to rapid growth in the 
District.  Many respondents who were served preliminary notices of layoff and were made 
part of these proceedings have been through one or more of these previous two layoff 
procedures.  It is incomprehensible that any of the respondents were not aware of the 
proceedings in the past two years, even if not directly subject to them. 
 

51. 

52.  When it became evident in November 2009 that the Governor threatened 

severe additional cuts to school funding, and that such cuts were imminent and would 
directly impact the District, the Assistant Superintendent ordered the District wide 
solicitation of updated information from all certificated employees regarding each 
employee’s credentials and certifications.  The all-employee canvass was accomplished by 
the Assistant Superintendent by sending out three e-mail messages entitled “Annual 
Verification, 2009-2010 Certificated Seniority List.”  The emails were sent to each 
certificated employee in the District.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

14

53. 

The first such “Annual Verification, 2009-2010 Certificated Seniority List” 
email was sent to all certificated employees on November 20, 2009.  The email requested 
each employee to provided updated information regarding the following: 

 
Legal Name; 
Seniority Date (first day of paid probationary service in the District); 
Degrees; 
Credentials; 
Certificates; 
Licensures; 
Subject(s) currently assigned. 

54. 

 
 
The email advised each employee to confirm whether the information for the 
employee that was then on file with the District was correct by instructing each employee to 
use the following steps to verify that your information is correct: (emphasis in the original) 
 

Open Public Folders; 
Select All Public Folders; 
Select District Forms; 
Select Human Resources; 
Open email from Brandon Krueger with the subject 2009-2010 Certificated Seniority 
List; and 
Open the attached document entitled Certificated Seniority List 11-03-09. 

55. 

The email continued with instructions to help each employee find his or her 
records on file with the District, and advised that once the information was accessed, and if 
the information was accurate and complete, the employee need do nothing else.  If the 
information in the District official records for the employee was incorrect or inaccurate in 
any fashion, an attachment for submitting corrections to the District’s HR Department was 
provided (Request for Correction), along with instructions regarding how to complete and 
submit the Request for Corrections.  Information to obtain help and to get questions 
answered was also provided.  The District requested all Requests for Correction be on file 
with the District no later than December 4, 2009. 

 
56.  A follow-up email entitled “Reminder-Annual Verification, 2009-2010 

Certificated Seniority List” was sent to all District certificated employees on December 7, 
2009.  The email was identical in most respects to the November 20 request for information, 
with two exceptions.  In the list of types of information on file with the District for which the 
District sought confirmation of accuracy or completeness, “Degrees” was omitted.  The date 
for submission of the Requests for Correction from District employees was also different, as 
it was extended to December 10, 2009. 

 

 

 
 
 
 

15

57.  A third email was sent to all District certificated employees from the HR 
Department on January 21, 2010.  This email was entitled “2009-2010 Certificated Seniority 
List-UPDATE.”  The types of information sought and the method for requesting changes or 
corrections of any incorrect, missing or incomplete information in any employee’s District 
Personnel record was the same as that set out in the December 7, 2009 email.  For the third 
time, District certificated employees were directed to an electronic copy of the District 
certificated Seniority List provided as an attachment to the email and requested to review it 
for completeness and accuracy with respect to the data carried on official District Personnel 
records for the employee.  Employees were provided until January 29, 2010, to provide 
Requests for Correction. 
 

58.  Many employees took advantage of this thrice repeated District canvass for 

updated and/or corrected information that should be reflected on the District certificated 
Seniority List.  The District was very forgiving about the stated deadlines for the submission 
of the Requests for Corrections, and in fact was continuing to make corrections to records up 
to and throughout the evidentiary hearing through the front desk of the HR Department and 
in the hearing itself.   

There was one exception, however.  The District was required to select a cut-

off date for the submission for Requests for Correction to records in order to produce a 
reasonably firm certificated Seniority List in order to determine seniority for the purpose of 
determining who of the District’s certificated employees should receive preliminary notices 
of layoff.  Thus, corrections submitted after February 1, 2010, were not reflected in the final 
Seniority List used to determine who received preliminary notices of layoff.  Nevertheless, 
the District did not cut off the correction process, and continued to make corrections as it was 
presented with evidence that corrections were warranted. 

The District HR personnel and counsel, as the hearing drew close and 

commenced,  investigated and attempted to verify, or is in the process of, investigating and 
verifying, the assertions made by each employee on each Request for Corrections of records.  
Many corrections to the Seniority List were made using these inputs, when found to be 
warranted and verified, before the seniority list became final.  The updated and augmented 
Seniority List was the tool the Assistant Superintendent and his staff used in both creating 
the lists of employees identified for receipt of preliminary notices of layoff, as well as lists of 
employees with first dates of paid probationary service to the District where ties needed to be 
broken and application of the tie-breaking criteria was required. 
 
END OF HEARING STIPULATION REGARDING SUBMISSION OF EVIDENCE OF 
ADVANCED DEGREES 

 
59. 

 
60. 

 
61. 

The District sought a finding in closing statements that the District’s system of 
notifying its employees that updates should be made to the District’s records to make certain 
the Seniority List was accurate was sufficient and adequate notice.  Respondents sought a 
finding that the notice was insufficient and pointed out repeatedly that only the first of the 
three email notices mentioned that respondents should provide information about “Degrees.”   

 

16

62. 

Several respondents testified about the canvassing email notices soliciting 

respondents to update their records.  Some were candid enough to state they paid the notices 
little heed, and found themselves scrambling after the preliminary notices went out to get 
their degree information on file with the District.  Others conducted themselves 
inappropriately and unprofessionally.  Such testimony and demeanor by a few respondents 
tended to diminish the impression of professionalism exhibited by most of the respondents, 
who, for the most part presented themselves professional, thoughtful and having 
appropriately prepared themselves to defend their jobs.  None of these respondents in this 
small group were willing to accept personal responsibility for making certain that the 
District’s records of credentials, education and qualifications information on file 
corresponded with their expectations of what the records should reflect, and each blamed the 
District for failure to remind them of what was their own responsibility.     
 

63. 

It is not the District’s responsibility to see to it that any employee’s 

documentation for earning an advanced degree, successfully completing post graduate units, 
obtaining an additional credential or authorization, or any other additional enhancement to 
their qualifications is updated or accurate.  This responsibility is solely and exclusively that 
of the certificated employee, and no one else.  If the employee incorrectly assumes the 
District’s records are updated and later finds the records are not, but has made no effort to 
check his or her own documentation on file for accuracy, it is disingenuous to try to blame 
the District for that failure.  The District’s responsibility is to make certain that any 
documentation the employee submits is accurately reflected in the District’s records, and 
nothing more.  Respondent’s contentions seek to shift a good deal if not all of their own 
responsibility to provide accurate and updated information to the District and away from 
themselves, where it exclusively belongs.   
 

64. 

The District was not legally required to send the respondents any email or 

other notifications that respondents should update their information.  The District sent the 
email notices solely as a courtesy and a convenience for the benefit of its employees, 
knowing that having everyone’s information accurately updated in advance might obviate the 
chaotic updating and correction of records that can and did occur, when those who have 
made little or no effort to keep their records updated suddenly realize their lack of diligence 
might cost them their job.  The District is under no legal obligation to remind its employees 
to update their records, and respondents pointed out no legal authority that requires the 
District to give such notice, reasonable or otherwise.  This responsibility is entirely that of 
the employee.  Thus, contending that the District’s emails failed to give “reasonable” notice 
to the employees to update their information assumes that the District is under a duty to give 
such notice.    
 

65. 

It also appears that some of this small group of respondents’ confusion 

stemmed from their failure to familiarize themselves with the difference between having 
evidence of completion of the post-graduate units necessary to prove that the employee is 
entitled to an enhancement on the District pay scale for completing the equivalent of a 
Master’s degree, and the submission of actual evidence of the award of the degree.  There is 
a significant difference, and it appears that many of the respondents who complained that 

 

17

they thought the District had already received evidence that they had been awarded a 
Master’s degree thought submission of an unofficial transcript showing the completion of the 
units was satisfactory proof that they had been granted the degree. 
 
RELIANCE UPON CBEDS REPORTS 
 

66.  Most of the respondents complaining about the District’s failure to recognize 

and credit them tie-breaking points for having Master’s degrees claimed they based their 
beliefs about the state of the District records for them because they claimed that District 
records for them reflected in District disseminated CBEDS reports provided to each 
certificated employee at the end of each school year showed they had Master’s degrees.  
These respondents claimed that they were entitled to rely upon these CBEDS reports as 
accurately showing that the District records showed credit for the degree. No CBEDS report 
for any respondent upon which any respondent allegedly relied was offered in evidence.    
 

67. 

The small group of respondents making this particular claim about Master’s 
degrees not reflected in the District tie breaking score sheet were profoundly unpersuasive.  
Each failed to accept personal responsibility for the timely filing of their own documents 
with the District and confirming the accuracy of their own records on file.  None paid much 
heed when the District email reminders were disseminated.  There was no showing that the 
assumptions these respondents made about the state of their credentials and records on file 
with the District was either reasonable or rational.  These respondents’ efforts to slough their 
own responsibilities off on the District, and then fault the District for failing to notify them 
when their records were not as they thought was rather unprofessional.   
 
A TWO EDGED SWORD-BE CAREFUL WHAT YOU WISH FOR 
 

68. 

This particular challenge to Master’s degree crediting for tie-breaking is short 
sighted and a dangerous two edged sword.  In order to prevail, the challenge seeks to create a 
duty that does not and should not exist, and then faults the District for failure to comply.  A 
necessary corollary to this claim is a possible change to a District policy that respondents 
appear to blame for creating the confusion, that of the District’s policy of being quick and 
generous with granting enhancements on the salary scale for obtaining the units necessary for 
an advanced degree before the degree is actually awarded.  The District has generously 
provided quick pay enhancements for employees on receipt of unofficial documentation 
evidence of completion of the units necessary for the degree, such as an unofficial transcript 
showing completion of units but that does not show the award of the degree.  The District has 
determined as a matter of policy not to force their employees to provide official 
documentation of completion of the units and actual award of the degree before the pay 
enhancement is provided.  This is a considerable benefit and incentive to the employee to 
attain post-graduate education.  The District has determined to provide its advanced degree 
seeking employees with the benefit in advance of receipt of official documentation of 
completion, because there is always a lag time, sometimes considerable, between completion 
of the units for the degree and actual official award of the degree.   

 

 

18

69. 

These respondents now complain that District records on a CBEDS report that 

reflect a change in pay scale for completion of post-graduate units but not attainment of the 
actual degree binds the District to treat them as if they have the degree for the purpose of 
breaking ties.  These respondents each revealed in their testimonies that they knew they had 
not yet been officially awarded their degrees, and that they only had unofficial 
documentation of units completed on file with the District as of March 15, 2010, and that the 
unofficial documentation did not show the award of the degrees.  The District has sought 
adequate proof of official award of the degree before granting a tie breaking point that is 
indisputably to be awarded only for the actual attainment of the degree, which necessarily 
means the degree has to have been officially awarded by the degree granting institution.  Yet 
these respondents have complained that untimely submission of an unofficial transcript 
showing only completion of units, but no evidence of even unofficial award of the degree, 
should entitle them to a point for the award of the degree, because the District accepted the 
unofficial transcript as satisfactory to grant the pay scale increase, which was then reflected 
on their CBEDS reports. 
 

70. 

The “be careful what you wish for” consequence of this contention comes into 

play if this claim that the District has a duty to give notice to these respondents that their 
degree information on file with the District is not what these respondents thought is found to 
have merit, the District could insist that no benefit or enhancement is available for any 
respondent completing continuing or post-graduate units or attaining degrees, absent official 
documentation of every group of units and every degree in advance of providing the 
employee any enhancement.  This strict outcome is precisely what this rather short-sighted 
contention invites. 
 
STIPULATION REGARDING LATE FILED EVIDENCE OF MASTER’S DEGREES 
 

71.  Nevertheless, in the interest of continuing to accommodate its employees, the 

District entered into a stipulation with respondents in closing regarding untimely filed 
evidence of advanced degrees.  The stipulation is as follows: 
 

72. 

Those who hold Master’s degrees granted before March 15, 2010 and have 

official transcripts or official documents showing conferral of the Master’s degree on those 
documents, then with respect to the award of tie-breaking points for having an additional 
degree, if the additional point for having the Master’s degree moves the employee up to the 
next higher band of employees, the employee receiving the extra point will be moved up to 
the next band and will be placed at the bottom of that next higher band.  No additional tie 
breaking will occur between the employees already in the next higher band and any 
employee moved into the next higher band due to the award of the extra point. 
 

73. 

The Assistant Superintendent elected to group employees subject to the tie 

breaking process by subject matter taught and the employee’s eligibility to teach in that 
subject matter area due to having the appropriate credentials.  If, after crediting each with the 
points authorized by the Resolution one or more employees were still tied, the 
Superintendent and his staff drew numbers from an envelope for each employee still tied in 

 

19

the particular group.  Groups of employees with the same first dates of paid probationary 
service to the District were thus ranked within their same dates, and were given seniority 
with respect to one another within their tie groupings.  No employee became subject to the 
lottery until the criteria specified by the Board had been applied, all possible eligible points 
had been credited and the employees were still tied.  These tie broken seniority dates were 
agreed in advance to be effective for this year only, as the application of the Tie-Breaking 
Criteria reflects the Board’s ranking of District priorities for this single school year only. 
 

74.  Although there were a number of individual issues and complaints regarding 

75.  As briefly alluded to above, bumping is the process where an employee who 

the actual application of the Tie-Breaking Criteria and the resulting rankings within same 
date groups, there was no issue regarding how the groups were selected or how the process 
of breaking the ties was accomplished.  The Assistant Superintendent’s methodology for the 
assembly and application of the Tie-Breaking Criteria and the resulting lottery, if still 
required, was not  arbitrary, capricious or other than even handed.  The methodology and its 
application was fair and transparent. 
 
BUMPING 
 
 
has received a preliminary notice of layoff looks at the Seniority List and attempts to find an 
individual with less seniority who is being retained for the upcoming school year who has the 
same or weaker credentials, authorizations and competencies in the same subject matter areas 
such that the more senior teacher receiving notice might be able to displace the junior 
teacher.  Whenever notices of layoff deviate from just going up the Seniority List 
consecutively from least senior forward in time and date, resulting in junior employees being  
retained in the process, bumping can become an issue.  There was no issue raised specific to 
bumping. 
 
FINANCIAL AND BUDGET REASONS FOR THE ACTION 
 

76. 

The District is facing multi-faceted financial pressure that has placed the 

District into a fiscal condition that could lead to an operating deficit for the upcoming school 
year.  The District is faced with the prospect of having the Sacramento County Office of 
Education appoint a fiscal monitor to oversee its finances and expenditures if it does not 
bring its budget into balance.  The District exhausted its “rainy day” cash reserve in order to 
save jobs for certificated employees during the previous two years.  The District is now faced 
with hard cuts and little room for maneuvering.  The District was warned by the Governor’s 
budget projections in January 2010 to expect a significant across-the-board cut in school 
funding due to a commensurate severe decline in receipt of revenue by the State.  In the 
previous school year, federal stimulus money helped alleviate some of the cuts.  This year no 
such inflow of federal funds is expected.   
 

77. 

Regardless of the ultimate mechanism, the District expects a substantial 

reduction in funding in the upcoming school year.  The Board has concluded it is not in the 
best interests of the District and the welfare of its students to operate at a deficit and have to 

 

20

run its finances through the County Office of Education and have its fiscal decisions subject 
to the review and approval of the County OE fiscal manager.  The Board and the 
Superintendent have considered myriad methods to deal with the anticipated reductions in 
expected funding.  Unfortunately, the law requires service of preliminary notices of layoff by 
a specific date, and at that time, reducing or eliminating certain non-mandated classes and 
programs offered in the District’s educational portfolio was the only remaining option for the 
District to bring its budget into balance.  The Associate Superintendent expressed his desire 
to save as many classes, programs and teacher’s jobs as fiscally possible and prudent, and the 
District’s on-going search for funding and options that will continue long after these 
proceedings are concluded. 
 
ATTRITION 
 
 
The Associate Superintendent, on behalf of the District, considered all known 
attrition, resignations, retirements and requests for transfer in determining the actual number 
of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.  In fact, more than 100 
employees had their preliminary notices of layoff rescinded because the District was able to 
implement its Plan for early retirement and enough persons accepted the offer to retire.  
 
STATE AND FEDERAL MANDATES 
 

78. 

79. 

There was no evidence that the District proposes to eliminate any services that 

80. 

This represents the District’s third consecutive annual layoff procedure.  Most 

are State or federally mandated.   
 
INDIVIDUAL RESPONDENTS AND THEIR CLAIMS 
 
 
of the respondents have been through this process at least once before, and were fortunate 
enough to be hired back when the District received better than expected funding.  Some of 
the respondents have been through all three years’ layoff processes.   
 
 
the respondents who testified presented themselves professionally and credibly, appropriately 
prepared considering the nature of the proceedings, and consistent with reasonable 
expectations of professional educators with advanced degrees, credentials and certifications 
who are charged with the responsibility to educate the youth of the community.   
 

There were 89 individual respondents who testified.  As stated above, most of 

81. 

82. 

The respondents fell into general groups regarding their individual issues that 

they felt needed to be raised during these proceedings.   

 
83.  A few respondents had no claim of any sort, and some of these had no idea 

they had no claim because they were completely unprepared to present a coherent, supported 
claim.  These respondents had not bothered to check any District records before they came 
forward to assert a claim that was ultimately directly rebutted by the District records on file 
for them that were indisputably correct.  These respondents wasted time and money.   

 

21

84.  Others made claims that were strikingly untimely, two of which sought 
correction in District records for the employees of data that was more than ten years old and 
which the employees had never made any previous effort to correct.   
 

85. 

Several made excellent attacks on the seniority system by making mutually 
exclusive alternative claims that, on the one hand, a senior employee who has never before 
taught the subject they are teaching should not be able to displace (bump) them because that 
senior employee had no experience teaching that course, even though there was no dispute 
the senior employee had credentials and competence that would enable the senior employee 
to teach the assignment.  These claimed that it was unfair not to give them some credit for 
the previous experience teaching the assignment against the naked seniority claim being used 
to displace them; and yet, at the same time, these same respondents made claims to the right 
to bump a different employee junior to themselves to teach a subject they had never taught 
before, simply because they were senior to that employee.  What was troubling about the 
testimony of the few respondents making such conflicting alternative claims was the fact that 
none of them appeared to see the conflict between trying to claim the advantages of the 
seniority system, using it as a weapon to displace a junior employee, even where they had no 
previous experience in the subject matter to be assumed, and at the same time decrying the 
use of seniority to displace them from an assignment the bumping in employee had never 
before taught.  These contentions certainly pointed out a flaw in the seniority system, as 
seniority alone often fails to place value upon a teacher’s experience in a particular subject 
matter, and at times overweights the mere possession of credentials and authorizations over 
actual experience.   
 
Common to all of the claims of the individual respondents were three features.  
 
First, each individual respondent who raised a factually or legally viable claim received relief 
from the District’s team of three counsel and three administrators overseeing the presentation 
of the District’s case and evaluating each individual claim as it was presented by the 
respondents during the evidentiary hearing.  Each individual claim that was assessed and 
found to have merit by the District team before the close of the evidentiary hearing resulted 
unhesitatingly in a rescission of that respondent’s respective preliminary notices of layoff.   
 

86. 

87. 

The second common feature was that, for those respondents who did not 

present a viable claim for correction or relief, those respondents did not receive relief from 
the District, because none of them raised a factually or legally viable claim.   
 

88. 

Third, and most important, almost none of the individual respondents who 
testified raised a claim that, had it been found to be meritorious, would have resulted in a 
change in who should or should not have received a preliminary notice of layoff or whether 
any PKS slated for reduction or elimination for the upcoming school year should not be 
permitted.  Jurisdiction for these proceedings is quite limited, and, without the District’s 
consent to extend the process, there is no jurisdiction in this forum to review claims of 
incorrect seniority dates or incorrect application of the Tie-Breaking Criteria, or any of the 
other issues the individual respondents raised, unless it can be shown that if the respondent 
prevails on the claim, his or her preliminary notice should be rescinded, and/or one of more 

 

22

of the PKS FTEs slated for elimination or reduction is factually or legally inappropriate.  
Almost none of the respondent’s claims, if recognized, would have had this jurisdictionally 
required impact.  Many of these claims were not only untimely raised, but constituted issues 
properly the subject of a different process, such as a grievance to correct the alleged error 
pursuant to the District’s internal or Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) processes 
between the District and its employees. 
 

89.  Although these proceedings have a material indirect impact in certain regards 
upon rehire rights, there is no jurisdiction in these proceedings to decide rehire rights or the 
order of rehire for any individual or group of certificated employees.  The fact that any 
individual respondent’s claim might affect the employee’s rehire rights is thus insufficient, in 
and of itself, to invoke the jurisdiction of these proceedings.  Most of the individual 
respondent’s claims, if recognized, would have impacted only the individual’s rehire rights.   

 
90.  Nevertheless, the District has elected to give the individual respondents a 
forum, even though it had no legal obligation to do so, and allowed all 89 individuals to state 
their claims, even only a very few had viable claims for which jurisdiction in these 
proceedings is appropriate.  Where the individual respondent’s claim was deemed to have 
factual or legal merit, the claim was recognized and relief was granted, as set forth above.  
For the remainder of the claims, recognizing any claim in this forum that could not have 
resulted in a rescission if satisfactorily proved, was entirely within the District’s discretion.  
As the District did not object to these claims being advanced that were remaining after the 
District recognized those it deemed to have merit were eliminated, those remaining claims 
are accordingly assessed here. 
 
RESPONDENTS WHO SEEK A CHANGE IN SENIORITY DATE 
 
 
 
 
Certain respondents sought to tack previous experience teaching in the District 
as long term substitutes on to their existing service in order to push their seniority dates back 
in time, to the date they claimed they first rendered paid service as a long term substitute.   A 
few of these respondents produced documentation that persuaded the District that they met 
the legal test for adding their long term substitute service to their existing service.  The 
District accordingly made changes to those respondents’ seniority dates as was warranted by 
the documentation presented, and preliminary notices to some were rescinded.   
 

THOSE SEEKING TO TACK PREVIOUS LONG TERM SUBSTITUTE SERVICE 

91. 

92.  None of the other respondents making a claim to an earlier seniority date than 
that already carried in the District’s records produced satisfactory evidence that they met the 
legal and factual requirements to have their previous long term substitute experience tacked 
to their recognized District service.  There were a variety of reasons the evidence supporting 
these remaining claims failed, such as the long term substituting had breaks in service in it 
and thus did not result in a consecutive 75 per-cent of the school year served, or were a 
cobbling together of several short terms of substitute service at different sites that did not 
combine to meet the threshhold, or, finally and most common, the long term substitution 

 

23

experience did not meet the 75 per-cent consecutive service in the school year test because it 
was less than that in the year claimed.  Accordingly, the remaining respondents’ claims to 
change their seniority dates to begin when they started their long term substituting fail for 
lack of evidentiary support. 
 

44914 v. 44918 

93. 

The District contends the provisions of Education Code section 44914 provide 
the District discretion to grant or deny credit for previous long term substitute service in the 
District for seniority purposes toward permanent status when the certificated employee 
continues on as a probationary employee in the District.  The District points to the 
discretionary language of the statute, use of the language, “ … the governing board may 
count the year of employment as a substitute or as a substitute and probationary employee as 
one year of the probationary period which he is required by law to serve as a condition to 
being classified as a permanent employee of the district, ” the fact that the statute deals with 
substitute service for the purpose of computing time for classification as a permanent 
employee and the fact that it was enacted in 1976 as reasons section 44914 governs and 
provides the District discretion in determining whether it may grant or refuse to allow 
employees to tack previous service as a substitute in the District in computing seniority. 

Respondents contend section 44918 mandates that the long term substitute 

who serves in the District for more than 75 per-cent of a previous year and continues on as a 
probationary employee must be given credit toward seniority for the substitute service.  
Respondents correctly point out that the language of section 44918 is mandatory and agree 
section 44914’s language is discretionary.  Respondents also agree that section 44918 was 
enacted later in time than section 44914.   

It is not necessary to resolve these contentions here, as no respondent whose 
seniority date was not corrected during the proceedings produced satisfactory evidence to 
advance a viable claim for a change in date.  None of the remaining respondents presented 
satisfactory evidence that they served 75 per-cent of the days of the school year for which 
they were making claim. 

“TIME SHEET” TEACHERS SEEKING TO TACK PREVIOUS TEMPORARY SERVICE 
 

96. 

Several respondents, including Ms. Soto, sought earlier seniority dates by 

attempting to tack earlier service under temporary teaching contracts, where they were paid 
hourly for service and were paid by submitting time sheets.  None of these claims had legal 
or factual merit.  None of the respondents making this claim produced satisfactory evidence 
in support of their claims.   
 

97.  However, two respondents making such claims warrant being singled out for 
special recognition.  These two respondents testified in a fashion that revealed they tried to 
conceal the true nature of their previous service in the District that they were contending 
should be recognized for additional seniority credit.  One only reluctantly conceded upon 

 
94. 

 
95. 

 

 

 

24

cross-examination that her previous service she hoped to tack was pursuant to a temporary 
contract.  The other refused to concede the true facts until confronted with a copy of the 
contract, and then she refused to acknowledge that her first day of service was later than she 
claimed, even though the contract impeached her claim.  The fact that these two respondents 
decided to advance their claims in this fashion was disappointing. 
 
THOSE SEEKING EARLIER SENIORITY DATES FOR ATTENDING PRE-CONTRACT IN-
SERVICES 
 
 
 

OPEN COURT 

98.  A significant number of respondents sought changes and advances in their 

seniority dates for attendance at Open Court in service training that occurred before the first 
day of paid service under their contracts for the given year they attended the training.  In 
each instance, the respondents attended the week long training that indeed did take place 
before the school term started.  Each of these respondents served as elementary or middle 
school teachers teaching at Title 1 schools in the District.  There was no doubt the training 
was useful and valuable to the respondents and to the District.  There was no evidence that 
training was mandatory, even though many respondents believed it to be so.  A few more 
forthcoming respondents more accurately described the parameters of the training; that it was 
“highly recommended and encouraged,” although not mandatory, making it clear that 
disapproval of one’s principal was at stake if one exercised the choice not to attend, but that 
attendance was still discretionary with the teacher. 
 

99. 

The respondents claiming credit on their seniority dates for attendance at Open 

Court trainings fell into two rough groups, those who were aware they were not paid a 
stipend or cash for attending, and those who were not sure.  Many respondents who attended 
Open Court trainings believed they were required to go as part of their job requirements, and 
most believed that such training attendance was part of their teaching contracts for that 
school year.  Some were aware that they received educational credit for the training in the 
form of units completed credit that would help them advance on the District’s salary scale, 
and others thought they had been paid for the time.   
 

100.  Each respondent who attended Open Court training, regardless of the year, 
was given hour for hour educational units credits on the District salary scale.  For some it 
resulted in a pay increase, for others it did not, because they had not yet accumulated enough 
credit hours to advance to the next step.  There was no evidence any respondent was 
compensated for Open Court training with cash or by a payment under their teaching contract 
for that year.  Therefore, as the service was not paid service to the District, but was rather in 
the form and nature of additional higher/continuing education credits, similar to participating 
in post-graduate classes toward an advanced degree.  Therefore, attendance at the Open 
Court trainings does not constitute paid service for the purpose of advancing their seniority 
dates. 
 
 

 

25

OTHER PRE-CONTRACT IN-SERVICE TRAINING DATE CLAIMS 

101.  A few other respondents sought to advance their seniority dates for claims that 

 
 
 
they attended in-service trainings before their contracts started that were not recognized by 
their seniority dates.  One or two of these claims were discovered during the proceedings by 
the District team to have merit, and corrections were made to those respondents’ District 
records immediately.  At least one such correction resulted in an immediate rescission of that 
respondent’s preliminary notice of layoff.2   
 

102.  None of the remaining claims had any merit.  The remaining respondents had 

either attended training that was not mandatory and was not part of their contract, or failed to 
prove their seniority date did not accurately include their attendance at all training required 
by their contracts. 
 

COUNSELORS SEEKING EARLIER SENIORITY DATES FOR PER-CONTRACT IN 
SERVICE DURING LONGER CONTRACT YEAR. 

104.  The counselor staffing the Tobacco Use Education Coordinator position made 

 
103.  The few respondent counselors who testified appeared to make a special effort 
 
to testify unpersuasively.  Two made claims that their seniority dates should be advanced due 
to attending in service training and due to the fact that counselors serve under a longer 
contract year than other certificated personnel.  One of these respondents claimed 
adjustments were due him for service in 2001, and another one for in service completed in 
1995.  Neither brought any documentation to substantiate their claims.  Neither had any 
explanation for why they waited for the better part of a decade or more to bring these claims, 
and neither appeared to exhibit any comprehension why bringing such grossly stale claims 
might be a problem.  Neither was able to coherently articulate any factual or legal basis for 
why the claimed adjustments should be made. 
 
 
an exceptionally self-absorbed claim that she is absolutely indispensible to the District and 
cannot be laid off, regardless of her seniority, because no one in the District has ever staffed 
the Tobacco Use Education program before and no one but her is capable of staffing it.  She 
failed to identify any sort of degree or credential she has that no one else does that is required 
to staff the program.  Other than the fact that she has staffed the position for the very few 
years the position has been in existence, she presented no evidence of any special education 
or qualifications that render her uniquely suited among all the District’s certificated 
counselor employees to staff the post, or why none of these many other well educated and 
qualified certificated employees in the District were incapable of learning the post from the 
ground up, as she did.   
 
 
 
 

                                                 
2 E.g. Respondent Ms. Kerwin 

 

26

MR. SATO AND MS. WELCH 

105.  Three respondents made claims their seniority dates should be adjusted 

106.  Unfortunately, the law3 is well settled that when a certificated employee 

RESPONDENTS WHO SEEK CREDIT FOR PREVIOUS SERVICE FOLLOWING 
RESIGNATIONS 
 
 
backwards in time in order to add previous service with the District that was broken when 
each of them resigned.  Each was reemployed following significant breaks in service.  One of 
these claims was quite compelling, reflecting a resignation that was driven by the 
respondent’s husband’s deployment to Iraq and her need to take another teaching position in 
Southern California in order to support her family.  She returned to the District and to living 
in Elk Grove when he returned.  
 
 
resigns and has a break in service, there is no lawful way to add the previous service and 
retain the first seniority date upon reemployment.  The law simply bars providing the remedy 
these respondents seek.   
 
MISCELLANEOUS INDIVIDUAL CLAIMS REQUIRING MENTION 
 
 
 
 
107.  Counsel for the District requested a Finding regarding Mr. Sato’s claim.  Mr. 
Sato’s claim was all but incomprehensible.  His affect was so flat and his responses so slow 
and sedate, it was all but impossible to understand him, despite repeated requests for 
repetition.  He evidently claimed that he should be retained to teach computers and/or 
business at the middle school level because one employee also teaching computers and two 
teaching business at the middle school level were rescinded earlier in the proceedings.  When 
asked what the credentials and competencies of the employees who were rescinded had, he 
had no idea.  There was no evidence to support Mr. Sato’s claim. 
 
 
108.  Ms. Welch complained that her supplement in Agricultural Specialization had 
not been considered in issuing her a preliminary notice of layoff.  Ms. Welch’s Agricultural 
Specialization supplement does not authorize her to teach anything other than her clear 
Agriculture credential authorizes.  She failed to point out how the Agricultural Specialization 
credential, if it was not considered, would have provided her any status or ability to bump or 
be skipped.  Ms. Welch should immediately check with the District’s HR Department to 
confirm if the supplement is on file with the District, and to provide the District the 
necessary documentation for it to be officially reflected in District records, if it not. 
 
 
 
 
109.  Ms. Dill claims she is entitled to have a seniority date of January 4, 2005, the 
date she took over for a retiring teacher in a kindergarten class.  Ms. Dill misrepresented the 
underlying facts in support of her claim.  She contended she had an interim permit when she 

MS. DILL  

                                                 
3 Education Code section 44931. 

 

27

took over the class on January 5 and taught under the authority of the interim permit as a 
temporary teacher, thus entitling her to the earlier seniority date.  The true facts were that 
Ms. Dill was hired under a 30 day substitute permit on January 4, 2005.  She applied for but 
had not been awarded the interim permit.  Ms. Dill refused to retreat from her claim even 
when presented with documentation from the Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) 
that reflects the interim permit was awarded by the CTC on April 7, 2005, which is the date 
the District carries in its records for her first day of paid service.  Ms. Dill’s claim lacked 
credibility and has no merit. 
 

MS. LESTER’S BIRTHDAY BASED KAVANAUGH CLAIM 

MR. STEWART AND MR. RUSSELL 

 
 
110.  Ms. Lester claims she should have her seniority date be August 14, 2003, 
because she started work for the District on that date.  Her seniority date is August 19, 2003.  
She claimed to have signed her contract on August 20, 2003, and that she recalls the date 
because it was her birthday and getting her contract signed on her birthday was a very 
memorable event.  Ms. Lester’s testimony was not credible and was peppered with 
inconsistencies and misrepresentations.  What she did say that was credible was that these 
events occurred a long time ago and her memory was weak regarding the details because the 
events were seven years ago.   She finally acknowledged, after much questioning and a good 
deal of evasiveness, that she did not actually work for the District on or before the day she 
signed her contract, and that she may have attended some training before that date for which 
she was separately paid with a stipend.  This claim is grossly untimely and lacks merit. 
 
 
 
 
111.  Mr. Stewart claimed that since he was bumped by persons who were 
rescinded, he should be rescinded as well.  He reasoned that since the person bumping him 
was rescinded, there is now no one to bump him.  It is not clear that anyone understood this 
rationale.  It has no merit. 
 
 
112.  Mr. Russell made an interesting argument against the seniority system along 
with a contention similar to that of Mr. Stewart.  He testified moving a more senior person 
who has never before taught the subjects into the position he has been staffing at Valley High 
School for the past two years, “is not a judicially economical way of spending County funds 
to have to train somebody else to teach this.”  He was unable to identify anyone junior to 
himself who is being retained to teach a subject he is credentialed and competent to teach.  
Although he raises a good point, his claim has no merit. 
 
 
 
 
claim they should be retained.  The first of these respondents failed to identify any junior 
person who was being retained to perform a service she was credentialed and competent to 
perform.  The second claimed flatly that she was entitled to be made permanent immediately.  
She offered no reason why other than the fact that she has been working for the District since 

113.  Two preschool teacher respondents with Multiple Subjects (MS) credentials 

THE PRESCHOOL TEACHERS WITH MULTIPLE SUBJECTS CREDENTIALS 

 

28

September 3, 1996.  She was completely unprepared to support her claim, and presented no 
documentary evidence to support her claim.  These claims have no merit.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.  
The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the proposed 
reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and the preliminary notice of layoff 
served on respondent is factually and legally appropriate. 
 

2. 

The services the District seeks to eliminate in this matter, as set forth in its 
Resolution and enumerated in the Factual Findings, are “particular kinds of services” that 
may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The 
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary 
or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise of the Board’s discretion.  Legal cause 
therefore exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the Elk Grove 
Unified School District to reduce or discontinue the 516.1 FTE remaining of particular kinds 
of services. 
 

3. 

The District is facing a significant projected deficit related to the loss of State 
reimbursement funding.  The reduction in particular kinds of services proposed is necessary 
to avert the District operating in a deficit in the upcoming school year. The reduction or 
discontinuation of these identified particular kinds of services relates solely to the welfare of 
the District and its pupils. 
 

4. 

Education Code section 44955 requires layoffs to take place in inverse order of 

seniority, with some notable exceptions.  “Thus, the statute provides that seniority 
determines the order of dismissals, and that as between employees with the same first date of 
paid service, the order of termination is determined on the basis of the needs of the district 
and its students. Senior employees are given bumping rights in that they will not be 
terminated if there are junior employees retained who are rendering services which the senior 
employee is certificated and competent to render. Conversely, as in this case, a district may 
move upward from the bottom of the seniority list, skipping over and retaining junior 
employees who are certificated and competent to render services which more senior 
employees are not.”4  There was no evidence that any certificated employee of the District is 
being retained to provide a service any of the respondents are certificated and competent to 
render.  As set forth in the Factual Findings, all employees the District elected to skip 
pursuant to the Skipping Resolution were appropriately skipped, and those more senior 
employees adversely affected by the skips failed to prove the skips were unlawful or 
inappropriate, individually or collectively.   

                                                 
4 Alexander v. Board of Trustees of the Delano Unified School District (1983) 139 Cal. App. 3d 567, 571-2; 
Moreland Teacher’s Association v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.      

 

29

5. 

Legal cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to 

give the remaining respondents, after the 12 rounds of rescissions, final notice that their 
services will not be required for school year 2010/2011.  Legal cause exists to sustain the 
Accusations.  The Board may give respondents final notices that their services will not be 
required by the District in the upcoming school year, in inverse order of seniority. 
 
 

ORDER 

1. 

The Elk Grove Unified School District action to reduce or eliminate 516.1 

FTE of particular kinds of services for the 2010/2011 school year is AFFIRMED. 
 

2. 

The Accusations with respect to respondent certificated employees of the Elk 

Grove Unified School District who received preliminary notices of layoff and were not 
rescinded, as set forth in the Factual Findings, are SUSTAINED. 
 

3. 

Final notice may be given to respondents by the District that their services will 

not be required for the upcoming school year.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of 
seniority.  
 
 
 
DATED: May 7, 2010 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
STEPHEN J. SMITH 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

30

