 
BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE   
NORTH COUNTY JOINT UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
OAH No.  2010030950 

 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of 
Certificated Employees: 
 
RENEE KRETZ, PATRICIA STARRITT, 
and GINA TOMASINI, 
 
 
 
 
 

   Respondents. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Administrative Law Judge Mary-Margaret Anderson, State of California, Office of 

Lawrence M. Schoenke, Attorney at Law, Dannis Woliver Kelly, represented the 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Hollister, California, on April 13, 2010. 
 
 
North County Joint Union School District. 
 
 
Respondents Renee Kretz and Gina Tomasini. 
 
 
 
 
 

Michelle A. Welsh, Attorney at Law, Stoner, Welsh & Schmidt, represented 

Respondent Patricia Starritt represented herself. 

The record closed on April 13, 2010. 

SUMMARY 
 

 
The Board of Trustees of the North County Joint Union School District decided to 
discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers in the 2010-2011 school year 
for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the competency and dedication of 
those whose services were proposed to be eliminated.  Except as to skipping criterion 
number 1, the process complied with Education Code requirements. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

 
 
the North County Joint Union School District (District). 
 

Evelyn Muro filed the Accusation in her official capacity as Superintendent of 

2. 

3. 

 Renee Kretz, Patricia Starritt, and Gina Tomasini (Respondents) are 

 
certificated employees of the District. 
 
 
School District adopted Resolution Number #09/10-13, in which the Board resolved to 
reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 
school year, as follows: 
 

On March 4, 2010, the Board of Trustees of the North County Joint Union 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
PARTICULAR KINDS OF 

 
  
NUMBER OF FULL- TIME       

SERVICES 

EQUIVALENT POSITIONS 

1.  Grades K-1 Multiple Subject 

Classroom Teaching 

2.  Grade 3 Multiple Subject 

Classroom Teaching 

3.  Grades 6-8 Multiple Subject 

Classroom Teaching 

1.0 
 
1.0 
 
1.0 

 4.       The Resolution also contained criteria that the District decided were sufficiently 

important to warrant deviating from seniority order when instituting the reductions:  

 
 

 

It  will  be  necessary  to  retain  the  services  of  certificated 
employees in the 2010-2011 school year regardless of seniority, 
who possess qualifications needed for the following programs: 
 
1.      Alameda  County  Office  of  Education  -  Educator-on-Loan 
Program. 
 
      2.    Special  Education,  Response  to  Intervention  (RTI),  and 
English  Language  Development  (ELD)  Teaching  position  – 
Current employee teaching special education students, providing 
RTI  services,  and  providing  ELD  service  in  one  teaching 
position  and  who  will  be  assigned  to  teach  Special  Education 
students  for  2010-2011  and  continue  to  provide  RTI  and  ELD 
service  and  who  possesses  or  will  be  eligible  to  possess  any 
the  California  Commission  on  Teacher 
document  from 
Credentialing  entitling  that  teacher  to  teach  special  education 
students with Mild/Moderate Disabilities.  

 

 

Muro testified that the skipping criteria were created with two teachers in mind and 

 
that they apply only to those two teachers.  Criterion number 1 applies to Gabriella Armento-
Ito and Criterion number 2 applies to Respondent Starritt.  
 
 
On March 5, 2010, written notice of the recommendation that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year (the preliminary notice) was served personally on 

The District’s Seniority List was used to determine who would receive notices.  

5. 

 

2

7. 

8. 

6. 

Superintendent Muro credibly testified about the reasons for the Board’s 

After the preliminary notices were sent, the District was informed of one 

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 

Each of the three Respondents filed a timely request for hearing.  Accordingly, an 

five teachers: Lisa Sinclair, Gabriella Armento-Ito, and all three Respondents.  Each notice 
contained the reasons for it.   
 
 
Accusation was filed and served.  Each Respondent filed a timely notice of defense and this 
hearing followed.  
 
 
resolution.  The District serves approximately 710 students in grades Kindergarten through 
eight.  Due to an anticipated shortage of funds, the District was required to look at areas to 
reduce.  As a result of the reductions, class sizes will be increased and the District expects to 
employ a total of just 29 teachers. 
 
 
retirement and of one teacher who was electing not to return.  Accordingly, the District has 
rescinded the notices to Respondent Tomasini and to Lisa Sinclair. 
 
 
made solely on the basis of the needs of the District and its pupils. 
 
Skipping criterion number 1– the Educator-on-Loan Program position 
 
 
of Education (ACOE) that District teacher Gabriella Armento-Ito would be released to 
work for the ACOE for the 2010/2011 school year pursuant to the ACOE’s Educator-On-
Loan Program (Program).  ACOE annually contracts with districts for educators to fill 
approximately 100 of these positions.  Under the contract, Armento-Ito remains a District 
employee, but ACOE reimburses the District for all her salary, benefits, and expenses.  If 
the contract were rescinded, Armento-Ito would be eligible to return to her classroom 
assignment with the District. 
 
 
this year both are classroom teachers.  Armento-Ito holds a supplemental credential in 
math, although Kretz teaches math pursuant to her multiple subject credential.  Kretz has 
more seniority than Armento-Ito.   
 
Skipping criterion number 2 – the Special Education position 
 
 
previously worked for the District for seven years before retiring to have knee surgery.  She 
currently holds just one credential: multiple subject.  In October of 2009, Starritt returned 
to teach in the District as a long-term substitute.  The District advertised a special education 
position, and although Starritt does not hold the required credential, she was asked to 
apply.  The District applied for and obtained a temporary permit for her to teach special 
education while she worked on obtaining the required credential.   

Armento-Ito and Respondent Kretz hold the same multiple subject credential and 

Respondent Starritt holds the position described in criterion number 2.  She 

On March 3, 2010, the District contracted with the Alameda County Office 

10. 

9. 

 

3

 
 
Starritt has applied to California State University at Monterey Bay to enroll in the 
program she needs to obtain a credential.  By letter dated April 12, 2010, Josh Harrower, 
Ph.D., coordinator, Special Education Program, CSU, Monterey Bay, advised that 
“pending admissions’ review of her transcripts I fully expect to admit Ms. Starritt to the 
program for the Fall 2010 term.” 
   
 
Respondent Starritt and Respondent Kretz have the same seniority date and 
hold the same multiple subject credential.  The only differences that are important in this 
matter are that Starritt holds a temporary permit to teach special education and has applied to 
enroll in a program to earn a special education credential.  These things are not true as to 
Respondent Kretz. 
 

 
11. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
1. 

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 

2. 

Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to 

44955 have been provided as required.  The District established jurisdiction for this 
proceeding as to each Respondent.  
 
 
reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 
 
Skipping issues 
 
 
in inverse order of seniority when effectuating an economic layoff.  An exception to this 
provision is contained in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), which allows 
deviation from seniority when:  
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), requires a district to proceed 

3. 

. . . the district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to 
teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that the 
certificated employee has special training or experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide 
those services . . . which others with more seniority do not 
possess.  

4. 

The District did not demonstrate that that the Educator-on-Loan Program 

 
 
qualifies as a “specific course or course of study” requiring “special training or experience” 
within the terms of section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).  It is not a District course or course 
of study; it is a program administered and paid for by another county’s office of education.  
Accordingly, criterion number 1 is not valid and the District may not skip Gabriella 
Armento-Ito.  
 

 

4

6. 

5. 

Criterion number 2, in contrast, does describe a specific course of study in 

 
the District: a special education position.  The fact that Respondent Starritt does not yet 
possess a full credential is irrelevant.  She possesses a permit to teach in the position and is 
teaching it.  Respondent Kretz is not qualified to teach in the position.   
 
 
Cause was established to allow the District to deviate from seniority order 
pursuant to Education Code section 44955 in effectuating the layoff as regards a special 
education position (criterion number 2).  The District may exempt Respondent Starritt from 
layoff, although it is not required to do so.   
 
Retention of employees 
 

7. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides seniority protection 

for permanent employees.  A district may not retain an employee with less seniority over 
another employee who is certificated and competent to render the same service. 

 
The District failed to notice Armento-Ito for layoff despite her lack of seniority 
because of the mistaken impression that she could be validly skipped.  But Respondent Kretz 
and Armento-Ito hold the same permanent positions with the District as classroom teachers, 
and Kretz is senior to Armento-Ito.  It therefore follows that Respondent Kretz may not be 
laid off.     

 
ORDER 

1. 

2. 

3. 

The Accusation against Gina Tomasini is dismissed. 

The Accusation against Gina Renee Kretz is dismissed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Notice may be given to Patricia Starritt that that her services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services. 
 
 
DATED: ________________________ 
 
 
                                     
             
                                                           
            
 
            
 

______________________________ 
MARY-MARGARET ANDERSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

5

