 
 
 
BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
SHORELINE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
         OAH No. 2010031382 
            

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
BEN DEMSHER, ANNE HALLEY, 
MELISSA RILEY and RACHEL 
SOMERVILLE, 
 
              
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Nancy L. Rasmussen, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter on April 29, 2010, in Tomales, California. 
 

Joseph C. Kinkade, Attorney at Law, Lozano Smith, represented the Shoreline 

Unified School District.  
 

James D. Allen, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Ben Demsher, Anne 

Halley, Melissa Riley and Rachel Somerville, who were present. 
 
 

The matter was submitted for decision on April 29, 2010. 

 
FACTUAL FINDINGS  

 
          1. 
Superintendent of the Shoreline Unified School District. 
 

Stephen Rosenthal made and filed the accusation in his official capacity as 

2. 

Respondents Ben Demsher, Anne Halley, Melissa Riley and Rachel 

3. 

Somerville are certificated employees of the district. 
 
 
On March 2, 2010, the district’s Board of Trustees adopted Resolution No. 9 
reducing the following particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2010-2011 school year and 
directing the superintendent to initiate and pursue procedures necessary to not reemploy 
certificated employees in 3.5 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions:   
 
 
 
 

 
Services 
Self-contained classroom teaching   
 
Secondary Art teaching 

FTE
2.5 
0.4 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
      

-1- 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

5. 

4. 

0.6 
          Total   3.5 

Secondary English teaching   
 
   

Before March 15, 2010, Superintendent Rosenthal gave written notice to 

Respondents each filed a timely request for hearing to determine if there is 

 
 
   
 
respondents and one other certificated employee, Kavitha Goldowitz, of the recommendation 
that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The reasons for the 
recommendation were set forth in these preliminary layoff notices. 
 
 
cause for terminating their services for the 2010-2011 school year.  (Kavitha Goldowitz filed 
a request for hearing but later withdrew it.)  An accusation was served on each respondent, 
and a joint notice of defense was timely filed on their behalf.  All prehearing jurisdictional 
requirements have been met. 
 
 
reductions because of the uncertainty of school funding for the 2010-2011 school year.   This 
district is a “basic aid” district (versus a “revenue limit” district), which means that its 
funding comes primarily from local property taxes.  Because of lower property value 
assessments, county property tax revenues are predicted to be lower for the next school year. 
To reduce district expenditures, Superintendent Rosenthal’s position has been cut from 230 
to 190 days per year, and the board notified school principals that their positions may be cut 
by five days.  Additional personnel cuts are necessary to assure the district’s fiscal solvency 
next year. 
 

Superintendent Rosenthal recommended that the board make the PKS 

 
6. 

7. 

The district’s contract with the teachers’ union contains tie-breaking criteria to 

determine the order of seniority for employees with the same first date of paid service in a 
probationary position.  Respondents Melissa Riley and Ben Demsher share the same first 
date of paid service and both are elementary teachers.  The district did not apply the tie-
breaking criteria to determine their relative seniority because both are subject to layoff.  Riley 
is on leave from a .5 FTE Spanish teaching position, and Gilda Obrador, a 1.0 FTE Spanish 
teacher, has the same first date of paid service as Riley.  Even if Riley were determined to 
have more seniority than Obrador, she would not have the right to “bump” into Obrador’s 
position because a part-time employee does not have the right to displace a full-time 
employee.  Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334. 

 
Respondents contend that the district was required to apply the tie-breaking criteria 

and its failure to do so makes the layoff arbitrary and capricious.  This contention is without 
merit.  Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides: “As between employees 
who first rendered paid service to the district on the same date, the governing board shall 
determine the order of termination solely on the basis of need of the district and the students 
thereof.”  Here, the district did not have to determine the order of termination between Riley 
and Demsher since both are subject to layoff.  If it becomes necessary to determine their 
relative seniority, e.g., if the district is able to rescind any layoff notices or rehire any 
elementary teachers, the district will have to apply the tie-breaking criteria at that time.  

 
      

-2- 

 
 
 

8. 

Respondent Rachel Somerville is a full-time Art and Yearbook teacher at 

While acknowledging that Hobbs does not have a position that Somerville could 

The district contracts with Shannon Hobbs, a credentialed art expert, to teach art to 

 
 
Tomales High School who has received a layoff notice for .4 FTE of her position.  There is a 
lot of demand for her classes, and Somerville expects enrollment in her classes to be larger 
next year than this year. 
 
 
some classes at Tomales Elementary School on a very part-time basis.  (Superintendent 
Rosenthal believes she teaches one day a week for fewer than 36 weeks.)  Hobbs receives a 
stipend which is funded from the local parcel tax.  Her contract ends in June, and it is 
unknown whether Hobbs will have a contract with the district next year. 
 
 
bump into, respondents argue that the district should not be allowed to lay off Somerville 
while using an outside contractor to teach art.  However, the fact that the district has a 
contract with Hobbs this year, and might have a contract with her next year, does not 
preclude it from laying Somerville off for .4 FTE.  It is within the district’s discretion to 
reduce secondary art teaching by .4 FTE, and Somerville is the only certificated employee in 
the district providing this service.  There is nothing legally wrong with the district utilizing 
parcel tax funds this year or next to pay Hobbs a stipend to provide some art instruction at the 
elementary level. 
  
 
picking the particular kinds of services to reduce.  They assert that the district is 
“overloaded” with social science teachers at the high school level and should have made cuts 
in that area rather than “targeting” employees at the bottom of the seniority list.  The 
evidence does not support respondents’ legal argument or the underlying factual assertions.  
The board has broad latitude to determine what services to reduce or discontinue, and it did 
not abuse its discretion. 
 
 
found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 
 
11.  No certificated employee junior in seniority to any respondent is being retained 
by the district to perform services that any respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
  

10.  All contentions made by respondents not specifically addressed above are 

Respondents argue, in essence, that the district abused its discretion when 

9. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
            1. 
and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required. 
 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, 

2. 

Cause exists because of the reduction of particular kinds of services pursuant 
to section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be required for the 

 
      

-3- 

 
 
 
2010-2011 school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils 
thereof within the meaning of section 44949. 
 

ORDER 

Notice may be given to respondents that their services will not be required for the 

2010-2011 school year because of the reduction of particular kinds of services. 

 

 

DATED: ______________________ 
 
                               
                               
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

________________________________ 
NANCY L. RASMUSSEN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings          

 
      

-4- 

