BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
TWIN RIVERS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In The Matter of the Reduction In Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE TWIN RIVERS 
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
                                                 Respondents. 

 
OAH No. 2010030030 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Timothy M. Cary and Loni Y. Chhen, Attorneys at Law, appeared on behalf of the 

 
This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Jonathan Lew, State of 
 
California, Office of Administrative Hearings, on April 7, 8, 9 and 14, 2010, in Sacramento, 
California. 
 
 
Twin Rivers Unified School District. 
 
 
of respondents listed in Attachment A.  Respondent Keith Kimble appeared on his own 
behalf. 
 
 
Evidence was received and submission of the matter was deferred pending receipt of 
additional written argument.  The District and respondents filed post-hearing briefs on April 
16 and 17, 2010, respectively.1  The case was thereafter submitted for decision. 
 
 

Margaret Geddes and A. Eugene Huguenin, Jr., Attorneys at Law, appeared on behalf 

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1.     Frank S. Porter is the Superintendent of the Twin Rivers Unified School 

District (District).  Patty L. Smart is the Associate Superintendent for Human 
Resources/Employee Relations of the District.  The actions of Mr. Porter, Ms. Smart, and the 
District Governing Board were taken in their official capacities. 
 

                                                 
1  
The District filed a Post-Hearing Brief, “Twin Rivers Unified School District’s Post Hearing Brief.”  This 
was marked as Exhibit 28 for identification.  Respondents filed a Post Hearing Brief that was marked as Exhibit P 
for identification.      

1

 
 

 
 

 

 

2.     Respondents are permanent or probationary certificated employees of the 

3. 

4. 

Associate Superintendent Patty L. Smart made and filed Accusations against 

District.  On March 10 through 15, 2009, the District served on each respondent a written 
notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to respondents pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would be reduced or would not 
be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation and noted that the District Governing Board had passed a Resolution 
reducing the certificated staff by 203.7 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. Most 
respondents timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying them for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
respondents.  The Accusations with required accompanying documents and blank Notices of 
Defense were timely served on respondents.  Most respondents timely filed Notices of 
Defense to the Accusation.  Each respondent identified in Attachment B to this Decision 
filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation, either in person or through counsel.   
 
 
Each individual identified in Attachment C was non-represented and filed no 
Request for Hearing.  The three individuals in Attachment D were non-represented and filed 
untimely Requests for Hearing. 
 
 
Seven District employees appeared at hearing to explain the reasons for their 
failure to request a hearing or file a Notice of Defense.  Mary Elizabeth is a self-represented 
party.  She filed a request for hearing, but no Notice of Defense.  The District mailed her the 
accusation packet which included a blank Notice of Defense.  Nicole Botaitis did not file a 
timely request for hearing.  She filed no Notice of Defense.  Xavier Young avers that he 
received nothing in the mail, although his vice principal provided him with the preliminary 
notice.  He suggested that other documents that the District mailed to him may have been 
sent to an old address.  Donato Nesta filed a request for hearing, but no Notice of Defense.  
He did not recall receiving an accusation packet.  Andrew Carter made a request for hearing 
and received the accusation packet on March 26, 2010.  He averred that he was told he 
needed to return the Notice of Defense by April 6, and was then later told that the deadline 
was March 31.  When he failed to meet the earlier deadline, he filed no Notice of Defense.  
In each of these five cases, District employees failed to timely file a Notice of Defense.  The 
District did not waive objections to their inclusion as respondents in this matter.  These five 
certificated employees who failed to file a Notice of Defense waived their right to a hearing. 
 

5. 

Dallas Tognotti timely filed a request for hearing.  He did not file a timely Notice of 

Defense.  Mr. Tognotti was out of the country over spring break, from March 24 through 
April 5, 2010.  He returned the Notice of Defense on April 6, 2010, his first opportunity to do 
so.  The District’s objection to his inclusion as one of the respondents in this matter was 
overruled at hearing.  Brad Betschart received a preliminary notice packet on March 12, 
2010.  The request for hearing was not in the packet.  He obtained a request for hearing from 
a union representative on March 15, and mailed it to the District on March 16, 2010.  He also 
attempted to hand-deliver a copy to the District on March 19, 2010, but the building was 
closed.  He did deliver a copy of his request for hearing to the District on March 23, 2010.  

 

2

On April 6, 2010, the District received by mail a request for hearing and Notice of Defense 
from Mr. Betschart, postmarked March 31, 2010.  The District’s objection to his inclusion as 
one of the respondents in this matter was overruled at hearing. 
 

6. 

On March 2, 2010, at a regular meeting, the District Governing Board was 

Any certificated employee who failed to file a request for hearing and/or a Notice of 
Defense, other than Mr. Tognotti and Mr. Betschart, has waived his or her right to a hearing, 
and may be subject to layoff by the District. 
 
 
given notice of the Superintendent’s recommendations that certificated employees holding 
203.7 FTE positions be given notice that their services would be reduced or not required for 
the next school year and stating the reasons for that recommendation. 
 
 
necessary to decrease programs and services and thus it was necessary to reduce teaching and 
other certificated services affecting employment of 203.7 FTE positions.  The District 
Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 164 providing for the reduction or elimination of 
the following particular kinds of services (PKS): 
 

On March 2, 2010, the District Governing Board determined that it was 

7. 

Services 

 

 

 

Equivalent Positions  

 

 

 

 

 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Site Administration    
 
 
Instructional Support  
 
 
Elementary Counseling 
 
 
Administrative Services 
  
Physical Education Services  
 
 
Math Instruction 
 
 
Social Science Instruction 
 
 
 
English Instruction 
Student Services 
 
 
 
Grades 7/8 Social Science/ELA Instruction  
 
Grades 7/8 Math/Science Instruction  
   
Spanish Instruction    
 
      
Grades 7/8 Self Contained 
   
               
Life Science/Biology Instruction  
               
 
Business Instruction   
     
 
Work Experience-Counseling 
 
Technology Coaching 
 
 
 
Elementary Classroom Instruction    
   
 
EL/Independent Study Instruction 
 
  
 
Resource Specialist 
 
 
 
Opportunity    
 
 
 
Industrial Arts 
 
Woodworking  
 
 
             
Visual and Performing Arts   

 
 
 
 

 
 

  2.0 
25.8  
  8.6    
11.0 
  9.6  
13.6  
12.0  
16.6  
  2.0  
  1.0 
  2.0  
  2.0 
  4.0 
  9.6 
  0.4 
  1.0 
  0.5 
51.0  
  0.4 
  1.0 
  4.0 
  0.6 
  0.6 
10.3 

 

3

Bilingual Instruction   
Computer Instruction  
Earth Science Instruction  
Adult Education with Disabilities 
Regional Occupation Program  

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

   
 
   
   
     

  1.0 
  2.1  
  0.8 
  6.0 
  4.2 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL  

          203.7 FTE 

8. 

The District began operations in July 1, 2008, after the consolidation of three 

elementary school districts and one high school district.2  It was created as a result of 
approval of a measure in November 2007, merging the four districts.  The only high school 
district consolidated into the new Twin Rivers District was the Grant Joint Union High 
School District.  The District serves approximately 27,000 preschool through adult education 
students in northern Sacramento County.  The District represented that reductions in 
particular kinds of services are necessary to ensure the District’s fiscal survival, which is 
threatened by a severe decrease in revenues to the District due to the State of California and 
national economic crisis.  Kate Ingersoll is the District’s Budget Services Director.  She 
testified that the proposed reductions are necessary for the District to remain solvent given 
revenue reductions and expected revenue shortfalls. 
 

The Governing Board’s resolution to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 

services was made in anticipation of decreased revenues to the District occasioned by the 
Governor’s state budget.  Kate Ingersoll, the District’s budget services director, noted that 
the proposed reductions are necessary for the District to remain solvent. 
 

9. 

The District maintains a Certificated Seniority List which contains employees’ 
seniority dates (first date of paid service), status as tenured, probationary or temporary, their 
FTE and current assignments.  Status, credential and authorization data were obtained from 
the District’s records and employees were given the opportunity to correct errors in the 
seniority list.  All certificated employees were sent a letter in December 2009, inviting them 
to correct their seniority date and any other information contained in their individual 
personnel information on file with the District.  They were asked to do so by January 2010. 
 

Ms. Smart and other District employees, including Michelle Abrams and Nancy 

Gamache, were responsible for implementation of the technical aspects of the layoff.  The 
District used the seniority list, Resolution No. 164, and all pertinent information from each 
employee’s personnel file, to develop a proposed layoff list of the least senior employees 
currently assigned in the various services being reduced.  The District then determined 
whether these employees held credentials in another area, were entitled to be “skipped” 

The three elementary school districts included North Sacramento School District, Del Paso Heights School 

                                                 
2  
District and Rio Linda Union School District.  The high school district was the former Grant Joint Union High 
School District.   
 

4

pursuant to the Governing Board’s Resolution, or could “bump” into positions held by junior 
District employees. 
 
Rescission of Notices 
 
 
following 23 respondents: 
 

10.  During the four days of hearing, the District rescinded the notices to the 

1.  George Brown 
2.  Christy Caceres 
3.  Roberta Coker 
4.  David Dawson  
5.  Daniel Dorantes  
6.  Constance Earley  
7.  Lynette Echelmeier  
8.  Diana Gontar 
9.  Brenda Hin 
10. Alan Hudson  
11. Steven Jensen 
12. Erin Klentos 
13. Amy Page 
14. Robert Pope  
15. Kadhir Rajagopal  
16. Erland Renslo 
17. Richard Sears  
18. Dominic Slavich  
19. Anna Stinson 
20. Nancy Thao 
21. Christina Verner  
22. Jacob Walker 
23. Linda Holmes-Yarbrough 

Seniority Date Changes 
 

11. 

The District provided respondents opportunity to correct errors in their 

seniority dates, including multiple conferences during the hearing.  There were a number of 
certificated employees who claimed to have attended mandatory professional development or 
in-services required by the former school districts prior to merging into Twin Rivers Unified 
School District.  The District properly adjusted seniority dates in each case where 
respondents provided documentation showing that they attended the paid in-service, and 
where the personnel and payroll records of the District reflected that these respondents were 
paid for attendance at the training sessions. 
 

 

5

The District changed the seniority dates of a number of respondents from August 8, 

2006, to August 7, 2006, after they demonstrated that they attended mandatory in-service 
training conducted by the former school districts and were paid for their attendance. 
The following individuals had their seniority dates changed to August 7, 2006: Jennifer 
Bourgeois, Thomas Cope, Jennifer Dwyer, Jacqueline Howard, Jeri Ann Jones, De Ann Karl, 
Keith Kimble, Rebecca Le Doux, Pakou Lee, Jan-Erik Maher, Yvette Medina, Joan 
Pentecost, Thuy Pham, Kathryn Sluis, Becky Solis, Elizabeth Spackman, Shannon Summers, 
Jenika Valenchich-Sheldon, Karen Vierk (now Nozicka), Christine Boerner, Devon Dragoo, 
Mara Gonzalez, Kelly Grumann, and Miriam Schroeder. 
 
Respondents Julie Pepper and Lorri Williams have District seniority dates of August 
 
9, 2006.  This was based on their attendance at a new teacher orientation for the former Rio 
Linda Union School District on that date.  Paula Roach was their principal at that time.  Ms. 
Roach asked Ms. Pepper and Ms. Williams to attend a two-day writing program used at their 
site (Step Up to Writing).  Both attended this training on August 7 and 8, 2006, before 
attending the new teacher orientation on August 9.  They both obtained permission to attend 
the new teacher orientation on August 9, so that they could attend the writing program as 
requested.  The District paid a registration fee of $325 for each of the two to attend the 
writing program.  However, neither was paid for their time spent attending the writing 
program.  Ms. Pepper and Ms. Williams would like their District seniority date to be changed 
to August 8, 2006, consistent with their peers who attended new teacher orientation that date. 
 
 
A probationary or permanent employee is “deemed to have been employed on the 
date upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”  (Ed. Code, § 
44845.)  Ms. Pepper and Ms. Williams were not engaged in “paid service” for the District 
when they attended the two-day writing program.  District Human Resources payroll records 
confirmed this.  They were asked by their supervisor to attend the writing program, and the 
equities in this case would certainly weigh in favor of adjusting their seniority date to August 
8.  However, the law requires that they render “paid service” and this was simply not the 
case.  Their District seniority date cannot be adjusted under these circumstances. 
 

12. 

The District also changed the seniority dates of a number of respondents for 
other various reasons based on supplemental information provided at the time of hearing.  
The individuals listed below had their seniority dates changed as follows:  
 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 

 
 
 
 

Michael Cook  
Constance Early  
Daniel Grubbs  
 
Brenda Hin  
Linda Holmes-Yarbrough  
 
H. Lanard German  
Jose Lozano    
 
Kathleen McCarthy    
Jasmine Patel   
 
Terry Press-Dawson   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

January 7, 2002 
April 28, 1980 
August 9, 2007 
August 23, 2005 
August 17, 2005 
August 21, 2007 
August 14, 2007 
February 24, 2004 
August 9, 2007 
October 15, 2001 

 

6

11. 
Connie Price   
12. 
Tania Salazar   
13.  Gayle Shibata  
14.  Victor Umeh   
15. 
Terri Williams  
16. 
Jonathan Young  

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

August 26, 1997  
August 14, 2000 
May 1, 2000 
August 16, 2006 
August 21, 2000 
January 22, 2008  

13. 

Board Resolution No. 164 provided that the District has the need to retain 

As a result of the adjustments/revisions in seniority dates, some notices were 

 
rescinded.  These were included in the list of rescissions set forth in Finding 10.     
 
Skipping  
 
 
certain certificated employees who possess certain credentials and which more senior 
employees do not possess.  The Superintendent was authorized to deviate from terminating 
certificated employees in order of seniority in instances where they are currently assigned to 
teach specific courses and will be assigned to teach those courses again for the next school 
year, and more senior employees do not possess the same specialized training and experience 
related to the course.   
 
 
 

The skipped individuals under Board Resolution 164 include those who are: 

Certificated employees with special education 

a. 
certifications who are currently using those certifications.  Said 
certificated employees who possess and are currently using 
special education credentials shall not be displaced by more 
senior employees unless those more senior employees possess 
the appropriate special education credential, training, 
competency, and experience to perform those special education 
services.   

b. 
Certificated employees whose position requires Bilingual 
Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development (BCLAD) 
Certificate for their position.  Said certificated employees who 
possess and are currently using the BCLAD certificate shall not 
be displaced by more senior employees unless those more senior 
employees possess the appropriate certificate, training, 
competency, and experience to perform those services.  

Certificated employees with necessary certification to 

c. 
teach at the secondary level such that the District may maintain 
its current academic departments at legally required levels.  Said 
certificated employees who possess and are currently using said 
credentials shall not be displaced by more senior employees 
unless those more senior employees possess the appropriate 

7

 

 

 

credential, training, competency, and experience to perform 
those services. 

With regard to certificated employees with necessary certifications to teach at the 

14.  With regard to certificated employees with special education certifications 

With regard to BCLAD, the District applied the PKS resolution skipping language 

 
 
who are currently using those certifications, respondents did not challenge the skipping for 
these certificated personnel. 
 
 
only to those teachers whose position required a BCLAD.  Respondents did not challenge the 
skipping for certificated employees who possess a BCLAD certificate.   
 
 
secondary level such that the District may maintain its current academic departments at 
legally required levels, the District did not skip any individuals pursuant to this section of the 
Resolution. 
 
Adult Education 
 
 
The District took the legal position that a District certificated employee 
assigned to a teaching position in the Adult Education program may not bump into the 
regular education (K-12) program, unless he or she obtained tenure in the K-12 program 
before being assigned to a position in Adult Education; and that no certificated employee 
currently assigned in the K-12 program may bump into the Adult Education program.  
Respondents did not object to the District’s position.  Some layoffs were affected by the 
District’s position on this issue, and proper adjustments were made by the District, including 
the rescissions of layoff notices to affected certificated employees (Erland Renslo, Diana 
Gontar, Jacob Walker and Steven Jensen).   
 

15. 

There are no certificated personnel currently assigned to a teaching position in the 

Adult Education program who earned tenure in the regular K-12 program and have the 
credentials and seniority to potentially bump into the regular K-12 program, and this was 
therefore not an issue. 
 
Early Childhood Education 
 

16. 

The District took the legal position that all certificated personnel currently 

assigned to a teaching position in Early Childhood Education do not have rights to bump into 
the regular education (K-12) program, and that no certificated personnel currently assigned 
in the K-12 program have the right to bump into a position in Early Childhood Education.   
Accordingly, the District rescinded the notices of Christina Verner and Roberta Coker.  
There was no objection by respondents, and this was therefore not an issue. 
 
 
 
 

 

8

Alternative Education  
 

17. 

The District rescinded the notices of four certificated personnel in the 

alternative education program.  Specifically, the District rescinded the notices of David 
Dawson, Christy Caceres, Erin Klentos, and Anna Stinson.  Some of these certificated 
employees were more junior to other certificated personnel currently assigned to the regular 
K-12 program who are certificated and competent to render services in the alternative 
education program and who consented to being assigned to teach in alternative education in 
lieu of being laid off, thereby effectuating their right to “bump” one of these employees.   
 

Education Code section 44865 provides that a person possessing a valid teaching 
credential issued by the State Board or the Commission on Teacher Credentialing, based on a 
bachelor’s degree, student teaching, and special fitness to perform, shall be deemed qualified 
for assignment in alternative education, but such person may only be assigned to teach in 
such a position if he or she consents.  Alternative education within the District includes the 
following programs: Independent Study, Community Day Schools, and Continuation 
Schools. 
 

18. 

Between April 12 and April 14, 2010, the District contacted multiple 

individuals who had a seniority date up through and including August 16, 2006, and who 
possessed the valid teaching credential that would enable them to teach in alternative 
education.  These calls were placed pursuant to a ruling made at the time of the April 9 
hearing that the District had an affirmative obligation to inquire whether these individuals 
would consent to an assignment to alternative education.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs (2009) 170 
Cal.App.4th 127.)  The District specifically asked each of these individuals whether they 
consented to assignment in alternative education.  No person more senior to David Dawson 
and Christy Caceres who has a valid teaching credential qualifying him or her to be assigned 
to alternative education consented to being assigned to teach in alternative education.  
Accordingly, the District rescinded the notices of Mr. Dawson and Ms. Caceres without 
objection by respondents, and without any further effect on other layoff notices.     
 

19. 

The District also rescinded the notices of Erin Klentos and Anna Stinson, who 

are both more junior to two more senior certificated employees holding a valid teaching 
credential qualifying them to be assigned in alternative education and who consented to the 
alternative education assignment.  Because the District rescinded two notices of two more 
junior certificated employees, the District is aware that it must also rescind two additional 
notices of certificated employees who are more senior than those two employees.   
 

The District has taken the position that the two most senior certificated employees 

who have consented to being assigned in alternative education should have their notices 
rescinded; these individuals are Lynn Reed, Jr. and Jodi Serrano.  However, respondents take 
the position that the two most senior certificated employees who have received preliminary 
layoff notices should have their notices rescinded.  There is no disagreement that the District 
must rescind two additional notices.   
 

 

9

20. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b) provides that “the services of 

no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a 
service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.”  When the 
District rescinded the notices of Erin Klentos and Anna Stinson, it was placed in a position of 
having to rescind two additional notices.  The additional notices are not conditioned upon the 
senior employees’ consent to assignment to alternative education.  The next two certificated 
employees more senior to Ms. Klentos and Ms. Stinson who received preliminary layoff 
notices should have their notices rescinded in order to meet the requirement of Education 
Code section 44955, subdivision (b). 
 

21. 

Respondents also argued that because the seniority date of Ms. Klentos and 
Victor Umeh are equal (they both have the seniority date of 8/16/06), that the District must 
exercise the tie-breaking criteria to determine which of these two individuals should have his 
or her notice rescinded.  The District takes the position that the District’s rescission of Ms. 
Klentos’ notice is the equivalent of no notice to Ms. Klentos.  The District is correct.  Tie-
breaking criteria are not required to be applied in this circumstance and the only consequence 
of withdrawing the Klentos notice is that one other more senior notice must be rescinded.   
Respondents in Categorically Funded Programs, and Counselor Employment Status   
 

22. 

Respondents made an offer of proof that certain respondents believe their 

status should change because they believe their positions are funded from the general fund, 
and they believe that they are therefore not Education Code section 44909 employees.3  The 
District provided testimony by Ms. Smart and Kate Ingersoll that established that these 
employees are still funded by categorical funds.  They remain section 44909 employees in a 
“Prob. 0” status.  Respondents did not provide any other evidence supporting their offer of 
proof. 
 

The District and certain respondents serving as counselors in certain categorically 

funded positions stipulated that they will resolve seniority and status issues informally, and 
requested that no ruling be made on this issue.  The parties agree that neither the District nor 
any affected respondents shall be precluded from bringing forth status and seniority issues 
applying to these counselors during any 2010-2011 reduction-in-force hearings if there is no 
informal resolution by the parties prior to that time. 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

3 Education Code section 44909 provides for employment of teachers to perform services under contract 
with public or private agencies or certain categorically funded projects which are not required by federal or state 
statutes.  In the Twin Rivers Unified School District decision last year (OAH No. 2009030049) the District was 
directed to classify such employees as probationary, and not as temporary employees.  (Bakersfield Elementary 
Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City School District (2007) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260; CTA v. Vallejo City Unified 
School District (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135.) 

 

10

23. 

The District explained that in calculating the number of employees who must receive 

Over-noticing 
 
 
Respondents complain that the District “overnoticed” respondents by sending 
significantly more preliminary notices (235) than the number of FTE’s of service reductions 
(203.7).  Respondents point to the “firm limit” on the number of preliminary notices to be 
sent to employees under Education Code section 44955, as being “not more than a 
corresponding percentage of certificated employees of the district.”  Respondents contend 
that the District must account for employee terminations arising collateral to the service 
reductions, including assured attrition.  For example, the District acknowledged 13 FTE of 
attrition assured for 2010-2011, in the form of ten non-reelected probationary employees and 
three resignations or retirements.  Respondents argue that instead of 203.7 FTE, it will only 
be necessary to give final notice of layoff to 190.7 FTE of certificated employees. 
 
 
notices it was required to take into account resignations, returns from leave, retirements, 
partial FTE’s, reassigned administrators and other factors.  The District believes it gave the 
number of preliminary notices reasonably required to carry out the reductions ordered by its 
governing board.  It has rescinded 23 notices to date, excluding the two additional rescissions 
occasioned by the rescissions of two junior Alternative Education notices.  The District has 
discretion to engage in the administrative actions necessary to achieve the 203.7 FTE service 
reductions.  It engaged in a relatively complicated analyses in doing so and respondents 
made no showing that the District acted in an arbitrary or capricious manner in exercising 
such discretion. 
 
 
required to be identical to the number of layoff notices a school district serves on its 
employees.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636; 
Hildebrandt  v.  St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334.)  The 
District posits that respondent’s reference to a “corresponding percentage” relates only to 
average daily attendance terminations based upon an actual reduction in attendance.  It 
suggests that where the governing board determines to discontinue or reduce a particular 
kind of service, there is no need to calculate a corresponding percentage. 
 
 
unnecessary in this case to resolve questions related to the “firm limits” respondents believe 
were exceeded under Education Code section 44955.  Following the District’s 2008-2009 
layoffs, the District rehired certificated employees from its reemployment list to fill the 
positions of employees who were out on leave, rather than filling such positions with 
temporary employees.  The District received information that 22 senior certificated 
employees currently on leave intend to return to certificated positions for the 2010-2011 
school year.  These 22 employees are entitled to return to the District because they are senior 
to those currently being laid off.  Thus, the District was required to take into account the 22 
teachers returning from leave to effectuate the 203.7 FTE reduction in certificated positions.  
The District properly included these teachers in its calculations of the number of preliminary 

The District has provided a satisfactory explanation for its noticing practices.  It is 

The number of positions eliminated by a particular kind of service layoff is not 

24. 

 

11

layoff notices that had to be issued.  The District will also rescind a total of 25 notices after 
accounting for the two Alternative Education employees. (See Finding 23.)  
 
After consideration of the 25 rescinded notices, positively assured attrition, 
 
administrators returning to the classroom, and the 22 employees reduced because of those 
returning from leave, the number of layoff notices issued by the District was neither 
unreasonable nor excessive.  It was well within the District’s discretion to serve 235 
certificated employees with preliminary layoff notices. 
 
 
25.  With due consideration and adjustments made for the matters noted above, no 
permanent or probationary certificated employees junior to respondents are being retained to 
perform a service which respondents are certificated and competent to render.  Those 
certificated employees junior to respondents being retained will provide services which 
respondents are not certificated and competent to perform. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  

2. 

1. 

3. 

The District employees receiving notices that their services would not be 

 
 
required next year have rendered valuable services to the District. 
 
 All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 
 
44949 and 44955 were met. The notices sent to respondents indicated the statutory basis for the 
reduction of services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due process.  
(San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation 
of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  The description of services to 
be reduced, both in the Board Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe particular 
kinds of services.  (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.  See, also, Degener v. 
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 
 
 The services identified in Board Resolution No. 164 are particular kinds of 
services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The 
Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause exists to reduce 
the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction and discontinuation 
of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates 
solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44949. 
 
 
A District may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall 
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 

4. 

 

12

 
 

 

 

 

 

5. 

Education Code section 44955 provides in pertinent part:  

¶…¶  

¶…¶  

(b) Whenever in any school year … whenever a particular kind 
of service is to be reduced or discontinued not later than the 
beginning of the following school year, …or whenever the 
amendment of state law requires the modification of curriculum, 
and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it 
shall have become necessary by reason of any of these 
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in 
the district, the governing board may terminate the services of 
not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated 
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at 
the close of the school year. Except as otherwise provided by 
statute, the services of no permanent employee may be 
terminated under the provisions of this section while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less 
seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.  

6. 

Education Code section 44955 provides that when certificated employees face 

layoffs due to reduction or elimination of PKS, the District has an affirmative obligation to 
reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions held by junior teachers, 
if the senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to occupy such positions.  The 
intent of the Legislation is clearly to prevent Districts from laying off senior teachers while 
retaining junior teachers.  Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c) provides in 
pertinent part:  
 

Services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of 
the order in which they were employed... The governing board 
shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that 
employees shall be retained to render any service which their 
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render…  

7. 

 
 
As set forth in Factual Findings 10, the District has rescinded notices of layoff 
to 23 certificated employees.  In addition, the District shall rescind two additional notices of 
certificated employees who are more senior than Erin Klentos and Anna Stinson.  These two 
additional notices are not conditioned upon the senior employees’ consent to assignment to 
alternative education.  (See Findings 19 and 20.)   
  

13

8. 

9. 

10. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 13 and 14, the District applied the PKS 

The District applied bumping rules with some consistency, and generally 

As set forth in the Factual Findings, the District has considered, provided a 

Respondents did not challenge skipping for certificated employees.  There was no 

 
reasonable explanation for, or made corrections to seniority dates for respondents.  (See 
Findings 11 and 12.)   
 
 
Resolution skipping language only to those teachers with special education certifications 
who are currently using these certifications, and to those teachers whose positions require 
BCLAD certificates.  With regard to certificated employees with necessary certifications to 
teach at the secondary level such that the District may maintain its current academic 
departments at legally required levels, the District did not skip any individuals pursuant to 
this section of the Resolution. 
 
 
evidence that the District abused its discretion in doing so. 
 
 
allowed bumping based upon the more senior employee holding a credential or authorization 
to teach the assignment of the less senior teacher.  The District articulated the rationale for its 
bumping rules (Findings 15 through 18) and properly applied them.  The District was not 
required to exercise tie-break criteria with respect to Ms. Klentos and Mr. Umeh.  (See 
Finding 21.) 
 
 
consideration of the 25 rescinded notices, positively assured attrition, administrators 
returning to the classroom, and the 22 employees reduced because of those returning from 
leave the number of layoff notices issued by the District was neither unreasonable nor 
excessive.  It was well within the District’s discretion to serve 235 certificated employees 
with preliminary layoff notices.  (See Findings 23 and 24.) 
 
 
Cause exists for the reduction of the particular kinds of services and for the 
reduction of full-time equivalent certificated positions at the end of the 2009-2010 school 
year pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  Therefore, and except as 
otherwise noted above, cause exists to give respondents notice that their services will be 
reduced or will not be required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The District did not engage in over-noticing of respondents.  After 

11. 

12. 

 

14

RECOMMENDATION 

Cause exists for the reduction of 203.7 full-time equivalent certificated positions at 

 
 
the end of the 2009-2010 school year.  After making the adjustments set forth in the Factual 
Findings and Legal Conclusions, notice shall be given to remaining respondents that their 
services will be reduced or will not be required for the ensuing school year, 2010-2011, 
because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  Notice shall be 
given in inverse order of seniority.   
 
 
 
DATED:  April 29, 2010 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

___________________________ 
JONATHAN LEW 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

15

ATTACHMENT A 

TRUSD Certificated Employees Preliminarily Notified of Layoff 
and Represented by Geddes/Huguenin as of 4/13/10 

 

 
Michael 
Alison 
Lauren 
Rosalind 
Joy 
Casey 
George 
Brad 
Tanya 
Larry 
Brandon 
Shea 
Jennifer 
Susan 
George  
Jeffrey 
Sandra 
Christy 
Alicia 
Steven 
Heather 
Sean  
Stephanie 
Emily  
Tera 
Mary 
Jason 
Daniel 
Annie 
John 
Roberta 
Michael 
Thomas 
Cynthia 
Andrea 

 

Amparo 
Autrand 
Azevedo 
Badger 
Ball 
Bartlett 
Baxter 
Betschart 
Beverley 
Bibayoff 
Blom 
Borges 
Bourgeois 
Bridge 
Brown 
Brown 
Bunch 
Caceres 
Caddell 
Cammack 
Campbell 
Campbell 
Carslake 
Carter* 
Carter 
Castellanos 
Cateriny 
Chambliss 
Clark 
Coder 
Coker 
Cook 
Cope 
Corral 
Cottrell 

16

Crates 
Cross 
Dahl-Trujillo 
Daniels* 
Dawson 
Dixon 
Dorantes 
Dwyer 
Earley 
Echelmeier 
Espino 
Farinsky 
Flissinger 
Franklin 
German 
Gleeson 
Glen 
Gontar 
Green 
Griffith 
Grubbs 
Hamilton 
Harback 
Harris-Hodnette 
Haskins 
Hatfield 
Hernandez 
Hin 
Hogerheide 
Holmes-
Yarbrough 
Hoppe 
Howard 
Huddleston 
Hudson 
Huezo 
Jimenez 
Johnsen 
Johny Warrior 
Jones 

Tangelica 
Calen 
Kara 
Deborah 
David 
Carl 
Daniel 
Jennifer 
Constance 
Lynette  
Michael 
Denise 
Geoffrey 
Roslyn 
H. Lanard 
Robin 
Jon 
Diana 
Kathryn 
Effie 
Daniel  
Natalie 
Kendra 
Brandi 
Jessica 
Brett 
Etelvina 
Brenda 
Eve 

Linda 
Brooke 
Jacqueline 
Matthew 
Alan 
Jessica 
Yolanda 
Genevieve 
Asha 
Jeri Ann 

 

17

Judal 
Jugoz 
Karl 
Kimball 
King 
Kleinle 
Klentos 
Klier 
Kokkos 
LaSalle 
Lawlor 
LeBaron 
Le Doux 
Lee 
Lingenfelter 
Lozano 
Lyons 
Maher 
Martin 
Martin 
Masters 
Mau 
McCarthy 

Teofilo 
Likah 
De Ann 
Jennifer 
Amy  
Justin 
Erin 
Theresa 
Katherine 
Jennifer 
Joanne 
Teal 
Rebecca 
Pakou 
Mysti 
Jose 
Kari 
Jan-Erik 
Jolie 
Shawn 
John 
Richard 
Kathleen 
Carrie-Anna  McCoy 
Elizabeth 
Sarah 
Tessa 
Christopher 
Barry 
Yvette 
Mary 
Sean 
Donna 
Miryam 
Saskia 
Richard 
Craig 
Renee 
Sean 

McCrory 
McElroy 
McGarr 
McKinnon 
McLennan 
Medina 
Michaelman 
Millard 
Miller 

Mills 
Moses 
Murray 
Myers 
Namanny 

 

18

Newberry 
Patel 
Pentecost 
Pepper 
Perron 
Perry 
Peyton 
Pham 
Polson 
Pope 
Prentice 
Press-Dawson 
Price 
Rajagopal 
Ranagan 
Reed, Jr. 
Reid 
Reighley 
Renslo 
Riar 
Roberson 
Roberts 
Ruggles 
Salazar 
Sayler 
Schubert 
Sears 
Seaton 
Sharp 
Sheridan 
Slavich 
Sluis 
Smith 
Smith 
Spackman 
Starrh 
Stevens 
Stinson* 
Stueve 

Jessica 
Jasmin 
Joan  
Julie 
Angela 
Jason 
Susan 
Thuy  
Maryann 
Robert 
Susan 
Terry 
Connie 
Kadhir 
Ron 
Lynn 
Karen 
Kristen 
Erland 
Navdeep 
Randy 
Diane 
Adrienne 
Tanya 
Kimberly 
Clay 
Richard 
Thomas 
Autumn 
Megan 
Dominic 
Kathryn 
Nichole 
Sarah 
Elizabeth 
Carly 
Michael 
Anna 
Jodie 

 

19

Shannon 
Nancy 
Brenda 
Dallas 
Sara 
Rebecca 
Erin 
Victor 

Jenika 
Christine 
Ann 
Heather 
 Jacob 
Jacqueline 
Michael 
Stacy 
Olivia 
Amber 
Beth 
Lorri 
Jennifer 
Megan 
Heather 
Maiko 
Jonathan 
Kristi 
 

Summers* 
Thao 
Theisen 
Tognotti 
Tolle 
Troxler 
Tucker 
Umeh 
Valenchich-
Sheldon 
Verner 
Veu 
Voigt 
Walker 
White* 
Wilder 
Wiley 
Wilkins 
Williams 
Williams 
Williams 
Woo  
Wooden 
Wren 
Xiong 
Young 
Zampieri* 

 

20

