BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
REDDING SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE 
REDDING SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
 

           Respondents. 

 

 

   
 
OAH No. 2010030050 

 

 

 
PROPOSED DECISION 

Thomas E. Gauthier, Attorney at Law, of Lozano Smith, represented the Redding 

Catherine B. Frink, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter in Redding, California, on April 19, 2010. 
 
 
School District. 
 
Michael N. McCallum, Attorney at Law, represented 24 respondents identified in 
 
Exhibit A (represented respondents), a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated 
herein by reference. 
 
 
 
 
submission of post-hearing briefs, which were received on April 23, 2010.  Respondents’ 
Closing Brief was marked as Exhibit O and made part of the record.  Redding School 
District’s Post-Hearing Brief was marked as Exhibit 17 and made part of the record.   The 
record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 23, 2010. 
 
 

Dawn Smith and Donna Walker were present and represented themselves.   

Evidence was received, the hearing was closed, and the record was held open for the 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
Jurisdiction 
 

1. 

Diane Kempley, Ed.D., Superintendent of the Redding School District 
(District), State of California, filed the Accusations in her official capacity as a public 
officer. 

1

2. 

On February 16, 2010, the Governing Board of the Redding School District 

(Board) adopted Resolution No. 39-09-10, which reduced and/or discontinued particular 
kinds of certificated services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

3. 

On March 12, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 46-09-10, which 

reduced and/or discontinued additional particular kinds of certificated services no later than 
the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

4. 

The Board further determined that it shall be necessary by reason of the 

reduction and/or discontinuance of services to decrease the number of permanent and/or 
probationary certificated employees at the close of the 2009-2010 school year by a 
corresponding number of full-time equivalent (FTE) positions, and directed the 
Superintendent or her designee to proceed accordingly by notifying the appropriate 
employees to implement the Board’s determination. 
 

5. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the District served 29 certificated employees, 
including respondents, with written notice, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, that their services would not be required for the next school year (Notice).  Each 
Notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation.  The Notice attached and incorporated 
by reference Resolution No. 39-09-10, or Resolution No. 46-09-10, which listed the services 
to be reduced or discontinued.  The combined total of the two resolutions resulted in a 
proposed reduction in the certificated staff by 27.6 FTE positions. 
 

6. 

Requests for Hearing were timely filed by 26 certificated employees to 

determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the next school year.  Any 
certificated employee who failed to file a request for hearing has waived his or her right to a 
hearing, and may be laid off by the District. 
 

7. 

The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each of the certificated 

employees who requested a hearing.  The Accusations with required accompanying 
documents and blank Notices of Defense (Accusation packet) were timely served on those 
certificated employees.   
 

8. 

Notices of Defense were timely filed by the represented respondents, and by 

respondents Dawn Smith and Donna Walker. 
 

9. 

Each respondent is presently a certificated employee of the District. 

10. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
Services to be Reduced or Eliminated 
 

11. 

The District provides educational services to approximately 3,200 students 

from kindergarten through the eighth grade (K-8) at seven school sites.  The District employs 

 

 

2

approximately 175 certificated employees and 235 classified employees.  The District has 
operated at a budget deficit during the 2009-2010 school year, and must make $3.2 million in 
budget cuts for the 2010-2011 school year.  To accomplish the budget reduction, the District 
must reduce services for the next school year. 
 

12. 

Resolution No. 39-09-10 called for the reduction or discontinuance of the 

following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year: 
 

Service 

Elementary school teaching 
services 

Community Day School teaching 
services 

Music 

Techno Expo 

Physical Education (P.E.) 

Assistant Principal 

Assistant to the Principal 

FTE 

17.0 

1.0 

4.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

 Total

26.0 

 

 

13. 

Resolution No. 46-09-10 reduced four part-time elementary teaching services 

positions (.4 FTE each), for a total of 1.6 FTE, in addition to the 26.0 FTE reduction pursuant 
to Resolution No. 39-09-10. 
 
 
The above-described services are “particular kinds of services” that can be 

14. 

reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.   
 

15. 

In arriving at the number of certificated employees required to be terminated, 

Resolution No. 39-09-10 and Resolution No. 46-09-10 both state that the Board “has 
considered all positively assured attrition which has occurred to date and which is expected 
to occur, that is, all deaths, resignations, retirements, and other permanent vacancies and 
leaves of absence” as of March 12, 2010.  The Board concluded that, notwithstanding any 
vacancies resulting in positively assured attrition, it would still be necessary to terminate 
certificated employees equal to 27.6 FTE. 
 

3

Bumping and Skipping 
 

16. 

Economic layoffs are generally to be carried out on the basis of seniority.  A 
teacher with more seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment than a junior 
teacher.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to a position held by a 
junior teacher if the senior teacher is properly credentialed.  That displacement of a junior 
teacher is known as “bumping.”  In general, the District has an affirmative obligation to 
reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions held by junior teachers 
if the senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to occupy such positions.  The 
seniority rule is not absolute, and a junior teacher with a needed credential or skills may be 
retained even if a more senior teacher is terminated.  Such “skipping” is recognized by 
statute (Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1)) and appellate law (Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of the Santa Clara Unified School 
District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831).  In order to depart from a seniority-based economic 
layoff, Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), requires the District to 
“demonstrate a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study… 
and that the certificated employee [to be skipped] has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study…which others with more seniority do not 
possess.” 
 

17. 

The District maintains a seniority list which contains pertinent information 

such as employees’ date of first paid service, current assignment, and credentials on file.  The 
District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list.  The District considered 
whether senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced or 
eliminated could bump more junior employees.  In determining who would be laid off for 
each kind of service reduced or eliminated, the District first applied known vacancies and 
then applied in progressive sequence the seniority list in inverse order, from least to most 
senior.  Employees with the same date of hire were laid off according to the needs of the 
District and its students.1 
 

18. 

The District skipped all special education teachers, nurses, and psychologists 
(with the exception of one special education teacher who was nonreelected), due to the fact 
that these individuals possess special credentials, training and experience that more senior 
certificated employees who were identified for layoff do not possess, and the District will 
have a need for these services in the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Seniority Date – Mike Spence 
 

19.  According to the District’s seniority list, Mike Spence has a seniority date of 

August 23, 2004.  Mr. Spence began work for the District on October 3, 2003 as a long-term 

                                                

1 Article 14, section 14.1 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) between the District and the 

Redding Teachers Association (RTA) specifies the method of determining the order of seniority as between two 
bargaining unit members with the same seniority date. 

 

 

4

substitute at the Community Day School.  He worked in this position from October 2003 to 
April 2004.  He then worked as a temporary teacher from April 14, 2004 through the end of 
the school year.  If his service as a long-term substitute and temporary teacher is combined, 
he worked 141 days out of 184 total duty days in the 2003-2004 school year, which is more 
than 75 percent of the school year.  Respondents contended that Mr. Spence should be given 
credit for his service in the 2003-2004 school year by reason of Education Code section 
44918, and that his seniority date should be October 3, 2003. 
 

20. 

Education Code section 44918 states, in pertinent part: 

 

 

 

(a) Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary 
employee, who serves during one school year for at least 75 
percent of the number of days the regular schools of the district 
were maintained in that school year and has performed the 
duties normally required of a certificated employee of the school 
district, shall be deemed to have served a complete school year 
as a probationary employee if employed as a probationary 
employee for the following school year. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
 
(d) Those employees classified as substitutes, and who are 
employed to serve in an on-call status to replace absent regular 
employees on a day-to-day basis shall not be entitled to the 
benefits of this section. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 

21. 

The District argued that Mr. Spence cannot combine his temporary and 

substitute service to achieve 75 percent of the school days for purposes of Education Code 
section 44918.  The District contrasted the language of Education Code section 44918 with 
that of Education Code section 44914, which states: 
 

If an employee of a school district has served as a probationary 
employee of the district in a position requiring certification 
qualifications, for one complete school year, and in the year 
immediately preceding the service as probationary employee has 
served as a substitute employee, or as a substitute and 
probationary employee, serving in both capacities during the 
same school year in the schools of the district, at least 75 
percent of the number of days the regular schools of the district 
were maintained, the governing board of the district may count 
the year of employment as a substitute or as a substitute and 
probationary employee as one year of the probationary period 

5

which he is required by law to serve as a condition to being 
classified as a permanent employee of the district. 

22. 

The District’s argument is not persuasive.  Education Code 44914 addresses a 
different issue, namely, whether a teacher can combine substitute service with probationary 
service in order to achieve a calculation of 75 percent of the school year for purposes of 
achieving probationary status.  The language of Education Code section 44918, while not 
specifically allowing for a combination of temporary and substitute service, does not 
preclude a calculation which combines both types of service, so long as the employee “has 
performed the duties normally required of a certificated employee of the school district,” as 
Mr. Spence has done in this case. 
 

23. 

By operation of Education Code section 44918, Mr. Spence became a 

probationary employee of the District on October 3, 2003, and his seniority date shall be 
adjusted accordingly. 
 
Respondents’ Challenges to Bumping 
 
 
 

Richard Hall 

24.  Molly Ranken (seniority date 8/21/96) currently serves in the position of 
Assistant Principal.  This position was eliminated by Resolution No. 39-09-10.  Ms. Ranken 
holds the following credentials: multiple subjects (MS); CLAD Administrative Services; 
Standard Secondary; and Learning Handicapped (LH).  She also has a reading specialist 
authorization.  Richard Hall (seniority date 9/21/05) holds MS and CLAD credentials, and 
had a limited assignment authorization to teach P.E. for the 2009-2010 school year.  His 
teaching assignment for 2009-2010 was sixth grade core (language arts and history) and P.E.  
The District served a layoff notice on Mr. Hall, because Ms. Ranken has greater seniority and 
can bump Mr. Hall from his position. 
 

25. 

Respondents contend that Ms. Ranken cannot completely displace Mr. Hall, 

because she cannot teach P.E.  However, Mr. Hall had a limited assignment authorization to 
teach P.E., which the District does not intend to renew.  Therefore, Ms. Ranken would be 
able to bump Mr. Hall from any position which he would be credentialed to teach in the 
2010-2011 school year.  Respondents’ argument to the contrary is not persuasive. 
 

26. 

Respondents also contend that, because Ms. Ranken holds a special education 
credential, she should be skipped by the District and be assigned to teach special education.  
The evidence established that Ms. Ranken’s LH credential would authorize her to teach in 
either of two special education positions that will be vacant for the 2010-2011 school year 
(one due to the nonreelection of an employee, and the other due to the resignation of Lillian 
Smith (Jones)).  The District argued that it is not required to assign Ms. Ranken to a special 
education position, but may reassign her to a teaching position utilizing her MS credential.  
This contention was not persuasive.  If the District proposes to skip teachers who hold 
special education credentials because of the District’s needs for such services, then it must do 

 

 

6

so consistently.  Therefore, the most senior respondent with an MS credential, Mike Spence 
(seniority date 10/3/03, as set forth in Findings 19 through 23) shall be retained.2 
 

John Selke 
 
27. 

Jody Greaney (seniority date 8/20/07) holds an MS credential as well as single 

subject credentials in Life Science and Introductory Physical Science.  Ms. Greaney’s 
teaching assignment for the 2009-2010 school year was a combination K-1 class.  John Selke 
(seniority date 8/18/08) holds a preliminary single subject credential in Science: Biology, and 
Introductory Business.  He also had a limited assignment authorization to teach mathematics 
for the 2009-2010 school year.  His teaching assignment for 2009-2010 was eighth grade 
science and math.  The District did not serve Ms. Greaney with a layoff notice, because she 
has greater seniority than Mr. Selke, and was able to bump him from his position teaching 
science.  Respondents contend that Ms. Greaney cannot completely displace Mr. Selke, 
because she cannot teach math.  This argument is not persuasive.  Mr. Selke had a limited 
assignment authorization to teach math, which the District does not intend to renew.  
Therefore, Ms. Greaney would be able to bump Mr. Selke from any position which he would 
be credentialed to teach in the 2010-2011 school year.  
 

Donna Walker 
 
28.  Garnet Callahan (seniority date 8/23/04) holds MS and CLAD credentials.  

Her teaching assignment for the 2009-2010 school year was as a home school K-8 teacher.  
This service has not been reduced or eliminated for the 2010-2011 school year.  The District 
has determined that the position of home school teacher does not require any specific 
credential, and can be filled by any certificated employee with a valid teaching credential.  
Ms. Callahan received a layoff notice because there were more senior teachers slated for 
layoff who could fill her position as a home school teacher. 
 

29.  Donna Walker (seniority date 8/22/91) holds a single subject credential in P.E. 

and a specialist credential in reading/language arts.  She is the most senior respondent.  At 
hearing, she stated her willingness to accept assignment to the home school K-8 teaching 
position for the 2010-2011 school year.  In its closing brief, the District acknowledged that 
the layoff notice given to Ms. Walker should be rescinded, in that Ms. Walker is eligible to 
bump into Ms. Callahan’s position. 
 
Temporary Job-Share Employees 
 

30. 

The District has a practice of allowing permanent or probationary certificated 

employees to work part-time for the District (typically .6 FTE), through an arrangement in 
                                                

2 The District served a layoff notice on Mr. Spence because he was being bumped by William Barnett 

(seniority date 9/11/00) who currently serves in the position of Assistant to the Principal.  This position was 
eliminated by Resolution No. 39-09-10.  Mr. Barnett holds a multiple subjects (MS) credential, and is able to bump 
Mr. Hall, for the reasons set forth in Findings 24 and 25. 

.   

 

7

which the District employs a temporary teacher for .4 FTE to share a 1.0 FTE classroom 
assignment with the permanent or probationary employee.3  The teacher(s) requesting to 
work part-time must submit a request to the District for a leave of absence, and the 
arrangement is approved on a year-to-year basis, with the District hiring a sufficient number 
of temporary teachers to correspond to the number of permanent teachers for which part-time 
job-sharing agreements have been approved.  As specified in section 12.1.3 of the CBA, the 
two individuals who propose to job-share (i.e., the permanent or probationary employee and 
the temporary employee) must submit a joint application on a form that has been approved 
by the District and the RTA (Exhibit D to the CBA).  The joint application form includes the 
beginning and ending dates of proposed job-share, and has signature lines for both 
applicants, the school principal, and the Superintendent, as well as a line to indicate the date 
of Board action either approving or disapproving the application. 
 

31.  Although the joint application form does not use the word “temporary” to 

describe the job-share employment arrangement, the joint application has a proposed 
beginning and ending date, and the permanent or probationary employee participating in the 
job-share arrangement must apply for a leave of absence for .4 FTE (which is stated in the 
joint application form).  Therefore, the individuals filling the .4 FTE position of the job-share 
arrangement are fully informed, by the joint application, that the position is for one year 
only, i.e., is a temporary position with the District, and that they are filling in for a teacher on 
leave of absence. 
 

32.  According to Dr. Kempley, the District notified the four individuals occupying 

the .4 FTE job-share temporary positions that they were being released as of the end of the 
2009-2010 school year.  Although the District considered these individuals to be temporary 
employees who are not entitled to notices of layoff, the Board adopted Resolution No. 46-09-
10 as a precaution, in the event that any of the individuals asserted that they should be 
considered probationary employees.  At the recommendation of the superintendent, the 
District sent precautionary layoff notices to three of the four individuals occupying the .4 
FTE job-share positions:  Jeni Moore, Elisabeth Bade, and Dawn Smith.4 
 

33.  At the present time, the District is not considering approval of any job-share 

arrangements for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

34.  Dawn Smith was first employed as a .4 FTE job-share teacher for the 2002-

2003 school year, and has been so employed by the District for every school year thereafter, 
through the 2009-2010 school year.  After a review of Ms. Smith’s personnel file, the District 
was able to locate temporary part-time employment contracts for Ms. Smith for the 2002-
2003, 2004-2005, 2006-2007, 2007-2008, 2008-2009, and 2009-2010 school years.  The 
District did not have temporary employment contracts for Ms. Smith for the 2003-2004 or 

                                                

3 Job sharing is addressed in Article 12 of the CBA. 
 
4 Dr. Kempley testified that the fourth individual, Theresa Vrismo, was hired as a substitute teacher to 

replace a .4 FTE permanent employee (Rebekah Gartin) who is on leave of absence for the 2009-2010 school year. 

 

8

2005-2006 school years.  Other District records pertaining to Ms. Smith demonstrated that 
she signed a joint application form, as described in Findings 30 and 31 above, for each of the 
school years in which she served in a .4 FTE job-share position. 
 

35.  Ms. Smith contended that she did not receive a temporary contract for her 
position as a job-share teacher for the 2003-2004 school year, as required by Education Code 
sections 44915 and 44916, and that she should have been considered probationary as of that 
date, in accordance with the rationale of Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High 
School Dist. (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911 (Kavanaugh).  
 

36. 

Education Code section 44915 states:  “Governing boards of school districts 

shall classify as probationary employees, those persons employed in positions requiring 
certification qualifications for the school year, who have not been classified as permanent 
employees or as substitute employees.” 
 

37. 

Education Code section 44916 states: 

 

 

 

The classification shall be made at the time of employment and 
thereafter in the month of July of each school year. At the time 
of initial employment during each academic year, each new 
certificated employee of the school district shall receive a 
written statement indicating his employment status and the 
salary that he is to be paid.  If a school district hires a 
certificated person as a temporary employee, the written 
statement shall clearly indicate the temporary nature of the 
employment and the length of time for which the person is being 
employed.  If a written statement does not indicate the 
temporary nature of the employment, the certificated employee 
shall be deemed to be a probationary employee of the school 
district, unless employed with permanent status. 

38. 

In Kavanaugh, the plaintiff, a certificated employee, believed she had been 

hired as a probationary employee.  She did not receive written notice of her status as a 
temporary employee until she had been working in her classroom for more than two weeks.  
In contrast, Ms. Smith (and all other certificated personnel participating as .4 FTE job-share 
employees) were well aware of their status as temporary employees, as reflected by the joint 
application, prior to the start of their employment.  Although the word “temporary” does not 
appear in the joint application, the temporary nature and duration of the employment is 
clearly indicated.  Other documents provided by the District, including the Certificated 
Employment Notification and Payroll Status Change Forms, contain information about 
employment status and pay rate.  These documents, taken together, constituted a “written 
statement” in compliance with Education Code section 44916. 
 

39. 

The District properly characterized Ms. Smith’s employment as temporary, 

and her argument to the contrary was not persuasive. 

9

 
Seniority Date – Kimberly Miller 
 

40.  Kimberly Miller (seniority date 9/18/06) has MS and CLAD credentials, and 

was assigned to teach a first grade class during the 2009-2010 school year.  Prior to the 2006-
2007 school year, Ms. Miller worked part-time for the District, as a .4 FTE job-share teacher 
for the 2000-2001 school year, and as a .5 FTE job-share teacher for the 2001-2002 through 
the 2005-2006 school years. 
 

41. 

Respondents introduced payroll status change documents with effective dates 

of August 2001 and August 2002, indicating that she worked .5 FTE in the classification 
“Job Share with Roberta Harris.” 
 

42.  Ms. Miller testified that she signed a contract for the 2000-2001 school year, 
and that she filled out the joint application form, as described in Findings 30 and 31 above, 
for each of the school years in which she served in a .5 FTE job-share position.  She 
contended she did not receive a temporary contract for her position as a job-share teacher for 
the 2001-2002 school year, and therefore she should have been considered probationary as of 
that date, in accordance with the rationale of Kavanaugh.  This contention is without merit, 
for the reasons set forth in Findings 36 through 38.  
 
Services Performed Pursuant to Personnel Services Agreements 
 

43. 

The District has employed a number of individuals in short-term positions 

through the use of Personnel Services Agreements (PSAs), under the authority of Education 
Code section 45103, subdivision (d)(2).5 Pursuant to Education Code section 45103, 
subdivision (b)(1), “short term employees employed and paid for less than 75 percent of a 
school year, shall not be a part of the classified service.”  Many of these short-term positions 
are paid for by categorical funds.  Some PSAs cover activities outside the regular school day, 
while others cover activities during the regular school day.  Each PSA specifies that the 
employee “is employed ‘at will’ and may be released from employment at any time.”  Each 
PSA lists the first date of service, as well as an estimated date of completion, and accounts 
for employment less than 75 percent of the school year.  The Board has adopted resolutions 
establishing the various short term positions and authorizing the superintendent to fill those 
positions.   
 
                                                

5 Education Code section 45103, subdivision (d)(2), states: 

“Short-term employee” means any person who is employed to perform a service for the district, 
upon the completion of which, the service required or similar services will not be extended or 
needed on a continuing basis. Before employing a short-term employee, the governing board, at a 
regularly scheduled board meeting, shall specify the service required to be performed by the 
employee pursuant to the definition of “classification” in subdivision (a) of Section 45101, and 
shall certify the ending date of the service. The ending date may be shortened or extended by the 
governing board, but shall not extend beyond 75 percent of a school year. 
 

 

 

10

44. 

Respondents contended that some services currently being performed under 

PSAs are education positions, i.e., positions requiring certification qualifications.6  Education 
Code section 44065, subdivision (a), provides in pertinent part: 
 

. . . [A]ny person employed on or after July 1, 1963, by a school 
district, . . . in a position in which 50 percent or more of his or 
her duties performed during the school year, whether performed 
in a particular school or district or countywide, consist of 
rendering service in directing, coordinating, supervising or 
administering any portion or all of the types of functions listed 
below in this section shall hold a valid teaching or service 
credential as appropriate, whichever is designated in regulations 
adopted by the Commission on Teacher Credentialing, 
authorizing the particular service. 

The types of functions are: 

(1) The work of instructors and the instructional program for 
pupils. 
 
(2) Educational or vocational counseling, guidance and 
placement services. 
 
(3) School extracurricular activities related to, and an outgrowth 
of, the instructional and guidance program of the school. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
 
(5) The selection, collection, preparation, classification or 
demonstration of instructional materials of any course of study 
for use in the development of the instructional program in the 
schools of the state. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
 
(9) The school library services. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 

                                                

6 Education Code section 44001 states: 
 
“Education position” or “position requiring certification qualifications” includes every type of 
service for which certification qualifications are established by or pursuant to Sections 44000 to 
44012, inclusive, Section 44065, and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 44200) of this part. 

11

 

 

 

 

45. 

Respondents specifically identified three employees who they contend are 

serving in education positions:  Barbara Bambauer (Tutor/Coordinator and Read 180 
Coordinator); Byrn Valencia (Intervention Groups Tutor, Intervention Coordinator, and after 
school literacy projects); and Mary Mazzini (classroom/primary grade music teacher).  
 

46. 

Respondents further contended that the individuals occupying these positions 

should properly be classified as probationary employees, citing Bakersfield Elementary 
Teacher’s Association v. Bakersfield City School District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1287 
(Bakersfield).  Consequently, respondents argued that a corresponding number of 
respondents should be retained to fill the positions held by Ms. Bambauer, Ms. Valencia, and 
Ms. Mazzini. 
 

47. 

The District argued that the individuals providing services pursuant to PSAs 
during the school day did not need to be certificated, since they worked under the direction 
of classroom teachers or other certificated personnel, in a manner similar to instructional 
aides.  The District noted that, under Education Code section 45344, an instructional aide 
need not perform his or her duties in the physical presence of the teacher, “but the teacher 
shall retain his responsibility for the instruction and supervision of the pupils in his charge.”  
The District further contended that respondents could not displace any individual working 
under a PSA, because those contracts terminate at the end of the 2009-2010 school year, and 
no certificated employees are being retained to perform work in these positions for the 2010-
2011 school year.  Finally, the District argued in its closing brief that, “if certificated 
employees are concerned that their duties are being transferred to classified employees, then 
their remedy is to file an unfair labor practice charge with the Public Employment Relations 
Board.” 
 

48. 

The parties disputed the extent to which Ms. Bambauer, Ms. Valencia, and 
Ms. Mazzini worked independently in providing services to students.  Ms. Bambauer, Ms. 
Valencia, and Ms. Mazzini did not testify at the hearing. 
 

49. 

Respondents’ arguments were not persuasive.  Even assuming, as respondents 

contend, that the positions occupied by Ms. Bambauer, Ms. Valencia, and Ms. Mazzini 
required certification qualifications, and that they were positions in categorically funded 
programs, it does not follow that the individuals occupying those positions should be 
classified as probationary.  Education Code section 44909 states, in pertinent part: 
 

The governing board of any school district may employ persons 
possessing an appropriate credential as certificated employees in 
programs and projects to perform services conducted under 
contract with public or private agencies, or categorically funded 
projects which are not required by federal or state statutes. The 
terms and conditions under which such persons are employed 
shall be mutually agreed upon by the employee and the 
governing board and such agreement shall be reduced to 
writing.  Service pursuant to this section shall not be included in 

 

12

computing the service required as a prerequisite to attainment 
of, or eligibility to, classification as a permanent employee 
unless (1) such person has served pursuant to this section for at 
least 75 percent of the number of days the regular schools of the 
district by which he is employed are maintained and (2) such 
person is subsequently employed as a probationary employee in 
a position requiring certification qualifications.  Such persons 
may be employed for periods which are less than a full school 
year and may be terminated at the expiration of the contract or 
specially funded project without regard to other requirements of 
this code respecting the termination of probationary or 
permanent employees other than Section 44918. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 

 

 

50. 

In Bakersfield, the court discussed employees in categorically funded 

programs, stating that, “although such persons are not specifically identified in the Code as 
temporary employees, they are treated in much the same way in that they may be dismissed 
without the formalities required for probationary and permanent employees in the event the 
program expires or is terminated, and their service does not count toward acquiring 
permanent status (unless they are reemployed the following year in a probationary position).” 
(Id. at p. 1286.) 7 
 

The decision in Zalac v. Governing Board of Ferndale Unified School District (2002) 
98 Cal.App.4th 838, 851, appears to support the conclusion in Bakersfield, that the rationale 
underlying Education Code section 44909 is to “[permit] school districts to hire additional 
teachers for special programs so long as the designated funds remain available, while 
retaining the flexibility to readily lay these teachers off if and when the funding is 
discontinued.” 
 

51.  On the other hand, there are cases in which the courts classify employees hired 
pursuant to Education Code section 44909 as temporary.  For example, in Vasquez v. Happy 
Valley Union School District (2008) 159 Cal.App.4th 969 (Happy Valley), the court noted 
that, “[t]he classification of ‘temporary’ covers a variety of scenarios. A temporary teacher 
is, among other definitions, a teacher hired by the district for a semester or a complete school 
year to replace a regular teacher who has been granted leave for that time or is experiencing 
long-term illness. (§ 44920.) A teacher may also be classified as temporary where the teacher 
is working on so-called categorically funded projects. (§ 44909.)” (Id. at p. 975.) 
 

                                                

7 The court in Bakersfield went on to state:  “Thus, certificated teachers assigned to a categorically funded 
program may be laid off without the procedural formalities due a permanent and probationary employee only if the 
program has expired.  (Hart Federation of Teachers, supra, 73 Cal.App.3d at pp. 215-216; Zalac, supra, 98 
Cal.App.4th at p. 852.)” (Id. at p. 1287.) 

13

Likewise, in Schnee v. Alameda Unified School District (2004) 125 Cal.App.4th 555, 

563-564 (Schnee), the court traced the history of Education Code section 44909, stating: 
 

“The intent of former section 13329 [now 44909] was ‘to 
prevent a person from acquiring probationary status solely 
through teaching in a categorically funded program. This 
permits the hiring of qualified persons for categorically funded 
programs of undetermined duration without incurring 
responsibility to grant tenured status based on such teaching 
services alone.” (Zalac, supra, 98 Cal.App.4th at p. 845.) … 
Any doubts that one may entertain concerning the interpretation 
of section 44909 that best conforms with the evident intent of 
the Legislature – no illuminating legislative history having been 
brought to our attention – are resolved by reference to those 
provisions of the Education Code that deal with temporary 
employees as defined in section 44919…. We can perceive no 
reason for treating persons whose employment is temporary by 
virtue of section 44909 differently in this respect than temporary 
employees under section 44919.  

 

 

52. 

The individuals serving under the PSAs currently in effect for the 2009-2010 

school year were clearly notified that the positions were for a limited duration at the time 
they entered into the contracts, in that the commencement and termination dates were 
specified, and the work was described as “at will” and subject to termination at any time.  
Thus, at best, such employees would be deemed temporary, and could properly be released 
by the District at the end of the 2009-2010 school year.  The rationale of Schnee is 
persuasive.  Temporary classification is specifically statutorily permitted to allow districts 
flexibility in staffing short-term vacancies and meeting district needs without having to 
provide status toward tenure and benefits.  Consequently, there would be no certificated 
employees who respondents could displace for the 2010-2011 school year, 
 

Individual Respondents 
 
53. 

Jennifer Severin (seniority date 8/14/08) - Ms. Severin holds MS and CLAD 

credentials, with authorizations to teach social science and English.  She is currently assigned 
to a seventh grade class for the 2009-2010 school year.  She provided reading intervention 
services and after school tutoring under a PSA from August 2006 to January 2007.  This 
position was categorically funded.  In January 2007, she took over a second grade classroom 
for the remainder of the 2006-2007 school year, pursuant to a temporary contract.  She was 
subsequently employed by the District to teach seventh and eighth grade core and physical 
education.  Ms. Severin argued that her employment under the PSA should be considered 
probationary, and that her seniority date should be changed to reflect her first date of paid 
service in a probationary capacity.  This argument is rejected, for the reasons set forth in 
Findings 46 through 52.  At best, her employment under the PSA was temporary, not 

14

probationary, and was for less  than 75 percent of the school year, thereby allowing the 
District to terminate her employment at the conclusion of the contract period. 
 

54. 

Jeffrey Wilder (seniority date 10/8/07) – Mr. Wilder holds a CLAD credential 
and a single subject credential in music.  His teaching assignment for the 2009-2010 school 
year is “K-8 music.”  For the 2004-2005, 2005-2006, and 2006-2007 school years, he taught 
part-time for the District pursuant to PSAs.  He taught a guitar ensemble class during school 
hours, and one or two music classes after school.  The evidence did not establish that he 
worked more than 75 percent of the school year for any of the years that he worked part-
time.  The funding for his PSAs was not established by the evidence.  Mr. Wilder contended 
that he was employed as a probationary employee starting in the 2004-2005 school year, and 
his seniority date should be changed to reflect his first date of paid service in a probationary 
capacity.  Argument rejected, for the reasons set forth in Findings 46 through 52.  At best, his 
employment under the PSAs was temporary, not probationary, and was for less than 75 
percent of the school year, thereby allowing the District to terminate his employment at the 
conclusion of each contract period. 

 
Charter School 
 

55. 

The District is the chartering entity of Stellar Charter School (Stellar).  

Stellar’s charter petition addresses employment qualifications in Element E, at page 10.  
Paragraph 4 states: 
   

56. 

Stellar’s charter petition addresses employee rights in Element M, at page 14: 

Beginning in the 2006-2007 school year, Stellar Charter School 
hired all staff members as “at will” employees.  Because of the 
tentative nature of charter schools, employees hired at Stellar 
Charter School from this date and through the term of this 
charter will accept their status of “at will”, which will not 
exceed the current school year of employment.  There will be no 
tenure rights granted to these employees at Stellar Charter 
School or Redding School District, nor will these employees be 
a part of the collective bargaining unit in the Redding School 
District. 

1.   Current employees of the Redding School District have no 

rights to employment at Stellar Charter School.  All 
employees hired after 2006 at Stellar Charter School are 
considered at-will employees.  In order for a current 
employee of Redding School District to become a Stellar 
Charter School employee, the individual would need to 
resign employment with Redding School District and waive 
all former employment and reemployment rights. 

15

 

  

 

 

2.   Employees who were hired before the 2006-2007 school 

year shall retain rights to return to a comparable position in 
the Redding School District (California Education Code 
47605).  Such staff shall continue to earn service credit in 
the Redding School District, and any other rights afforded to 
regular certificated/classified employees of the Redding 
School District. 

3.   No Redding School District employee shall be required to 
work at Stellar Charter School (California Education Code 
47605). 

57. 

Stellar’s charter petition addresses labor relations in Element O, at page 15: 

Stellar Charter School shall be the exclusive public school 
employer of the employees of the charter school for the purpose 
of the Education Employment Relations Act. 

58. 

Respondents contend that, because the District has certain oversight 

responsibilities over Stellar as the chartering authority of the charter school, and because 
Stellar’s charter provides that employees hired before the 2006-2007 school year retain rights 
to return to a comparable position in the District and continue to earn service credit, 
respondents with multiple subject credentials should be able to displace less senior teachers 
at Stellar with multiple subject credentials.  This argument is without merit, and directly 
contradicts the terms of Stellar’s charter.  Laid-off certificated employees of the District may 
seek employment at Stellar for the 2010-2011 school year, but would be required to waive all 
former employment and reemployment rights with the District. Employment at Stellar is “at 
will,” and no respondent could be guaranteed a position for the 2010-2011 school year. 

 

Welfare of the District and Its Students 
 

59. 

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services 

identified in Resolution No. 39-09-10 and Resolution No. 46-09-10 was not arbitrary or 
capricious, but constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 

60. 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District as 
determined by the Board. 
 

61. 

Except as previously noted, no certificated employee junior to any respondent 
was retained to perform any services which any respondent was certificated and competent to 
render. 
 
 

16

 

 

 

 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 

2. 

The services identified in Resolution No. 39-09-10 and Resolution No. 46-09-

10are particular kinds of services that could be reduced or discontinued under section 
Education Code section 44955.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees 
of the District due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  Cause 
for the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s 
schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
 

3. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 

4. 

Respondent Mike Spence’s seniority date shall be changed to October 3, 2003, 

by reason of Findings 19-23. 
 

respondent Mike Spence. 
 

to respondent Donna Walker. 
 

5. 

As set forth in Finding 26, the District shall rescind the layoff notice to 

6. 

As set forth in Findings 28 and 29, the District shall rescind the layoff notice 

7. 

No employee with less seniority than any named respondent is being retained 

to render a service which any named respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 5 and 6, the Board may give respondents final 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services will not be required for the ensuing school 
year, 2010-2011. 
 
 

ORDER 

1. 

2. 

The District shall comply with Legal Conclusions 4 through 6. 

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 5 and 6, the Accusations served on 

respondents are sustained.  Notices of layoff shall be rescinded as to respondents Mike 
Spence and Donna Walker.  Notices shall be given to Dawn Smith and to the remaining 
respondents identified in attached Exhibit A that their services will not be required for the 
2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services.  Notice shall be given to respondents in inverse order of seniority. 

 

 

 

 

17

All other contentions and claims not specifically mentioned were considered 

3. 
and are DENIED. 
 
 

Dated: __________________________  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
CATHERINE B. FRINK 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

18

EXHIBIT A 
REDDING SCHOOL DISTRICT 
RESPONDENTS REPRESENTED BY  
MICHAEL McCALLUM, ATTORNEY AT LAW 

 
 
Adams, Heather 
Alexander, Stephanie 
Bade, Elizabeth 
Callahan, Garnet 
Conway, Katherine 
DeMott, Janetta 
Fowler, Chad 
Hall, Rich 
Henderson, Michelle 
Henry, Sherri 
Jones, Samantha Grace 
Kubish, Mark 
Lockard, Michele 
Miller, Kim 
Moore, Jeni 
Osborne, Shannon 
Petty, Jennifer 
Roccal, Brenda 
Selke, John 
Severin, Jennifer 
Skelton, Kim 
Spence, Mike 
Wilder, Jeffrey 
Winterscheidt, Julie 
 
 
 

 

19

