BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
HAMILTON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment/ 
Reduction in Force of:  
 
LESLIE CARLSEN 
FRANK CATOMERISIOS 
SUSAN McDONOUGH 
SUZANNE TEFS, 
 
                                                Respondents. 

 
 
 
OAH No. 2010031604 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Rebecca M. Westmore, Administrative Law Judge, Office 

Matthew Juhl-Darlington, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of the Hamilton Unified 

 
 
of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 29, 2010, in Hamilton City, 
California. 
 
 
School District. 
 
 
respondents, except Suzanne Tefs, were present throughout the hearing. 
 
 
decision on April 29, 2010. 
 
 

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for 

Michael N. McCallum, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of all respondents.  All 

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1.     Ray L. Odom is the Superintendent of Hamilton Unified School District 
(District).  His actions and the actions of the District’s Governing Board (Board) were taken in 
their official capacities. 
 

2.     Respondents are permanent certificated employees of the District. 

3.     On March 8, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 09-111 (Resolution), 
entitled “A Resolution of the Governing Board of the Hamilton Unified School District to 
Decrease the Number of Certificated Employees Due to a Reduction in Particular Kinds of 

1

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

Services.”  Pursuant to the Resolution, the Board determined that it was necessary and in the 
best interest of the District to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services (PKS) and to 
decrease a corresponding number of certificated District employees not later than the 
beginning of the 2010-2011 school year.  The Board directed Superintendent Odom to send 
appropriate notices to all employees whose services will be reduced or eliminated by virtue of 
the PKS reductions and eliminations.  The PKS reductions and eliminations are based solely 
upon economic reasons, and are not related to the skills, abilities or work performance of the 
affected teachers. 
 

4.     Pursuant to the Resolution, the Board resolved to reduce the following 11.83 

full-time equivalent (FTE) positions: 
 

Certificated Positions  

 

 

 

 

FTE 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
Administrative 
 
 
Adult Education 
 
 
Agriculture 
  
 
Art 
 
Continuation School   
 
 
Counselor 
 
 
Elementary School 
 
 
 
English 
 
 
Librarian 
 
 
 
Mathematics   
 
 
 
Science 
 
 
Social Studies  
Woodshop 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
          11.83 FTE 
 
Total 

0.33                             
0.50  
0.50  
0.33  
0.50  
1.50  
5.00  
0.50  
0.67  
0.50  
0.50  
0.50 
0.50                                        

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.     On March 15, 2010, in accordance with the Resolution, and pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the District served preliminary layoff notices on 20 
certificated employees advising that their services would not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year.  Seven certificated employees timely filed a Request for Hearing to determine if 
there is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year. 
 

6.     On March 26, 2010, Superintendent Odom made and filed the Accusation 

against the seven certificated employees who requested a hearing.  On March 29, 2010, all 
seven respondents timely filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation.  On April 6, 2010, the 
Board issued Notices of Rescission to three respondents and one certificated employee,1 based 

                                                 

1 The three respondents who received Notices of Rescission were Erica Gorden, Kelly Henning and Michelle 

Walker.  The certificated employee who did not request a hearing but received a Notice of Rescission was Kelly 
Langan. 

 

 

 
 
 

 

2

on revised revenue estimates for the 2010-2011 school year, and the matter proceeded against 
the remaining four respondents. 
 
District’s Layoff Procedures 
 

7.     The District maintains a HUSD Certificated Seniority List (Seniority List) which 
contains data obtained from the District’s records and its employees, including, but not limited 
to, employees’ names, hire dates, school sites, classifications, NCLB status, teaching positions, 
FTE’s, and credentials. 
 

8.     At hearing, Superintendent Odom asserted that the Board accepted and applied 

the following “tie-breaking” criteria that were developed in 2009 by the Hamilton Union 
Elementary School District,2 to determine the order of termination of certificated employees 
who first rendered paid service to the District on the same date: 
 

a. 
Credential and experience to teach or serve in a 
particular program or provide a particular service of need by the 
District (e.g. bilingual, special education, etc.) 

Rating: 
experience 

+1 per credential, +1 per year of 

b. 
Years of experience previous to current employment as a 
full-time credentialed teacher in a probationary/permanent K-12 
teaching situation in a public school 

Rating: 

+1 per year 

c. 

Credentials that permit supplementary authorizations 

Rating: 

+1 per supplementary authorization 

d. 

Number of teaching and/or specialist service credentials 

Rating: 

+1 per credential 

Earned degrees beyond the B.A. or B.S. level (e.g., 

e. 
masters, doctorate) 

Rating: 

+1 per degree 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 

2 At hearing, Superintendent Odom testified that Hamilton Union Elementary School merged with Hamilton 

High School in 2009 to form the Hamilton Unified School District. 

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Multiple language skills relevant to District need (e.g., 

f. 
Spanish) 

Rating: 

+1 for Spanish 

g. 

Preliminary v. Clear/Life Credentials 

Rating: 
Credential 

+1 per preliminary, +2 per Clear/Life 

h. 

National Board Certification 

Rating: 

+1 per certificate 

 

 

 

 
Discussion 
 

9.     Frank Catomerisios has a seniority date of October 11, 2004.  He holds a 
Lifetime Multiple Subject Credential.  He is currently assigned to teach 0.83 FTE at Ella 
Barkley Continuation High School, and 0.17 FTE of independent study at Hamilton High 
School.  His services were reduced by the reduction of 0.50 FTE at the Continuation School, 
pursuant to the Board’s Resolution.  Mr. Catomerisios contends that because he has a multiple 
subject credential, he should be allowed to “bump” a more junior elementary school teacher 
for 0.50 FTE. 
 

10.     At hearing, Superintendent Odom asserted that Mr. Catomerisios “has always 

taught alternative school,” and “has not taught in the elementary school setting.”  According to 
Superintendent Odom, although Mr. Catomerisios’ credential allows him to teach in an 
elementary school setting, if the 0.50 FTE reduction is rescinded, “it would not be reasonable 
to reassign him to the elementary school setting” because “it’s very disruptive” to assign half-
time status to an elementary, self-contained classroom.  Superintendent Odom believes that 
Mr. Catomerisios “is not qualified to bump into an elementary school position.”  He admitted 
that the Board did not adopt competency criteria in its Resolution. 
 

11.     Mr. Catomerisios has been teaching at Ella Barkley Continuation High School 
for six years.  He provides individual instruction on all subjects, except science and physical 
education, to approximately 20 students.  Mr. Catomerisios asserted that “I taught in 
elementary school in a part-time position,” and have “substitute taught numerous elementary 
school jobs.”  He was hired as a long-term substitute for a combination 5th/6th grade class for 
four months.  Mr. Catomerisios argued that he is credentialed, competent and willing to teach 
in an elementary school position, and should be permitted to bump into 0.50 FTE of more 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

junior employees, Erica Gorden3 or Kelly Henning,4 who are being retained by the District to 
teach at Hamilton Elementary School in the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

12.     Economic layoffs are generally to be carried out on the basis of seniority.  A 
teacher with more seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment than a junior 
teacher.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to a position held by a 
junior teacher if the senior teacher is properly credentialed.  That displacement of a junior 
teacher is known as “bumping.”  In general, the District has an affirmative obligation to 
reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions held by junior teachers if 
the senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to occupy such positions.  The 
seniority rule is not absolute, and a junior teacher with a needed credential or skills may be 
retained even if a more senior teacher is terminated.  Such “skipping” is recognized by statute 
(Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1)) and appellate law (Santa Clara Federation 
of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of the Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 
116 Cal.App.3d 831).  In order to depart from a seniority-based economic layoff, Education 
Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), requires the District to “demonstrate a specific need 
for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study… and that the certificated employee 
[to be skipped] has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of 
study…which others with more seniority do not possess.” 
 

13.     It is undisputed that Mr. Catomerisios is credentialed to teach elementary 
school.  He holds the same Multiple Subject Credential held by each of the junior teachers who 
have been retained by the District to teach in an elementary school position in the 2010-2011 
school year.  With regard to his competency to teach elementary school, the Resolution does 
not establish “competency” criteria or explicitly state that in order to be retained to teach in an 
elementary school position, certificated employees must have taught in an elementary school 
position within a specified number of years.  Even though Superintendent Odom testified that 
Mr. Catomerisios is not competent, his testimony alone is insufficient to establish that Mr. 
Catomerisios is not competent to teach an elementary school position.  Moreover, Mr.  
Catomerisios testified that he has taught elementary school positions in part-time substitute and 
long-term substitute positions.  In addition, the District failed to establish that the junior 
employees who are being retained have special training and experience to teach elementary 
school that Mr. Catomerisios does not possess. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd . (d)(1).)   Therefore, 
the District failed to establish that Mr. Catomerisios is not competent to teach in an elementary 
school position. 
 

14.     Even though the District failed to establish that Mr. Catomerisios is not 

competent to teach in an elementary school position, the District contends that it would be 
unreasonable and disruptive to reassign Mr. Catomerisios to half-time status at Hamilton 

                                                 

3 Erica Gorden has a seniority date of August 19, 2005.  She holds a Multiple Subject Credential, 
Supplemental Authorization in Mathematics, and CLAD Certificate.  She is currently assigned to teach 1.00 FTE 
Kindergarten at Hamilton Elementary School. 

 
4 Kelly Henning has a seniority date of August 18, 2006.  She holds a Multiple Subject Credential.  She is 

currently assigned to teach 1.00 FTE 4th grade at Hamilton Elementary School. 

 

5

Elementary School.  While Mr. Catomerisios is certificated and competent to teach in an 
elementary school position, the District is not required to permit Mr. Catomerisios, or any 
other part-time employee, to “bump” a full-time teacher out of part of his or her position.  It is 
“within the scope of a school district’s discretion … to define a position as full time if the 
district concludes that the assignment cannot be as well performed on a part-time basis….  So 
long as the determination is reasonable and made in good faith, neither section 44955 nor any 
other provision of the Education Code precludes a school district from defining a position, or 
‘service,’ as full time.” (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 
Cal.App.4th 334, 343-344.)  Therefore, Mr. Catomerisios’ contention that he be permitted to 
“bump” into a .50 FTE elementary school teaching position is rejected. 
 

15.     Respondents Leslie Carlsen, Susan McDonough and Suzanne Tefs first rendered 
service to the District on August 12, 2008, and are affected by the reduction in particular kinds 
of services.  Initial application of the “tie-breaking” criteria by the District resulted in Susan 
McDonough being the “most senior” and Suzanne Tefs being the “most junior” of the three 
respondents.  According to Superintendent Odom, none of the affected respondents objected to 
the “tie-breaking” criteria, or the order of seniority that was established as a result of the initial 
application of the “tie-breaking” criteria. 
 

16.     At hearing, the parties agreed to reapply the “tie-breaking” criteria to establish 

the accuracy of the order of seniority initially established by the District: 
 

17.     Leslie Carlsen has a seniority date of August 12, 2008.  She holds a Clear 

Multiple Subject Credential, Supplemental Authorization in Music, and Cross-cultural, 
Language and Academic Development (CLAD) Certificate.  She is currently assigned to teach 
8th grade at Hamilton Elementary School. 
 

18.     Susan McDonough has a seniority date of August 12, 2008.  She holds a 

Lifetime Multiple Subject Credential, Supplemental Authorizations in English and Social 
Science: Anthropology, and CLAD Certificate.  She is currently assigned to teach 5th/6th 
grade at Hamilton Elementary School. 
 

19.     Suzanne Tefs has a seniority date of August 12, 2008.  She holds a Clear 

Multiple Subject Credential, Supplemental Authorization in English and Social Science, and 
CLAD Certificate.  She is currently assigned to teach 7th/8th grade at Hamilton Elementary 
School. 
 

20.     After reapplying the “tie-breaking” criteria, it was determined that Ms. Carlsen 

had 15 points and was entitled to seniority over Ms. McDonough, who had 14 points.5  
However, at the request of Ms. McDonough, both respondents submitted copies of their 
credentials for further review. 
 

                                                 

5 At hearing, respondents’ counsel represented that Ms. Tefs was not contesting the order of seniority.  

Therefore, the “tie-breaking” criteria were not applied to Ms. Tefs.    

 

6

21.     A review of the credentials of Ms. Carlsen and Ms. McDonough revealed that 

the “tie-breaking” criteria were appropriately applied at hearing, and all of the applicable 
points were appropriately awarded.  Therefore, in the event the District has an opportunity to 
rehire certificated teachers prior to the 2010-2011 school year, Ms. Carlsen is entitled to 
seniority over Ms. McDonough, and Ms. McDonough is entitled to seniority over Ms. Tefs. 
 

22.     It is within the discretion of the Board to employ “tie-breaking” criteria.  
Respondents did not establish that the Board violated its discretion, or engaged in arbitrary or 
capricious action when it accepted the “tie-breaking” criteria developed in 2009 by the 
Hamilton Union Elementary School District.  Application of the tie-breaking criteria resulted 
in determining the order of termination solely on the basis of the needs of the District and the 
students thereof. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
 
The District employees who received notices that their services would be 
reduced or would not be required in the 2010-2011 school year are not being laid off for 
reasons related to their ability or performance. 
 

2. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
proposed reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and the preliminary notice of 
layoff served on respondents are factually and legally appropriate.  The District has met its 
burden.  The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next school year is an 
appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955.  As stated in San Jose 
Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of particular 
kinds of services on the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that section, and, 
“in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section 
44955 is the only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.”  
The District must be solvent to provide educational services and cost savings are necessary to 
resolve its financial crisis.  The Board’s decision to reduce particular kinds of services was a 
proper exercise of its discretion.  In addition, all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth 
in Education Code sections 44944 and 44945 were met. The notices sent to respondents indicate 
the statutory basis for the reduction of services and adequately describe the particular kinds of 
services to be reduced, and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due process.  
(Ibid., at p. 627; see also, Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831; Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838; and Degener v. 
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 

3. 

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular  

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another manner. (Gallup 
v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California Teachers Association v. Board of 
Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)  A school board may reduce 
services within the meaning of the statute either by determining that a certain type of service 

 

7

shall not be performed at all or by reducing the number of district employees who perform 
such services.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 
64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  As set forth in Factual Finding 4, the services identified in the Resolution 
are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  
Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
 
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides in pertinent part:  

4. 

Whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school 
year, …or whenever the amendment of state law requires the 
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the 
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by 
reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of 
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may 
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding 
percentage of the certificated employees of the district, permanent 
as well as probationary, at the close of the school year.  Except as 
otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent 
employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section 
while any probationary employee, or any other employee with 
less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.  

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the 
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine 
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the 
district and the students thereof.  Upon the request of any 
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the 
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days 
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance 
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in 
determining the order of termination and the application of the 
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other 
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing 
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for 
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to 
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would 
not exist without such a requirement. 

8

 

 
 

 

5. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), cause exists to give 

 
notice to respondents Leslie Carlsen, Frank Catomerisios, Susan McDonough and Suzanne 
Tefs that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year 
because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

Final notices may be given to Leslie Carlsen, Frank Catomerisios, Susan McDonough 
and Suzanne Tefs that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 
 
 
DATED:  May 5, 2010 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
REBECCA M. WESTMORE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

9

