BEFORE THE  
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 
OF THE 
RIVERSIDE COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Employment Status of  
Ten Certificated Employees of the Riverside 
County Office of Education, 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

OAH No. 2010030631 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Todd M. Robbins, Attorney at Law, represented the Riverside County Office of 

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 

 
 
California, heard this matter in Riverside, California on April 20, 2010. 
 
 
Education. 
 
 
reduction in force proceeding except for Kelli DuCloux during that portion of the proceeding 
in which she asserted her right to occupy the positions held by more junior employees. 
 
 
 

Ronald G. Skipper, Attorney at Law, represented all respondents appearing in this 

Dr. Kelli DuCloux represented herself in connection with her bumping status. 

The matter was submitted on April 20, 2010. 

 
 

 

 
The Riverside County Office of Education 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
1. 

The Riverside County Office of Education (RCOE) is comprised of three 
components:  The County Superintendent of Schools, who is elected to serve a four-year 
term of office; seven elected members of the County Board of Education, each of whom 
serve four year terms of office; and approximately 1,900 employees, 400 of whom are 
certificated and employed directly by the County Superintendent of Schools.1  RCOE 

                                                
1  
1293.  This is not the case with local school districts, where certificated employees are employed by the district. 

A county superintendent of schools directly employs certificated employees under Education Code section 

1

provides educational services and supports to meet the needs of certain students do not or 
cannot receive services directly from the 23 local school districts that are within Riverside 
County (e.g., services provided to pregnant teens, juveniles residing in correctional facilities, 
or students with profound disabilities). 

 
Kenneth M. Young (Superintendent Young) is RCOE’s Superintendent of Schools.  
Patrick Kelleher (Director Kelleher) is RCOE’s Executive Director, Division of Personnel 
Services.  Kevin Rubow (Coordinator Rubow) is RCOE’s Coordinator for Certificated 
Personnel. 
 
RCOE’s Budget Concerns and Need for Reorganization 
 
 
Following meetings at the cabinet level and based upon budgetary concerns 
and a conviction that reorganization of its special education delivery system would benefit 
students, Director Kelleher recommended to Superintendent Young that he approve a 
resolution authorizing the reduction and elimination of particular kinds of services.  Director 
Kelleher recommended that certain employees determined by seniority be given notice that 
their services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

2. 

3. 

On March 5, 2010, Superintendent Young signed the following resolution: 

“REDUCTION OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF CERTIFICATED SERVICES 

RESOLUTION NO.: 17-10 

WHEREAS, the Superintendent of Schools of Riverside County has 

determined that it is in the best interests of the County Office and the welfare 
of the schools and the pupils thereof that the particular kinds of services set 
forth herein must be reduced or discontinued due to financial conditions; and 

WHEREAS, it is the opinion of the Superintendent that because of 

the aforementioned reason, the number of certificated employees of the 
County Office must be reduced; and 

WHEREAS, the Superintendent does not desire to reduce the 
services of regular certificated employees based upon reduction of average 
daily attendance during the past two years. 

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Superintendent of 

Schools for Riverside County as follows: 

A. 

That the particular kinds of services set forth below be 

reduced or eliminated commencing in the 2010-2011 school year: 

Alternative Education/Special Education Itinerant 
Specialists 

9 

F.T.E. 

Correctional Education Teaching Services 

10 

F.T.E. 

2

 

 

Special Education Emotionally Disturbed 
Teaching Services 

Special Education Trainable Mentally 
Handicapped Teaching Services 

Special Education Autistic Teaching Services 

Special Education Mentally 
Handicapped/Developmentally Disabled 
Teaching 
S
i
TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

2 

2 

1 

1 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

25 

F.T.E. 

B. 

That due to the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of 

services, the corresponding number of certificated employees of the Riverside 
County Office of Education shall be terminated pursuant to Education Code 
section 44955. 
 
C. 

That the reduction of certificated staff be achieved by the 
termination of regular employees and not by terminating temporary and 
substitute employees. 

That "competency" as described in Education Code section 

44955(b) for the purposes of bumping shall necessarily include possession of a 
valid credential in the relevant subject matter area, "highly qualified" status 
under the No Child Left Behind Act, an appropriate EL authorization (if 
required by the position), and a completed security clearance (if required by 
the position). 

E. 

That, as between certificated employees with the same seniority 
date, the order of termination shall be determined solely by criteria adopted by 
the Superintendent. 

F. 

That the Superintendent’s designee is directed to initiate layoff 

procedures and give appropriate notice pursuant to Education Code sections 
44955 and 44949. 

PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Superintendent of Schools of Riverside 
County on Friday, March 5, 2010. 

 
D. 

 

  Kenneth M. Young 
Kenneth M. Young 
Riverside County Office of Education 

 Exhibit A to Resolution No. 17-10 provided:

 

 

 

3

 

 

 

 

 

The following certificated personnel will receive a layoff notice: 

 

1.  Jose Bustos 
2.  Kelli DuCloux 
3.  Robin Elder 
4.  Kyndal Hays 
5.  Robert Hernandez 
6.  Yadira Kashak 
7.  Tabitha Muteti 
8.  Vikki Roberts 
9.  Jess Walker 

 

1.  Joy Sanders” 

The following certificated personnel will receive a precautionary layoff notice:  
 

4. 

 
Superintendent Young’s decision to reduce and eliminate particular kinds of 
 
services was the direct result of California’s fiscal crisis, the probable reduction in RCOE 
funding for the 2010-2011 school year, and a firm belief that special education services could 
be provided to students in a better fashion by reorganizing RCOE’s delivery system for those 
services.  The particular kinds of services identified in Resolution No. 17-10 were services 
Superintendent Young was authorized to reduce and discontinue.  The resolution to reduce 
and eliminate certain services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and making the decision 
to do so was a matter squarely within Superintendent Young’s sound discretion.   

 
5. 

 
On March 5, 2010, Superintendent Young signed a non-exclusive delegation 
of authority appointing Director Kelleher to act on his behalf with regard to the reduction in 
force proceeding required under Resolution No. 17-10.  
 
The Reduction in Force and the Issuing of Preliminary Layoff Notices 
 

6. 

In accordance with Resolution No. 17-10, Director Kelleher and Coordinator 

Rubow issued preliminary layoff notices to the most junior employees holding those positions 
that were subject to reduction and elimination.  Before issuing the preliminary layoff notices, 
Director Kelleher and Coordinator Rubow considered all known positive attrition including 
resignations, retirements and probationary non-reelects.   
 
Jurisdictional Matters 
 
 
Kelli DuCloux, Robin Elder, Kyndal Hays, Robert Hernandez, Yadira Kashak, Tabitha 
Muteti, Vikki Roberts and Jess Walker written notice of that recommendation made to 
Superintendent Young that their services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school 
year.  RCOE filed and served accusations and other required documents upon respondents, 

On and before March 15, 2010, RCOE served upon respondents Jose Bustos, 

7. 

 

4

9. 

8. 

On April 20, 2010, the record in the administrative hearing was opened.  

each of whom timely filed a notice of defense.  Each respondent was served thereafter with a 
notice of hearing.  All jurisdictional requirements were met to conduct this reduction in force 
proceeding.  
 
 
Attorney Todd M. Robbins appeared on behalf of the district.  Attorney Ronald G. Skipper 
appeared on behalf of all respondents present at the hearing.  Counsel for RCOE gave a brief 
opening statement.  Counsel for respondents reserved opening statement.  Jurisdictional 
documents and a written stipulation were presented, counsel stipulated that the preliminary 
layoff notice and accusation served upon respondent Tabitha Muteti (Muteti) be withdrawn 
due to a recent retirement and Muteti’s seniority and qualification to assume the recently 
vacated position, documentary evidence was received, and sworn testimony was provided.  
Kelli DuCloux’s request to be heard on the issue of her right to hold the positions being held 
by more junior employees was granted, and her testimony and the testimony of others was 
taken on the bumping issue.  Thereafter, counsel for RCOE and respondents provided closing 
argument, Dr. DuCloux waived closing argument, the record was closed and the matter was 
submitted.  
 
The Seniority List and Bump Analysis 
 
 
RCOE maintains a seniority list for certificated employees, a continuously 
evolving schedule that sets forth each employee’s seniority number, name, seniority date, 
position title, unit, annual length of service, status (tenured, probationary second year, 
probationary first year, or P0 (a status given to certificated employees who are neither 
tenured, temporary, or substitutes) status, the employee’s credentials as of March 15, 2010, 
whether the employee holds English language authorization, whether the teacher holds No 
Child Left Behind (NCLB) status, and “bump notes.”   
 
 
Coordinator Rubow advised of RCOE’s effort to maintain an accurate seniority list.  Each 
letter contained the employee’s current position, first paid date of probationary service with 
RCOE, certificated status, credentials and authorizations, and NCLB and EL Authorization 
status.   Coordinator Rubow requested each employee review the information and provide 
RCOE with any corrections or additional information.  The information provided to 
Coordinator Rubow was verified and included in RCOE’s seniority list. 
 
 
Rubow’s letter was sent out and that she did not receive that letter.  However, it was not 
established that any of the information set forth in RCOE’s seniority list that pertained to Dr. 
DuCloux as it existed on March 15, 2010, was incorrect. 
 
 
list was utilized to produce the “bump analysis” that was employed in this layoff proceeding.  
The bump analysis that was created utilized Resolution No. 17-10 to identify the services 
being reduced or discontinued, the persons who were providing those services, and whether 
the persons being displaced under Resolution No. 17-10 had the seniority and qualifications 

12.  Under Coordinator Rubow’s supervision, RCOE’s updated master seniority 

11.  Kelli DuCloux (Dr. DuCloux) testified she was on leave when Coordinator 

By letters dated January 12, 2010, sent to all certificate employees, 

10. 

 

5

13. 

to displace (bump) a more junior employee.  The process Coordinator Rubow used in 
creating the bump analysis was in accordance with the economic layoff statutes found in the 
Education Code which generally require the retention of senior certificated employees over 
more junior employees and the retention of permanent employees over probationary 
employees and others with less seniority.  There was no “skipping” of any junior employees. 
 
The CalSAFE Program Teachers 
 
 
Joy Sanders (Sanders), Yadira Kashak (Kashak) and Robin Elder (Elder) are 
RCOE certificated employees who provide teaching services through the California School 
Age Families Education (CalSAFE) program, a categorically funded program that is 
designed to encourage and improve academic achievement and parenting skills of expectant 
and parenting students in addition to providing the children of these students with child care 
and developmental services.  Sanders began employment with RCOE in 1986 as an 
instructional assistant and she began her service as a certificated employee in CalSAFE’s 
predecessor program in September 1987.  Kashak has been employed by RCOE since 1992, 
the first two years as a long-term substitute teacher and then as an instructor in the Pregnant 
Minors Program (the predecessor to CalSAFE) beginning in April 1997.  Elder has been a 
certificated employee with RCOE since August 2002, following a career in law enforcement. 
 
 
14.  Notice is taken that CalSAFE was established by Chapter 1078, Statutes of 
1998, and became operational in July 2000.   CalSAFE was a comprehensive, continuous, 
and community-linked school-based program that replaced the Pregnant Minors Program 
(PMP), School Age Parenting and Infant Development (SAPID) Program, and Pregnant and 
Lactating Students (PALS) Program.   
 
 
(Assistant Superintendent Schnack), who was in charge of RCOE programs but not RCOE 
personnel, met with RCOE employees who were assigned to the CalSAFE program and with 
Michael Bochicchio (Bochicchio), President of the RCOE teachers’ association.  Assistant 
Superintendent Schnack discussed changes in the program (e.g., fathers caring for infants 
were now eligible to attend the program) and she assured those employees assigned to the 
CalSAFE program that their employment status would not be affected by the change in 
programs.  Sanders, Kashak and Elder attended this meeting.  Bochicchio, Sanders and 
Kashak specifically recalled Assistant Superintendent Schnack telling them that their right to 
tenured and permanent status would not change as a result of the transition in programs.  
 
 
Superintendent Young continuously employed CalSAFE employees under offers of 
employment that specifically stated that the CalSAFE positions that were being offered were 
for categorically funded projects. 
 
 
year from 2001 to the present, stated in part: 
 

The offers of employment, which Sanders, Kashak and Elder signed for each school 

Sometime in 2001, (then) RCOE Assistant Superintendent Sandy Schnack 

16.  Notwithstanding Assistant Superintendent Schnack’s comments, 

15. 

 

6

“Employment in this position is offered as a part of a categorically funded 

project of indeterminate duration and is subject to the provisions of Section 1294.5 of 
the Education Code.  Service in this position shall not be included in computing the 
service required as a prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a 
permanent employee unless you serve in this position for at least 75 percent of the 
number of days in the regular schools of the Riverside County of Superintendent of 
Schools (hereinafter referred to as the Superintendent) are maintained and you are 
subsequently employed as a probationary employee.  Employment is subject to 
termination at the discretion of the Superintendent or at the expiration of the 
categorically funded project.  The provisions of Sections 44949 and 44955 of the 
Education Code pertaining to dismissal and reduction in work force do not apply to 
this employment. . . .  
 
Each employee signed an acceptance of offer/notification which stated in part:  I 
accept the offer of employment/notification of employment status set for above. . . .” 

17. 

18. 

Sanders and Kashak received performance reviews from their immediate 

 
 
Sanders, Kashak and Elder read the contracts before signing them.  The 
contract language should have raised questions about their status.  Despite this contract 
language, Sanders, Kashak and Elder never asked RCOE for clarification of their status, nor 
did they specifically ask their employee association about their status before 2009. 
 
 
supervisors before the 2009-2010 school year which stated they held “permanent” status.  
RCOE afforded Elder a stipend to serve as a Peer Assistant and Review (P.A.R.) Consulting 
Teacher for the 2009-2010 school year, which theoretically required her to meet certain 
minimum qualifications including “Current RCOE classroom teacher with permanent status.”  
Sanders, Kashak and Elder were listed as having “tenured” employment status on RCOE 
Professional Assignment Information Forms that were provided to the California Basic 
Educational Data System.   
 
 
whom were assigned to the CalSAFE program.  The CalSAFE employees were not given 
permanent or probationary status for that reduction in force proceeding.  At that time it 
became evident to Sanders, Kashak, Elder and Bochicchio that the district did not consider 
CalSAFE employees to hold permanent or probationary status.  After discussion, the RCOE 
teachers’ association recommended that Sanders, Kashak and Elder seek documentation to 
establish that RCOE had, in fact, conferred them with permanent or probationary status.    
 
 
Sanders, Kashak and Elder argued that RCOE was estopped to assert that they 
were not permanent employees and that it would be unjust to terminate their employment on 
the basis that they did not obtain tenure when working in the CalSAFE program.  Each 
asserted that Assistant Superintendent Schnack’s comments concerning their right to tenure 
and permanent status were clear and unambiguous.  Each asserted that she relied on these 
and other representations to their detriment.  And, each implied that their reliance on these 
representations was reasonable.  Sanders testified that she would have transferred into a non-
categorically funded position from CalSAFE had she known her employment with CalSAFE 

In 2009 RCOE was required to lay off various certificated employees, some of 

20. 

19. 

 

7

22. 

21.  No evidence established that Sanders, Kashak or Elder were employed by the 

would not lead to her permanent status.  Kashak implied that she would have looked for 
other employment had she known she was not a permanent employee.  Elder testified that 
she was offered the opportunity to work in a custodial facility and that she specifically chose 
to work with CalSAFE because she believed her employment there would result in her 
tenured status based upon Assistant Superintendent Schnack’s representations, her status as a 
P.A.R. consultant, and notations set forth in RCOE documents affirming her permanent and 
tenured status. 
 
 
superintendent in regular educational programs as probationary employees before their 
employment in the CalSAFE program.   
 
 
RCOE argued that Sanders, Kashak and Elder could not be permanent or 
probationary employees because of their service in a categorically funded program; that 
despite their lengthy and valuable service with the district, these three categorically funded 
employees were unable to “bump” permanent or probationary employees; and that these 
employees could not be retained over permanent and probationary employees.  RCOE 
introduced offers of employment signed by each employee dating back to the beginning of 
the CalSAFE program, documentation that established that Sanders had never been 
employed by RCOE under any contract of employment that provided her with probationary 
or permanent status, and documentation that established that Kashak was employed under a 
temporary emergency permit from July 1998 through June 2001 and was not employed in a 
probationary or permanent position during that period of employment.  The notations in 
RCOE’s seniority list indicated that Sanders, Kashak and Elder held “P0” status (which is 
neither a formal probationary status nor indicative of a tenured status).  RCOE argued that 
the “permanent” status notations set forth on the performance reviews entries were made by 
individuals who did not have the authority to confer permanent status, that Elder’s service as 
a P.A.R. Consulting Teacher did not require her to have permanent status, and that the 
information that RCOE provided to California Basic Educational Data System was irrelevant 
for purposes of this proceeding.  
 
 
they did not have to worry about their tenured status under the CalSAFE program.  Absent 
anything further, it would have been reasonable for Sanders, Kashak and Elder to rely on 
Assistant Superintendent Schnack’s representation in this regard.  However, after the 2001 
meeting in which those assurances were given, each of these employees was presented with a 
series of contracts specifically stating: (1) that the employment being offered was part of a 
categorically funded project of indeterminate duration; (2) that service in the position would 
not be included in computing the service required to become classified  as a permanent 
employee unless the employee provided service in the position for at least 75 percent of the 
number of regular school days in the contract period and was subsequently employed as a 
probationary employee; (3) that employment was subject to termination on expiration of the 
categorically funded project; and (4) that the provisions of Education Code sections 44949 
and 44955 of the Education Code pertaining to reduction in work force did not apply to the 
employment.   
 

23.  Assistant Superintendent Schnack certainly assured each of these teachers that 

 

8

The admonitions in the series of contracts that Sanders, Kashak and Elder signed 

24.  Dr. Kelli DuCloux began employment with RCOE on September 14, 2004.  

 
should have warned each of them that they were not permanent employees and should have 
caused each of them to inquire of someone in RCOE’s personnel division about their status 
or to ask the teachers’ association to do so on their behalf.  The assertion that there was some 
ambiguity in the contract that caused these employees to be convinced that they had 
permanent status was unreasonable.  Given the cautionary language in the employment 
agreements, any continuing reliance upon the assurances that had been given by Assistant 
Superintendent Schnack in 2001 was unreasonable.  The statements in performance reviews, 
the data RCOE provided to the State of California in forms, and Elder’s holding a P.A.R. 
consultant position were not provided in response to any question about permanent status nor 
did these statements unambiguously guarantee tenured status.  Finally, a preponderance of 
the evidence did not establish that Sanders, Kashak or Elder specifically relied to their 
detriment upon any RCOE representation about their permanent status in deciding to accept 
or reject specific employment opportunities.  
 
Kelli DuCloux 
 
 
She holds a clear multiple subject teaching credential, a child development program director 
permit, and applied for a special education credential after March 15, 2010.  She holds two 
master’s degrees and a doctorate in Education.  She holds an emergency CLAD authorization 
and is NCLB compliant.  Dr. DuCloux is assigned as a correctional education teacher.  While 
this is a form of alternative education, and while she has provided services to Special 
Education students outside of the Special Education program, she does not have a Special 
Education credential or authorization.  Her seniority number is 168. 
 
 
Dr. DuCloux observed that she was senior to those persons holding seniority numbers 
369, 368, 360, 359, 352, 317, and 305, each of whom was described in the seniority list as a 
“Specialized Academic Instruction Teacher.”  She testified that she had more degrees than 
those individuals, some of whom she believed to be non-NCLB compliant.  She claimed that 
she taught Special Education students in her classroom and that she had applied for and was 
awaiting her Special Education credential.  Dr. DuCloux asserted that she was competent and 
qualified to teach as a Specialized Academic Instruction Teacher and that she should be 
permitted to bump these junior employees.   
 
 
Special Education credential or authorization, Dr. DuCloux never advised RCOE that she 
held such a credential or authorization2, and the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing website does not indicate that Dr. DuCloux held a Special Education credential 
or authorization on April 14, 2010.  Dr. DuCloux did not teach Special Education classes at 
RCOE and she was not authorized to do so.  She taught at a correctional facility.  
 

The “Specialized Academic Instruction Teacher” position at RCOE requires a 

25. 

                                                
2  
credentials because she was on leave.  Even though that might be the case, it made no difference because Dr. 
DuCloux does not hold a Special Education credential or authorization. 

Dr. DuCloux testified she did not receive the January 2010 letter asking for information about her 

 

9

27. 

The termination of respondents as a result of Superintendent Young’s decision 

26.  Dr. DuCloux cannot to bump any junior employee assigned by RCOE to 

 
Specialized Academic Instruction because she does not hold a Special Education credential 
or authorization.  
 
Ultimate Conclusions Regarding RCOE’s Reduction in Force 
 
 
to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of services was totally unrelated to the quality of 
the professional services provided by these fine teachers.  The length of service provided by 
these employees bespeaks of their value to RCOE, as does their academic achievements and 
professional accomplishments.  An examination of the performance reviews received in 
evidence in this proceeding underscores this conclusion.   Each review established that the 
individual whose employment was being terminated met or exceeded RCOE standards in 
connecting with students, used a variety of instructional strategies, facilitated the learning 
experience, engaged students in problem solving, promoted learning and excelled in every 
other area that was subject to being rated.   
 
 
services provided by RCOE certificated employees for legitimate reasons.  This decision was 
unrelated to the competency or dedication of the employees whose services were proposed to 
be reduced and discontinued.  Superintendent Young’s determination was lawful, reasonable, 
and ultimately in the best interest of RCOE and its students.   
 

Superintendent Young resolved to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of 

28. 

RCOE’s administrative staff initiated and followed a systematic procedure to identify 

employees who were directly affected by the resolution.  A careful evaluation was made to 
determine each employee’s seniority date, tenured status, credentials and authorizations, and 
qualifications in making determinations about what bumping rights, if any, an employee had.  
RCOE staff correctly determined that Joy Sanders, Yadira Kashak and Robin Elder worked 
in a categorically funded program and were not entitled to permanent or probationary status 
in this reduction in force proceeding.  RCOE did not retain any junior credentialed employee 
to provide services which a more senior employee was certificated, competent and qualified 
to render.  RCOE properly and in good faith applied relevant provisions of the Education 
Code in this reduction in force proceeding.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Statutory Authority  
 
 
 

1. 

Education Code section 44944 provides in part: 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the 
governing board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year . . . 
the governing board and the employee shall be given written notice by the 
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been recommended 
that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor . . . 

 

10

(c) 

(b) 

 
 
The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for 
not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year . . . If an employee fails to request a 
hearing on or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his 
or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . . 
 
 
shall be conducted and a decision made in accordance with . . . the Government Code 
and the governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency therein, except 
that all of the following shall apply: 
 
   
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation and he or she shall be 
notified of this five-day period for filing in the accusation. 

In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the proceeding 

The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any, 

(1) 

 

. . . 

 

(3) 

The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge 

 
  
who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a 
determination as to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related to the 
welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be prepared 
for the governing board and shall contain a determination as to the sufficiency of the 
cause and a recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing board shall 
make the final determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and disposition. None 
of the findings, recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed 
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding on the governing 
board.  Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or 
governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the 
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.  Copies of the proposed decision shall 
be submitted to the governing board and to the employee on or before May 7 of the 
year in which the proceeding is commenced. . . .”  

Education Code section 44955 provides in part: 

“(a)  No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 

2. 
 
 
causes other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 
44947, inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her 
position for cause other than as specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in 
the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary . . . 
to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board 
may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the 
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close 
of the school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 

(b)  Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 

11

 

 
 

 

permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to 
render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 
render.  

 
. . . 
 

. . . 

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 

 
same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the 
basis of needs of the district and the students thereof . . .   
 

(c) 

Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 15th of 

 
 
May . . . and services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the 
order in which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with 
the provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or 
probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for 
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year. 
 
 The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner 
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and 
qualifications entitle them to render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any 
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught, 
and for which he or she does not have a teaching credential or which is not within the 
employee’s major area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the 
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter competency test 
in the appropriate subject. 
 
 
Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following 
reasons: 
 
 
a specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services 
credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a 
school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, which 
others with more seniority do not possess. 
 
 
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.” 
 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach 

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 

(d) 

(2) 

(1) 

 

 

 

12

Education Code section 1294.5 provides: 

3. 
 

“Any county superintendent of schools may employ persons possessing an 

appropriate credential as certificated employees in programs and projects to perform 
services conducted under contract with public or private agencies, or other 
categorically funded projects of indeterminate duration.  The terms and conditions 
under which such persons are employed shall be mutually agreed upon by the 
employee and the county superintendent and such agreement shall be reduced to 
writing.  Service pursuant to this section shall not be included in computing the 
service required as a prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a 
permanent employee unless (1) such person has served pursuant to this section for at 
least 75 percent of the number of days the regular schools of county superintendent by 
which he is employed are maintained, and (2) such person is subsequently employed 
as a probationary employee in a position requiring certification qualifications.  Such 
persons may be employed for periods which are less than a full school year and may 
be terminated at the expiration of the contract or specially funded project without 
regard to other requirements of this code respecting the termination of probationary or 
permanent employees. 
 
This section shall not be construed to apply to any regularly credentialed employee 
who has been employed in the regular educational programs of the county 
superintendent of schools as a probationary employee before being subsequently 
assigned to any one of these programs.” 

5. 

4. 

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in 

 
Jurisdiction 
 
 
Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955.  All notices and other jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were 
satisfied as to all respondent employees identified herein.   
 
The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
with any statistical computation.  It is within the governing authority’s discretion to 
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued 
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose 
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)  A school district has wide 
discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or 
so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of 
law.  (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 
318, 322.) 
  
Competence 
 
 
determine whether in addition to possessing seniority an employee is also “certificated and 

The Education Code leaves to the governing authority the discretion to 

6. 

 

13

8. 

7. 

Seniority 

Under Education Code section 44845, seniority is determined by the date a 

competent” to be employed in a vacant position.  The term “competent” in this regard relates 
to an individual’s specific skills or qualifications including academic background, training, 
credentials, and experience, but does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance.  
(Forker v. Board of Trustees (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)  In addition to seniority the 
only limitation in placing a teacher in a vacant position is that the teacher that is selected be 
“certificated and competent” to render the service required by the vacant position.  Among 
employees who meet this threshold limitation, there is no room in the statutory scheme for 
comparative evaluation. (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299.)  An 
employee holding a special credential or needed skill, if such credentials or competence are 
not shared by a more senior employee, may be retained though it results in termination of a 
senior employee.  (Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.) 
 
Seniority and Bumping 
 
 
 
 
certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”   
 
 
Education Code section 44846 provides in part: “The governing board shall 
have power and it shall be its duty to correct any errors discovered from time to time in its 
records showing the order of employment.”    
 
 
 
 
subdivision (b), in part, as follows: “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of 
no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while . . . any 
other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.”  
 
 
competent employees, and “skipping” authority to retain junior employees who are 
certificated and competent to render services which more senior employees are not.  
Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to subdivision (b) where a district 
demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study and that a junior 
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course that 
the senior certificated employee does not possess.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. 
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.)  School districts have broad discretion in defining 
positions within the district and establishing requirements for employment.  This discretion 
encompasses determining the training and experience necessary for particular positions.  
Similarly, school districts have the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that 
will be eliminated, even though a service continues to be performed or provided in a different 
manner by the district.  (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 
Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) 
 

Essentially this language provides “bumping” rights for senior certificated and 

Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff statute, provides in 

The Statutory Scheme 

9. 

 

14

12. 

10. 

Bumping 

Categorically Funded Positions 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to 

Education Code section 1294.5, set forth in its entirety at Legal Conclusion 3, 

11.  As a review of the many and diverse programs categorically funded readily 

 
 
 
determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an 
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be 
assigned to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra. at 136-137.) 
 
 
 
 
reveals, a categorically funded project need not involve the creation of special classes 
divorced from the normal curriculum, but may augment the curriculum in whatever manner 
is specified in the particular program.  The defining characteristics are that the program be 
financed outside the base revenue limit with funds designated for a use specified by the 
particular program.  (Zalac v. Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. (2002) 98 
Cal.App.4th 838, 848.) 
 
 
authorized Superintendent Young to employ Sanders, Kashak and Elder in CalSAFE, a 
categorically funded project of indeterminate duration.  The statute prohibited RCOE from 
computing a CalSAFE employee’s service toward attainment of eligibility for classification 
as a permanent employee unless that employee was subsequently employed as a probationary 
employee in a position requiring certification qualifications.  Sanders, Kashak and Elder did 
not meet that condition.  Nor did they establish that they had been employed in the regular 
educational programs of the county superintendent as probationary employees before being 
assigned to the CalSAFE program. 
 
Estoppel 
 
 
the requirement that consideration must be given in exchange for the promise sought to be 
enforced.  A promise which the promisor should reasonably expect to induce action or 
forbearance on the part of the promisee or a third person and which does induce such action 
or forbearance is binding if injustice can be avoided only by enforcement of the promise.  To 
be binding, the promise must be clear and unambiguous.  (Cotta v. City and County of San 
Francisco (2007) 157 Cal.App.4th 1550, 1566.)  The elements of a promissory estoppel 
claim are: (1) a promise clear and unambiguous in its terms; (2) reliance by the party to 
whom the promise is made; (3) the reliance must be both reasonable and foreseeable; and (4) 
the party asserting the estoppel must be injured by his reliance.”  (US Ecology, Inc. v. State 
of California (2005) 129 Cal.App.4th 887, 901.)   
 
 
Promissory estoppel is based on a promise; equitable estoppel is based on 
misrepresentation of an existing fact.  The doctrine of equitable estoppel is based on the 
theory that a party who by his declarations or conduct misleads another to his prejudice 
should be estopped from obtaining the benefits of his misconduct. The required elements for 
an equitable estoppel are: (1) the party to be estopped must be apprised of the facts; (2) the 

Promissory estoppel is a doctrine which employs equitable principles to satisfy 

14. 

13. 

 

15

15. 

party to be estopped must intend his or her conduct shall be acted upon, or must so act that 
the party asserting the estoppel had a right to believe it was so intended; (3) the other party 
must be ignorant of the true state of facts; and (4) the other party must rely upon the conduct 
to his or her injury.  It is well settled that the estoppel doctrine is applicable to government 
entities where justice and right require it.  (Cotta v. City and County of San Francisco, supra, 
at 1566-1567.) 
 
The series of contracts described in Finding 16 put Sanders, Kashak and Elder 
 
on notice that they were not permanent employees.  Any continuing reliance upon assurances 
given by Assistant Superintendent Schnack in 2001 and any purported reliance upon the 
information contained in any performance review or form that was issued by any division 
other than RCOE’s personnel division concerning their employment status was unreasonable.  
Sanders, Kashak and Elder did not reasonably rely to their detriment upon any RCOE 
representation about their permanent status in deciding to accept or reject specific 
employment opportunities.  The estoppel doctrines do not apply.   
 
 Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees 
 

16.  As a result of Superintendent Young’s lawful decision to reduce or discontinue 

17. 

The charges set forth in the accusation were sustained by a preponderance of 

particular kinds of service being provided by certificated employees, cause exists under the 
Education Code to give notice to Jose Bustos, Kelli DuCloux, Robin Elder, Kyndal Hays, 
Robert Hernandez, Yadira Kashak, Vikki Roberts and Jess Walker that their employment 
will be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services will not be 
needed by the district for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Determination 
 
 
the evidence and related to the welfare of RCOE and the students thereof.   RCOE’s staff 
made assignments and reassignments under Resolution No. 17-10 in such a manner that the 
most senior RCOE employees were retained to render services which their seniority and 
qualifications entitled them to render.  No RCOE employee with less seniority than any 
respondent will be retained to render a service which any respondent is certificated, 
competent and qualified to render.  
 
The termination of the individuals as a result of Superintendent Young’s decision to 
 
reduce and discontinue particular kinds of services is totally unrelated to the competence of 
these fine teachers.  The length of service provided by these employees bespeaks of their 
value to RCOE, as does their academic achievements and professional accomplishments.  
The performance reviews in evidence underscores this conclusion.  
 
 
 
 

This determination is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 

 

16

RECOMMENDATION 

 
 
It is recommended that Superintendent Young give notice to Jose Bustos, Kelli 
DuCloux, Robin Elder, Kyndal Hays, Robert Hernandez, Yadira Kashak, Vikki Roberts and 
Jess Walker that their employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year 
and that their services will not be needed for the 2010-2011 school year: 
 
 
 
DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 

 
________________________________ 
JAMES AHLER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

17

