 BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE 
CLAREMONT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Susan L. Formaker of the Office of Administrative Hearings 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  2010030602 
 
 

 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certificated Employees of the Claremont 
Unified School District, 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
heard this matter on April 21, 2010, and April 22, 2010, in Claremont, California. 
 
 
Michael W. Garrison, Jr., and Tanya A. Guzman of O’Melveny & Myers LLP 
represented Petitioner Dr. Terry Nichols (Nichols), Superintendent of the Claremont Unified 
School District (District). 
 
 
Michael R. Feinberg and Amy Moolin Cu of Schwartz, Steinsapir, Dohrmann & 
Sommers LLP represented the Respondents listed on Exhibit A received at the hearing, which is 
incorporated herein as if set forth in full.  Respondents Elmira Jannati, Francis DeCastro, Erin 
Abelar, Homa Khodadoost, Micah Cohen, and Sheri Frost were not represented by counsel at the 
hearing and did not appear.  The District withdrew the Accusation at the outset of the hearing as 
against Katya Gentry, Christina O’Grady, Jennifer Quincer, Angela Ruiz, Kerrie Richardson, 
Jennifer Norin, Kara Leeper, Regina Hartman, Rachel Lynch, Victoria Trudel, and Katherine 
Gilmore.   
 
 
until April 29, 2010, for an additional evidentiary submission by Respondent Kristen 
VanKouwenberg, which was timely submitted and marked for identification as Exhibit K.  
Petitioner had no objection to the admission of Exhibit K, and it was received.  The record was 
further left open until May 7, 2010, for the parties to submit written closing arguments.  The 
District’s Closing Brief was timely submitted and marked for identification as Exhibit 25; the 
represented Respondents’ Post-Hearing Brief was timely submitted and marked for identification 
as Exhibit L.  The matter was deemed submitted as of May 7.1

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing.  The record was left open 

1   Respondents made an unopposed motion to continue the hearing in this matter from 

                     
 
April 22, 2010, to May 7, 2010, a period of fifteen days.  The dates prescribed in Education 
Code sections 44949, subdivision (c), and 44955, subdivision (c), were thereby extended for a 
period of 15 days.   

1. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
 
 
Nichols made and filed the Accusations in his official capacity.  Devon Freitas 
 
(Frietas), Assistant Superintendant of Human Resources for the District, acting in her official 
capacity, caused all pleadings, notices and other papers to be served upon Respondents pursuant 
to the provisions of Education Code2 sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
 
 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

2. 

3. 

On March 4, 2010, on Nichols’ recommendation, the Board of Education of the 

District (Board) adopted Resolution Number 19-2010, reducing or eliminating 70.1188 full-time 
equivalent (FTE) positions for the 2010-2011 school year, as follows:  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
1.  K-6 Teacher Services (Reduce)   
2.  7-8 Teacher Services (Reduce) 
 
3.  9-12 Teacher Services (Reduce)  
4.  Child Development Program Teaching Services (Reduce) 
5.  Counselor Services (Reduce) 
 
6.  Psychologist Services (Reduce)   
7.  Transition Specialist Psychological Services (Eliminate) 
8.  Child Development Program Specialist Services (Reduce) 
 
4. 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

32.0 fte3 
12.9 fte 
18.8 fte 
1.4188 fte 
2.0 fte 
1.0 fte 
1.0 fte 
1.0 fte 

On March 15, 2010, the Board adopted an amended Resolution Number 19-
2010, which narrowed the scope of the reduction or elimination of positions for the 2010-
2011 school year.  The amended Resolution provided for the reduction or elimination of 
36.4188 FTE positions as follows: 

 
1.  K-6 Teacher Services (Reduce)   
2.  7-8 Teacher Services (Reduce) 
 
3.  9-12 Teacher Services (Reduce)  
4.  Child Development Program Teaching Services (Reduce) 
5.  Counselor Services (Reduce) 
 
6.  Psychologist Services (Reduce)   
7.  Transition Specialist Psychological Services (Eliminate) 
8.  Child Development Program Specialist Services (Reduce) 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

22.2 fte 
  3.4 fte 
  4.4 fte 
1.4188 fte 
2.0 fte 
1.0 fte 
1.0 fte 
1.0 fte 

 

 

                                                                 
 
 
 
 

3  The “fte” formatting is in the original resolution. 

2  All further references are to the Education Code. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

2

  
6. 

 
7. 

5. 

Pursuant to Resolution Number 16-2010, adopted by the Board on May 15, 

2010, the District exempted from the order of layoff those certificated employees qualified to 
provide service in Special Education. The District demonstrated a specific need for personnel 
with special training and experience to teach special education, which others with more 
seniority do not possess.  (Code § 44955, subd. (d).)  Respondents did not contest these 
“skipping” criteria. 

The proposed reduction or elimination of services is related to the welfare of the 

District and its pupils.  The Board took action to reduce or eliminate the services set forth in 
Findings 3 and 4 primarily because of a reduction in state funding and resulting budgetary 
concerns.   

Prior to adoption of the original Resolution Number 19-2010, and again prior 
to the Board’s adoption of the amended Resolution Number 19-2010, the District identified 
vacancies for the 2010-11 school year due to any positively assured attrition (confirmed 
resignations and retirements), non-reelections of probationary employees, and release of 
temporary certificated employees.  Such attrition, non-reelections of probationary employees, 
and release of temporary employees was taken into consideration in determining the number 
of FTE reductions needed and in determining the order of layoff.  There has been no further 
attrition since March 15, 2010. 
 
Prior to March 15, 2010, the District provided notice to Respondents pursuant 
 
to Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.  On or about March 16, 2010, 
after adoption of the amended Resolution Number 19-2010, the District notified affected 
employees of the withdrawal of the notices of intent not to reemploy them.   

8. 

On or about March 31, 2010, the District filed and served the Accusation. 

 
9. 
 
10.  All certificated employees listed on Exhibit 23 either requested a hearing or 

submitted a Notice of Defense, and the District waived any failures of such employees 
properly to request a hearing or to submit a Notice of Defense.  Exhibit 23 thus properly 
identifies all Respondents in this action, except for those certificated employees as to whom 
the District withdrew the Accusation at the outset of the hearing. Exhibit 23 is reproduced as 
Appendix 1 to this Proposed Decision.    
.   
 
 

11.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

12. 

The District developed a seniority list (Exhibit 8) which contains employees’ 
names, seniority dates (first date of paid service in a probationary capacity), and credentials 
and authorizations held.  Certificated employees were provided the opportunity to review the 
information used to create the list and confirm its accuracy, and the District modified the 

 

 
 
 

3

seniority list to take account of information provided by employees that was verified by the 
District.  The District then used the seniority list, in combination with other information, to 
identify positions for layoff in inverse order of seniority within each particular kind of 
service being reduced or eliminated, adding additional positions for layoff until the full 
number of FTEs for reduction or elimination in a particular kind of service had been reached. 
 In identifying positions, junior employees satisfying the “skipping” criteria were ignored.   

 
13.  On March 4, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution 22-2010 (Exhibit 9) setting 
forth criteria to break ties in seniority among certificated employees with the same first paid 
date of probationary service.   Resolution 22-2010 requires a consideration, first, of the level 
of credentialing (e.g., “clear” credentials versus lesser credentials), second, of experience, 
third (if there is still a tie), of education, and fourth (if there is still a tie) substitute relevant 
experience.  
 
14. 

In creating the seniority list, the District applied each one of the tie-breaking 

criteria in order, one step at a time, as needed, with respect to teachers with the same first date of 
paid service.   
 
15. 

Respondents did not challenge the tie-breaking criteria.  However, in certain 

instances (discussed as relevant below), some Respondents contended the criteria failed properly 
to be applied or were improperly not applied.   

 
16.  Once teachers were identified for layoff using the seniority list, the District 

determined whether any of them could “bump” less senior employees currently assigned to 
positions the more senior teachers were credentialed and competent to teach.  The District 
then determined whether the less senior employees held credentials in another area and were 
entitled to “bump” other, more junior employees.  In determining whether a teacher was 
“competent” to teach another position, the District utilized a competency criterion requiring 
that the teacher had taught in the area in the past five years (presumably prior to the notice of 
layoff).  The competency criterion was within the discretion of the District. 
 
 
 
 
so, in determining the particular kinds of services that would be reduced or eliminated.  
Respondents point to some of Freitas’s testimony indicating that attrition is only going to be 
taken into account to determine who will be “brought back” (that is, whose layoff notices will be 
withdrawn), rather than to reduce the number of layoffs.  Although Freitas’s testimony was not 
entirely consistent, she ultimately clarified that attrition was, in fact, taken into account prior to 
the adoption of the original Resolution Number 19-2010 on March 4, 2010.  She also credibly 

Respondents argue that Freitas improperly accounted for attrition, or failed to do 

Attrition 

17. 

 

 
 
 

4

18. 

7-8 and 9-12 Teacher Services 

Respondents more successfully argue that “7-8 Teacher Services” and “9-12 

testified that no additional attrition occurred between March 4 and March 15, 2010.4  In a 
layoff arising out of a reduction of particular kinds of services, such evidence is sufficient to 
establish that attrition was accounted for in determining the services to be reduced or 
eliminated, particularly where Respondents failed to submit competent evidence that attrition 
was not taken into account.  (See Legal Conclusion 2, below.) 
 
 
 
 
Teachers Services” are not properly considered particular kinds of services.  All regular 
teaching services in the seventh through twelfth grades within the District occur in a 
departmentalized setting.  A departmentalized setting exists where a single subject is taught by 
a teacher with an appropriate credential to different groups of students over the course of a 
school day.  Such an assignment requires that a teacher hold a single subject credential 
authorizing the teaching of that subject area or, if the class is offered in grade nine or below, the 
teacher may hold a supplemental authorization for instruction in that subject area.  (Code §§ 
44256, subd. (a), and 44258.)  For layoff purposes, the District has grouped all teachers in the 
intermediate schools together, regardless of the subjects for which such teachers are 
authorized to teach or the subjects they actually teach, and determined to lay off the most 
junior of those teachers up to the number of FTE positions being reduced.  The same process 
was followed for high school teachers.   
 
 
 School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district 
and establishing requirements for employment. (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 
Cal.3d 294, 299-300.)  Similarly, school districts have the discretion to determine particular 
kinds of services that will be eliminated, “even though a service continues to be performed or 
provided in a different manner by the district.” (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 

19. 

 

4 The Administrative Law Judge’s credibility findings may take into account factors 

                    
 
that would not appear from a written record of the proceedings.  “On the cold record a 
witness may be clear, concise, direct, unimpeached, uncontradicted--but on a face to face 
evaluation, so exude insincerity as to render his credibility factor nil.  Another witness may 
fumble, bumble, be unsure, uncertain, contradict himself, and on the basis of a written 
transcript be hardly worthy of belief.  But one who sees, hears and observes him may be 
convinced of his honesty, his integrity, his reliability.”  (Meiner v. Ford Motor Co. (1971) 17 
Cal.App.3d 127, 140.)  The trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a witness and 
reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.”  (Stevens v. Parke, 
Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.)  The trier of fact may also “reject part of the testimony 
of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted portions with bits of 
testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth 
out of selected material.”  (Id., at 67-68, quoting from Nevarov v. Caldwell (1958) 161 
Cal.App.2d 762, 777.) 

 

 
 
 

5

Cal.App.4th 1571, 1582-1585; Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 
Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) 
 
20.  What amounts to a particular kind of service for layoff purposes varies 
 
according to the circumstances and must in each case be determined in light of the specific 
facts.  A particular kind of service may be a certain subject, it may be the teaching of the 
subject for a particular purpose, or it may be a particular manner of teaching the subject.  
(Walsh v. Board of Trustees of Redlands High School Dist. (1934) 2 Cal.App.2d 180; Fuller 
v. Berkeley School Dist. of Alameda County (1934) 2 Cal.2d 152; Gallup v. Board of 
Trustees, supra, 41 Cal.App.4th at 1571.)  CTA v. Goleta Union School District (1982) 132 
Cal.App.3d 32, holds that elementary teaching is a distinct particular kind of service.  In San 
Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 637, the court noted that in 
elementary teaching it is difficult to identify a reduction in particular subjects because “many 
subjects are taught to the same students by the same teacher in the same classroom at unspecified 
times during the day.”  However, “[s]ubjects taught in secondary schools and community 
colleges by designated teachers at particular hours permit easy identification for purposes of 
PKS reductions.”  (Ibid.)  In the instant case, the District’s identifying particular kinds of 
services across subject matters suggests that the services being performed are 
interchangeable.  By virtue of the fact that different credentials or authorizations are needed 
for each subject matter, teaching services in different subject matters at the intermediate and 
secondary school levels cannot be considered the same, identifiable particular kinds of 
service.  The fact that the District decides upon class sizes by grade levels, rather than by 
particular kinds of services, as the District contends, is irrelevant to the analysis of the 
identification of particular kinds of services for layoff purposes. 
 
 
secondary schools, the District makes any identification of services for layoff based on these 
categories arbitrary and capricious in violation of the statutory framework.  (Campbell 
Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 807-808 [layoff may 
not be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious].)  With respect to these positions, the proposed 
layoffs cannot be said to be related to the needs and welfare of the District and its pupils.   
 
 
Teacher Services” as particular kinds of services, all planned layoffs directly arising from these 
categories of purported services must be disregarded.  Accordingly, the Accusations against 
Victoria Walker (.2 FTE), Linda Atherton (.4 FTE), Doris Donovan (.8 FTE), John Madunich 
(1.0 FTE), Sandra Franco-Hinderliter (1.0 FTE)5, Janie Van Ryn (1.0 FTE), Ana Espinosa (1.0 
                    
5  Ms. Franco-Hinderliter bumped Molly Arboleda under the District’s analysis.  
 
Under a “second level bump,” the District found that Lindsay Lazenby then bumped Ms. 
Franco-Hinderliter.  However, because Ms. Arboleda must be retained (since her potential 
layoff originated out of an improper designation of a purported particular kind of service) and 

By failing to identify specific subjects for reduction in the intermediate and 

Because the District improperly classified “7-8 Teacher Services” and “9-12 

21. 

22. 

 

 

 
 
 

6

FTE), Korina Gonzales (.2 FTE), Kristin McKown (1.0 FTE), Eric Peterson (1.0 FTE), and 
Melissa Salter (.2 FTE6) (the employees originally identified for layoff before any bumping was 
taken into account) must be dismissed.  To the extent that the District also provided layoff 
notices to employees who would be bumped by any of these employees as a result of seniority 
rights, those employees’ Accusations must also be dismissed, as there would no longer be any 
basis for a bump to occur.  Accordingly, the Accusation against Molly Arboleda (1.0 FTE) must 
be dismissed.  To the extent additional teachers providing services to grades 7-8 and 9-12 
received layoff notices and were served with Accusations based solely on their status in teaching 
those grades, they must also be retained.   Those employees included Marizka Rivette (1.0 FTE), 

 

6  Ms. Salter has two seniority dates, each one associated with different portions of her 

                                                                 
holds a position the more senior Ms. Franco-Hinderliter is certificated and competent to 
render, Ms. Franco-Hinderliter must also be retained.  
 
 
position, and she received two different layoff notices.  A number of the teachers subject to 
layoff have similar situations.  The holding of more than one seniority date is caused by the 
District’s policy on part-time work.  While the District allows many teachers to work on a 
part-time basis, when a teacher moves from a full-time position, or a position with more part-
time hours, to a part-time position with fewer hours, the District requires the teacher to resign 
from the portion by which his or her position is reduced.  If the teacher then resumes working 
for a portion of the position from which he or she had previously resigned, a new seniority 
date is assigned to the portion of the position newly taken on by the teacher.  The former 
position portion would retain the original seniority date.  Such splitting of seniority dates 
allows for the possibility that a teacher can be both tenured and probationary with respect to 
different portions of the same position.  It is not clear this is allowed by law.  For example, in 
Reis v. Biggs Unified School District (2005) 126 Cal.App.4th 809, a teacher received notice 
that a school district was not reelecting him to two part-time positions.  Without explicitly 
considering whether a teacher could hold both a tenured and non-tenured position at the same 
time, the Court of Appeal ruled that the teacher had improperly been given notice of non-
reelection from a .57 FTE tenured position but that he could be non-reelected from his other 
.43 position, since the services in that position did not count towards tenure.   In contrast, in 
Holbrook v. Board of Education of Palo Alto Unified School Dist. (1951) 37 Cal.2d 316 
(1951), the California Supreme Court held that where a certificated employee held varying 
portions of a certificated position along with varying portions of a non-certificated service 
over a period of three years, the employee attained full tenure and not just one-fourth tenure, 
as the district had asserted.  Neither of these cases is directly on point, as the issue here 
concerns one teaching position and not two separate positions.  While the District’s policy is 
troubling, Respondents’ counsel did not raise any objections to it.  Respondents thus waived 
any objections to having different seniority dates apply to different portions of their 
positions. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

7

23. 

Miguel Trujillo (1.0 FTE), Eric Tucker (1.0 FTE), and Melissa Wonacott (1.0 FTE).7  
Accordingly, the Accusations against these additional teachers should be dismissed.  Linda Carr 
Handley (with a seniority date of September 1, 2006, and 1.0 FTE), who was to bump Lindsey 
Lazenby, who, in turn, was to bump Ms. Franco-Hinderliter under the District’s analysis 
(Exhibit 11), must also be retained, since Ms.Carr Handley is the Respondent who is most senior 
to Ms. Franco-Hinderliter and certificated and competent to fill a position Ms. Franco-
Hinderliter is being retained to teach.8  Lindsey Lazenby would continue to be subject to layoff, 
since she was bumped as a result of elementary school layoffs. 
 
 
Respondents contend that because English teacher Victoria Walker, with a 
seniority date of September 18, 2009, would no longer be laid off based on the improper 
designation of services, each of the senior Respondent teachers noticed for layoff and 
credentialed to teach English should be retained.  Under the analysis above, junior English 
teachers Victoria Walker (.2 FTE), Linda Atherton (.2 FTE9), and Melissa Salter (.2 FTE) would 
all be retained, and Respondents presumably would make the same argument they have made 
concerning Ms. Walker’s retention with respect to all three of these teachers, that is, that all 
teachers subject to layoff who are senior to any of these three teachers and who are certificated 
and competent to teach English should be retained.  Respondents thus assert that the “domino 
effect” should apply, regardless of whether a particular employee was actually prejudiced by the 
retention of the junior employee.   The domino effect theory argued by Respondents was  
rejected by the Court of Appeal in Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 
576, where the Court declined to force a school district to retain all employees that were senior 
to junior employees who mistakenly were not given notice.  Instead, the Court of Appeal 
indicated only those who were prejudicially affected would need to be retained.  Similarly, here 
only the senior employees subject to layoffs who would be prejudiced by an inability to exercise 
bumping rights because of the required retention of junior employees should be retained.10  In 
                    
 
Accusations, but because of their current assignments at intermediate or high schools and the 
fact that they were not bumped by other employees, it can be inferred that they were provided 
with layoff notices and Accusations in the event the proposed order of layoff was determined 
to be incorrect. 
 
 
the most senior teachers at the intermediate and high schools slated for layoff, up to the 
designated number of FTE, should be retained.  However, if the category of particular kind of 
defined “service” is invalidated, it stands to reason that all layoff notices associated with that 
category of “service” are likewise invalidated. 
 
 
 
 

10   This was the same analysis used with respect to Ms. Carr Handley in Finding 22.  

8  Respondents provided a different analysis, starting with the proposition that only 

7  The District did not identify why these Respondents received layoff notices and 

9  Ms. Atherton’s other .2 FTE is in Music.  

 

 

 
 
 

8

24.  Here the most senior teacher noticed for layoff who is certificated and competent 

determining whether a Respondent is certificated and competent to fill such a position, both 
credentials and experience must be considered in light of the District’s competency standard, set 
forth at Finding 15.   
 
 
to teach English could claim entitlement to retention of a total of .6 FTE in English.  The most 
senior teacher certificated and competent to fill the positions of Ms. Walker, Ms. Atherton, and 
Ms. Salter is Talia Bowman (1.0 FTE), with a seniority date of September 1, 2006.   The 
Accusation therefore must be dismissed against Ms. Bowman to the extent of .6 FTE for which 
she must be retained.  Ms. Bowman was already going to bump into two other positions (held by 
Melissa Salter, .8. FTE, and Suzanne Hensley, .2 FTE) which are senior to those of the junior 
retained positions of Ms. Walker, Ms. Atherton, and Ms. Salter.  Because of Ms. Bowman’s 
retention of .6 FTE of her position, the bump need only be of the remaining .4 FTE of her 
position, which would still bump the teacher(s) less senior to her whose positions she is 
certificated and competent to render.  Based on the application of tie-breaker criteria, Ms. Salter 
would be bumped by .4 (instead of .8 as in the District’s bumping chart) as the most junior 
employee performing services Ms. Bowman is certificated and competent to render.  Ms. 
Hensley would no longer be bumped by .2 FTE.11  The Accusations against Ms. Salter and Ms. 
Hensley must be dismissed to by .4 FTE and .2 FTE, respectively. 
 
 
services as particular kinds of services, as discussed in Findings 18 through 21. 
 
 
26.  Other than the services invalidated pursuant to Findings 18 through 21, the 
remaining services set forth in Finding 4 are particular kinds of services which may be reduced 
or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. 
 
 
neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s discretion.  The 
decision to include competency requirements, as set forth in Finding 16, for “bumping” rights 
likewise is not arbitrary or capricious and is a proper exercise of the District’s discretion.   
 
 
District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees as determined by the Governing Board. 

The decision to reduce the particular kinds of services identified in Finding 26 is 

The reduction of services set forth in Finding 26 is related to the welfare of the 

25.  No other Accusations must be dismissed as a result of the improper designation of 

27. 

28. 

                                                                 
Because Ms. Carr Handley was the most senior teacher affected by the retention of Ms. 
Franco-Hinderliter, and Ms. Lazenby would otherwise have been subject to layoff in the 
absence of Ms. Franco-Hinderliter, only Ms. Carr Handley’s Accusation must be dismissed 
as a result of the unwinding of this double-bump and the retention of Ms. Franco-Hinderliter. 
 
 

11  This is the second, more senior of Ms. Salter’s two part-time positions.   

 

 

 

 
 
 

9

 

are reviewed below. 
 

Sheri Castro 
 
30. 

29.  A number of Respondents raised issues particular to their situations.  Those issues 

Respondent Sheri Castro, who is tenured, has two seniority dates: September 1, 
2001, and September 1, 2007.  Each date is associated with a .5 FTE partial position teaching 
first grade at Sumner Elementary School, with the two partial positions together comprising a 1.0 
FTE position.  Based on Ms. Castro’s September 1, 2007, seniority date, she is to be laid off by 
.5 FTE as part of the elementary school layoffs.  In addition to her clear multiple subject 
credential, she holds a supplemental authorization in Physical Education that allows her to teach 
this subject up to ninth grade.  Ms. Castro previously taught physical education under this 
supplementary authorization for 10 years at the Central School District.  She also teaches 
physical education as part of the curriculum in her own elementary classroom at Sumner 
Elementary School. 

 
31.  Ms. Castro shares the same first date of paid service as Phyllis Epling, who 

teaches 1.0 FTE of physical education.  Ms. Epling was originally noticed for layoff in 
connection with the grade 7-8 service category, but her layoff notice was subsequently 
withdrawn. 

The District failed to apply tie-breaker criteria to Ms. Castro and Ms. Epling.  Ms. 

Castro contends that had such criteria been applied, Ms. Castro would have been determined to 
be senior to Ms. Epling by virtue of having a clear credential as compared to Ms. Epling’s 
preliminary credential.  As a result, Ms. Castro asserts that she should be able to bump Ms. 
Epling. 
 
33. 

The District does not dispute that Ms. Castro’s credential is what the District has 
termed a “superior level of certification.”  However, the District contends that Ms. Castro cannot 
bump Ms. Epling under Code section 44955, subdivision (b), because bumping can only occur 
between employees with different seniority dates, not the same seniority date.   

The District’s argument is persuasive.  Code section 44944, subdivision (b), only 

permits the bumping of employees with “less seniority.”  The tie-breaker criteria apply to the 
order of termination as between employees with the same first date of paid service, that is, to 
those with the same seniority date.  Since Ms. Castro was noticed for layoff in connection with 
the elementary school layoffs and not the grade 7-8 category layoffs, the order of termination 
does not come into play.   Ms. Castro is properly subject to layoff. 
 
// 
 

 
32. 

 
34. 

 

 
 
 

10

// 

Timothy Northrup and Jessica Gariador 
 
35. 

Timothy Northrup teaches fourth through sixth grade physical education.  He 

travels among the District’s elementary schools teaching a pull-out physical education program.  
He has a clear multiple subject credential and a seniority date of July 1, 2006.  

Jessica Gariador, with a seniority date of September 1, 2005, has a clear multiple 

subject teaching credential with a concentration in Kinesiology.  She contends this would 
“likely” qualify her for a supplemental authorization in physical education.  

 
37.    Both Mr. Northrup and Ms. Gariador contend that they should be able bump 

Francisco Quintana, a junior physical education teacher at San Antonio High School (the 
District’s continuation high school).  Mr. Quintana holds a .5 FTE position with a seniority date 
of September 1, 2006.  He also holds a single-subject credential in physical education. 

 Education Code section 44865 allows a teacher to be assigned to teach at a 

continuation school if the teacher has a valid credential based on a bachelor’s degree, student 
teaching, and “special fitness” to perform.  The teacher must also consent to teaching in a 
continuation school; both Ms. Gariador and Mr. Northrup contend they would be willing to do 
so. 

 
39.  Neither Ms. Gariador nor Mr. Northrup have experience teaching physical 
education to adults.  Nor do they currently hold single subject credentials in physical education 
or supplemental authorizations to teach physical education.  While Ms. Gariador may be able at 
some point to obtain a supplemental authorization, she does not currently have one.  Any 
qualification for bumping another teacher must be determined as of the date notice of layoff was 
given.  

 
36. 

 
38. 

 
40. 

Based on Finding 39, Ms. Gariador and Mr. Northrup have not established a 
“special fitness” to teach physical education in the continuation school.  Teaching physical 
education to teenagers and young adults is substantially different from teaching it to 
elementary school-age children.  The skills to be taught and levels of coordination vary 
significantly.  Moreover, in light of the District’s competency criteria for bumping, Ms. 
Gariador and Mr. Northrup cannot show experience teaching physical education of the type 
required in a continuation school within the last five years.  Ms. Gariador and Mr. Northrup 
are properly subject to layoff. 

 
Kristen Van Kouwenberg 
 
41.  Kristen Van Kouwenberg is a Kindergarten teacher at Chaparral Elementary 
School.  She has a clear multiple subject credential with CLAD certification.  She has two 

 

 
 
 

11

seniority dates with the District: September 1, 1994, with which .4 FTE is associated, and 
September 1, 2007, with which .1 FTE is associated. 

 
42.  Ms. Van Kouwenberg began working for the District on a full-time basis in 
1994.  She continued working full-time for six years, through the 1999-2000 school year.  
When she had her first child, she took a leave of absence from a full-time position to a part-
time position, reducing her workload to .5 FTE for the 2000-2001 school year.  During the 
2001-2002 school year, Ms. Van Kouwenberg resigned half of her position, retaining half of 
her seniority, and her tenured status, for the remaining .5 portion. 

 
43.  Ms. Van Kouwenberg continued working .5 FTE through the 2005-2006 

school year.  In the 2006-2007 school year, she reduced her workload to .4 FTE to help her 
friend, teacher Cynthia Simpson.  She did so by taking a leave of absence with respect to .1 
FTE of her prior .5 FTE position. 

 
44. 

In 2007-2008, Ms. Van Kouwenberg reverted to working .5 FTE.  In March of 
2007, when assignments for the next school year were being considered, Ms. Simpson asked 
Ms. Van Kouwenberg to job share with her, so that Ms. Simpson would work .6 FTE and 
Ms. Van Kouwenberg would work .4 FTE.  The possibility of Ms. Simpson obtaining a full-
time teaching position during the next year was also discussed with their school 
administrator, who thought it was possible such a position might become available.  If Ms. 
Simpson obtained a full-time position, the job share with Ms. Simpson, and the reduction of 
FTE for Ms. Van Kouwenberg would be unnecessary, so that Ms. Van Kouwenberg would 
keep her .5 FTE position.  Ms. Van Kouwenberg ultimately agreed to the job share.  The 
District required her to resign her .1 FTE to enter into the job share with Ms. Simpson.   

 
45.  Ms. Van Kouwenberg argues she was promised her .1 FTE back in the event 
Ms. Simpson was offered a full-time position and that she relied on that promise in agreeing 
to the job share.  While she testified she understood her resignation would be null and void if 
Ms. Simpson obtained a full-time position, there was no documentary evidence upon which 
she relied that would have justified such an understanding.  In fact, Ms. Van Kouwenberg 
specifically signed a resignation from .1 FTE of her position on March 19, 2007 (Exhibit I), 
and then signed a reemployment action, acknowledging the probationary nature of her .1 
FTE, on July 31, 2007 (Exhibit J.)  The District’s internal memorandum (Exhibit K), dated 
February 15, 2007, reflects that while the District was willing to allow Ms. Van Kouwenberg 
to “have back” her .1 FTE in the event Ms. Simpson had a full-time job made available to 
her, she was required to “resign officially.”  These facts are insufficient to support an 
argument that the District should be estopped from asserting the more junior seniority date 
associated with Ms. Van Kouwenberg’s .1 FTE.  She was properly noticed for layoff. 
 
// 
 

 

 
 
 

12

Linda Atherton 
 
46. 

In light Findings 18 through 22, it is unnecessary to address the separate 

arguments raised by Ms. Atherton that her layoff notice failed to provide sufficient notice of 
which .4 FTE out of her total position would be affected by the layoff.  As set forth above, 
her layoff notice was improper. 
 

Kristin McKown and Janie Van Ryn 
 
47. 

In light of Findings 18 through 22, it is unnecessary to address the separate 

arguments raised by Ms. McKown and Ms. Van Ryn.  As set forth above, their layoff notices 
were improper. 
 
Lenora Hester and Cynthia Wiedefeld 
 
48.  At hearing, both Lenora Hester and Cynthia Wiedefeld testified regarding their 

experiences at the District.  Their testimony reflected their commitment to teaching and 
dedication to students.  However, they failed to identify a justification for setting aside their 
layoff notices.  They were properly identified for layoff. 

 
Other Matters 
 
49. 

 
50. 

To the extent Respondents submitted any arguments or evidence other than as 

discussed above, such arguments and evidence were unpersuasive or surplusage. 

Except as discussed above, no certificated employee junior to any Respondent 

 
was retained to render a service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.   
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955, by reason of Findings 1 through 11. 
 
 
Respondents contend that the number of particular kinds of service reductions 
must be reduced because the District did not properly account for positively assured attrition.  
While Respondents focus on some of the inconsistencies involved in Freitas’s testimony 
concerning positively assured attrition, she ultimately clarified that attrition was considered both 
prior to the adoption of the original Resolution Number 19-2010 on March 4, 2010, and no 
additional attrition occurred between March 4 and March 15, 2010.   (Finding 17.)  In a layoff 
involving reductions in particular kinds of service, a governing board need only consider 
positively assured attrition that occurred prior to the March 15th layoff notice deadline.  (San 
Jose Teachers Association v. Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at 635.)  That is what occurred in the 

 

 
 
 

13

3. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

instant case.  Freitas’s testimony need not be disregarded simply because there was no 
documentary evidence supplied regarding the specific application of attrition.  The District 
established by a preponderance of the evidence that attrition was taken into account. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)   The FTE proposed reductions in service associated with what was referred to by the 
District as “”7-8 Teacher Services” and “9-12 Teacher Services” are determined not to be 
particular kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of Findings 18 
through 21.  Cause therefore does not exist to reduce or discontinue such services. 
 

4. 

By reason of Finding 26, the remaining proposed reductions in service are 

particular kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955. Cause exists under sections 
44949 and 44955 for the District to reduce or discontinue such particular kinds of services, 
which cause relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils.    

5. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.       
(§ 44955, subds. (b) and (c); Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 
473-474; Krausen v. Solano County Junior College District (1974) 42 Cal.App.3d 394, 402.) 
For purposes of analyzing “bumping” rights, a district may, in its discretion, define the term 
“competent,” as used in section 44955, so long as the competency standard is reasonable.  To 
be reasonable, a competency standard must relate to the skills and qualifications to teach.  
(See Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 564-567 
[definition of competency under parallel statute applicable to community college districts 
held reasonable because it required one year’s full-time teaching in the subject area in the 
prior ten years].)   Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the 
junior teachers possess special credentials or needed skills, capabilities, or experience which 
their more senior counterparts lack.  (§ 44955, subd. (d) (1); Santa Clara Federation of 
Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) 

6. 

 
 
In determining the order of seniority among employees who first rendered paid 
service to the District on the same date, the order of termination shall be “solely on the basis 
of needs of the district and the students thereof.”  (Code § 44955, subd. (b).)  The District’s 
tie-breaking criteria met this standard.     

Cause exists to terminate the services of all Respondents other than those 

 
7. 

 

 
 
 

14

specifically identified in Findings 22 through 24, by reason of Findings 1 through 50, and 
Legal Conclusions 1 through 5.   

 

ORDER 

 
The Accusation is sustained and the District may notify all Respondents (other than 
those identified in Findings 22 through 24, in inverse order of seniority, that their services 
will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds 
of services.  The Accusation is dismissed as against the Respondents identified in Findings 
22 through 24. 
 

Dated:  May 21, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
SUSAN L. FORMAKER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

15

APPENDIX 1: List of All Respondents 

Claremont Unified School District 

 

 

 

 
 
 

Last Name 
Abelar 
Arboleda 
Arevalo de Madunich  Josefina 
Atherton 
Barnes 
Barnes 
Bowman 
Carney 
Carr-Handley 
Carter 
Castro 
Cerafice 
Cohen 
Cohen 
Cooke 
DeCastro 
Donovan 
Dyar 
Espinosa 
Evans 
Franco-Hinderliter 
Frost 
Frost 
Garcia 
Garcia 
Gariador 
Gentry 
Gentry 
Gilmore 
Gonzales 
Hartman 

First Name  FTE 
.475 
Erin 
1.0 
Molly 
.475 
.4 
Linda  
.2 
Deborah 
.2 
Deborah 
1.0 
Talia 
1.0 
Kristina 
1.0 
Linda 
1.0 
Lena 
.5 
Sheri 
1.0 
Cecilia 
.6 
Micah 
.4 
Micah 
.6 
Nicole 
.4 
Francis 
.8 
Doris 
.4 
Timothy 
1.0 
Ana 
.4 
Kim 
1.0 
Sandra 
.2 
Sheri 
.4 
Sheri 
.5 
Mominani 
.5 
Mominani 
1.0 
Jessica 
1.0 
Jennifer 
Katya 
1.0 
Katherine  1.0 
Korina 
Regina 

.2 
1.0 

16

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
.2 
.2 
1.0 
.3 
.6 
.5 
.5 

First Name  FTE 
Juliana 
Richard 
Sheila 
Jennifer 
Jennifer 
Timothy 
Ann 
Ann 
Christina 
Christina 

Last Name 
Mittino 
Moore 
Mowbray 
Norin 
Norin 
Northrop 
O'Connor 
O'Connor 
O'Grady 
O'Grady 
Ortega-Gingrich  Elizabeth  1.0 
1.0 
Peterson 
1.0 
Quincer 
1.0 
Rhoads 
1.0 
Richardson 
1.0 
Riihimaki 
1.0 
Rivette 
.5 
Ruiz 
.5 
Ruiz 
.2 
Salter 
.8 
Salter 
.2 
Schreiber 
.4 
Simpson 
.1 
Simpson 
.5 
Texeira 
.5 
Texeira 
1.0 
Troesh 
1.0 
Trudel 
1.0 
Trujillo 
.5 
Tucker 
1.0 
Tucker 

Eric 
Jennifer 
Tamara 
Kerrie 
Dawn 
Marizka 
Angela 
Angela 
Melissa 
Melissa 
Chelsea 
Cynthia 
Cynthia 
Michelle 
Michelle 
Jeremy 
Victoria 
Miguel 
Maria 
Eric 

Jodi 
Suzanne 
Lenora 
Melissa 
Elmira 
Homa 
Denise 
Lindsay 
Kara 
Rachel 
John 
Carolyn 
Yvonne 
Kristina 

1.0 
.2 
.4 
1.0 
.4688 
1.0 
.5 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
.5 
.5 
1.0 

Hassler 
Hensley 
Hester 
Jackson 
Jannati 
Khodadoost 
Klinovsky 
Lazenby 
Leeper 
Lynch 
Madunich 
Magallanes 
Marin-Hines 
McKown 
 

 

Janie 

Van Ryn 
VanKouwenberg Kristen 
Victoria 
Walker 
Kimberly 
Walters 
Cynthia 
Wiedefeld 
Melissa 
Wonacott 
Cathy 
Zimmerman 

1.0 
.1 
.2 
.5 
.1 
1.0 
.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

17

