BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF EDUCATION 
OF THE 
BARSTOW UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
Respondents listed in Appendix A. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

    OAH No. 2010030307 
  
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

Todd M. Robbins, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, Attorneys at Law, 

 
 
of California, heard this matter in Barstow, California on April 26, 2010. 
 
 
represented the Barstow Unified School District.  
 
 
respondents listed in Appendix A, except for respondent Pamela Brown.  
 

Kent Morizawa, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, Attorneys at Law, represented the 

No appearance was made by or on behalf of respondent Pamela Brown.  
 
The matter was submitted on April 26, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Jeff Malan, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel Services of the Barstow 

 
 
Unified School District, made and filed the accusation dated March 10, 2010, in his official 
capacity as the designee of Susan Levine, District Superintendent. 
 
 
 

Respondents1 are certificated district employees. 

2. 

The district initially identified 25 certificated employees as respondents designated for layoff.  The district 

                                                 
1  
subsequently dismissed one of these employees (Anastasia Curran), and three employees (Janice Plazola, Jennifer 
Sample, and Stephanie Strait) did not request a hearing or file a notice of defense.  Accordingly, by the conclusion 
of the hearing, there remained as respondents in this matter the 21 persons identified in Appendix A.  

1

 
 
 

 

 
4. 

 
6. 

3. 

On March 9, 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, the superintendent notified the Board of Education of the Barstow Unified School 
District in writing of her recommendation to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
services for the upcoming school year.  The superintendent stated the reasons for the 
recommendation.  The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment 
was not related to their competency as teachers.  

On March 9, 2010, the board adopted Resolution No. 28, determining that it 

would be necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of the 
current school year.  The board determined that the particular kinds of services that must be 
reduced for the 2010-2011 school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE) 
positions: 

Full-Time Equivalent

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Particular Kind of Service 
 
 
Elementary K-6 Teaching Services   
Grades 9-12 Special Education Mild/Moderate 
 
Teaching Services 
Grades 7-8 Middle School SAI Teaching Services  
 
Secondary Art Teaching Services 
 
Secondary Computer Teaching Services 
Elementary Music Teaching Services 
 
 
The proposed reductions totaled 32 FTE positions.2  
 
5. 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

24 

3 
2 
1 
1 
1 

The board further determined in Resolution No. 28 that “competency,” as 

described in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for the purposes of bumping, 
“shall necessarily include: (1) possession of a valid credential in the relevant subject matter 
area; (2) ‘highly qualified’ status under the No Child Left Behind Act in the area to be 
assigned; (3) an appropriate EL authorization (if required by the position).”   

The board directed the superintendent or her designee to determine which 

employees’ services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of the 
reduction of the foregoing particular kinds of services.  The board further directed the 
superintendent or her designee to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the 
district who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services.   
 

7. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district timely served on respondents a 
written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services would not be 
required for the upcoming school year, along with the related accusation.  The notice set 
forth the reasons for the recommendation.  The notice advised respondents of their right to a 
hearing, that each respondent had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person 

                                                 
2  
layoff is substantially less than the 32 FTE PKS designated for reduction. 

Because of attrition (e.g., resignation and retirement), the number of certificated employees identified for 

2

 

 

sending the notice by the date specified in the notice, a date which in each case was more 
than seven days after the notice was served, and that the failure to request a hearing would 
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing.  

 
The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment was not 

related to their competency as teachers.  

 
8. 

 
All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 

Respondents timely filed written requests for hearing and notices of defense.  

12. 

10. 

11. 

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of the 

The services the board addressed in Resolution No. 28 were “particular kinds 

 
9. 
district.  
 
 
of services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of 
services was not arbitrary or capricious and constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  No 
particular kinds of services were lowered to levels less than those levels mandated by state or 
federal law. 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
welfare of the district and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as 
determined by the board.  
 
The board considered all positively assured attrition, including resignations, 
 
retirements and requests for transfer, in determining the actual number of necessary layoff 
notices to be delivered to its employees.  
 
 
positions for the 2010-2011 school year.  The board has not yet authorized the district to fill 
either of these positions, and it is not known whether and when the board will do so.  
 
 
multiple subject credential and board authorization to teach English and AVID pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44256 and 44865 respectively.3  
 
 
Jauss, and Shannon VandeBrake) who have greater seniority than Dilbeck, and who have 
been slated for layoff, even though they have sufficient undergraduate units to qualify for 
board authorization to teach secondary English.  Respondents asserted that since these three 
                                                 
3  
subject credential to teach departmentalized subjects (e.g., English) up to the ninth grade level.  The teacher must 
have completed at least 12 undergraduate semester units in the subject in question.  Section 44865 permits teachers 
with any credential to teach in certain special areas, including AVID. 
 

14.  Olivia Dilbeck teaches middle school language arts and AVID.  She has a 

Respondents identified three elementary school teachers (Linsey Chavez, Joshua 

The district has advertised openings for two independent study teaching 

Section 44256 permits a local school board on an annual basis, to authorize a teacher with a multiple 

13. 

 

3

15. 

Respondent Douglas Campbell teaches elementary school music.  He holds a 

individuals are eligible for board authorization to teach secondary English, the district should 
permit them to bump into middle school teaching positions held by more junior employees, 
or at least the position held by Dilbeck.  However, eligibility for board authorization does not 
equate to possession of such authorization.  Further, since these individuals are not highly 
qualified to teach secondary English, they are not competent under the board’s bumping 
criteria to displace more junior employees.  Accordingly, none of the three named 
individuals may bump Dilbeck or any other less senior employee.4
 
 
single subject credential in music and is highly qualified in that subject.  He has about 28 
years of secondary school teaching experience.  He is unable to bump into a position held by 
a junior employee, but he believes that he meets the minimum qualifications for either of the 
two independent study positions the district hopes to fill for the 2010-2011 school year.   
 
Respondents argued that it is “reasonably certain” that the board will authorize the 
 
two independent study positions and that Campbell should therefore be permitted to bump 
into one of those positions.  The evidence did not, however, establish such a reasonable 
certainty and it would therefore be premature for the administrative law judge to issue the 
requested order at this time.  
 
 
subject credential and a supplementary authorization in English.  She is not highly qualified 
to teach English, and thus does not possess the competency to bump more junior employees 
pursuant to the criteria set forth in the board’s Resolution.  The district nonetheless permitted 
Tomkins to bump the more junior Mark Ferrara, a middle school language arts teacher.  This 
was not an oversight on the district’s part.  Instead, the district made a deliberate decision in 
this regard on the basis that both Tomkins and Ferrara have precisely the same credentials 
and authorizations, i.e., they both have a multiple subject credential,5 a supplementary 
authorization in English, EL authorization, they are both highly qualified in elementary 
education, and they both lack such status in English.  Under these unique circumstances,6 the 
district felt that it should retain Tomkins, the more senior of the two teachers, as this seemed 
consistent with the spirit of the layoff statute.  
 

Christina Tomkins teaches elementary school.  She holds a clear multiple 

16. 

Respondents suggested that Dilbeck may be displaced because her board authorization expires at the end of 

                                                 
4  
the present school year.  However, the fact remains that Dilbeck is presently (and validly) in a middle school 
position.  While it is certainly possible that she will be returned to an elementary teaching position next year, it is 
also possible that she will receive another annual board authorization to teach middle school English.  Accordingly, 
it would be improperly speculative to find — and accordingly it is not found — that Dilbeck is being retained to 
perform services which any more senior respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
  
5  
 
6  
because they lacked highly qualified status and because Wharmly himself does have such status.  The situation of 
Ferrara and Maxey vis-à-vis Wharmly is thus distinct from the situation of Tomkins vis-à-vis Ferrara. 
 

As discussed below, respondents Ferrara and Maxey were not permitted to bump the more junior Wharmly 

Tomkins’ credential is clear, Ferrara’s is preliminary. 

 

4

17. 

Respondent Mark Ferrara is a middle school language arts teacher.  He holds a 

Ferrara’s assertion that he is highly qualified in English was based on a single subject 

This is the only instance when the district deviated from the bumping criteria set forth 

 
in the board resolution.  The district’s decision was neither arbitrary or capricious, but 
instead constituted a proper exercise of its discretion.  No authority was presented that a 
district’s otherwise reasonable decision to deviate from a school board’s bumping criteria 
necessarily constituted an abuse of discretion.7   
 
 
preliminary multiple subject credential and a supplementary authorization in English.  As 
noted above, Ferrara was bumped by the more senior Tomkins.  Ferrara asserted at the 
hearing that he is highly qualified in English and is thus competent to bump the more junior 
Charles Wharmby III, who is presently in a middle school language arts reading assignment.  
Wharmby is himself highly qualified in English. 
 
 
evaluation worksheet, which reflects that he completed 27 post-secondary units in English 
classes, and six additional units in Speech classes.  Gail Hanoumis, a district credential 
technician who reviewed Ferrara’s documentation, concluded that all 33 of these units 
qualified as English units for NCLB purposes.  As such, it appeared to Hanoumis that Ferrara 
had sufficient post-secondary units to attain highly qualified status.8  Ferrara also asserted 
that Assistant Superintendent Malan told him in around June 2009 that he was highly 
qualified.  During the same general period (March to June 2009), Ferrara had several 
conversations with Hanoumis, who did not, however, tell him that he was highly qualified.  
 
 
received in evidence established that an individual may achieve highly qualified status by 
demonstrating core competence9 in one of several ways: (i) an exam (such as a CSET exam) 
in the core subject; (ii) a subject matter waiver; (iii) an undergraduate major or graduate 
degree in the core subject; (iv) advanced certification in the core subject; or (v) completion 
of a HOUSSE evaluation.10  Notably, all five of these alternatives involve formal 
determinations made by a body other than the school district.  It thus appears that the 
district’s role is not to determine highly qualified status, but simply to verify whether such a 
determination has been made by another body.   
 

The testimony of Hanoumis and a California Department of Education document 

Hanoumis testified that highly qualified status may be achieved through the completion of 32 post-

                                                 
7  
Of course, a decision to deviate from duly-authorized bumping criteria could raise a red flag, if other 
circumstances suggesting an abuse of discretion (e.g., the desire to retain or layoff an employee for improper 
motives) existed.  No such evidence is reflected in the present record, however. 
 
8  
secondary semester units in the core subject. 
 
9  
and thus need not be addressed. 
 
10  
was not eligible, due to the date on which he received his credential. 
 

HOUSSE refers to “High Objective Uniform State Standards of Evaluation,” a process for which Ferrara 

Other requirements to achieve highly qualified status (such as an appropriate crendential) were not at issue 

 

5

18. 

Respondent Christine Maxey is an elementary school teacher.  She has a clear 

It was not established that Ferrara has achieved highly qualified status through any of 
 
the foregoing means.  Further, Hanoumis testified that documentation she received from the 
California Commission on Teaching Credentialing (CCTC) did not reflect highly qualified 
status on Ferrara’s part.  Thus, despite her initial view that Ferrara was highly qualified, her 
initial view was not corroborated by CCTC documentation.  Accordingly, Ferrara is not 
highly qualified within the meaning of the NCLB Act and he is not competent to bump 
Wharmly. 
 
 
multiple subject credential and a supplementary authorization in English.  The district 
identified her for layoff within the elementary school teaching PKS.  Like Ferrara, Maxey 
contended that she is highly qualified in English and is thus competent to bump the more 
junior Wharmly.  In support of her contention, she proffered transcripts from three post-
secondary institutions, which she claimed established that she completed over 32 semester 
units of English.  However, whether 32 of those units were in English was not clear from the 
course names.11  More importantly, and as found above, the determination of highly qualified 
status is to be made by a body other than the school district.12  No evidence of any such 
determination was proffered at the hearing.  Accordingly, Maxey is not highly qualified 
within the meaning of the NCLB Act and she is not competent to bump Wharmly.  
 
 
subject credential.  The district assigned him an August 21, 2006, seniority date.  Jauss 
believes that his seniority date should be August 8, 2006, based on his participation in certain 
in-service training he testified he was required to attend before commencing his teaching 
duties with the district.  The most important document bearing on this issue is Jauss’s initial 
district employment contract, which neither party proffered at the hearing.  Absent this 
document, the facts presented were insufficient to reach a definitive finding as to his 
seniority date.13  Further, it was established that Jauss would still be subject to layoff if he 
were given the earlier seniority date.14  For these reasons, the administrative law judge 
declines to make a finding on this issue. 
 

Respondent Joshua Jauss teaches elementary school, and has a clear multiple 

19. 

Maxey claimed, for example, that 24 of her units completed at Azuza Pacific University had an English 

                                                 
11  
“component,” or had English “embedded” in them, or were “related” to English.  It was impossible to discern from 
the record whether such claims, assuming that they are true, would qualify the classes in question as English classes 
for NCLB purposes. 
 
12  
Maxey’s circumstances in fact provide an excellent example as to why the determination of highly 
qualified status is not to be made by the district:  a district would simply not have the means to verify and evaluate 
for NCLB purposes claims like those Maxey made with regard to the nature of her coursework.  
 
13  
contract. 
 
14  
single subject credential that could possibly make him competent to bump a more junior employee in another 
position. 
 

More senior elementary teachers were laid off, and Jauss holds no credentials or authorizations beyond his 

For example, Jauss did not recall whether the in-service training days were within his district employment 

 

6

20. 

Respondent Sabrina Gilmore teaches high school drama (two periods) and art, 

 
has a clear single subject art credential, majored in technical drama at Cal State San 
Bernardino, and is highly qualified to teach both art and drama.  In addition to her formal 
teaching assignments, Gilmore is the thespian coordinator (i.e., faculty member associated 
with the student theater club) and is responsible for two student theater productions per 
academic year.  She accepted a position teaching drama at the request of the district because 
no other teacher had her experience.  She does not believe that any other teacher could 
perform in her position as a drama teacher.  She is the only drama teacher at her school and, 
in fact, in the district. The district has not yet decided whether it will eliminate its drama 
program next year. 
 
Respondents argue that since Gilmore is the district’s only drama teacher, her layoff 
 
constitutes a de facto implementation of a PKS reduction (i.e., high school drama teaching 
services) that is outside the scope of the board’s authorization.  The layoff of Gilmore does 
not necessarily imply the discontinuation of the district’s drama program, however.  For 
example, the district could possibly grant board authorization to teach drama to another 
teacher.  While such an individual would presumably lack Gilmore’s experience and highly 
qualified status, the district nonetheless retains the discretion to determine how to provide 
instruction in drama to its students, in the broader context of providing for all of the 
educational needs of its students.  Even if the district ultimately decides to eliminate its 
drama program for next year (which for now is speculative), such a decision would not 
constitute a PKS reduction of services subject to Education Code section 44955, because it 
would not involve the layoff of certificated staff.15      
 
 
services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.   
 
 

21.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

                                                 
15  
Gilmore is being laid off in connection with the board’s secondary art PKS reduction.  The district does not 
consider drama to be a subcategory within the scope of art.  As such, it does not appear that the district was required 
to lay Gilmore off completely.  Instead, the district could have achieved its 1.0 FTE reduction in secondary art by 
designating Gilmore for partial layoff (i.e., representing the portion of her teaching assignment that is comprised of 
art classes), and designated another art teacher for partial layoff as well.  However, respondents did not challenge the 
district’s decision not to split the secondary art PKS reduction between two employees, and whether the district 
properly exercised its discretion in that regard was not litigated at the hearing.   

 

7

 
3. 

 
4. 

Pursuant to section 44995, a senior teacher whose position is discontinued has 
the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to 
fill.  In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is 
filling that position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  
Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Santa 
Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified 
School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843; Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. 
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.)   

 
The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine 

whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic 
layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned 
to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at 136-137.) 

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in 

 
with any statistical computation.  It is within the governing authority’s discretion to 
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued 
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose 
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)  A school district has wide 
discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or 
so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of 
law.  (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 
318, 322.) 
 

5. 

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district 

6. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44845, certificated employees are deemed 

and establishing requirements for employment.  This discretion encompasses determining the 
training and experience necessary for particular positions.  Similarly, school districts have 
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a 
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.  
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)  
 
 
“to have been employed on the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a 
probationary position.”  
 
 
accusation.  Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the district to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the welfare of the schools and 
the pupils thereof.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the district 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The district 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board 
be directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is recommended that the board give respondents 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services are no longer required by the district. 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

7. 

 

8

ADVISORY DETERMINATION 

The following advisory determination is made:   

The accusations served on respondents are sustained.  Notice may be given to 

 
 
respondents before May 15, 2010, that their services will not be required because of the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated.  
 
 
 
DATED:  ________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
DONALD P. COLE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

9

Appendix A 

Nichole Alvarez 

Pamela Brown 

Douglas Campbell 

Linsey Chavez 

Shelie Crowley 

Amber Baker 

Julie Diza 

Alicia Arch 

Erica Bravo 

 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
7 
 
8 
 
9 
 
10.  Mark Ferrara 
 
11. 
 
12. 
 
13. 
 
14. 
 
15. 
 
16. 
 
17. 
 
18. 
 
19. 
 
20. 
 
21. 
 

Joshua Jauss 

Joy Mendoza 

Angela Stepp 

Katherine Gaeta 

Theresa Ganchero 

Sabrina Gilmore 

Patricia Hailey 

LaKisha Harris 

Christine Maxey 

Karen Tupman 

Shannon VandeBrake 

 

10

