BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ATASCADERO SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OAH No. 2010030093 

In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
Katherine Aaron, Shauna Ames, Deborah 
Beck, Emilia Bruzzo, Paul Cappellano, Steve 
Collins, Julie Cross, Julie C. Davis, Kara 
Ferrell, Grace Franklin, Teresa Harback, 
Lynne Hendrickson, Yvonne High, Rebecca 
Morris, Jill-Anna Myers, Anne M. Olson, 
Laurie Peterson, Rebecca Trueman, and 
Dorothy Wagster,  
 
                                        Respondents. 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
Humberto Flores, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, heard this matter on April 19 and 22, 2010, at Atascadero, California. 
 
 
District.   
 

Patricia Andreen, Attorney at Law, represented the Atascadero Unified School 

John Sachs, Attorney at Law, represented the Respondents except Respondent 

Deborah Beck, who appeared at hearing and represented herself. 

 
Evidence was received and the matter was submitted for decision. 

 
 

SUMMARY 

The Governing Board (Board) of the Atascadero Unified School District (District) 

 
 
decided to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by certificated 
personnel for the 2010-2011 school year for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related 
to the capabilities and dedication of the teachers whose services were proposed to be reduced 
or eliminated.  District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process 
involving review of seniority and credentials.  The selection process complied with 
Education Code requirements. 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.  John Rogers, Superintendent of the District, filed the Accusations in his official 

 
 
capacity. 
 

2.  Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

3.  On February 16, 2010, Kimberley Spinks, the Director of Human Services, on 

 
 
behalf of the Superintendent, recommended that the Board give notice that certain services 
performed by certificated employees, including Respondents, be reduced or eliminated, and 
that the services of Respondents would not be required for the ensuing school year.  
 
 
4.  On February 16, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 10-09-10 whereby the 
Board resolved to discontinue or reduce the particular kinds of services.  The Board further 
determined that based on the discontinuance or reduction of services, it would be necessary 
to decrease the number of certificated employees at the close of the present school year by a 
corresponding number of full-time equivalent (FTE) positions as follows: 
 
 
 

Administrative Services - Principal   

1.0 FTE  

  

 

 

 

Elementary Multiple Subject Instruction 

  

            7.0 FTE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Elementary Music Instruction 
Elementary Choir/Band 
 
Elementary Music Coordinator 
 

 

 

 

School Counselors – Counseling 9-12 
 
Special Education 
 
 

Learning Center Teachers 
Learning Center Support Teacher 

 

 

 

 

Atascadero High School 
 
 
 
 

Learning Center Support Teachers   
 
AVID Program 
 
Spanish Teacher 
 
Art Teacher 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

Atascadero Junior High School 
English Teacher 
 
AVID Program 
 
Drama Teacher 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

1.9 FTE 
  .5 FTE 

2.0 FTE 
 
 

3.0 FTE 
1.0 FTE 

1.42 FTE 
  .58 FTE 
  .29 FTE 
  .29 FTE 

   
  .1.0 FTE 
  .33 FTE 
  .50 FTE 
 

 
 
 
 
 
           20.46 FTE 

 

 
 

5.  Pursuant to Resolution 10-09-10, the Board directed the Superintendent to notify 

7.  The Board adopted Resolution No. 12-09-10, setting forth a selection process 

the employees affected by the Board’s resolution and give notice to said employees that their 
services would not be required for the ensuing school year and state the reasons therefore. 
 
 
6.  The Board adopted Resolution 11-09-10 wherein the Board defined “competency” 
as follows: “[An] employee shall be deemed to be ‘competent’ to render services if he or she 
possesses the necessary credential, is No Child Left Behind (NCLB) compliant, and has 
taught the subject matter or performed the particular service, within the District, for one 
complete school year within the past 10 years.”  The Board further resolved that “certain 
certificated employees possess certain special skills and experience, because of their training 
and/or work for the District to provide unique services.”       
 
 
involving review of credentials and other criteria for breaking ties between employees with 
the same first dates of paid service.  The District did not apply the tie-breaking criteria in this 
case because it contended that all of the Respondents are subject to layoff.  In any event, the 
Governing Board was not arbitrary or capricious in establishing the tie-breaking criteria.  The 
process complied with Education Code requirements. 
 
 
8.  On or about March 23, 2010, Superintendent Rogers notified Respondents in 
writing that it had been recommended their services would not be required for the next 
school year.  The mailing included the reasons for the notification, a copy of the Accusation 
and other jurisdictional documents as required by the Education Code.  
 
9.  The Assistant Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each Respondent 
 
on March 23, 2010.  Notices of Defense and Requests for Hearing were timely filed by all of 
the employees who appeared for the hearing.  All jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
 
for leave, in determining the necessary layoff notices to be delivered to employees. 
 
 
current assignments and locations, advanced degrees, credentials, and authorizations.   
The District then identified the most junior employees working in a particular kind of service 
being reduced or discontinued and determined which employees would receive layoff 
notices.   
 
 
Conrad even though he less seniority than Respondents.  The District decided to skip Mr. 
Conrad because of his experience and his ability to teach high school band.  The District 
maintains that this position requires special talent and ability, such as a working knowledge 
of all instruments, stamina to work a substantial amount of after school hours, a commitment 
to work year-round, and the ability to create excitement on the part of students for the band 
program. 
 

12. (a)  The District has decided to “skip” and retain the services of teacher Nathaniel 

10.  The District considered attrition, including resignations, retirements and requests 

11.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority dates, 

 

3

      (b)  Ms. Spinks, who was principal of the high school during the 2007-2008 
school year, testified that Mr. Conrad has been able to exceed the huge expectations the 
District and community places on the high school band program.  He is highly regarded by 
his peers, the District and the community for his knowledge, and the excitement he generates 
on the part of students.  He has consistently proven his ability to motivate students, which is 
evidenced by their success in statewide competitions, and their performances in high school 
musicals, parades and sporting events.   

 
      (c)  In addition to teaching, Mr. Conrad puts on events to generate funds for the 
program, insures that the musical instruments are properly tuned, schedules participation in 
events such as parades and competitions, and collaborates with the drama teacher and choral 
director to produce the spring musical.  Mr. Conrad has been with the District for three years.  
Since that time there has been a yearly increase of student participation in band by 10 to 15 
students.  Ms. Spinks attributes this increase to the efforts of Mr. Conrad.  Finally, Mr. 
Conrad has helped to raise funds for the band program by establishing relationships with 
booster clubs and other community groups.   

 
      (d)  Respondent Rebecca Trueman teaches music at four elementary school sites.  

13. (a)  The District has decided to retain the services of Respondents Emilia Bruzzo, 

Although she has the credentials to teach high school band, the District proved that it 
properly exercised its discretion by “skipping” Mr. Conrad and retaining his services for the 
2010-2011 school year.    
 
 
the high school choir teacher, and Respondent Laurie Peterson, the middle school choir 
teacher.  The District decided to retain the services of Respondents Bruzzo and Peterson 
because of their unique professional experiences and training.  The District maintains that the 
middle and high school choir positions require special talents, abilities, experience, and the 
ability to motivate students.   
 

      (b)  Respondent Bruzzo has 25 years experience as a performer, composer, 
musical director, and conductor.  She has been with the District for five years.  For the past 
five years she has collaborated with the band and drama teachers to produce the high school 
spring musical.  In fact, she has been the musical director for the musical for the past three 
years.  She coordinates or directs five different choirs and developed a curriculum for 
musical theater.  Besides directing the various choirs, she also teaches classes in Musical 
Theater and Introduction to Singing.  Respondent Bruzzo also schedules choral performances 
in and outside of the District as a way to gain support in the community.  She has organized 
several four-day festival trips involving as many as 80 students.  She has managed and 
directed the Atascadero High School Choir Boosters to obtain financial support for the high 
school choir program.  Finally, Respondent Bruzzo has been the musical director for various 
community theater productions at the San Luis Obispo Little Theater.   
 
     (c)  Respondent Peterson has 20 years experience conducting and directing choirs 
 
of all ages.  She is proficient in piano, music history and theory, sight singing, performance 
practice, and playing multiple voice parts.  She has been with the District 11 years.  When 

 

4

15.  Respondent Rebecca Morris is bilingual and bi-literate.  Ms. Morris currently 

      (d)  The District properly exercised its discretion in deciding to retain the services 

she started with the District, the middle school choir program had 40 students.  Since she has 
been the choir director, the choir has expanded to 150 students.  Respondent Peterson 
motivates the choir students, teaches them the fundamentals of participating in a choral 
group, and prepares the choir for local and state competitions.  She has particular expertise in 
working with adolescent boys who are experiencing voice changes.  This is particularly 
important for a middle school choir director.  She also established and teaches a keyboarding 
class.  Her choral groups have consistently received superior ratings and awards when they 
perform at festivals and competitions. 
 
 
of Respondents Peterson and Bruzzo. 
 
 
14. The District has decided to retain the services of teacher Yvonne High even 
though she less seniority than Respondents.  The District decided to “skip” Ms. High because 
of her experience and her ability to teach high school dance.  The District maintains that this 
position requires special talent and ability.  The District established that no other Respondent 
is qualified to teach dance.  The District properly exercised its discretion in deciding to retain 
the services of Respondent Yvonne High. 
  
 
teaches Spanish and holds a .29 FTE position.  She is one of two teachers at the high school 
with a BCLAD credential.  Respondent Morris has over 20 years experience teaching 
English to Spanish speakers, and Spanish to both English and Spanish speakers.  Respondent 
Grace Franklin has recently earned a BCLAD credential, which she received after March 15, 
2010.  Respondent Franklin teaches English Language Learners at an elementary school.  
Respondents Morris and Franklin are confident of their skills and passionate about teaching.  
Through their testimony, they established the importance of being able to communicate to 
Spanish speaking parents.  Respondents Morris and Franklin both noted that the District 
needs bilingual teachers.  Ms. Spinks testified that in the event Respondents Morris and 
Franklin are laid off, there will be three teachers holding BCLAD credentials in the District.  
As a result, the District’s need for teachers holding BCLAD credentials will be met for the 
2010/2011 school year. 
 
 
Davis, Kara Ferrell, Teresa Harback, Jill-Anna Myers, and Deborah Beck did not assert 
“bumping rights.”  That is, they did not assert that are competent and credentialed to perform 
services in a position currently occupied by a certificated employee with less seniority.   
 
17.  Respondent Olson teaches music at certain elementary schools in the District.  
 
Her seniority date is August 27, 1999.  She has never taught full-time and currently holds a 
.90 FTE position.  She is requesting that she be deemed to teach in a self-contained 
elementary classroom.  Respondent Olson has not taught a full year at the District within the 
last 10 years.  Therefore, she does meet the competency criteria established by the District.  
 

16.  At the hearing, Respondents Shauna Ames, Paul Cappellano, Steve Collins, Julie 

 

5

19.  Respondents contend that the projected increase in student enrollment set forth in 

18.  Respondent Rebecca Trueman teaches music full-time at certain elementary 
 
schools in the District.  In addition to her music credential, Respondent Trueman holds a 
multiple subject credential.  Her seniority date is August 27, 1996.  She asserts that she can 
bump certain teachers who teach in a self-contained classroom.  However, Respondent has 
always taught music for the District.  She has not taught in a self contained classroom for at 
least one out of the last 10 years.  Therefore, she does not meet the competency criteria 
established by the District. 
 
 
the Second Interim Budget Report (Exhibit A) establishes that the District acted improperly 
in adopting Resolution 10-09-10.  Respondents’ contention is not persuasive.  The District 
based Resolution 10-09-10 on its decision to reduce particular kinds of services; not on 
declining enrollment.  In any event, the projected increase in enrollment is attributed to 
incoming special education students (approximately 59) from the San Luis Obispo County 
Office of Education.    
 
 
20.  Respondent Deborah Beck, who appeared in propia persona, is a counselor with 
the District.  Her testimony established that she performs important and valued work for the 
District.  However, she did not establish that she is competent and credentialed to perform 
services in a position currently occupied by a certificated employee with less seniority.   
 
 
Factual Finding 4, related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  
 
 
performed by any employee with less seniority who is being retained. 
 

21.  The reduction or discontinuation of the particular kinds of services set forth in 

22.  Respondents are not certificated and competent to render a service being 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
 

 
1.  All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 
were met.  Therefore, jurisdiction was established for this proceeding as to all Respondents. 
 
 
2.  Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to reduce the 
number of certificated employees due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds 
of services.  The Board’s decisions to reduce or eliminate the identified services were neither 
arbitrary nor capricious.  The decisions relate solely to the welfare of the District’s schools 
and the pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.   
 
 
Respondents Emilia Bruzzo, Laurie Peterson, and Yvonne High was neither arbitrary nor 
capricious and related to the welfare of the pupils and schools within the District.  The 
evidence established that the experience, training and abilities of these teachers are 
extraordinary and are necessary to maintain the high standards that the District and the 
community have come to expect of the band, choir and dance programs.  
 

3.  The District’s decision to “skip” and retain the services of Nathaniel Conrad and 

 

6

4.  Respondents contend that the competency criteria established by the District was 

 
vague and not legally permissible under Education Code section 44955.  Respondents’ 
contention is not persuasive.  The Court of Appeal in Duax v. Kern Community College 
District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 567, held that a District has the discretion to establish 
competency standards for certificated employees of the District.  In Duax, the Governing 
Board established a standard of competency that required one year of full-time teaching of 
the subject matter within previous ten years.  The Court found that such standard “clearly 
related to skills and qualifications to teach” and did not define competency too narrowly.  In 
this case, the District properly exercised its discretion in establishing competency criteria and 
said criteria relate to the skills and qualifications of its certificated employees. 
 
 
senior employee subject to layoff is certificated and competent to render. 
 

5.  No junior certificated employee is being retained to perform services which a more 

ORDER 
 
1.  The Accusations against Respondents Emilia Bruzzo, Laurie Peterson, and 

2.  Notice may be given to Respondents Katherine Aaron, Shauna Ames, Deborah 

 
Yvonne High are dismissed.  The Accusations against all other Respondent are sustained. 
 
 
Beck, Paul Cappellano, Steve Collins, Julie Cross, Julie C. Davis, Kara Ferrell, Grace 
Franklin, Teresa Harback, Lynne Hendrickson, Rebecca Morris, Jill-Anna Myers, Anne M. 
Olson, Rebecca Trueman, and Dorothy Wagster, that their services will not be required for 
the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Dated: April 26, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_________________________________ 
HUMBERTO FLORES 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

7

