BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF  
THE MANHATTAN BEACH UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 
 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certain Certificated Employees of the  
Manhattan Beach Unified School District,
 
                                                   Respondents.
 
 

 
 
  

 

  OAH No. L2010031166 

PROPOSED DECISION

Jennifer M. Russell, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Howard A. Friedman, Attorney at Law, represented Manhattan Beach Unified 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on May 5, 2010, in Manhattan Beach, 
California. 
 
 
School District (District). 
 
Lawrence B. Trygstad, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Don 
 
Braunecker, Lynn Burrell, Donna Gallageher, Shawn Genut, Jody Kellogg and Edward 
Naves, who were not present at the hearing. 
 
 
hearing and represented themselves. 
 
 
represented at the hearing. 
 
 
Evidence was received by stipulation, testimony and documents.  The record was 
held open for submission of Post-Hearing Briefs by May 11, 2010.  District submitted a 
Post-Hearing Brief on May11, 2010, which has been marked for identification as Exhibit 
12.  No respondent submitted a Post-Hearing Brief.  The matter was submitted on May 
11, 2010. 
 

Respondents Grisel Hands, Tom Walker and Krist Walz failed to appear or be 

Respondents Brittney Olson and Sam Sybesma (Sybesma) were present at the 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Kathryn A. Hall, Director of Human Resources for the District, made and 

1. 

 
 
filed the Accusation in her official capacity. 
 
 
 

2. 

Respondents in this proceeding are certificated employees of the District. 

3. 

On March 8, 2010, the District provided written notice to respondents 

pursuant to Education Code1 sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the 
District’s decision and noted that 20.7 full time equivalent (FTE) positions would be 
reduced or discontinued.  

On April 9, 2010, the District filed and thereafter served the Accusation 

and related documents on respondents.  Each respondent in this matter filed a timely 
Notice of Defense requesting a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for 
not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  All prehearing jurisdictional 
requirements were met. 

On March 8, 2010, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted 
Resolution 2010-7(Resolution) reducing or discontinuing the following particular kinds 
of services (PKS) for the 2010-2011 school year: 

 
Certificated Services   
 

Number of Full-Time Equivalent Positions (FTE) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

    .8FTE 
Teacher-Math, Secondary 
    .4FTE 
Teacher-Social Studies, Secondary 
  1.0FTE 
Teacher-Spanish, Secondary   
    .6FTE 
Teacher- English, Secondary   
    .2FTE 
Teacher-Art, Secondary (ceramics) 
    .4FTE 
Teacher-MCHS AVID Program 
    .6FTE 
Teacher-Secondary General Education Physical 
    .2FTE 
 
Teacher-Secondary Biology 
    .4FTE 
 
Teacher-Secondary Physics 
    .2FTE 
 
 
Teacher-PACE 
    .2FTE 
 
Teacher-CAHSEE 
 
  1.6FTE 
 
Secondary Counselors  
  1.0FTE 
Nurse   
 
 
Special Education Program Specialist 
    .6FTE 
Teachers-Elementary General Education Physical Education 2.0FTE 
         *10.0 FTE 
Teachers- Elementary Class Size Reduction   
    .5FTE 
 
 
 
School Psychologist 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

          *20.7FTE 
 
Total Full Time Equivalent Reduction         *20.7FTE 
 
 

* As amended2

Total 

 
 

 

 

                                                 

otherwise. 

All statutory citations are to the Education Code, unless indicated 

On April 28, 2010, the number of FTE positions was revised to include 

two additional certificated services. 

2

 
4. 

 
5. 

 
 
 
 

1 

 
2  

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

7. 

6. 

The services set forth in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of services 

The Resolution established tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative 

 
seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the 
same day.  The Resolution also provided that the order of employee termination shall be 
based on the needs of the District and its students in accordance with the nature and type 
of credentials and authorizations of the certificated employees.   
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955. 
 
 
The Board took action to reduce the services set forth in Factual Finding 5 
because of uncertainty surrounding future State funding.  The decision to reduce services 
was not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals whose services are 
proposed to be reduced or eliminated.  The decision to reduce the particular kinds of 
services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s 
discretion. 

8. 

 

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employee’s seniority 

 
dates (first date of paid service), current assignments, and credential and certifications.  
Certificated employees within the District were given access to the seniority list to verify, 
update or correct pertinent information.   

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and 

“bumping” list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services 
being reduced.  The District then determined whether the least senior employees held 
credentials in another area and were entitled to “bump” other employees.  In determining 
who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number 
of reductions not covered by the known vacancies, and determined the impact on 
incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  The District then checked the credentials of 
affected individuals and whether they could “bump” other employees. 

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations, 

retirements and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of layoff notices to 
be delivered to employees by March 15, 2010. 

Respondent Sybesma is a certificated employee of the District with a 

physical education (P.E.) credential.  The Resolution provides for discontinuation of a .6 
FTE P.E. teaching position.  Sybesma was noticed for .2 FTE of the .6 FTE reduction.  
He contended that his .2 FTE should be reassigned to teach elective dance, a course 
taught by Yvonne Johnson (Johnson).  Johnson holds a Performing Arts Occupations 
credential and is retained and paid by the Southern California Regional Occupational 
Center to teach an elective dance course within the District.   Johnson is not a District 
employee, and therefore was correctly omitted from the seniority list.  Sybesma is not 
certificated to teach elective dance.  The District correctly identified Sybesma as an 
employee subject to a .2 FTE layoff. 

 
9. 

 
10. 

 
11. 

 
12. 

 
 

 

 

3

 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
 

1. 

Section 44949 provides in pertinent part as follows: 

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given 
notice by the governing board that his or her services will 
not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons 
specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the 
employee 
the 
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that 
it  has  been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the 
employee, and stating the reasons therefore. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 

shall  be  given  written  notice  by 

2. 

Section 44955 provides in pertinent part as follows: 

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her 
position  for  causes  other  than  those  specified  in  Sections 
44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, 
and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or 
her  position  for  cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections 
44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily 
attendance  in  all  of  the  schools  district  for  the  first  six 
months in which school is in session shall have declined . . 
. , whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 
discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following 
school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the governing 
board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by 
reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of 
permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board 
may 
than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of 
the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close 
of  the  school  year.    Except  as  otherwise  provided  by 
statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be 
terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less 
seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said 
permanent employee is certified and competent to render. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
 

the  services  of  not  more 

terminate 

4

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to 
the  district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall 
determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  on 
needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.    Upon  the 
request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so 
determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  .  .  .  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the 
order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in 
ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in 
the group . . . . 
 
(c) . . . [S]ervices of such employees shall be terminated in 
the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as 
determined by the board in accordance with Sections 44844 
and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or probationary 
employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as 
provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed 
reemployed for the ensuing school year. 
 
The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and 
reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be 
retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and 
qualifications entitle them to render. . . .  
 
(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may 
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of 
seniority for either of the following reasons: 
 
(1) The district demonstrated a specific need for personnel 
to teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that the 
certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to 
provide those services, which others with more seniority do 
not possess. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 

4. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and 

 
 
3. 
44955 were met. 
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.  The 
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor 
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and 
pupils within the meaning of section 44949. 

The services set fort in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of services 

 

5

6. 

5. 

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 

 
 
44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students 
shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce service’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees 
are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees 
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) 
 
 
of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or discontinuation of the 
particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 5.  The District properly identified 
the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board 
directed be reduced or discontinued. 
 
 
services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

Cause exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44945 to reduce the number 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 

7. 

 

ORDER 

The District may give notice to respondents Don Braunecker, Lynn Burrell, 

 
 
Donna Gallageher, Shawn Genut, Grisel Hands, Jody Kellogg, Edward Naves, Brittney 
Olson, Sam Sybema, Tom Walker and Krist Walz that their services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

 
 

Dated: May 17, 2010 

 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
JENNIFER M. RUSSELL 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

6

