BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD  
POWAY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

OAH No. 2010020592 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Accusations Against: 
 
JILLIAN BOYER, et al; 
Respondents Listed on Exhibit B, 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 

On April 22, 2010, in San Diego, California, Alan S. Meth, Administrative Law 

Clifford D. Weiler, Attorney at Law, represented the Poway Unified School District. 

Malinda R. Dickenson, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Milena Schroeder. 

Michael P. Baranic, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Jillian Boyer, Tiffany 

 
 
Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, heard this matter.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Castillo, Amber Madsen, Sarah McCracken, Craig Morrison, Casey Rozzell, Christine 
Smith, and Jacqueline Wight. 
 
 
At the hearing, the respondents represented by Mr. Baranic withdrew their requests 
for hearing.  No respondents who requested a hearing except Ms. Schroeder appeared at the 
hearing. 
 
 
briefs by Mr. Weiler and Ms. Dickenson. 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 29, 2010 following the submission of closing 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

On or about March 31, 2010, William Chiment, Associate Superintendent, 

 
 
Personnel Support Services, Poway Unified School District (hereafter, “the District”), made 
and filed the accusations against respondents in her official capacity. 
 
 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

2. 

 1

3. 

4. 

Before March 15, 2010, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 

On or before March 15, 2010, each respondent was given written notice that 

 
 
44955, Mr. Chiment notified the Governing Board of the District of his recommendation as 
designee of the Superintendent of the District that respondents be notified their services will 
not be required for the ensuing school year.  The notification to the Governing Board set 
forth the reasons for the recommendation. 
 
 
the Superintendent had recommended that notice be given to respondents, pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that their services will not be required for the 
ensuing year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation.  The notices 
satisfied the requirements of sections 44949 and 44955.  San Jose Teachers Association, Inc. 
v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 632; Campbell Elementary Teachers Association v. 
Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 803-04, distinguishing Karbach v. Board of Education 
(1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 355, 360-63. 
 
 
cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.  Accusations were timely served 
on respondents, and each respondent filed a timely Notice of Defense.  All pre-hearing 
jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

Each respondent timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is 

5. 

6. 

 
discontinue the following services for the 2010-11 school year: 

The Governing Board of the District took action in Resolution No. 34-2010 to 

Particular Kind of Service 

Learning Support Services (LSS) Teacher on Special Assignment 

Discontinuance or 
Reduction 
Reduction 

Full-time 
Equivalents 
.5 

Categorically funded Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA) - 

Discontinuance 

2.00 

 

(TOSA) – Math 

ASES 

Counselors’ services program 
Counselor - Home School Liaison 
Special Education Program Psychologist 
Kindergarten through Fifth Grade classroom teaching services  
Middle school Language Arts/Social Science teaching services 
Middle school Math teaching services 
Middle school Physical Science teaching services 
Middle school Life Science teaching services 
Middle school Physical Education teaching services 
Middle school Earth Science teaching services 
Middle school AVID teaching services 
Middle school English Language Development teaching services 
Middle school Wheel elective teaching services 
Middle school Band/Orchestra teaching services 
Middle school Choir teaching services 
Middle school Spanish teaching services 
Middle school Drama teaching services 

Discontinuance 
Discontinuance 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 

 3.20 
1.00 
2.00 
111.00 
13.00 
5.00 
2.00 
1.60 
3.40 
1.40 
1.60 
1.60 
3.20 
.80 
.20 
1.40 
.60 

 2

Particular Kind of Service 

Middle school Art teaching services 
Middle school Journalism teaching services 
Middle school Industrial Technology teaching services 
Middle school Yearbook teaching services 
High school English teaching services 
High school Math teaching services 
High school Social Science teaching services 
High school Spanish teaching services 
High school French teaching services 
High school German teaching services 
High school Filipino teaching services 
High school Business teaching services 
High school Life Science teaching services 
High school Physical Science teaching services 
High school Physical Education/Health (ENS) teaching services 
High school Physical Education teaching services 
High school Health teaching services 
High school Choir teaching services 
High school Drama/Theatre teaching services 
High school Band/Orchestra teaching services 
High school Art teaching services 
High school/ROP Art teaching services 
High school Consumer Family/Home Economics teaching services 
High school AVID teaching services 
High School Continuing Education teaching services 
Learning Support Services (“LSS”) Assistant Director 

Assistant Principal - Categorical 
 
Categorically funded hourly impact teacher services 

TOTAL FTEs 

The resolution also provided: 

 

Discontinuance or 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
12 months to 11 months 
Discontinuance 
 
Discontinuance 

Full-time 
Equivalents 
.80 
.80 
.83 
.60 
14.60 
13.60 
8.20 
6.20 
2.00 
1.20 
1.42 
1.00 
4.60 
7.20 
3.20 
3.60 
1.20 
1.20 
1.60 
1.40 
.60 
1.80 
1.80 
1.40 
2.00 
.09 

1.00 
 
 (65.00) 

239.44 

For purposes of “bumping” (displacement) and reemployment rights and the 
determination of “competency” within the meaning of Education Code sections 
44955(b), 44956(a)(1), and 44957(a) to the extent such might apply, “competency” 
shall be based upon all of the following conditions which will allow for bumping and 
reemployment: 

(A) 
Possession and current filing of a preliminary or clear credential 
for the subject matter into which the employee would bump for the 2010-
2011 school year; and  

the employee is serving in or is on leave from a teaching position 

(B) 
other than as an hourly compensated “impact teacher”, and whose job 

 3

performance was included within the scope of formal evaluation 
procedures of an applicable collective bargaining agreement, provided 
however that this condition sub-paragraph (B) shall not apply to restrict 
the bumping by or reemployment rights of any administrator or counselor 
who is serving in or on leave from such administrative or counseling 
position in this school district; the intent of this subparagraph (B) is that 
impact teachers do not possess the right to displace or serve as regular 
classroom teachers as a result of the discontinuances and reductions of 
certificated services; and 

(C) 
if bumping for the 2010-2011 school year, and for purposes of 
rights to reemployment in the future, into a non-teaching position (such as 
a position outside the collective bargaining unit), the employee must have 
actively served in that particular kind of service for 50 (fifty) percent FTE 
(full-time equivalent) or more at least one complete school year (not 
cumulative) within the last three school years (2007-2008 and following). 

The services set forth above are particular kinds of services which may be reduced or 

 
discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  California Teachers 
Association v. Board of Trustees of the Goleta Union School District (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 
32, 34-37 and cases cited therein.  See also San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen, supra at 
635-38, in which the court specifically rejected the reasoning of Burgess v. Board of 
Education (1974) 41 Cal.App.3d 571; Zalac v. Governing Board (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 
853-54. 

7. 

8. 

No certificated employee junior to any respondent is retained to perform 

Furthermore, these services may be reduced because of budgetary difficulties.  Zalac 

 
v. Governing Board, supra, and cases cited therein.  The decision to reduce or discontinue 
the services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but rather a proper exercise of the District's 
discretion. 
 
 
services which any respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 
District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees of the District as determined by the Board of Education. 
 
 
and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees. 
 
 
relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  
The Board provided the order of termination shall be based on the needs of the District and 
its students.  
 

The Governing Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements 

The Governing Board established tie-breaker criteria for determining the 

10. 

9. 

 4

11. 

12.  Milena Schroeder’s seniority date, according to the District, is August 13, 

Ms. Schroeder began working for the District in 2000 as a temporary employee.  She 

The District created a Seniority List which contains employees’ seniority dates 
 
(first date of paid service), status, site, grade/subject, and credentials and authorizations.  The 
District used the Seniority List to develop a proposed layoff and “bumping” list of the least 
senior employees currently assigned in the two services being reduced.  The District then 
determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another area and were 
entitled to “bump” other employees.  In determining who would be laid off for each kind of 
service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by the known 
vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  The 
District then checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they could “bump” 
other employees.  
 
 
2008.  She holds a multiple subject teaching credential.  She claims a seniority date of 
September 1, 2003.  
 
 
served as a probationary employee under a contract dated July 1, 2003, was paid in a 
probationary position on September 1, 2003, and continued her employment through 2005.  
Ms. Schroeder was on maternity leave for two years (2005-06 and 2006-07).  She then 
resigned, but was rehired within 39 months of her resignation.  She is presently working as a 
tenured teacher. 
 
 
Ms. Schroeder was noticed for layoff in March 2009 for the 2009-10 school year.  
She requested a hearing and appeared at the hearing held on April 23 and 24, 2009.  She 
raised the issue of her seniority date at that hearing.  The Administrative Law Judge in his 
proposed decision determined August 13, 2008 was her seniority date.  The Governing Board 
adopted the proposed decision with some corrections not relevant to this proceeding on  
May 11, 2009.  Respondent received a final layoff notice from the District. 
 
 
which the Governing Board determined her seniority date was August 13, 2008. 
 
 
school year. 
 
 

Ms. Schroeder did not seek judicial review of the Governing Board’s final action in 

On or about June 9, 2009, the District re-employed Ms. Schroeder for the 2009-10 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter relating to the elimination of 239.44 full-time 

 
 
equivalent positions exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  All notices and 
jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 

 5

 
 

 

 

2. 

Education Code section 44845 provides: 

Every probationary or permanent employee employed after June 30, 1947, shall be 
deemed to have been employed on the date upon which he first rendered paid service 
in a probationary position. 
 
Education Code section 44848 provides in part: 
 
When any certificated employee shall have resigned or been dismissed for cause and 
shall thereafter have been reemployed by the board, his date of employment shall be 
deemed to be the date on which he first accepted reemployment (if reemployed 
before July 1, 1947) or rendered paid service (if reemployed after June 30, 1947) 
after his reemployment. 
 
Education Code section 44931 provides: 

Whenever any certificated employee of any school district who, at the time of his or 
her resignation, was classified as permanent, is reemployed within 39 months after 
his or her last day of paid service, the governing board of the district shall, 
disregarding the break in service, classify him or her as, and restore to him or her all 
of the rights, benefits and burdens of, a permanent employee, except as otherwise 
provided in this code.  However, time spent in active military service, as defined in 
Section 44800, subsequent to the last day of paid service shall not count as part of the 
aforesaid 39-month period. 
 
Education Code section 44955 provides in part: 

No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes 

(a) 
other than those specified in Section 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, 
inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 
cause other than as specified in Section 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
(b)  Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all of the schools 
of a district for the first six months in which school is in session shall have declined 
below the corresponding period of either of the previous two school years, whenever 
the governing board determines that attendance in a district will decline in the 
following year as a result of the termination of an interdistrict tuition agreement as 
defined in Section 46304, whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year, or whenever 
the amendment of state law requires the modification of curriculum, and when in the 
opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by 
reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in 
the district, the governing board may terminate the services of not more than a 
corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the district, permanent as 
well as probationary, at the close of the school year.  Except as otherwise provided by 
statute, the services of no permanent employee may be terminated under the 

 6

provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or any other employee 
with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent employee is 
certificated and competent to render. 
 

. . . 

Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 15th of May in 

 
(c) 
the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and services of such employees shall be 
terminated in the inverse of the order in which they were employed, as determined by 
the board in accordance with the provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the 
event that a permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices and a right 
to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed 
for the ensuing school year. 

3. 

Respondent Schroeder argues her seniority date should be September 1, 2003 

 
 
rather than August 13, 2008 because she first provided paid service to the District in a 
probationary position on September 1, 2003, and the language of section 44955 requires a 
school district to use that statute in calculating a seniority date.  The District calculated Ms. 
Schroeder’s seniority date by using section 44948 because that statute specifically applies to 
her situation since she resigned her position, and then was reemployed.  Ms. Schroeder 
argues that the District cannot use section 44948 to determine her seniority date because 
section 44955 does not direct a governing board to use it, and refers only to section 44845. 
  
 
Court in San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 641 did rely on 
section 44848 to determine a seniority date.  The court reasoned: 
 

Notwithstanding the absence of a reference to section 44848 in section 44955, the 

Appellants also contend that the district misclassified two other groups of individual 
employees for purposes of seniority; however, these contentions lack merit.  The first 
group consists of five individual appellants who attained permanent status, resigned, 
and then were rehired within 39 months and were not given credit for purposes of 
seniority for their preretirement employment.  If a certificated employee resigns and 
is thereafter re-employed, his date of employment is normally deemed by section 
44848 to be the date of re-employment; however, the original date is effective if the 
employee's services were “terminated for lack of enrollment or discontinuance of 
service or are otherwise interrupted in a manner declared by law not to constitute a 
break in service. . .”  Appellants rely on a combined reading of the latter part of 
section 44848 and the provisions of section 44931 which state when a permanent 
employee resigns and is re-employed within 39 months, the district “shall, 
disregarding the break in service, classify him as, and restore to him all the rights, 
benefits and burdens of, a permanent employee, except as otherwise provided in this 
code . . .”  We hold that section 44931 provides that the break in service shall be 
“disregarded” as to individual rights, burdens and benefits, but not as to seniority 
rights which affect other employees.  The “except as otherwise provided in this code” 
provision in section 44931 must be read as deferring to section 44848. 

 

 7

Based on San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen, supra, Ms. Schroeder’s argument has no 

 
judicial support. 
 
 
Ms. Schroeder refers generally to a rule of statutory construction which provides that 
a court will not interpret away clear language of a statute in favor of an ambiguity that does 
not exist.  Lennane v. Franchise Tax Bd. (1994) 9 Cal. 4th 263, 268. 
 
There are, however, numerous rules of statutory construction, and a brief review of 
 
them would be helpful.  In Select Base Materials, Inc., v. Board of Equalization (1959) 51 
Cal. 2d 640, 645, the court summarized some of them as follows: 
 

The fundamental rule of statutory construction is that the court should ascertain the 
intent to the Legislature so as to effectuate the purpose of the law.  (Citation omitted.)  
Moreover, ‘every statute should be construed with reference to the whole system of 
law of which it is a part so that all may be harmonized and have effect.’  (Citation 
omitted.)  If possible, significance should be given to every word, phrase, sentence 
and part of an act in pursuance of the legislative purpose.  (Citation omitted.)  Such 
purpose will not be sacrificed to a literal construction of any part of the act.  
(Citation omitted.) 
 
Section 44955 is part of a series of statutes that deals with the difficult question of 

 
how a school district may fairly lay off teachers under certain circumstances.  The legislation 
created a seniority system that requires the comparison of one teacher’s seniority date with 
that of another.  To that end, the Legislature enacted section 44845 to provide for a broad 
definition of when employment begins for layoff purposes.  Section 44848 undertakes to 
determine when employment began in a much narrower context, that of a certificated 
employee who left his or her employment and then accepted reemployment.  In order to 
properly harmonize the statutes relating to layoffs of certificated employees, and give effect 
to every part of the legislation on the subject, Ms. Schroeder’s argument cannot be accepted.  
That would require that a statute specifically covering her situation be ignored, and the rules 
of statutory construction do not permit that.  Her argument must be rejected. 
 
Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the District 
 
to discontinue particular kinds of services relating to 239.44 full-time equivalent positions.  
The cause for the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to 
the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  A preponderance of the evidence sustained 
the charges set forth in the Accusation.  It is recommended that the Board give respondents 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services will no longer be required by the District.  
 
 

4. 

 8

ORDER 

1. 

The Accusations served on the respondents set forth in Exhibit B, below, are 

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

 
 
sustained.  Notice shall be given to each respondent before May 15, 2010 that his or her 
services will not be required for the 2010-11 school year pursuant to the Board of 
Education’s resolution because of the reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
 
 
 
DATED:  __________________________ 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________________ 
ALAN S. METH 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

 9

POWAY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
EXHIBIT “B” TO ACCUSATION 
First Amendment, after filing of Accusation 
[composed at 11:00 A.M. on 4-21-10] 
 

RESPONDENTS (hi-lighted) WHO REQUESTED A HEARING (Ed C 44949)   
Those who initially requested a hearing but later filed NO Notice of Defense are crossed 
out.   

Boyer, Jillian 
Cabral, Kriscia   [withdrawing] 
Castillo, Tiffany 
Draper, Valerie 
Gonzalez, Bonnie 
Halander, Scott  (0.75) 
Hall, Trent 
Lazzari, Liliana 
Mac Martin, David 
Madsen, Amber 
Manteuffel, Melissa 
McCracken, Sarah   [withdrawing] 

Morrison, Craig 
Ow, David   [withdrawing] 
Poggemoeller, Jessica 
Ransom, Lisa 
Rodillon, Stacey 
Rozzell, Casey 
Schelhorse, Danielle 
Schroeder, Milena 
Smith, Christine   [withdrawing] 
Smith, Loura   [withdrawing] 
Wood, Carol

 
INDIVIDUAL WHO FILED LATE REQUEST FOR HEARING: 

Wight, Jacqueline 

PRECAUTIONARY RESPONDENTS:   

(None requested a hearing) 

*********************************************************************** 
*********************************************************************** 

EMPLOYEES  WHO  WERE  SERVED  NOTICES  AND  FAILED  TO  FILE  ANY 
REQUEST FOR HEARING

“Standard” noticed employees who did not request a hearing: 
 

Cruise, Kimberly 
Cuevas-Balanon, Hilary 
Dasteel, Marie 
Davis, Mindy 
Degrandmont, Karen 
Dorward, Danielle 
Ellis, Britta 
Embrey, Julie 
Esteban, Rosalie 

Anella, Alessandro 
Battle, Carol 
Bayro, Karin 
Bell, Katherine 
Bennett, Kathy 
Biel, Anga 
Blankman, Jeffrey 
Cambra-Adamson, Christin 
Campos, Elizabeth 
Canning, Erin 
Carlin, Adam 
Caterina, Jebette 
Chan, Anne 
Corbell, Edith 
Cosgrove-Stamp, Michaelle 

 10

 

“Standard” noticed employees who did not request a hearing (continued)
 

Eveleth, Kelly 
Fallentine, Rebecca 
Faucher, April 
Filasky, Hayley 
Finnegan, Casey 
Fisher, Scott 
Flores, Veronica (Counselor) 
Friedrick, Deborah 
Gonzalez, Christina 
Hattar, Hope 
Haygood, Hollie 
Healy, Elizabeth 
Hong, Jin 
Horne, Christina 
Hsieh, Nohelani 
Ingram, My-Nga 
Jones, Stacy 
Kim, Jane 
Klock, Michelle (Psychologist) 
Koshenina, Ann 
Lafferty Jr, James 
Lawson, Charmaine 
Lemersal, Antoinette 
Leonard, Tanya (0.20) 
Lindberg, Alicia 
Lindner, Karen 
Lou, Xoong 
Louie, Jessica 
Lowry, Nikolette 
Lucht, Sonita 
Ludwig, Amy 
MacLeod, David 
McCarty, Doreen 
McCoy, Tristan 
McGarry, Laura 
McKee, Jordan 
McMillan, Kathryn 
Mikkelson, Anne 
Morshead, Jannelle 
Nelson, Dorit 
 

 

Arellano, Cynthia 
Chavez, Ana 
Lucey, Norma 
Ochoa, Maribel 
Perucho, Artemisa 
Serrano, Katherine 
Araujo, Blanca 
 

 

 11

 
Nevares, Nicholas (0.20) 
Okugawa, Sandra 
Olmsted, Helen 
Orielly, Lauren 
Orrell, Lindsey 
Padua, Jerilyn (Counselor) 
Pantaleon, Efren 
Pedretti, Sabriya 
Pei, Lillian 
Perkio, Danielle (0.83) 
Power, Megan 
Pretak, Jennifer 
Proffitt, Jennifer 
Ramin, Diana 
Raquel, Shantel 
Renas-Hetzel, Lori 
Rhines, Stephanie 
Schultz, Andrew 
Sciarratta, Mai 
Scott, Amy 
Smith, Charmaine 
Smyth, Kori 
Southwick, Cheryl 
Stefanick, Erin 
Sullivan, Alexandra 
Tse, Mabel 
Uyloan, Heidi 
Villena, Kristina 
Vincent, Jeremy 
Vincent, Shelley 
Waasted, Jacob 
Walsh, Jamie 
Weltsch, Limor 
West, Jazmin 
Williams, David 
Wilson, Marylou 
Yearling, Kristen (Counselor) 
You, Joseph 
Young, Colin 
Young, Kelly

Barragan, Angelica 
Dyer, Lynne 
Flores, Ledia 
Kitts, Maria 
Ozakcay, Elba 
Sanchez,Amelia

 

Precautionary noticed who did not request a hearing: Dual Immersion 

 
Precautionary noticed who did not request a hearing:  Impact teachers 
 

Albertson, Elizabeth 
Angeles, Candelaria 
Ashwell, Alisa 
Arseneau, Jacqueline 
Astamendi, Amber 
Barker, Tamra 
Bartel, Cathleen 
Bryan, Kim 
Buddin, Carol 
Burrows, Gregory 
Camarillo, Erica 
Carini, Maria 
Cella, Diane 
Chew, Tracey 
Cline, Nancy 
Coe, Jody 
Dunn, Jeralyn 
Eazer, Charlotte 
Elderson, Erik 
Feinstein, Laura 
Fitzwilliam, Catherine 
French, Jody 
Gallinetti, Christine 
Hamels, Amanda 
Herman, Stacy 
Huntsman, Jill 
Kronheimer, Danielle 
Lau, Diane 
Lococo, Breanne 
Lopez, Maureen 
Lorimer, Lynn 
Lynch, Kimberly 

 

Magid, Barbara 
Marx, Alexandra 
Nguyen, Kimberly 
Nissim, Dana 
Oliva, Megan 
Otto, Deborah 
Ozols, Kristie 
Petersen, Linda 
Pini-Savoie, Gina 
Plascencia-Contreras, Marisa 
Pratt, Colleen 
Richley, Emily 
Rivera, Martha 
Robles, Abby 
Sauer, Connie 
Severino, Angela 
Silvestre, Maricel 
Simpson, Cynthia 
Sivan, Audrey 
Sousa, Andrea 
Steiner, Eileen 
Stokes, Karen 
Sullivan, Shannon 
Suokko, Julia 
Szoka, Karen 
Tibbs, Denise 
Tiegs, Adrienne 
Vargas, Claudia 
Vaus, Emily 
Wieseler-Lehardy, Carla 
Winegrad, Elaine 
Zanetti,Rafaela

 12

