BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
BASSET UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 

     OAH Case No. 2010030603 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES 
OF THE BASSETT UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
Respondents. 
 
 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Law Offices of Margaret A. Chidester & Associates and Margaret A. Chidester 

Schwartz, Steinsapir, Dohrmann & Sommers and Shirley A. Lee represented the 

Daniel Juárez, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative 

 
 
Hearings, heard this matter on April 27, 2010, in La Puente, California. 
 
 
represented the Basset Unified School District (BUSD). 
 
 
certificated employees of the Bassett Unified School District listed in Appendix A (referred 
to herein as Respondents). 
 
 
argument by written briefs.  The parties filed closing briefs timely.  Each brief was marked 
for identification. 
 
 
 
Pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (e), the continuance extended 
 
the statutory deadlines for a period of time equal to the continuance, for the ALJ to issue his 
Proposed Decision and for BUSD to take action thereafter. 
 

The ALJ granted a continuance to May 14, 2010, to allow the parties to make closing 

The matter was deemed submitted for decision on May 14, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Dr. Cynthia Byrd (Byrd), BUSD Assistant Superintendent of Human 

 
 
Resources Development, filed the Accusation in her official capacity. 
 
 
 
 
reduction in State funding, the BUSD Governing Board (Governing Board) determined to 
reduce or discontinue certain services within BUSD and adopted Resolution 19-10 to, among 

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of BUSD. 

On February 18, 2010, due to the State’s budget crisis and an anticipated 

2. 

3. 

 

1

5. 

4. 

In response to the written notice, Respondents requested a hearing to 

By March 15, 2010, pursuant to Resolution 19-10, the Superintendent notified 

other things, direct the Superintendent to notice those certificated employees that would 
reduce the number of certificated positions, as set forth in Factual Finding 8, effective the 
2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
the Governing Board and Respondents, in writing, that it was the Superintendent’s 
recommendation that Respondents be notified that Respondents’ services would no longer be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The notice stated the reasons for such notice, and 
informed each Respondent of his or her right to request a hearing. 
 
 
determine if there is cause to not reemploy him or her for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Respondent. 
 
 
 
 
8. 
2011 school year: 
 
SERVICES 
 
16 Elementary K-8 multiple subject classroom teachers 
 
3 Middle school 6-8 multiple subject classroom teachers   
 
1 Secondary mathematics classroom teacher 

Resolution 19-10 reduces or discontinues the following services for the 2010-

BUSD served the Accusation and other required documents timely on each 

All jurisdictional requirements were met. 

        POSITIONS (F.T.E.)1

  1 FTE 

16 FTE 

  3 FTE 

6. 

7. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 Secondary English classroom teachers 

1 Secondary history/social science teacher  

1 Secondary Spanish language teacher 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  2 FTE 

  1 FTE 

  1 FTE 

9. 

The services set forth in Factual Finding 8 are particular kinds of services that 

 
 
may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. 
 
 
from the order of layoff certain certificated employees who have special training and 
experience and are assigned to teach a course of study or to fulfill a particular administrative 
task that others with more seniority do not possess. 
 

10(a).  The Governing Board, through Resolution 19-10, also determined to exempt 

                                                
1  Full-time equivalent. 
 

 

2

10(b).  More specifically, the Governing Board seeks to exempt the following five 

 
described certificated personnel: 
 

Certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service in 

Certificated personnel who possess administrative credentials, who are 

 
currently assigned to administrative positions, and who will be assigned to 
administrative positions for the 2010/2011 school year. 
 
 
special education, who are presently assigned within the scope of that 
credential, and who will be assigned within the scope of that credential for the 
2010/2011 school year. 
 
 
Certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service in 
language, speech, and hearing, who are presently assigned within the scope of 
that credential, who will be assigned within the scope of that credential for the 
2010/2011 school year. 
 
 
school psychologist, who are presently assigned within the scope of that 
credential, and who will be assigned within the scope of that credential for the 
2010/2011 school year. 
 
 
Certificated personnel who possess a single subject credential 
authorizing service in music, who are presently assigned within the scope of 
that credential, and who will be assigned within the scope of that credential for 
the 2010/2011 school year. 

Certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service as a 

11. 

12. 

The Governing Board, through Resolution 19-10, also determined the tiebreak 

Respondents did not contest the Governing Board’s exemption criteria, or the 

 
 
Governing Board’s application of those criteria to BUSD’s certificated personnel. 
 
 
criteria to be applied when certificated permanent and probationary employees share the 
same first date of paid service.  The tiebreak criteria, referenced in the collective bargaining 
agreement between BUSD and the Bassett Teachers Association, consists of determining 
seniority by lot.  Exhibit B to Resolution 19-10 states, “The district shall conduct the lottery 
in a fair, equitable, and reasonable manner in consultation with the association, and with 
association representation present.” 
 
Resolution 19-10 further explains that “[a]s between tied employee[s], low 
 
lottery numbers will indicate low seniority for that hire date.  For example, an individual 
with a lottery number of ‘1’ would be laid off before an individual with a lottery number of 
‘10’.”  However, at hearing, the parties explained that those conducting and participating in 
the lottery utilized the inverse value of lottery numbers (the opposite of what the Resolution 
provided).  That is, low lottery numbers indicated greater seniority and high lottery numbers 
indicated lesser seniority.  This inconsistency is deemed a non-substantive procedural error. 

13. 

 

3

17. 

15. 

16. 

14. 

BUSD identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of 

Respondent Jason Hill (Respondent Hill) argued that he should be retained by 

Respondents did not contest the validity of the lottery process.  They did not 
 
argue that the inverse value of lottery numbers utilized in the lottery process invalidated the 
lottery results.   
 
 
services that the Governing Board directed to be reduced or discontinued.  BUSD 
specifically identified Respondents Vanessa Chavez, Teresa Fernandez, Jason Hill, Estela 
Jaeger, Wendy Max, Guadalupe Nieto, Shondale Pagano, Stella Park, Jennifer Prasad, Esther 
Rengpian, Isabel Reyes, Berenice Rios, Rosemary Ross2, Carin Sakuma, Luz Torres, and 
Van Truong. 
 
 
0.4 FTE to teach two periods of reading/writing in the California High School Equivalency 
Examination program (CAHSEE).  Respondent Hill’s seniority date is September 1, 2007.  
His credentials qualify him to teach reading/writing in CAHSEE.  Among others, he holds a 
preliminary single subject credential in English and can teach English learners (those not 
proficient in the English language). 
 
 
The BUSD teacher currently teaching the two CAHSEE periods sought by 
Respondent Hill is a teacher named Daniel Ramirez (Ramirez).  Ramirez did not testify.  
Ramirez was not served with notices and is not a party to this proceeding.  Ramirez’s 
seniority date is September 1, 1990.  He holds a professional clear multiple subject credential 
and a bilingual (Spanish) cross-cultural, language, and academic development certificate 
(BCLAD).  According to Byrd (the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources), Ramirez 
is authorized to teach the CAHSEE courses by virtue of his BCLAD certificate. 
 
 
reading/writing in CAHSEE, relying largely on an interpretation of the California 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing’s Administrator’s Assignment Manual (the manual).  
Respondents’ counsel attached a portion of the manual to her closing brief as an exhibit.  
Respondent Hill argued that, while Ramirez is significantly more senior to him, Ramirez’s 
credentials are not appropriate to teach in CAHSEE, whereas Respondent Hill’s credentials 
are specifically designed for the CAHSEE courses. 
 
 
Respondent Hill’s reliance on the manual was inappropriate, as Respondent 
Hill did not seek to admit that manual into the record as evidence.  There was no testimony 
regarding the manual.  The portion of the manual relied upon by Respondent Hill was not 
authenticated.  BUSD did not have an opportunity to provide testimony regarding the 
                                                
 
at hearing, did not identify Respondent Rosemary Ross (Respondent Ross) as one of the 
certificated employees represented by Respondents’ counsel.  However, at hearing, 
Respondents’ counsel affirmed that she represented all affected certificated employees in this 
matter.  Further, Respondent Ross did not appear and assert self-representation or 
representation by another. 

2  Appendix A, the list of represented Respondents proffered by Respondents’ counsel 

Respondent Hill argued that BUSD has wrongly assigned Ramirez to teach 

19. 

18. 

 

4

20. 

21. 

Respondent Shondale Pagano (Respondent Pagano) argued that she should be 

information contained in the manual.  The portion of the manual attached to Respondents’ 
brief cannot be and was not admitted into the record, despite the absence of an objection by 
BUSD. 
 
 
retained because she is competent to teach in the Genesis Program or in an adult school 
position teaching English as a second language (ESL) or another program called Distance 
Learning (DL).  The parties agree Respondent Pagano is the most senior BUSD teacher to be 
laid off in this proceeding.  Respondent Pagano’s seniority date is September 27, 2002.  The 
parties further agree Donna Thomas (Thomas) is the teacher who currently teaches in the 
Genesis Program and is retiring at the end of the 2009-2010 school year.  Respondent Pagano 
argues that BUSD should place her into Thomas’s position, as the most senior Respondent 
competent to teach in the Genesis Program.  As to the adult education classes, Respondent 
Pagano argues she is sufficiently senior to be placed in an adult education class position.  
Respondent Pagano previously taught in BUSD’s adult education classes, but is now a 
certificated employee with permanency within the K-12 classes, not the adult education 
classes. 
 
 
retained because she is competent to teach BUSD’s adult education classes and based on her 
seniority, she should be placed in a position to teach adult education classes.  Respondent 
Jaeger is certificated to teach adult education classes.  However, Respondent Jaeger is a 
certificated employee with permanency within the K-12 classes, not the adult education 
classes. 
 
 
The Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds 
of services set forth in Factual Finding 8 was due to the anticipated decline in State funding; 
the Governing Board’s decision was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper 
exercise of discretion. 
 
 
welfare of BUSD and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of BUSD, as 
determined by the Governing Board. 
 
 
not related to their competency as teachers. 
 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 

The recommendation that Respondents be terminated from employment was 

Respondent Estela Jaeger (Respondent Jaeger) argued that she should be 

22. 

24. 

23. 

25.  No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to render a 

service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 

1. 

The parties met all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in 

 

5

2. 

3. 

Respondent Pagano’s argument that she should teach the Genesis Program was 

Respondent Hill’s arguments were unpersuasive.  While the evidence supports 

 
his contention that he is properly credentialed to teach reading/writing in the CAHSEE 
program, there was insufficient evidence to establish his further contention that he should 
bump Ramirez out of his current assignment.  There was no persuasive evidence that 
Ramirez was wrongly assigned or improperly credentialed to teach the CAHSEE program, 
especially in light of Byrd’s testimony.  Respondent Hill’s reliance on the manual was 
improper and his arguments interpreting the manual’s content could not be substantiated by 
the record. 
 
 
unpersuasive.  There was insufficient evidence regarding the Genesis Program and the 
current teaching position (held by Thomas) within the Genesis Program.  BUSD has the 
discretion to fill that position and the evidence in this proceeding was inadequate to establish 
that Respondent Pagano should be retained specifically to teach the Genesis Program. 
 
 
teach adult education classes fails. 
 
 
The Legislature created two distinct teacher categories:  day school (K-12) and 
evening school (adult education).  The Education Code mandates that service in one category 
cannot be counted toward service in the other. 
 
 
 

Respondents Pagano and Jaeger’s arguments that they should be retained to 

Education Code section 44929.26 provides in pertinent part: 

4. 

6. 

5. 

Nothing in Sections 44929.20 to 44929.23, inclusive, shall be 
 
construed to give permanent classification to a person in the adult school who 
is already classified as a permanent employee in the day school.  In case a 
teacher obtains permanent classification in the evening school and later is 
eligible for the same classification in the day school by reason of having 
served the probationary period therein, he or she shall be given his or her 
choice as to which he or she shall take. 
 
 
evening school shall not be included in computing the service required as a 
prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a permanent 
employee in the day school . . .   Service in the day school shall not be 
included in computing service required as a prerequisite to attainment of, or 
eligibility to, classification as a permanent employee in the evening  
school . . . 

Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, service in the 

7. 

Pursuant to the law, if a teacher in one category (either K-12 or adult 

 
 
education) wishes to switch to the other category, he or she must serve a probationary period 
and must then choose one category or the other.  An adult education teacher switching to K-
12 education would enter the K-12 program at the bottom of the seniority list, making a 
bump highly unlikely.  Therefore, in accordance with the Education Code, adult education 

 

6

8. 

9. 

The services identified in the Resolution 19-10 are particular kinds of services 

teachers do not have tenure or seniority in K-12 education and cannot bump into it, and K-12 
teachers do not have tenure or seniority in adult education and cannot bump into it. 
 
Cause exists to sustain BUSD’s action to reduce or discontinue the full-time 
 
equivalent positions set forth in BUSD’s Resolution 19-10 for the 2010-2011 school year, 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, as set forth in Factual Findings 1-25, 
and Legal Conclusions 1-7, and 9-13. 
 
 
that the Governing Board can reduce or discontinue under Education Code section 44955.  
The Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was not 
arbitrary or capricious, but was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of BUSD’s schools and pupils within 
the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
 
 
kinds of services that the Governing Board directed to be reduced or discontinued. 
 
 
section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to 
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are 
made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 
Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) 
 

11.  A school district may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code 

BUSD properly identified the certificated employees providing the particular 

10. 

12. 

BUSD established cause to not reemploy Respondents for the 2010-2011 

13.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

school year. 
 
 
that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

7

ORDER 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

The Accusations served on all other Respondents are dismissed. 

____________________________ 
DANIEL JUAREZ 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
The Accusations served on Respondents Vanessa Chavez, Teresa Fernandez, Jason 
Hill, Estela Jaeger, Wendy Max, Guadalupe Nieto, Shondale Pagano, Stella Park, Jennifer 
Prasad, Esther Rengpian, Isabel Reyes, Berenice Rios, Rosemary Ross, Carin Sakuma, Luz 
Torres, and Van Truong, providing the particular kinds of services that the Governing Board 
directed to be reduced or discontinued, are sustained. 
 
 
Notice shall be given to Respondents Vanessa Chavez, Teresa Fernandez, Jason Hill, 
Estela Jaeger, Wendy Max, Guadalupe Nieto, Shondale Pagano, Stella Park, Jennifer Prasad, 
Esther Rengpian, Isabel Reyes, Berenice Rios, Rosemary Ross, Carin Sakuma, Luz Torres, 
and Van Truong, that their services will be terminated at the close of the 2009-2010 school 
year. 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated:  May 18, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

8

Appendix A 

Respondents In Case Number 2010030603 

 
 
Bowers, Wendy 
1. 
 
Carrillo, Dora  
2. 
 
Chavez, Vanessa 
3. 
 
Corado, Nancy 
4. 
Cordero, Cristina 
 
5. 
Covington, Thomas   
6. 
 
Crozier, Dorothy 
7. 
 
De La Rosa, Chona 
8. 
 
Doerner, Lynda 
9. 
 
Felix, Heather  
10. 
 
Fernandez, Teresa 
11. 
 
Fitch, Christopher 
12. 
13. 
 
Fuentes, Jesus  
14.  Gallo-Ramirez, Jessica 
15.  Garcia, Maria Teresa  
16.  Garcia, Martha Celina 
 
17.  Gutierrez, Jesus 
 
18.  Heggins, Erica 
 
19.  Henderson, Tamara 
 
20.  Herrera, Maria 
 
 
21.  Hill, Jason 
 
Jaeger, Estela  
22. 
 
Larson, Jacqueline 
23. 
 
24. 
Lerma, Meghan 
 
25.  Mamea, John   
26.  Martin, William 
 
27.  Max, Wendy 
 

28.  McCandliss, William 
29.  Merrel, Anne 
30.  Mora, Ryann 
31.  Mordon, Shirley 
32.  Nieto, Guadalupe 
33.  Oh, Stacy 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51.  Valencia, Yvette 
52.  Villanueva, Yvonne 
53.  Watson, Nona 

Pagano, Shondale 
Park, Stella 
Perez, Margarita 
Pinell-Hernandez, Lisa 
Prasad, Jennifer 
Rengpian, Esther 
Reyes, Isabel 
Rios, Berenice 
Sakuma, Carin 
Saravia, Jacob 
Schlitt, Audrey 
Senter, Lori 
Simpson, Sean 
Strickland, Denise 
Tiscareno, Rene 
Torres, Luz 
Truong, Van 

 

 

9

