BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
SANTA BARBARA SCHOOL DISTRICT 

OAH No.:  2010031399 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Layoffs of: 
 
MARIA AGUIRRE and other Certificated 
Employees of the Santa Barbara School 
Districts, 
 
                                                 Respondents. 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter came on for hearing before Richard J. Lopez, Administrative Law Judge 

Michael C. Blacher, Attorney at Law, represented the Complainant. 

 
 
 
of the Office of Administrative Hearings, at Santa Barbara, California, on May 12, 2010 
 
 
 
 
Respondents. 
 
 
was received. 
 

Tareq M. Hishmeh and Alexis Ridenour, Attorneys at Law, represented all 

Oral and documentary evidence and evidence by way of stipulation and official notice 

The Administrative Law Judge now finds, concludes and orders as follows: 

 
 

SUMMARY 

The Governing Board (Board) of the Santa Barbara School Districts (District) decided 

 
 
 
to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by certificated personnel for 
the 2010/2011 school year for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the 
competency and dedication of the teachers whose services were proposed to be reduced or 
eliminated.  District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection  
process involving review of credentials and seniority, “skipping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process complied with 
Education Code requirements. 
 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
 
Parties 
 
 
capacity as Superintendent of the District. 
 
 
District: 
 
 

1.  Complainant J. Brian Sarvis filed the accusation1 in this proceeding in his official 

2.  The following persons, the Respondents herein, are certificated employees of the 

RESPONDENTS 
 
David Abel 
Kelly Ary 
John Bailey 
Bethany Bodenhamer 
Eliesa Bollinger 
Anais Burke 
P. J. Carmean 
Clanci Chiu 
Ashley Cornelius 
Marcelo Cruz 
Emily Cuttrel 
Brian Eisen 
Krista Finlay 
David Gilberton 
Ryan Gleason 
Tami Gunton 
Sarah Harbison 
Helen Hernandez 
Gretchen Hess 
Nellie Hill 
Phillip Hughes 
Monica Huston 
Heather Marshall 
Christine McLain 
Katherine McLean 
Lauren Minadeo 

                                                
1 The term “accusation” refers to a pleading utilized under the Administrative Procedure Act, Government Code 
section 11503.  Respondents are not “accused” in the every-day sense of that word, unless it can be said they are 
accused of not having enough seniority to retain their positions with the District in the face of a resolution to reduce 
positions. 

 

2

Matt Moran 
Luke Ohrn 
Maynard Pilapil 
Jessica Rapp 
Kristen Ritter 
Francisco Sanchez 
Karina Sanchez 
Laurie Sigloch 
Joseph Zamora 
Hene Colton 
Audra Dabeny 
Stacey Johnson 
Jean McKnight 
Jill Menegon 
Karina Sanchez 
Guadalupe Santos 
Rosalyn Tomblin 
Edna Truillo 
Linda Wilson 
Eric Eisenberg 
Dana Liss 
Monserra Capdevilla 
Andrea Ferrero 
Beverly Bostock 
Maria Aguirre 

3.  The Governing Board of the District, upon recommendation by the 

 
Reduction of Services 
 
 
Superintendent, adopted and issued timely resolutions to reduce or discontinue particular 
kinds of certificated services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year 
because of financial constraints resulting from revenue being insufficient to maintain the 
current levels of programs and necessary program changes resulting therefrom.  The District 
anticipates a $6,000,000 deficit for the 2010/2011 school year. 
 
4.  On March 2, 2010, the Governing Board of the District adopted Resolution 
 
number 09/10-35 reducing services for the 2010-2011 school year.  Said Resolution specifies 
the Reduction or Elimination of Particular Certificated Services as follows: 
 
/ / 
/ / 
/ / 
/ / 
/ / 
/ / 

 

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

TYPE OF PROGRAM 

FTE (Full-Time Equivalent)

Thereafter, on March 9, 2010, the Governing Board of the District adopted Resolution 

 
1.0 
 
1.0 
 
3.0 
 
3.0 
 
2.0 
1.4 
 
         10.0 
7.0 
 
6.0 
 
2.0 
 
2.0 
 
 
1.0 
         11.0 
 
3.0 
         53.4 

Elementary Principal  
Administrator, Safety, Welfare and Attendance 
School Psychologists  
Community Day School 
Home School Santa Barbara Grades K-6 
La Cuesta Dos Pueblos 
Mathematics   
Social Sciences 
 
Science 
 
Art 
 
 
Spanish 
Health  
 
English/Theater 
Physical Education 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
number 09/10-35, further reducing the services for the 2010-2011 school year as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. 
 
 
adopted Resolution No. 07/08-23 to determine the order of layoff for those certificated 
employees with the same date of first paid probationary service and to establish competency 
criteria due to the reduction of particular kinds of service. 
 
 
nor capricious, but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s discretion given the 
budgetary constraints, other factors considered by the Board, and the manner in which the 
decision to reduce or discontinue services was reached. 
 

5.  With regard to services provided by the District, on February 12, 2010, the Board 

The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are particular kinds of 

6.  The decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was neither arbitrary 

TYPE OF PROGRAM 

Child Development 

     TOTAL FTE 

         10.22 

         63.62 

FTE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.  The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 

District and its pupils and students, and has become necessary to decrease the number of 
certificated employees as determined by the Board. 

 

4

 
Notice and Process 
 

10.  Respondents Dana Liss, Andrea Ferrero, Maria Aguirre, Monserra Caddevila and 

 
8.  Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the Governing Board 
timely directed that notice be given to Respondents that their services will not be required for 
the ensuing school year, and stating the reasons therefore. 
 
 
 
9.  Within the deadline set forth in Education Code section 44949, the Respondents 
were provided written notice by personal service or registered mail of the recommendation 
that Respondents receive notice pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that 
their services will not be required for the ensuing school year, and stating the reasons 
therefore.  All Respondent except those in Finding 10 timely requested a hearing.  
Thereafter, an accusation was served upon those Respondents and those Respondents filed 
notices of defense, which were timely. 
 
 
Guadalupe Santos were allowed to participate as Respondents pursuant to the ruling of the 
Administrative Law Judge despite their failure to file timely and completely comply with all 
the notice requirements. 
 
Findings Re: Certain Respondents 
 
 
accusation as to Sarah Harbison.  
 
 
12.  David Gilbertson presently has a district office assignment as a school 
psychologist.  He was first hired by the District on July 1, 2006 as a coordinator of special 
education, an administrative position and a district office assignment.  He served two years in 
that position before undertaking his present position with a seniority date of July 1, 2008.  
Mr. Gilbertson has not taught in the District.  He did not establish that any other certificated 
employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service which Mr. Gilbertson is 
certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
13.  Jill Menegon is a teacher at Harding School with certification and competence in 
pre-school music and child development.  She did not establish that her seniority date is other 
than August 19, 2009.  She did not establish that any other certificated employee with less 
seniority is being retained to render a service which Ms. Menegon is certificated and 
competent to render. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11.  During the course of the hearing the District withdrew and rescinded the 

 

5

14.  Nellie Hill’s seniority date is August 22, 2005 and her seniority number is  
 
6-082205. She has an academic major of geological science.  She has NCLB2 competencies 
in mathematics and science and she is competent and credentialed to teach mathematics and 
science.  However, another teacher with a seniority number of 8-082205, and therefore junior 
to Ms. Hill, is being retained to perform a service – teaching science – which Ms. Hill is both 
competent and credentialed to render. 
 
Seniority 
 
 
contains employees’ seniority dates (the first date of paid service) NCLB competencies, 
credentials, academic major, and experience in discipline prior to start date with the District.  
Clanci Chiu has nine years of said experience and not six years as indicated on the Secondary 
Seniority List.  Otherwise the evidence established that the Seniority Lists utilized in the 
layoff process are accurate as to the information contained therein.  No junior certificated 
employee is being retained to perform services which a more senior employee subject to 
layoff is certificated and competent to render other than is set forth in Finding 14. 
 
 

15.  The District maintains Seniority Lists (Elementary and Secondary) which 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

3.  Cause exists to correct the Secondary Seniority List consistent with Finding 15. 

1.  All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 

2.  Cause exists to dismiss the accusation as to Respondent Sarah Harbison by reason 

 
 
 
were met by the District.  Therefore, jurisdiction was established for this proceeding as to all 
Respondents by reason of Findings 8, 9 and 10. 
 
 
of Finding 11. 
 
 
 
4.  Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to reduce the 
 
number of certificated employees due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds 
of services by reason of Findings 3, 4 and 5.  The Board’s decision to reduce or eliminate the 
identified services set forth in Finding 4 was neither arbitrary nor capricious in that the 
decision relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and the pupils within the 
meaning of Education Code section 44949, by reason of Findings 6 and 7. 
 
 
Finding 14. 
 

5.  Cause exists to dismiss the accusation as to Respondent Nellie Hill by reason of 

                                                
2 The No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 often abbreviated in print as NCLB: Federal legislation that purports to 
enact the theories of standards-based education reform. 

 

6

6.  Other than as set forth in Finding 14 no permanent or probationary employee with 
 
less seniority is being retained to render a service for which Respondents are certificated and 
competent by reason of Finding 15. 
 
 
7.  Cause exists to give notice to Respondents other than those set forth in Findings 11 
and 14 that their services will not be required for the 2010/2011 school year by reason of the 
whole of the Findings herein. 
 
 

ORDER 

3.  Notice may be given to all remaining Respondents that their services will not be 

2.  The accusations against Sarah Harbison and Nellie Hill are dismissed. 

 
 
 
1.  The Secondary Seniority List, Exhibit 7 page 25, shall now state 9 years with 
regard to Respondent Clanci Chiu’s experience in discipline prior to start date with the 
District. 
 
 
 
 
required for the 2010/2011 school year. 
 
 
 
Dated:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RJL:rfm 
 

 
 
RICHARD J. LOPEZ 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

