BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE 
UKIAH UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
MENDOCINO COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
OAH No. 2010031521 

 
JENNIFER BAILEY ET AL., 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against 
Certificated Employees: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Respondents. 

Margaret M. Merchat, Attorney at Law, represented complainant Lois J. Nash, Ed.D., 

CORRECTED PROPOSED DECISION 
 
Administrative Law Judge Melissa G. Crowell, State of California, Office of 
 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Ukiah, California, on April 28, 2010. 
 
 
Superintendent, Ukiah Unified School District. 
 
 
with the exception of Stephen Burrell, who was self-represented.  
 
 
 

The matter was submitted for decision on April 28, 2010. 

James D. Allen, Attorney at Law, represented all respondents listed on Attachment A, 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

2. 

1. 

3. 

Respondents listed on Attachment A are certificated employees of the district. 

On March 3, 2010, the district’s Board of Trustees adopted Resolution  

Lois J. Nash, Ed.D., made and filed the accusation in her official capacity as 

 
 
Superintendent of the Ukiah Unified School District. 
 
 
 
 
No. 13, 2009-10 reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of services and directing the 
superintendent to give appropriate notices to certificated employees whose positions would 
be affected by the action. 
 
 
employees, including respondents, of the recommendation that their services would be 
reduced or terminated for the 2010-2011 school year.  Each notice set forth the reasons for 
the recommendation. 
 

On March 9, 2010, Superintendent Nash gave written notice to 43 certificated 

4. 

 

1

6. 

5. 

All respondents filed a timely request for hearing to determine if there is cause 

 
for reducing or terminating their services for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Bailey and Rachelle Donovan, filed a timely notice of defense.  It is found that the district 
has not been prejudiced by their failure to timely file a notice of defense, and they are 
permitted to be respondents in this proceeding.   
 

An accusation was served on all respondents.  All respondents, except Jennifer 

7. 

In its resolution, the board took action to reduce or eliminate the following 

particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year: 

 
Services 

 

 

 

 

 

FTE1 Reduction

English Language Development Instruction  
 
Physical Education (2 periods) 
 

 
 

1.0 
0.33 
0.33 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Computers/Projects (ROP) (1 period) 
Computer Careers (5 periods)  
Sophomore Seminar (3 periods) 
High School English (5 periods) 
Excel (5 periods) 
Instrumental Music (1 period) 

Ukiah High School 
1.  Wood (2 periods) 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
 
Pomolita Middle School  
8. 
9. 
10.  Dean Services  
 
Adult School 
11. 
12.  Adult School Instructional Services2  
13.  Adult School Principal 
 
 
Eagle Peak Middle School  
English (5 periods) 
14. 
15. 
Counselor II   
 
Class Size Reduction  
16. 
 
 

Elementary Instructional Services 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

English Language Development Instruction 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

0.4 
0.2 
1.0 
0.6 
1.0 
1.0 
0.2 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

1.0 
1.0 

29.0 

 
 

 

                                                 

1  Full-time equivalent positions. 
 
2  These services include GED Services, High School Diploma, Adult Basic Education, English 

 
as a Second Language, Jail High School Diploma Services, and GED Instruction Services. 

2

Resource Specialist Services  
Physical Education Coordinators 
Elementary Music 

Non CLAD Services  
17.  Non-CLAD Instructional Services3  
 
District Wide Services 
18. 
19. 
20. 
 
 
 
8. 
 
9. 

Total:   

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

4.0 

2.0 
2.0 
1.0 

49.06

The resolution does not reduce services below mandated levels.  

The district is aware of nine elementary teachers who will retire at the end of 

the school year.  The district took this positively assured attrition into account before sending 
out layoff notices to the elementary teachers affected by the elimination of class size 
reduction services.   

By resolution, the board adopted tie-breaking criteria for purposes of 

determining the order of termination of certificated employees with the same seniority date.  
The same criteria have been used by the district for four years. The district applied the 
criteria to determine the relative seniority of certificated employees who hold the same 
seniority dates in years 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008.  The district only ranked the teachers 
who shared the seniority date of August 19, 2008, because that tie needed to be broken in 
order to effectuate the layoff.   

The district proposes to skip respondents James Evans, Erika Francis, Melissa 
Galicia, Leah Guerrero, Janet Morris, Graciella Rodarte, and Tiffany Standridge, but served 
on them precautionary notices.  The district has now concluded that respondents Gay Tow, 
Scott Tucker, and Alex Van Patten, also satisfy the board’s skipping criteria.4  It was 
stipulated that each of these teachers may be skipped.  The district will rescind the March 15 
notices served on these respondents.  

Respondent Stephen Burrell has a 1.0 FTE position as a Counselor 2 at Eagle 
Peak Middle School.  His position is being eliminated by reason of the PKS reduction of 1.0 
Counselor II services.   

 
10. 

 
11. 

 
12. 

 
13. 

Respondent Sharon Pomelia has a multiple subject credential and a CLAD 

certificate.  She has a seniority date of August 27, 2008.  She holds a 1.0 FTE position as a 

                                                 
3  These services include: 1.0 FTE Middle School Physical Education Services; 1.0 FTE High 
 
School Services (English (3 periods), Skills for Success (1 period), CAHSEE Prep (1 period) and Film 
Appreciation  
(1 period)); 1.0 FTE Elementary Independent Study Services; and 1.0 FTE Elementary Music Services. 
 
 

4  The board’s skipping criteria are contained in Resolution No. 14, 2009-10.  

 

3

middle school teacher at Pomolita School.  Respondent Pomelia is being bumped by a more 
senior teacher, Kitty Graham, whose position is being eliminated by the PKS resolution 
eliminating 1.0 FTE English Language Development Instruction.  

Respondent Theresa Oster has a multiple subject credential, and a seniority 

date of August 19, 2008.  She holds a 1.0 FTE position as a middle school teacher at 
Pomolita Middle School.  Respondent Oster is being bumped by a more senior teacher, 
Leticia Warren, whose  position is being eliminated by the PKS resolution eliminating 1.0 
FTE Middle School English.  Oster and respondent David Bigelman share the same seniority 
date and each were subject to being bumped by Warren.  Respondent Oster was determined 
to be the more junior teacher after application of the tie-breaking criteria.  

Respondent Kristine Kaney has a single subject Social Studies credential and 
is assigned to Eagle Peak Middle School.  Her 1.0 FTE position is being reduced by .6 FTE 
by reason of being bumped by a more senior teacher, Jeffery Burrell, whose 1.0 FTE position 
was reduced by .6 FTE due to the PKS resolution eliminating .6 FTE Sophomore Services.  
Kaney will retain a .4 FTE position.  

Issues Raised by Respondents  
 

16. 

The board’s resolution for skipping authorizes the district to skip the following 

employees when implementing the reductions:   

Certificated personnel who possess conversational Spanish 
skills that are used in the course of their work day to assist 
students and families. 

 
The district relied on this criterion to skip one elementary teacher, Andrea Werra.  

Werra has a multiple subject credential, a CLAD, and an emergency BCLAD.  Werra has a 
seniority date of August 19, 2008.  The district has determined that Werra meets the skipping 
criterion because of her Spanish-speaking ability, and it did not serve her with a March 15 
notice.  The district notes that it initially interviewed Werra for a teaching position with the 
district in Spanish, and that she has worked for many years as a Bilingual Resource Teacher.   

Two other elementary teachers, respondents Amber Walker and Rebecca 

Burford, were not skipped and they received a March 15 notice.  Like Werra, neither of these 
teachers has a BCLAD.  They both use Spanish to communicate with families during parent 
teacher conferences and in sending home notes from school, but they do not teach in a 
bilingual classroom or in an immersion program.  The district does not believe that either of 
these teachers qualifies to be skipped because they have not held a Bilingual Resource 
Teacher position and were not interviewed for their teaching position in Spanish.   

Respondents argue that Werra should not have been skipped, or if she can be 
skipped, then Walker and Burford should also be skipped.  It is concluded that none of these 
teachers may be skipped.   

 
14. 

 
15. 

 

 

 
17. 

 
18. 

 

4

 
In order to deviate from seniority order and retain a junior teacher, the district must 

satisfy the requirements of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d).  This section 
provides in relevant part:  

 

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate 
from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority 
for either of the following reasons:   
 
(1)  The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to 
teach a specific course or course of study, . . . and that the 
certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which 
others with more seniority do not possess. 
 
(2)  For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the 
laws. 

 
Thus in order to skip Werra and layoff a more senior elementary teacher, the school 
district must establish the following: that it has “a specific need” for personnel to teach “a 
specific course or course of study”; that Werra possesses “special training and experience 
necessary to teach such a course or course of study; and that teachers senior to Werra do not 
possess those special qualifications.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2009) 170 
Cal.App.3d 127.)   

 
Werra’s position is a 1.0 FTE Elementary Instructional Services.  She is assigned to 

teach in a regular elementary program; she is not assigned to an immersion or bilingual 
program.  Werra’s bilingual ability is not a requirement for her assignment.  This case falls 
squarely within the holding of Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 576, 
where the court held that junior bilingual elementary school teachers who were not employed 
to teach classes in a formal bilingual program could not be retained over more senior 
elementary teachers who were not bilingual.   

 
It is concluded that the district has failed to establish that it has a specific need for 
personnel to teach “a specific course or course of study,” or that Werra possesses special 
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study.  The district has not 
established cause under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), to deviate from 
seniority order with respect to Werra. 

The most senior elementary teacher who received a March 15 notice is the 

teacher who has been affected by the district’s erroneous decision to skip Werra.  (Alexander 
v. Board of Trustees, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at p. 576.)  The appropriate remedy for this 
error is to direct that this employee may not receive a final notice. 

 
19. 

 

 

5

20. 

Respondent Walker is a second-year probationary teacher with a seniority date 
of August 21, 2007.  Walker was a certificated employee during the 2008-2009 school year, 
but was out for six weeks on maternity leave and missed other work days due to utilization of 
her sick leave.  Walker testified that she was told by the district that she did not earn credit 
toward tenure for that school year because she did not work a sufficient number of days.  It 
was not established in this proceeding that respondent Walker’s seniority date or status 
should be different.  

Respondent Pomelia notes that the seniority list does not reflect that she has a 
Reading Specialist Certificate or a Master’s Degree in Education.  The seniority list does not 
reflect teacher’s degrees, advanced or otherwise.  With respect to the Reading Specialist 
Certificate, it is not clear that Pomelia has advised the district of this certificate.  While the 
degree and the certificate are relevant to application of the tie-breaking criteria, they do not 
affect whether Pomelia will be laid off in this proceeding.  

Respondents contend that, even though it makes no difference to the 

 
elimination of their services, Education Code section 44955 required the district to apply its 
tie-breaking criteria to other employees who share the same first date of paid service.  The 
district did apply the criteria to these employees, but did not set forth their ranking on the 
seniority list because it did not affect the order of termination.  Under Education Code 
section 44955, the district must apply tie-breaking criteria when it affects the order of 
termination, and in this case it did not.  The district did not err by not applying its tiebreaking 
criteria to respondents.   

 
23.  All contentions made by respondents not specifically addressed above are 

found to be without merit and are rejected.   

Except as to the most senior elementary teacher who has been prejudiced by 

the district’s decision to skip Werra, no permanent employee is being terminated while a 
permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service 
which the permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.  

The cause for the reduction in particular kinds of services relates to the welfare 

of the schools and the pupils thereof. 

 
21. 

 
22. 

 
24. 

 
25. 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

 
 
44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been 
provided as required. 
 
 
pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give a final layoff notice to respondents James 
Evans, Erika Francis, Melissa Galicia, Leah Guerrero, Janet Morris, Graciella Rodarte, 
Tiffany Standridge, Gay Tow, Scott Tucker, and Alex Van Patten.  

By reason of the matters set forth in Factual Finding 11, there is no cause 

2. 

 

6

3. 

By reason of the matters set forth in Factual Findings 18 and 19, the district 

 
 
must identify the most senior elementary teacher noticed for 1.0 FTE Elementary 
Instructional Services reduction.  There is no cause pursuant to Education Code section 
44955 to give a final notice to this employee.  
 
 
to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to employees occupying 49.06 Full-Time 
Equivalent certificated positions that their services will be reduced or will not be required for 
the 2010-2011 school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the 
pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
 

Cause exists because of the reduction of particular kinds of services pursuant 

4. 

ORDER 
 

3. 

1. 

2. 

The district shall identify the most senior elementary teacher noticed for 

The accusations against respondents James Evans, Erika Francis, Melissa 

 
Galicia, Leah Guerrero, Janet Morris, Graciella Rodarte, and Tiffany Standridge, Gay Tow, 
Scott Tucker, and Alex Van Patten are dismissed.  
 
 
layoff.  A final layoff notice may not be given to that employee.  
 
Notice may be given to employees occupying 49.06 Full-Time Equivalent 
 
certificated positions that their services will be reduced or eliminated for the 2010-2011 
school year because of the reduction in particular kinds of services. 
 
 
DATED: _________________________ 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
MELISSA G. CROWELL  
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

7

