 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
LEGGETT VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
          OAH No. 2010031522 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation 
Against: 
 
MARIA VELAZQUEZ-SOTELO, 
 
 
 

Respondent. 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 

Administrative Law Judge Dianna L. Albini, State of California, Office of 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Ukiah, California, on April 27, 2010.   
 

Margaret M. Merchat, General Counsel, School and College Legal Services of 

California, represented Leggett Valley Unified School District. 

 

 
Phoebe Graubard, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Maria Velazquez-Sotelo.   

On April 27, 2010, the record closed and the matter was submitted for decision. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Catherine Scott made and filed the Accusation against respondents in his 

official capacity as the Superintendent (Superintendent) of the Leggett Valley Unified School 
District (District) 

Respondent Maria Velazquez-Sotelo is a certificated employee of the District. 

On March 10, 2010, Superintendent Catherine Scott presented the District’s 

Governing Board with a recommendation that the District give notice that particular kinds of 
services (PKS), then offered through the District, be reduced or eliminated by the District for 
the ensuing school year (2010-2011) in the form of three full time equivalent (FTE) 
certificated positions as follows:  

 
1. 

 
2. 
 
3. 

 
 

1 

 

 
 

 
 

a. Eliminate the equivalent of      
b. Eliminate the equivalent of        1.0 (FTE) Elementary Instructional Services; 
c. Eliminate the equivalent of 
study hall instructional services (4 periods); 
d. Eliminate the equivalent of 

.64 (FTE) High School Spanish combined with 

.166 (FTE) Elementary Spanish combined with 

.5 (FTE) Dean of Students; 

conditioning (K-8) instructional services (1 period); 

e. Eliminate the equivalent of 

.166 (FTE) Physical Education Instructional 

Services (1 period); 

period); 

Services (1 period); 

f. Eliminate the equivalent of 

.166 (FTE) English Instructional Services 1 

g. Eliminate the equivalent of 

.166 (FTE) Cultural Geography Instructional 

h. Eliminate the equivalent of 
 
 

 

 

Total             3.0 FTE 

.166 (FTE) Study Hall (1 period). 

4. 

On March 10, 2010, the District’s Governing Board ratified the 
recommendation of the Superintendent and adopted Resolution No. 10-12.  The resolution 
recites that, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, it has become necessary 
for the District to reduce or to eliminate particular kinds of services (PKS), no later than the 
beginning of the 2010-2011 school year, and directs the Superintendent or her designee to 
initiate and pursue procedures necessary not to reemploy the equivalent of 3.0 FTE.   

On March 11, 2010, the Superintendent gave written notice to respondent, 

pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, of her recommendation that notice be 
given her that her services would not be required for the ensuing school year.  The written 
notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation. 

Respondent timely requested a hearing to determine whether or not cause 

exists for not reemploying her for the 2010-2011 school year.  

The accusation was served and the respondent timely filed a notice of defense. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

The District anticipates a loss of funding in the amount of approximately 

$900,000, due to the budget deficit in California and the declining enrollment in the District.  
In order to have the funds available for mandated services, the District is modifying the 
manner in which it provides the Spanish foreign language class.  The Spanish class for the 
2010-2011 school year will be a provided as a self-study Rosetta Stone program offered in 
the computer lab.  Self study computer courses have been used by the District in the past. 
Spanish is not a mandated service. 

Since 1996, respondent has been a Spanish teacher with the Leggett Valley 

 
5. 

 
6. 

 
7. 
 
8. 
 
9. 

 
10. 

2 

 

 
 

Unified School District.  She is a currently assigned to teach the K-12 Spanish classes and an 
Independent Study class. Respondent has a clear Single Subject credential in Spanish, as well 
as a Masters degree, a Community Life Credential and authorization to teach Introduction to 
French and English.  Respondent is currently assigned to teach four periods of high school 
Spanish combined with study hall instructional services, as well as, one period of elementary 
Spanish combined with conditioning (K-8) instructional services.  The Board’s resolution 
eliminates respondent’s positions.  Respondent was also informed that based on her seniority 
rights and credentials, she has bumping rights into a .4 position (2 periods) in Spanish at the 
Whale Gulch Elementary School.  Respondent declined at hearing to accept her right to 
bump into the .4 position. 
 

11. 

Respondent contends the Board’s resolution to terminate her position and offer 
Spanish as a self study course is not related to the welfare of the District or the students.  She 
believes that learning a foreign language through a self study course will not provide the 
students with the type of quality education.  Respondent believes this will have a negative 
impact on those students wishing to advance to four-year colleges.   

 
Further, respondent maintains the Board’s resolution as it pertains to her, is 

fraudulent, arbitrary and capricious.  Respondent did not provide any specific facts to support 
her claim.  She also argues that since the amount of funding the District is to receive is 
unknown at this time it is speculative for the District to assert an approximately $900,000 
loss in funding as a justification for eliminating her position.   

 
Where a governing board determines to discontinue or reduce a particular kind of 

service, it is within the discretion of the board to determine the amount by which it will 
reduce a particular kind of service so long as a district does not reduce a service below the 
level required by law.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-
636.)  The evidence established that the District’s determination that it can comply with all 
statutory mandates with a reduced foreign language staff was not arbitrary, but rather was 
based upon reasonable considerations.   

 
The district believes it has retained a sufficient number of teachers and can adequately 
implement the Rosetta Stone program in order to meet the needs of the District.  The District 
anticipates that it will be able to provide the necessary foreign language services during the 
upcoming 2010-2011 school year.  If the District finds it difficult to provide foreign language 
services, it has the option of changing the manner or method of offering the service. 
(Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808;’ Gallup v. 
Loma School Dist. (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571.) 

The services set forth above are particular kinds of services that may be 

reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.   

The reduction or elimination of services is related to the welfare of the district 

 
12. 

 
13. 
and of its pupils. 

3 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
1. 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees at Leggett Valley 
Unified School District due to the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services set 
forth in Finding 3, pursuant to Education Code section 44955.  
 

2. 

The discontinuation of the particular kinds of service provided by respondent 
relates solely to the welfare of the District and its students within the meaning of Education 
Code sections 44949 and 44955.   

 
 
be required for the 2010-2011 school year 

ORDER 

Notice may be given to respondent Maria Velazquez-Sotelo that her services will not 

DATED:  May 6, 2010 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

__________________________ 
DIANNA L. ALBINI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

4 

