BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
MERCED UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
OAH No. 2010030514 

In the Matter of the Non-
Reemployment/Reduction in Force of:  
 
HAYDEE ARREOLA 
YOUNES BENOMAR 
MARIA L. FUENTES 
MARTHA MARMOLEJO 
MAYRA FLORES-REYES 
MAYCOL WILSON 
 
 

 

 

 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Rebecca M. Westmore, Administrative Law Judge, Office 

Todd A. Goluba, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of the Merced Union High 

Ernest H. Tuttle, III, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of all respondents, who were 

 
 
of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 15, 2010, in Merced, California. 
 
 
School District. 
 
 
present throughout the hearing. 
 
Evidence was received, and the record remained open to allow respondent Younes 
 
Benomar to submit evidence that he is “Highly Qualified” under the No Child Left Behind Act 
to teach 9th grade mathematics.  On April 19, 2010, Rosa Wood, Human Resource Specialist, 
submitted a Declaration, stating under penalty of perjury, that, “[b]ased on the information I 
received from the [California Commission of Teacher Credentialing] CCTC, it is my 
professional conclusion that Mr. Benomar is ‘Highly Qualified’ under the No Child Left 
Behind Act to serve in a 9th grade math assignment for the 2010-2011 school year.”  The 
record was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on April 19, 2010.   
 
 
 
 
 

1

 
 
 

 
 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1.     Vincent Scott Scambray is the Superintendent of Merced Union High School 

District (District).  Raynee J. Daley, Ed.D., is the Assistant Superintendent of Human 
Resources of the District.  Their actions and the actions of the District’s Governing Board 
(Board) were taken in their official capacities. 
 

2.     Respondents are permanent or probationary certificated employees of the 

District. 
 

3.     On March 11, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 10-09 (Resolution), 

which provided for the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services (PKS), and the 
reduction of a corresponding number of certificated employees not later than the beginning of 
the 2010-2011 school year.  In order to limit the number of reductions, the District considered 
all positively-assured attrition, including deaths, resignations, retirements, non-reelections, and 
other permanent vacancies.  The Board directed Superintendent Scambray to send appropriate 
notices to all employees whose services will be terminated by virtue of the PKS reductions and 
eliminations.  The PKS reductions and eliminations are based solely upon economic reasons, 
and are not related to the skills, abilities or work performance of the affected teachers.   
 

4.     Pursuant to the Resolution, the following particular kinds of services were 

identified for reduction or elimination:   
 

Certificated Positions  

 

 

 

 

 

FTE 

 

Classroom Teaching Positions                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Business  
 
 
 
Foreign Language – Spanish  
 
 
Industrial Technology 
 
 
 
Physical Education 
Social Science 
 
 
 
Special Education (Mild/Moderate)  
Advancement via Individual Determination (AVID) 
Enrichment 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
1.50 FTE 
3.00 FTE 
0.40 FTE 
2.00 FTE 
2.80 FTE 
2.00 FTE 
0.80 FTE 
4.20 FTE 

Counseling Positions 
 
 

Counselor 

 

 

 

 

 

4.00 FTE 

   

Administrator Positions 
 

Director of Categorical Programs  

                                                   
 

 

 

 
1.00 FTE 

___________________________________________________________ 
          21.70 FTE 
 
Total 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

5.     On March 11, 2010, the Board defined the “competency” of a senior employee 
for reassignment into a position currently held by a junior employee, for the 2010-2011 school 
year, as follows: 
 

(A) currently possesses clear or preliminary credential(s) 
authorizing the subject(s) and grade level(s) to which the 
employee will be assigned, and 

(B) has taught the subject area or served in the nonteaching 
position (e.g. Teacher on Special Assignment) to which he/she 
will be assigned for at least one semester in the past five school 
years, and 

(C) has “highly qualified” status under the No Child Left 
Behind Act (NCLB) for the subject matter and grade level to 
which he/she will be assigned, and 

(D) possesses a currently valid and properly filed CLAD, 
BCLAD, SDAIE or other regular (non-emergency) EL 
certificate, and 

(E) if assigned to teach AVID, have completed AVID training 
and taught AVID for at least one semester in the past five school 
years, and 

(F) if assigned to teach an Advanced Placement class, shall 
possess valid documentation of completion of Advanced 
Placement training and have taught at the Advanced Placement 
level for at least one semester in the past five school years. 

6.     On March 11, 2010, the Board developed the following “tie-breaking” criteria to 

be used in determining the order of termination of certificated employees who first rendered 
paid service to the District on the same date: 
 

Possession of a current valid and properly filed regular 
credential (clear, professional clear, or preliminary). 

Possession of a currently valid and properly filed CLAD, 
BCLAD, SDAIE, or other regular (non-emergency) EL 
certificate. 

The employee is “Highly Qualified” within the meaning of the 
No Child Left Behind Act.  

a. 

b. 

c. 

 

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Possession of a supplemental or single subject credential (not 
Board authorization) to teach in the following areas: 

(1) Math 
(2) Science 
(3) English 

d. 

 
 
 

e. 

f. 

g. 

The employee whose currently valid and properly filed 
credentials authorize a broader scope of service. 

The employee holding the highest current placement on the 
salary schedule.  

If a tie still exists after application of criteria a. to f., the tie shall 
be broken by lot.  Numbers shall be drawn with the lowest 
number drawn winning the tie and continuing until all remained 
tied individuals are ranked in order. 

7.     On March 11, 2010, in accordance with the Board’s Resolution, and pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the District served preliminary and precautionary 
layoff notices on 47 certificated employees advising that their services would be reduced or 
would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons 
for the recommendation and enclosed a copy of the Board’s Resolution reducing the 
certificated staff by 21.70 FTE.  Twenty-six certificated employees timely filed a Request for 
Hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year. 
 

8.     On March 26, 2010, Superintendent Scambray made and filed Accusations 

against the 26 certificated employees who timely filed a Request for Hearing.  The 
Accusations with required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense were 
timely served on certificated employees, including respondents.  Between March 30, 2010, and 
March 31, 2010, sixteen respondents timely filed Notices of Defense to the Accusations.  On 
April 1, 2010, the District served notices of rescission on 10 affected teachers1 who had timely 
filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation, and the matter proceeded against the remaining six 
respondents. 
 
District’s Memorandum Regarding English Learner Authorization 
 

9.     On September 18, 2007, Dr. Daley issued a memorandum advising certificated 

employees that the Board required all teachers to obtain English Language Learner (EL) 
Authorization by April 15, 2008, and that the principals were assisting teachers to develop an 
                                                 

1 The names and dates of hire of the ten certificated employees who were not present or represented by 
counsel at the hearing are: (1) Gary Haflich – August 20, 1991; (2) Kathrin Hernandez – November 27, 2007; (3) 
Jillian Mendoza – August 6, 2008; (4) Janel Mouillesseaux – August 6, 2007; (5) Donald Olaver – August 27, 1992; 
(6) Joshua Pedroza – August 6, 2008; (7) Tom Post – August 6, 2004; (8) Anna Ramirez – August 6, 2008; (9) 
Veronica Serrano – August 6, 2008; and (10) Nancy Williamson – August 6, 2004. 

4

 

 

 

 

 

 

action plan to successfully complete the EL authorization process.  On February 24, 2009, 
Superintendent Scambray recommended to the Board, and the Board voted unanimously to 
authorize “the use of the EL Authorization as skipping criterion for future certificated layoff 
processes.” 
 
District’s Layoff Procedures 
 

10.     The District maintains a Seniority List which contains data obtained from the 

District’s records and its employees, including, but not limited to, employees’ seniority 
ranking; tenure status; seniority dates; names; full-time equivalent (FTE) positions; 
departments; assignments; sites; credentials; and EL certificates.  The District used the 
Seniority List to develop a 2010 Certificated Layoff Implementation Chart identifying the 
certificated employees who would receive preliminary and precautionary layoff notices.  None 
of the respondents raised any challenges to the accuracy of the Seniority List or 2010 
Certificated Layoff Implementation Chart. 
 

11.     At hearing, Dr. Daley asserted that the District issued a preliminary layoff notice 

to Martha Marmolejo because EL students comprise between 15 and 100 percent of the 
students in her classes, and she has not obtained her EL Authorization.   
 

12.     Dr. Daley also asserted that the District issued preliminary layoff notices to 

Younes Benomar, Haydee Arreola, Mayra Flores-Reyes, and Maria Fuentes because they did 
not express an interest in, attend or complete an Advanced Placement (AP) training course.  
The District “skipped” two probationary teachers (Maycol Wilson and Maria Arteaga), and 
one permanent teacher (Moises Gutierrez), because each of the three junior teachers expressed 
an interest in, attended and completed a one-week AP training course in San Diego, California.  
In addition, each of the junior teachers has taught at the AP level for at least one year 
subsequent to their AP training course.  The District did, however, issue precautionary layoff 
notices to the three junior teachers.  According to Dr. Daley, the AP training course is valuable 
to the District because the “teachers get a specialized view of how they take students through 
the curriculum to the point where students are able to sit for college-level … exams.”  In 
addition, the District is emphasizing a rigorous curriculum in order to “clos[e] the achievement 
gap,” and encouraging its students to be college-bound.  Dr. Daley stated that “AP is a 
demanding curriculum, so it’s not uncommon [for AP teachers] to only teach one class,” and 
admitted that there is no legal requirement for certificated teachers to take AP training courses 
to teach AP students.  However, the District wishes to retain junior teachers who can help to 
“sustain [their] program.”  The District does not believe that it is required to offer AP training 
to all of its certificated teachers. 
 

13.     Dr. Daley asserted that the District applied the “tie-breaking” criteria between 
Mayra Flores-Reyes and Maria Fuentes, and broke the tie in favor of Maria Fuentes based on 
her higher salary.  In addition, the District applied the “tie-breaking” criteria between Haydee 
Arreola and Janel Mouillesseaux, but did not break the tie.  The District recommended drawing 
lots at the end of the hearing to break the tie and to determine if Ms. Arreola would be laid off 

 

5

entirely, or would receive a 0.20 FTE position.  Ms. Arreola refused to participate in the 
drawing because “the District said it doesn’t want someone teaching one period.” 
 
Discussion 
 
 
Business; 3.00 FTE in Foreign Language – Spanish; and 0.80 FTE in AVID.  Based on 
seniority dates and credentials, the affected certificated employees, are as follows: 
 

The Classroom Teaching Positions at issue in this hearing are 0.50 FTE in 

14. 

A.  Martha Marmolejo has a seniority date of 8/20/96.  She holds a Single Subject 

Credential in Spanish, Single Subject Credential in Business, and Administrative Credential.  
She served as an Administrator with the District for five years, and was reassigned to the 
classroom for the 2009-2010 school year.  Ms. Marmolejo is currently assigned to teach 0.50 
FTE in Business; 0.167 FTE in Foreign Language – Spanish; and 0.333 FTE in AVID at 
Buhach Colony High School.  Her services were eliminated by 1.50 FTE for Business; 3.00 
FTE for Foreign Language – Spanish; and 0.80 FTE for AVID, pursuant to the Board’s 
Resolution to eliminate Classroom Teaching Positions in the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

At hearing, Dr. Daley asserted that the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, along with 

federal funding requirements, requires the District to ensure that all teachers obtain their EL 
Authorization.  According to Dr. Daley, if a teacher without proper EL Authorization teaches a 
class with one or more EL students present, it is recorded as a “misassignment,” which can 
affect their funding.  Two opportunities were made available for the District’s certificated 
teachers to obtain their EL Authorization.  They could: (1) undertake coursework to obtain a 
Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development (CLAD) Certificate; or (2) study for and 
take the California Teachers of English Learners (CTEL) exam.  Dr. Daley stated that “the 
District … provided information regarding opportunities for teachers to obtain their EL 
certification,” and worked with the teachers’ union to get the word out.  The District imposed a 
deadline of April 15, 2008 for teachers to obtain their EL Authorization, and 80 to 85 percent 
of the certificated teachers complied.  As for new teachers hired by the District, they have their 
CLAD “built into their credential.”  Dr. Daley confirmed that “administrators serve at the will 
of the board and can be placed back in the classroom at any time,” and that between 2004 and 
2009, Ms. Marmolejo was the Program Specialist assigned to work with the teachers to 
develop action plans to obtain their EL Authorization.   The District submitted evidence to 
demonstrate that EL students comprise between 15 and 100 percent of the students in Ms. 
Marmolejo’s classes, and Dr. Daley asserted that the district cannot redistribute the students to 
ensure that no EL students attend Ms. Marmolejo’s classes. 
 

Ms. Marmolejo admitted at hearing that “I knew teachers needed the CLAD certificate, 
but did not know the deadline,” and “unfortunately, I didn’t see the time coming to going back 
into the classroom.”  As part of her administrative duties, Ms. Marmolejo was “responsible for 
the EL program,” and for assisting and ensuring that all of the teachers obtained their EL 
authorization.   She did not obtain her CLAD, however, because her administrative duties were 
“huge,” and “[she] had other meetings going on.”  Ms. Marmolejo asserted that when she 
returned to the classroom in the 2009-2010 school, she “was concerned about [her] curriculum, 

 

6

not [her] CLAD.”  Then, in January 2010, when the District changed her classes, it “required 
another type of preparation.”  In addition, during the 2009-2010 school year, Ms. Marmolejo 
began experiencing significant health problems, which culminated in a surgical procedure 
requiring eight days off work in March 2010.  Furthermore, Ms. Marmolejo was finalizing her 
divorce proceedings.  Together these incidents delayed her ability to begin her CLAD courses.  
Ms. Marmolejo is currently taking expedited on-line CLAD courses through the University of 
Phoenix, and hopes to complete her EL authorization by June 14, 2010.  She asserted that “I’m 
a good teacher … I love my students …, and I’ve served my district with energy.”  She 
apologized for not obtaining her EL authorization, and believes that “a courtesy reminder 
would have been nice.”  According to Ms. Marmolejo, she became aware of the requirement to 
complete the EL authorization when a co-worker mentioned it to her in January 2010, but did 
not become aware of the actual deadline until March 2, 2010, when she met with Dr. Daley.  
She does not recall the Board’s February 24, 2009 Minutes authorizing the Superintendent to 
use the EL authorization for skipping criteria.  Ms. Marmolejo argued that because other 
teachers do not have their EL authorization, she should be able to retain her position because 
she is “working on it,” and has “invested a lot of years in the District.” 
 
Younes Benomar has a seniority date of 8/6/07.  He is a probationary 
 
employee.  He holds an Internship Credential in Spanish, Preliminary Single Subject 
Credential in Spanish, and Supplementary Authorization in Mathematics.  He is Highly 
Qualified under NCLB to teach 9th grade mathematics.  Mr. Benomar is assigned to teach 1.00 
FTE in Foreign Language – Spanish at Buhach Colony High School.  His services were 
eliminated by 3.00 FTE for Foreign Language – Spanish, pursuant to the Board’s Resolution to 
eliminate Classroom Teaching Positions in the 2010-2011 school year.    Pursuant to 
stipulation by the parties, the District has agreed to reassign Mr. Benomar to a 9th grade 
mathematics position during the 2010-2011 school year. 
  

B. 

C. 

Haydee Arreola has a seniority date of 8/6/07.  She holds a Single Subject 

D.  Mayra Flores-Reyes has a seniority date of 8/7/06.  She holds a Single Subject 

Credential in Spanish, Supplemental Credential in Psychology, and Bilingual, Crosscultural, 
Language and Academic Development (BCLAD) Certificate, pursuant to SB 2042.  She is 
currently assigned to teach 0.80 FTE in Spanish and 0.20 FTE in AVID at Atwater High 
School.  Ms. Arreola’s services were eliminated by 3.00 FTE for Foreign Language – Spanish, 
and 0.80 FTE in AVID, pursuant to the Board’s Resolution to eliminate Classroom Teaching 
Positions in the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Clear Credential in Foreign Language – Spanish, and CLAD Certification.  She is currently 
assigned to teach 1.00 FTE of Foreign Language – Spanish at Merced High School.  Her 
services were eliminated by 3.00 FTE for Foreign Language – Spanish, pursuant to the Board’s 
Resolution to eliminate Classroom Teaching Positions in the 2010-2011 school year.   
 
 
E.  Maria Fuentes has a seniority date of 8/7/06.  She holds a Single Subject Clear 
Credential in Foreign Language – Spanish, and BCLAD Certificate.  She is currently assigned 
to teach 1.00 FTE in Foreign Language – Spanish at Merced High School.   Her services were 

 

7

eliminated by 3.00 FTE in Foreign Language – Spanish, pursuant to the Board’s Resolution to 
reduce Classroom Teaching Positions in the 2010-2011 school year.  
 

G.  Maria Arteaga has a seniority date of 1/15/05.  She is a probationary employee.  

At hearing, Ms. Arreola, Ms. Flores-Reyes and Ms. Fuentes asserted that they were not 
offered an opportunity to take an AP training course, and were not told that they would be laid 
off if they did not take an AP training course.  They each expressed a willingness to take an AP 
training course at their own expense, as well as to teach an AP class.  Together, they believe 
that the layoff procedures should be clear, transparent and fair, especially in light of the time 
and money they have invested in the District and the District has invested in them. 
 
F.  Maycol Wilson has a seniority date of 8/7/08.  He is a probationary employee.  
 
He holds a Single Subject Credential in Foreign Language – Spanish, and EL Authorization.  
He is currently assigned to teach 1.00 FTE in Foreign Language – Spanish at Merced High 
School.  His services were eliminated by 3.00 FTE for Foreign Language – Spanish, pursuant 
to the Board’s Resolution to eliminate Classroom Teaching Positions in the 2010-2011 school 
year.  Mr. Wilson received a precautionary layoff notice, and filed a Notice of Defense in this 
matter.  No issues were raised at hearing by or on behalf of Mr. Wilson.   
 
 
She holds a Single Subject Credential in Foreign Language – Spanish, and EL Authorization 
pursuant to SB 2042.  She is currently assigned to teach 0.60 FTE in Foreign Language – 
Spanish and 0.40 FTE AVID at Atwater High School.  Her services were eliminated by 3.00 
FTE for Foreign Language – Spanish, pursuant to the Board’s Resolution to eliminate 
Classroom Teaching Positions in the 2010-2011 school year.  Ms. Arteaga received a 
precautionary layoff notice, but did not request a hearing or file a Notice of Defense in this 
matter. 
 
 
Credential in Foreign Language – Spanish, and BCLAD Certificate.  He is currently assigned 
to teach 1.00 FTE Foreign Language – Spanish at Atwater High School.  His services were 
eliminated by 3.00 FTE for Foreign Language – Spanish, pursuant to the Board’s Resolution to 
eliminate Classroom Teaching Positions in the 2010-2011 school year.  Mr. Gutierrez received 
a precautionary layoff notice, but did not request a hearing or file a Notice of Defense in this 
matter.  
 
Skipping Junior Teachers with EL Authorization  
 

H.  Moises Gutierrez has a seniority date of 8/6/07.  He holds a Single Subject 

15. 

The District’s goal was to have 100 percent of its faculty obtain EL 

Authorization by April 15, 2008.  Ninety-two percent of the faculty complied with the 
District’s goal by February 24, 2009.  On that same day, the Board authorized the use of the 
EL Authorization as “skipping” criteria for future layoff procedures.  Thereafter, the District 
continued to actively encourage its faculty, including Ms. Marmolejo, to obtain their EL 
Authorization.  On January 29, 2010, Dr. Daley issued a memorandum to Ms. Marmolejo 
giving her until February 5, 2010 to submit proof that she had completed and/or was in the 
process of obtaining her EL Authorization.  On February 1, 2010, Ms. Marmolejo advised the 

 

8

District that she was planning to take the CTEL Examination on June 12, 2010 to obtain her 
EL Authorization.  On February 4, 2010, Ms. Marmolejo advised the District that she would 
not take the CTEL examination, but would instead pursue CLAD coursework through the 
University of Phoenix.  She began her on-line CLAD coursework on February 16, 2010.   
 

The District’s rationale for skipping junior teachers and laying off Ms. Marmolejo is the 

District’s belief that other provisions of the Education Code require that a teacher who 
provides instruction to even a single EL student2 must possess an EL Authorization.  Failure to 
comply with this perceived mandate would, in the view of the District, subject it to the risk of 
civil liability and sanctions by state and federal governmental agencies.  These sanctions 
include the loss of funding.  
 

16. 

The Legislature has directed the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (CTC) to “issue a certificate that authorizes the holder to provide [specified] 
services to limited-English-proficient pupils…” (Ed. Code, § 44253.)  This statute follows a 
legislative declaration that limited-English-proficient pupils have the right to a quality 
education and “their special needs must be met by teachers who have essential skills and 
knowledge related to English language development and specially designed content instruction 
delivered in English…” (Ed. Code, § 44253.1.)  The same section expresses the Legislature’s 
intent that the CTC “implement an assessment system to certify those teachers who have the 
essential skills and knowledge necessary to meet the needs of California’s limited-English-
proficiency pupils.”  Education Code section 44253.5 requires the CTC to develop an 
examination by which teachers may establish their “competence in the knowledge and skills 
necessary for effective teaching of limited-English-proficient pupils.”  School districts must 
report instances in which teachers have been misassigned including those instances in which 
districts have failed to follow Education Code sections 44253, et seq.(Ed. Code, §44258.9.)  In 
summary, it is the CTC which “licenses” teachers and prescribes the areas in which they may 
provide instruction by virtue of their credentials. (Ed. Code, §§ 44001, 44830, 44831, and 
44253.1.)  The CLAD certificate was the designated certificate created in response to the 
Legislative mandate.  If such certificate, or its equivalent, “authorizes” instruction to limited-
English-proficient pupils, the teaching of such students without the certificate is necessarily 
unauthorized.  This interpretation is in accord with the position taken by the California 
Department of Education as reflected in documents received in evidence at the administrative 
hearing. 
 

17.  Ms. Marmolejo did not establish that the Board engaged in arbitrary or 
capricious action or violated its discretion by requiring that certificated teachers obtain their 
EL Authorization.  The District established that it is required by state and federal law to ensure 
that EL students receive instruction from certificated teachers with EL Authorization, and that 
EL students comprise between 15 and 100 percent of the students in Ms. Marmolejo’s classes.  

                                                 

2 Education Code section 305, subdivision (a), reads: “‘English learner’ means a child who does not speak 

English or whose native language is not English and who is not currently able to perform ordinary classroom work in 
English, also known as a Limited English Proficiency or LEP child.” 
 

 

9

Therefore, Ms. Marmolejo does not meet the “competency” criteria set forth in the Board’s 
Resolution, which requires that she possess a currently valid and properly filed CLAD, 
BCLAD, SDAIE or other regular (non-emergency) EL certificate, and is subject to layoff. 
 
Skipping Junior Teachers with Advanced Placement Training 
 

18. 

The District argued that it was permitted to skip three junior (two permanent and 

one probationary) teachers with AP training, and terminate three senior teachers without AP 
training because the AP training constitutes “special training and experience.”  The only 
permissible justifications for skipping are contained in Education Code section 44955, 
subdivision (d).  A school district may not create justifications for skipping.  To do so would 
deprive teachers of their seniority rights.  While Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
(d), does not define the term “special training and experience,” it is clear that the focus of the 
inquiry must be on a district’s “specific need” and on what is “necessary” to qualify a teacher 
to teach a course that requires “special training and experience.”  Under section 44955, 
subdivision (d), the inquiry is focused on whether the senior teacher does “not possess” the 
“special training and experience necessary to teach [a] course . . . .”   
 

19.  While a governing board has latitude in determining what factors contribute to 

competency for provision of a particular service, those factors must be reasonable.  There must 
be a rational relationship between the competency criteria and performance of a particular 
service.  The governing board also has latitude in choosing to skip junior employees who 
provide specialized services.  But, the Board must show these junior employees have special 
training and experience necessary to teach AP classes, and that others with more seniority do 
not possess those skills.  The Board may prefer to keep its junior teachers who have completed 
an AP training course and completed at least one year of AP teaching.  These junior teachers 
appear to be performing well in their AP classes, and have brought much to the District’s plan 
to expose students to AP teachers.  However, even though they may be the ideal teachers to 
teach AP classes, they are not the only teachers who can effectively teach AP classes.  Ms. 
Arreola, Ms. Flores-Reyes, and Ms. Fuentes are senior employees who are certificated and 
competent to teach AP classes.  As set forth below in the Legal Conclusions, the very clear 
intent of the Education Code is to prevent the termination of permanent employees while 
probationary employees or employees with less seniority are retained to render services which 
the senior employee is certificated and competent to render.  Establishing a preference for 
existing staff, by enacting competency criteria designed to exclude senior teachers, violates the 
intent of the Education Code.  The District admitted that certificated teachers are not required 
to take AP training courses to teach AP classes.  Therefore, the District failed to establish that 
the three senior teachers without AP training are not certificated or competent to teach AP 
classes. 
 

20.  Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed 

above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 
 
 

 

10

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The District employees who received notices that their services would not be 

 
 
required in the 2010-2011 school year are not being laid off for reasons related to their ability 
or performance. 
 

2. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
proposed reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and the preliminary notice of 
layoff served on respondents are factually and legally appropriate.  The District has met its 
burden.  The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next school year is an 
appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955.  As stated in San Jose 
Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of particular 
kinds of services on the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that section, and, 
“in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section 
44955 is the only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.”  
The District must be solvent to provide educational services and cost savings are necessary to 
resolve its financial crisis.  The Superintendent’s recommendation to reduce particular kinds of 
services was a proper exercise of his discretion.  In addition, all notice and jurisdictional 
requirements set forth in Education Code sections 44944 and 44945 were met. The notices sent 
to respondents indicate the statutory basis for the reduction of services and adequately describe 
the particular kinds of services to be reduced, and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide 
them due process.  (Ibid., at p. 627; see also, Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing 
Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831; Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838; and 
Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 

3. 

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular  

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another manner. (Gallup 
v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California Teachers Association v. Board of 
Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)  A school board may reduce 
services within the meaning of the statute either by determining that a certain type of service 
shall not be performed at all or by reducing the number of district employees who perform 
such services.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 
64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  As set forth in Factual Finding 4, the services identified in the Resolution 
are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  
Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 
 

4. 

Education Code section 44253.10, subdivision (i), provides, in pertinent part,  
That “[t]he governing board of each school district shall make reasonable efforts to provide 
limited-English-proficient pupils in need of English language development instruction with 
teachers who hold appropriate credentials, language development specialist certificates, or 

 

11

cross- cultural language and academic development certificates that authorize English 
language development instruction ….” 
 

5. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides in pertinent part:  

Whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school 
year, …or whenever the amendment of state law requires the 
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the 
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by 
reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of 
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may 
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding 
percentage of the certificated employees of the district, permanent 
as well as probationary, at the close of the school year.  Except as 
otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent 
employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section 
while any probationary employee, or any other employee with 
less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.  

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the 
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine 
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the 
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any 
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the 
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days 
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance 
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in 
determining the order of termination and the application of the 
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other 
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing 
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for 
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to 
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would 
not exist without such a requirement. 

6. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides that when certificated 
employees face layoffs due to reduction or elimination of PKS, the District has an affirmative 
obligation to reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions held by 
junior teachers, if the senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to occupy such 
positions.  The intent of the Legislation is clearly to prevent districts from laying off senior 
teachers while retaining junior teachers. 
 

12

 

 

 

 

7. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), establishes two justifications for 

a school district to skip over a junior employee and terminate a more senior employee: 
 

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to 
teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide services 
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either 
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that 
the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide 
those services, which others with more seniority do not possess. 

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the 
laws. 

8. 

The District has the burden of demonstrating that certificated employees have 

 
 
the “special training and experience” necessary to teach a course of course of study.  If the 
necessity for this “special training and experience” is demonstrated, the District must further 
establish that junior employees possess the qualifications necessary to teach such course or 
course of study, and that senior employees do not possess the “special training and 
experience.”  (Beldsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127.) 
 

9. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), cause exists to give 

notice to respondent Martha Marmolejo that her services will not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year, as set forth in Factual Findings 14A, and 15 through 17.  The District 
established that EL students comprise between 15 and 100 percent of the students in Ms. 
Marmolejo’s classes.  Ms. Marmolejo had adequate notice and a reasonable opportunity to 
obtain her EL Authorization, but failed to do so in a timely manner. 
 

11. 

10. 

Because the District failed to demonstrate that certificated teachers are required 

Cause does not exist to give notice to respondent Younes Benomar, that his 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year, as set forth in Factual Finding 
14B.  Pursuant to stipulation by the parties, the District has agreed to reassign Mr. Benomar to 
a 9th grade mathematics position during the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
to complete an AP training course prior to teaching AP classes, the District may not skip 
teachers with AP training under Education Code section 44955.  Therefore, cause does not 
exist to give notice to respondents Haydee Arreola, Mayra Flores-Reyes, and Maria Fuentes 
that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year, as set forth in Factual 
Findings 14C, 14D, 14E, 18 and 19.  Junior employees are being retained to perform the 
services which respondents Haydee Arreola, Mayra Flores-Reyes and Maria Fuentes are 
certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

 

 

13

12. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, cause exists to give notice to 

 
respondent Maycol Wilson, that his services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school 
year, as set forth in Factual Finding 14F.  No certificated employees with seniority dates junior 
to Mr. Wilson are being retained to teach classes for which he is certificated and competent to 
teach. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

Final notice may be given to respondent Martha Marmolejo that her services 

will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

The Accusation against respondent Younes Benomar is dismissed. 

The Accusations against respondents Haydee Arreola, Mayra Flores-Reyes, and  

2. 

3. 

Final notice may be given to respondent Maycol Wilson that his services will 

4. 

Maria L. Fuentes, are dismissed. 
 
 
not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
 
DATED:  May 5, 2010 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
REBECCA M. WESTMORE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

 

14

