BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ROSEVILLE JOINT UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE ROSEVILLE JOINT 
UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
                                                           Respondents. 

 

 
 

 

OAH No. 2010030179 

 

PROPOSED DECISION  

This matter was heard before Karen J. Brandt, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, State of California, in Roseville, California, on April 6, 2010. 
 

Terry Filliman, Attorney at Law, represented the Roseville Joint Union High School 

Michael McCallum, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents, who are listed on 

District (District). 
 

Attachment A hereto. 
 

Evidence was received on April 6, 2010.  The record was left open to allow the 
parties to submit legal citations in support of their arguments.   On April 9, 2010, the District 
submitted its list of citations, which was marked for identification as Exhibit 22.  On April 9, 
2010, respondents submitted their list of citations, which was marked for identification as 
Exhibit A.  The record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 9, 
2010.  
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

On March 2, 2010, the District’s Board of Trustees (Board) adopted 

Resolution No. 1002, entitled “Resolution of the Roseville Joint Union High School District 
Board of Trustees Relative to the Reduction or Elimination of Particular Kinds of 
Certificated Services” (PKS Resolution).   Pursuant to the PKS Resolution, the Board 
determined that it was necessary and in the best interest of the District to reduce or eliminate 
certain particular kinds of services (sometimes referred to herein as PKS) and to decrease a 
corresponding number of certificated District employees not later than the beginning of the 
2010-2011 school year.  In the PKS Resolution, the Board directed the Superintendent to 

1 

send appropriate notices to all employees whose services will be terminated by virtue of the 
PKS reductions and eliminations.  The Board also directed the Superintendent to make 
assignments and reassignments in such manner that certificated employees are retained to 
render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.  The PKS 
reductions and eliminations are based solely upon economic reasons, and are not related to 
the skills, abilities or work performance of the affected teachers. 
 

2. 

The PKS Resolution identified the following particular kinds of services for 

reduction or elimination: 
 

A.  High School Teaching Services: 

1.  Athletic Director Release Periods (GBHS, OHS) 
2.  Activities Director Release Periods (RHS, WHS, AnHS) 
3.  Librarians, .50 FTE at each Comprehensive Site 
4.  Special Education Academic Lab 
5.  English 
6.  Math 
7.  Science (Physical and Life Science) 
8.  Social Science 
9.  Spanish 
10. Drama 
11. Family and Consumer Sciences 
12. Physical Education 
13. Business (at GBHS) 
14. Web Design, Computer Applications 
15. 3D Animation, Advanced Multimedia 
16. Construction Technology 
 

.67 FTE1 
1.00 FTE 
2.50 FTE 
2.00 FTE 
6.17 FTE 
5.50 FTE 
2.83 FTE 
2.00 FTE 
.50 FTE 
.33 FTE 
.50 FTE 
.33 FTE 
.33 FTE 
1.00 FTE 
.67 FTE 
.67 FTE 

B.  High School Certificated Support Services: 

1.  Counselor 
2.  EL Coordinator 
 

C.  Administrative Services: 

                                                                             2.00 FTE 
.67 FTE 

1.  Assistant Principals (.17 FTE, two each at GBHS, OHS,  
      RHS, and WHS) 
2.  Assistant Principal (Adelante High School) 
 

1.33 FTE 
.50 FTE 

     31.50 FTE 

Total 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

two-semester class is a .33 FTE. 

1 “FTE” stands for full-time equivalent.  According to the District, a one-semester class is a .17 FTE, and a 

 

2

3. 

The PKS Resolution set forth the District’s competency criteria as follows: 

That “competency” for the purposes of Education Code section 44955, 
44956 and 44957 shall be met based upon (1) current possession of a 
preliminary or clear credential for the subject matter, grade level or 
pupil personnel services to which the employee will be assigned at the 
beginning of the 2009-10 school year; and (2) the employee must have 
taught at least one subject within the department of the proposed 
assignment, taught in alternative education, or performed the non-
teaching service (e.g., pupil personnel) for one semester term within the 
District in the past ten school years (e.g., 2000-2001 or later).  

In addition, the PKS Resolution set forth the District’s tie-breaking criteria as 

 

4. 
follows: 
 

That as between employees who first rendered paid service on the same 
date, the order of termination and reemployment pursuant to Education 
Code sections 44955 and 44846 shall be based solely on the needs of 
the District and the students thereof, as determined by applying the 
point system described herein.  This system shall be applied only where 
the implementation of layoffs or reemployment rights actually impacts 
two or more employees with the same first date of paid service and is 
applied only to those employees.  In case of each tie, points shall be 
granted to each affected employee based upon all the following criteria.  
The points for each employee shall be totaled and the employees 
ranked from highest to lowest with the lowest being subject to layoff 
and next lowest being subject to layoff, etc.  For reemployment, the 
employee with the highest total shall be reemployed first and so on.  In 
the case that two or more employees remain tied by point total after 
totaling points for criteria a-h and the tie must be broken to determine a 
layoff, then criteria i shall be invoked. 
 
a.  Possession  of  a  currently  valid  preliminary  or  clear  California 

teaching credential – three points. 

b.  Possession  of  one  or  more  additional  valid  subject  matter 
authorizations  (excluding  supplemental  authorizations)  –  one  point 
for each additional authorization 

c.  Possession  of  a  National  Board  Certification  for  teaching  –  two 

points. 

d.  Possession  of  one  or  more  language  certifications  (e.g.,  LDS, 
CLAD, SB 1969, SB 395, BCC, BCLAD, Certificate of Completion 

3

. 

 

 

 

of Staff Development) authorizing instruction to English Learners – 
one point. 

e.  Assignment  during  the  2009-2010  school  year  teaching  in  a 
program  primarily  for  severely  handicapped  or  emotionally 
disturbed students – two points 

f.  Possession  of  a  master’s  or  doctorate  degree  –  one  point  for  each 

degree. 

g.  Service  during  2009-2010  supervising  one  of  the  following  school 
sponsored  extra  curricular  activities:    athletic  director,  high  school 
head  or  assistant  coach,  student  activities  director,  yearbook 
advisor,  ASB  leadership  advisor,  choir  director,  band  director, 
drama director, dance director or newspaper advisor – one point for 
each activity up to three points maximum. 

h.  Assignment  during 

the  2009-2010 

teaching 
International  Baccalaureate  courses,  Advanced  Placement  courses, 
Project Lead the Way courses, AVID courses or ELD courses – one 
point for each course up to three points maximum. 

school  year 

i.  In  any  case  where  a  tie  results  after  calculating  points  for  all  the 
above criteria, a random drawing by lot will be conducted for each 
tie  by  the  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Personnel  Services  in  the 
presence of an authorized representative of the Roseville Secondary 
Education Association. 

5. 

Pursuant to the PKS Resolution, on March 8, 2010, Tony Monetti, 

Superintendent of the District, gave notice to the Board of his recommendation that certain 
identified certificated employees be given written notice that their services would not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year as provided in Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955.2 
 

6. 

On or about March 4, 2010, Ronald Severson, Assistant Superintendent, 

Personnel Services, sent preliminary layoff notices to the certificated employees identified 
for layoff.  The preliminary layoff notices enclosed a copy of the PKS resolution and 
informed the certificated employees of their right to request a hearing.  In response to the 
preliminary layoff notices, the District received 23 requests for hearing.  On March 18, 2010, 
Mr. Severson sent letters to the 23 certificated employees who requested a layoff hearing, 
serving upon them the Accusation, Statement to Respondent, form Notice of Defense, Notice 
of Hearing and relevant statutes, and informing them of their right to file a notice of defense 
if they desired a hearing.  On March 19, 2010, a Notice of Defense was served on behalf of 

                                                 

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise indicated.   

4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

the 23 certificated employees who desired a hearing, all of whom are respondents in this 
matter. 
 

7. 

Attached hereto as Attachment A is a list of all respondents.  Respondents are 

currently certificated employees of the District.  Each respondent was properly and timely 
served with a preliminary layoff notice and timely requested a hearing.  Each was also 
properly and timely served with the Accusation, Statement to Respondent, form Notice of 
Defense, Notice of Hearing and relevant statutes, and had filed on their behalf a timely 
Notice of Defense. 
 

8. 

At the hearing, the District rescinded the preliminary layoff notice served upon 

respondent Jessica Fork.  The District reduced the proposed layoff of respondent Amy 
Shishido from 1.0 FTE to .50 FTE, and the proposed layoff of Mark Armstrong from 1.0 
FTE to .50 FTE. 
 

9. 

The PKS Resolution provides that the Board “has considered all positively 

assured attrition, including deaths, resignations, retirements and other permanent vacancies, 
for 2010-2011 which has occurred to date in determining the needed services to be reduced 
or eliminated.”  Mr. Severson testified that all positively assured attrition had been 
considered when the District made its layoff determinations.  There was no evidence 
presented at the hearing to indicate that the District failed to properly take into consideration 
any positively assured attrition.  
 
Angela Ash 
 

10. 

 Angela Ash is a respondent in this matter.  Her seniority date with the District 

is August 19, 2008.  She is a probationary employee.  She has a preliminary single subject 
credential in Home Economics and Health Sciences, and an English Learner Authorization.  
She holds a .83 FTE at Granite Bay High School.3  She is currently teaching two periods of 
Culinary Tech.  As a result of the reduction of .50 FTE of Family and Consumer Sciences as 
set forth in section A.11 of the PKS Resolution (Finding 2), the District has proposed to 
reduce .50 FTE of Culinary Tech and, correspondingly, to reduce .50 FTE of Ms. Ash’s .83 
FTE. 
 

11. 

Lisa Sherman is also a probationary employee of the District with a seniority 
date of August 19, 2008.  She has a preliminary single subject credential in Health Science.  
She is currently teaching three periods of Health and Wellness at Antelope High School.  The 
District did not serve a preliminary layoff notice on Ms. Sherman. 
 

12.  At the hearing, Ms. Ash argued that she is credentialed and competent to teach 
Health and Wellness and should be permitted to bump into .50 FTE of Ms. Sherman’s Health 

                                                 

3 The Seniority List indicates that Ms. Ash holds a .66 FTE position, but the Revised Layoff/Bump Chart 

developed by the District states that Ms. Ash holds a .83 FTE position.  The parties did not address this discrepancy 
during the hearing.  The .83 FTE set forth in the Revised Layoff/Bump Chart is accepted as the correct FTE for Ms. 
Ash for the purposes of this proposed decision.   

 

5

and Wellness assignment.  The District disputed Ms. Ash’s argument, asserting that Ms. Ash 
did not meet the competency criteria set forth in the PKS Resolution (Finding 3), and that, 
even if Ms. Ash were deemed to be competent, she cannot bump Ms. Sherman because Ms. 
Sherman scored more points than Ms. Ash when the tie-breaking criteria (Finding 4) were 
applied. 
 

13.  Ms. Ash was a student teacher for a Health and Safety class at Roseville High 
School during the second term of the 2007-2008 school year.  She asserted that, as a result of 
her student teaching, she meets the competency criteria set forth in the PKS, which requires 
that a certificated employee “must have taught at least one subject within the department of 
the proposed assignment … for one semester term within the District in the past ten school 
years (e.g., 2000-2001 or later).” 
 

14. 

The District argued that the competency criteria in the PKS Resolution should 

be interpreted to require that a teacher must have been employed by the District as a 
certificated employee at the time he or she taught in order to receive recognition for teaching 
a subject in the past 10 years. 
 

15. 

The plain language of the PKS Resolution’s competency criteria does not 

support the interpretation the District seeks.  There is no requirement in the PKS Resolution 
that the teacher had to have been a certificated employee of the District when he or she 
taught the subject for which he or she seeks recognition.  From the information presented at 
the hearing, when Ms. Ash student-taught, she assumed all the duties and responsibilities of a 
teacher.  Given this evidence and the plain language of the PKS Resolution, Ms. Ash 
established that she met the PKS Resolution’s competency criteria to teach the Health and 
Wellness class currently being taught by Ms. Sherman. 
 

16. 

Even though the District disputed that Ms. Ash complied with the competency 
criteria, the District applied the tie-breaking criteria set forth in the PKS Resolution (Finding 
4), and determined that Ms. Sherman prevailed, receiving six points to Ms. Ash’s five points.  
Ms. Ash did not dispute the number of points the District assigned to Ms. Sherman.  Ms. Ash 
asserted, however, that the District should have assigned her one more point for the 
extracurricular culinary internship program she is currently supervising.  The District pays 
her a $2,000 stipend per semester to supervise this extracurricular activity.  The District 
argued that this extracurricular activity did not qualify for any points under the tie-breaking 
criteria established by the Board. 
 

17. 

Section g. of the tie-breaking criteria (Finding 4) provides that a certificated 

employee will obtain a point for the following school-sponsored extracurricular activities, up 
to a total of three points: “athletic director, high school head or assistant coach, student 
activities director, yearbook advisor, ASB leadership advisor, choir director, band director, 
drama director, dance director or newspaper advisor.”  Mr. Severson testified that the Board 
chose to give points for the specific extracurricular activities identified in section g. because 
the Board determined that these activities added value to the District, its schools and/or its 
programs, and that a teacher could not be granted points for teaching other extracurricular 
activities that were not specifically identified in the PKS Resolution. 

 

6

18.  Mr. Severson’s testimony was persuasive.  In section g. of the tie-breaking 

criteria (Finding 4), the Board listed the particular extracurricular activities for which 
certificated employees would receive points.  The list does not include the extracurricular 
culinary internship program Ms. Ash is currently supervising.  It was within the discretion of 
the Board to establish its tie-breaking criteria.  Respondents did not establish that the Board 
engaged in arbitrary or capricious action or violated its discretion by choosing to give points 
only for certain specified extracurricular activities.  Because the extracurricular culinary 
internship program supervised by Ms. Ash is not one of the extracurricular programs 
specifically listed in the tie-breaking criteria, Ms. Ash cannot be given any points for it.  
Because she cannot be given any points for that program, Ms. Ash did not establish that she 
should be permitted to bump into .50 FTE of Ms. Sherman’s Health and Wellness teaching 
assignment. 
 
Leadership Course 
 

19. 

The parties disputed whether any of the respondents should be allowed to 

bump into an elective Leadership course currently taught by Emmalyn Kisaka. 
 

20.  Ms. Kisaka is employed by the District as a probationary teacher.  Her 

seniority date is August 19, 2008.  She has a clear single subject credential in Physical 
Education, with a supplementary authorization in Marketing/Entrepreneurship.  She also has 
a clear Adapted Physical Education Specialist credential and an English Learner 
Authorization.  She teaches at Antelope High School.  In the fall semester of the 2009-2010 
school year, she taught three periods of Physical Education; in the spring semester, she is 
teaching two periods of Physical Education and one period of Leadership.  The District did 
not serve her with a preliminary layoff notice. 
 

21. 

There was a question raised at the hearing about the number of FTE’s at issue 

with regard to the Leadership class.  According to respondent Kristen Patten, in the 2009-
2010 school year, Ms. Kisaka is teaching the spring Leadership class, a .17 FTE; Josh 
Nielsen taught the fall Leadership class, also a .17 FTE.  The District conceded that 
Leadership is a year-long class with a .33 FTE. 
 

22.  Mr. Nielsen is a respondent in this matter.  His seniority date is August 7, 

2009.  He has a clear single subject credential in Social Science and Physical Education, and 
a CLAD (English Learner Authorization).  He also teaches at Antelope High School.  He is 
currently teaching two periods of AP European History and one period of World Studies. 
 

23. 

Leadership is an elective class, i.e., it is not an academic subject required for 

graduation.  The class is designed to teach leadership skills to students who may wish to 
assume leadership positions at Antelope High School.  Ms. Kisaka and Mr. Nielsen were 
approved to teach the Leadership class in the 2009-2010 school year by a committee on 
assignments pursuant to section 44258.7.4 

                                                 

4 Section 44258.7, in relevant part, provides: 

 

7

24. 

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing, in its Administrators’ Assignment 

Manual, has provided the following guidance on electives such as Leadership: 
 

Elective Classes:  In most cases there is an obvious match between the 
class curriculum and the authorizations listed on the credential.  
However, there will be classes, usually electives, for which there is no 
match.  These include, but are not limited to, classes in life skills, 
leadership, study skills, conflict management, teen skills, and study 
hall.  … [¶]  If no credential exists that authorizes the curriculum and 
elective credit is being given, the employing agency should select the 
credentialed teacher whose knowledge and training best fulfills the 
needs of the student.  In such assignments, the teacher’s consent is 
required.  Title 5 § 80005(b) allows an employing agency to select an 
individual that holds a credential based on a bachelor’s degree and a 
teacher preparation program including student teaching and approved 
subject area knowledge and training.  An individual who holds an 
emergency permit, teaching permit, internship, or waiver may not serve 
in this type of assignment.   

 

 

25.  Mr. Severson testified that a certificated employee does not require a specific 

credential to teach Leadership, and that the types of qualifications and experience that the 
committee on assignments looks for in deciding whether a certificated employee should be 
approved to teach that elective class include whether the employee has a Social Science 
credential, and/or experience with school government, team dynamics, school clubs and 
organizations, and/or has worked with students leaders in the past. 
 

26. 

For the 2009-2010 school year, the committee on assignments determined that 

Ms. Kisaka had “developed the necessary leadership skills and training needed to teach this 
course through her AVID training as well as her educational and coaching experiences over 
the past three years.”  The committee approved Mr. Nielsen to teach the Leadership course 
because he had “[y]ears of experience as a teacher and coach.  Has the ability, knowledge 
and skills to shape our students in accordance with course content.” 
 

                                                                                                                                                             

(c) A teacher employed on a full-time basis who teaches kindergarten or any of grades 1 
to 12, inclusive, and who has special skills and preparation outside of his or her credential 
authorization may, with his or her consent, be assigned to teach an elective course in the 
area of the special skills or preparation, provided that the assignment is first approved by 
a committee on assignments. For purposes of this subdivision an “elective course” is a 
course other than English, mathematics, science, or social studies. The membership of the 
committee on assignments shall include an equal number of teachers, selected by 
teachers, and school administrators, selected by school administrators.     

(d) Assignments approved by the committee on assignments shall be for a maximum of 
one school year, but may be extended by action of the committee upon application by the 
schoolsite administrator and the affected teacher. All initial assignments or extensions 
shall be approved prior to the assignment or extension… 

 

8

27. 

The District asserted that a more senior teacher could not bump into the 

elective Leadership class for three reasons.  First, the District argued that, before a 
certificated employee could teach an elective course, he or she had to apply for and receive 
approval from the committee on assignments pursuant to section 44258.7.  According to the 
District, because none of the respondents had received such approval, they could not bump 
into the Leadership class.  Second, the District asserted that, to teach Leadership to students 
at Antelope High School, the teacher should be located at that high school in order to build 
relationships with the students.5  Third, the District initially asserted that it would be 
“problematic” for a teacher from another high school to teach a one-period Leadership class 
at Antelope High School given time and travel issues.  The District withdrew this third 
reason for opposing bumping into the Leadership class when it was pointed out that, as part 
of this layoff, several teachers who were employed at one high school were permitted to 
bump into classes taught by more junior teachers at other high schools. 
 

28.  Ms. Patten is currently a probationary teacher.  Her seniority date is August 

19, 2008.  She holds a clear single subject credential in Social Science.  She also has an 
English Learner Authorization.  She currently teaches one period of U.S. History and one 
period of Student Government at Antelope High School.  She also has one release period for 
Activities Director.  She designed the Leadership class currently being taught by Ms. Kisaka, 
and taught that class during the 2008-2009 school year.  Before her employment with the 
District, Ms. Patten had experience with student government and leadership from her prior 
teaching experience and her involvement with student government at California State 
University, Sacramento.  The ninth-grade elective Leadership class “directly feeds into” the 
tenth-grade Student Government class Ms. Patten is now teaching. 
 

29.  Ms. Patten testified that the most important qualification to teach the 
Leadership class is past leadership experience.  She believes that it is also helpful to have a 
Social Science credential.  She agreed with the District that it would be detrimental to the 
students in the Leadership class to have a teacher who was not located at Antelope High 
School given the “continuity” that is important to prepare the students to assume leadership 
positions at the school. 
 

30.  During closing argument, the District conceded that of all the respondents, Ms. 

Patten was the most qualified to teach the Leadership class, but she was not the most senior. 
 

31. 

Even though the District disputed that a more senior teacher should be allowed 

to bump into the Leadership class, it identified the five most senior respondents who might 
wish to bump into that class:  Steve Clinton, Deborah DeBacco Weddle, Jessica Fork, Cindy 
Geistert, and Amy Shishido.  All these respondents have seniority dates of August 16, 2007.  
They are permanent certificated employees.  The District applied the tie-breaking criteria set 
forth in the PKS Resolution (Finding 4) to these five respondents.  Ms. Fork received seven 
points; Ms. Shishido received five points; the other three respondents each received four 
                                                 

5 The District consists of eight high schools: Adelante High School, Granite Bay High School, Oakmont 

High School, Antelope High School, Independence High School, Roseville High School, Woodcreek High School, 
Challenge High School.   

 

9

points.  Respondents did not dispute these tie-breaking results.  Because Ms. Fork’s 
preliminary layoff notice was rescinded at the hearing, the parties agreed that, as a result of 
the application of the tie-breaking criteria, Ms. Shishido was the most senior respondent with 
an August 16, 2007 seniority date. 
 

32.  Ms. Shishido has a preliminary single subject credential in English and an 
English Learner Authorization.  She is currently teaching two periods CP English 10 and one 
period of CP English 9 at Roseville High School.  She has consented to teach the elective 
Leadership class at Antelope High School.  There was, however, no evidence presented at 
the hearing as to her qualifications or experience to teach that class. 
 

33. 

The evidence established that there are no mandatory credentials, 

qualifications or experience requirements necessary to teach the elective Leadership class.  
Instead, on an annual basis, the committee on assignments determines whether the teacher(s) 
who have consented to teach the class have sufficient qualifications and experience to be 
approved for that assignment.  There was no evidence presented that the District has yet 
selected a certificated employee to teach the Leadership class in the 2010-2011 school year 
or that the committee on assignments has yet reviewed any teachers for that assignment. 
 

34.  While the evidence showed that it might be more beneficial to assign a teacher 

from Antelope High School, instead of a teacher from another District high school, to teach 
the Antelope High School elective Leadership class, in this layoff, the District has permitted 
senior teachers who are currently teaching at one District high school to bump into a single 
class taught by more junior teachers at different District high schools in subjects including 
Math, History, Science and English.  Because the District has allowed these single-class 
bumps, the District did not present sufficient evidence to establish that such single-class 
bumping should not be allowed for the Leadership class.  In this era of email and cellphone 
communications, the evidence did not establish that it would be contrary to the students’ 
interests to allow Ms. Shishido to teach the elective Leadership class at Antelope High 
School, even though she may currently be teaching classes at a different District high 
school.6 
 

35.  Although Ms. Patten may be located at Antelope High School and may be the 
most qualified respondent to teach the Leadership class, she is not the most senior.  Because 
Ms. Shishido has given her consent and is the most senior respondent, she must be given the 
first opportunity to present her qualifications and experience to, and seek approval from, the 
committee on assignments to teach the .33 FTE elective Leadership class at Antelope High 
School during the 2010-2011 school year.  If the committee on assignments determines that 
Ms. Shishido does not have sufficient qualifications and experience to teach that course, it 
must then review the experience and qualifications of the other respondents who have 

                                                 

6 At the hearing, respondents argued that, based upon the District’s argument regarding the elective 
Leadership class, all the bumping that the District has allowed by senior teachers into classes taught by more junior 
teachers at different District high school should be disallowed.  In light of the findings in Finding 34, respondents’ 
argument is rejected.   

 

10

consented to teach that course in order of seniority, and must retain the most senior 
respondent who is approved by the committee on assignments for .33 FTE.   
 
Ted Herr’s Bump 
 

36. 

Ted Herr is a certificated District employee.  His seniority date is August 27, 

1986.  He has a life single subject credential in Math and Spanish.  He also has a CLAD.  He 
currently teaches one class of EL Pre-Algebra at Roseville High School.  He also is the 
Intervention Support Coordinator, also known as the EL Coordinator, for .67 FTE. 
 

37. 

Pursuant to section B.2. of the PKS Resolution (Finding 2), the Board is 

eliminating Mr. Herr’s .67 FTE EL Coordinator position for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

38.  Given Mr. Herr’s seniority date and Math credential, the District decided that 

he could bump into .67 FTE of respondent Deborah DeBacco Weddle’s math assignment. 
 

39.  Ms. DeBacco Weddle is a permanent certificated employee.  Her seniority 
date is August 16, 2007.  She holds a professional clear single subject credential in Math.  
She also has an English Learner Authorization.  She is currently teaching one period of 
Algebra 1 and two periods of Geometry at Granite Bay High School. 
 

40. 

Respondents argued that, given Mr. Herr’s Spanish credential, in order to 

ensure that the most junior teachers were laid off, instead of allowing Mr. Herr to bump into 
.67 FTE of Ms. DeBacco Weddle’s Math classes, the District should have allowed Mr. Herr 
to bump into .67 FTE of the Spanish classes taught by certificated employees more junior 
than Ms. DeBacco Weddle.  Respondents pointed to the following Spanish classes taught by 
more junior employees that the District should have allowed Mr. Herr to bump into:  (1) 
Aimee Girouard is a probationary employee with an August 7, 2009 seniority date, a 
preliminary single subject credential in Spanish, and an English Learner Authorization.  She 
is currently teaching three periods of Spanish 2 at Oakmont High School.  The District has 
served her with a notice of non-reelection.  Her current position will therefore be vacant for 
the 2010-2011 school year;  (2) Jessica Hartman is a probationary employee with a seniority 
date of August 7, 2009, and a preliminary single subject credential in Spanish, with 
supplementary authorizations in Introductory English, Introductory Music, and Literature, 
and an English Learner Authorization.  She is currently teaching two periods of Spanish 1 
and one period of Spanish 2 at Woodcreek High School;  (3) Amparo Quinonez is a 
probationary employee with a seniority date of August 7, 2009, and a preliminary single 
subject credential in Spanish, with a supplementary authorization in Introductory Math and 
an English Learner Authorization.  He is currently teaching three periods of Spanish 1 at 
Antelope High School. 
 

41.  Mr. Severson testified that the District has allowed Mr. Herr to bump into Ms. 

DeBacco Weddle’s Math classes, and not into the Spanish classes currently taught by the 
three identified more junior certificated employees, because Mr. Herr currently teaches Math 
and has taught Math extensively in the recent past.  Although Mr. Severson recognized that 
Mr. Herr was credentialed to teach Spanish, he testified that it has been “several years” since 

 

11

Mr. Herr had taught that subject.  The was no evidence to establish exactly when in the past 
Mr. Herr taught Spanish in the District or whether it was in the last 10 years, as required by 
the competency criteria set forth in the PKS Resolution (Finding 3). 
 

42.  While the District may have chosen to allow Mr. Herr to bump into .67 FTE of 

the Spanish assignments currently being taught by certificated employees more junior than 
Ms. DeBacco Weddle, it was within the District’s discretion to determine that Mr. Herr 
should bump into a Math assignment and not a Spanish assignment.  Respondents did not 
establish that the District acted in an arbitrary or capricious manner or abused its discretion 
by allowing Mr. Herr to bump into .67 FTE of Ms. DeBacco Weddle’s Math assignment.   
 
Assistant Principals 
 

43. 

 As set forth in Finding 2, section C.1. of the PKS Resolution provides for the 

reduction of the following Administrative Services: 
 

1.  Assistant Principals (.17 FTE, two each at GBHS, OHS,  
      RHS, and WHS)                                                                    1.33 FTE 
                      .50 FTE 
2.  Assistant Principal (Adelante High School) 

44.  When it reduced the FTE’s of Assistant Principals, the District did not choose 

the most junior Assistant Principals.  Instead, the District chose to reduce more senior 
Assistant Principals based upon the recommendations of the high school Principals.  The 
Board approved the layoffs of the Assistant Principals designated by the Principals in a 
separate resolution not made part of the record.  None of the Assistant Principals chosen for 
reduction were given preliminary layoff notices.  Instead, they were allowed to bump more 
junior certificated employees. 
 

45. 

The affected Assistant Principals and certificated employees were as follows:  

(a) 

Andrea Zimmerman is currently an Assistant Principal at 

Oakmont High School.  Her seniority date is August 15, 1996.  She has a 
professional clear single subject credential in Life Science and Biological 
Sciences, with a supplementary authorization in Introductory Sciences.  Her 
Assistant Principal assignment was reduced by .17 FTE.  Given her Biological 
Sciences credential, she was allowed to bump into .17 FTE of respondent Amy 
Kraft’s 1.0 FTE.  Ms. Kraft is a probationary employee with a seniority date of 
August 7, 2009.  She has a preliminary single subject credential in Chemistry 
and Biological Sciences.  She currently teaches two periods of CP Chemistry 
and one period of Biology at Antelope High School.  Pursuant to Ms. 
Zimmerman’s bump, Ms. Kraft’s 1.0 FTE was reduced to a .83 FTE. 

Mark Werlein is also currently an Assistant Principal at Oakmont High 

 
School.  His seniority date is July 1, 2007.  He holds a clear single subject 
credential in music.  If Mr. Werlein, instead of Ms. Zimmerman, had been 
partially released from .17 FTE of his Assistant Principal position, given his 

 

12

 

 

 

credential, he would not have been able to bump into .17 FTE of Ms. Kraft’s 
Biological Sciences assignment.  

(b) 

Heather Schlaman is an Assistant Principal at Woodcreek High 

School.  Her seniority date is August 15, 1996.  She holds a clear single 
subject credential in English, and a clear specialist instruction credential in 
Reading and Language Arts.  Her Assistant Principal assignment was reduced 
by .17 FTE.  Given her English credential, she was allowed to bump into .17 
FTE of respondent Florentino Guzman’s 1.0 FTE.  Mr. Guzman is a 
probationary employee with a seniority date of August 19, 2008.  Mr. Guzman 
has a preliminary single subject credential in English.  He is currently teaching 
two periods of CP English 10 and one period of AP Language/Composition at 
Granite Bay High School. 

Shane Waggoner is also an Assistant Principal at Woodcreek High 
 
School.  His seniority date is July 1, 2007.  He holds a clear single subject 
credential in Math, with a supplementary authorization in Physics.  If Mr. 
Waggoner, instead of Ms. Schlaman, had been partially released from .17 FTE 
of his Assistant Principal position, given his credential, he would not have 
been able to bump into .17 FTE of Ms. Guzman’s English assignment. 

(c) 

Brent Mattix is an Assistant Principal at Granite Bay High 

 
School.  His seniority date is August 19, 1999.  He holds a professional clear 
single subject credential in English.  His Assistant Principal assignment was 
reduced by .17 FTE.  Given his English credential, he was allowed to bump 
into .17 of Mr. Guzman’s 1.0 FTE.  Pursuant to the bumps by Ms. Schlaman 
and Mr. Mattix, and two other reductions pursuant to this layoff, Mr. 
Guzman’s full 1.0 FTE was eliminated. 

 
David Vujovich is also an Assistant Principal at Granite Bay High 
School.  His seniority date is July 1, 2007.  He holds a clear single subject 
credential in Social Science.  If Mr. Vujovich, instead of Mr. Mattix, had been 
partially released from .17 FTE of his Assistant Principal position, given his 
credential, he would not have been able to bump into .17 FTE of Mr. 
Guzman’s English assignment. 

 

 

46.  At the hearing, the District argued that it was within its discretion under 

section 44951 to choose whichever Assistant Principals it wished to partially release from 
their assignments without concern for their seniority.  Respondents argued that, while section 
44951 permits a school district to release whichever Assistant Principal it wishes outside a 
layoff, because the reductions of the Assistant Principals’ assignments were included in this 
layoff pursuant to the PKS Resolution, the District was required to comply with the 
provisions of section 44955 and reduce the most junior Assistant Principals’ assignments.  
Respondents asserted that if the District had complied with section 44955 and chosen the 
most junior Assistant Principals for reduction, because those Assistant Principals have 
different credentials than the more senior Assistant Principals who were partially released, 

13

 

 

 

 

those more junior Assistant Principals would not have been able to bump respondents Kraft 
and Guzman.  This issue is addressed in the Legal Conclusions below. 
 

47. 

There was no evidence that the District proposes to eliminate any services that 

are mandated by state or federal laws or regulations. 
 

above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 

48.  Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed 

49. 

Except as provided in Findings 35 and 46, no junior employees are being 

retained to render services that more senior respondents are certificated and competent to 
perform. 
 

50. 

The District’s reductions and discontinuances of particular kinds of services 

relate solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth 

in sections 44949 and 44955. 
 

2. 

The services identified in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of services 
that may be reduced or eliminated under section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or 
eliminate the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper 
exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or elimination of services relates solely to the 
welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949. 
 

3. 

As set forth in Finding 8, the District agreed to rescind the preliminary layoff 
notice served upon respondent Jessica Fork.  The District also agreed to reduce the proposed 
layoff of respondent Amy Shishido from 1.0 FTE to .50 FTE, and the proposed layoff of 
Mark Armstrong from 1.0 FTE to .50 FTE. 
 

4. 

As set forth in Finding 35, the District must give respondent Amy Shishido the 
first opportunity to present her qualifications and experience to, and seek approval from, the 
committee on assignments to teach the .33 FTE Leadership class at Antelope High School 
during the 2010-2011 school year.  If the committee on assignments determines that Ms. 
Shishido does not have sufficient qualifications and experience to teach that class, it must 
then review the experience and qualifications of the other respondents who have consented to 
teach that class in order of seniority, and must retain the most senior respondent who is 
approved by the committee on assignments for .33 FTE. 
 

5. 

As set forth in Findings 45 and 46, pursuant to section 44951, the District chose 
to partially release Assistant Principals from their assignments who were more senior to other 
Assistant Principals whose assignments were not reduced.  Respondents argued that, because 
the Board chose to include the reductions of the Assistant Principals’ assignments in this 

 

 

14

layoff, pursuant to section 44955, the District was required to reduce the assignments of the 
most junior Assistant Principals.  Respondents asserted that if the District had complied with 
section 44955 and chosen the most junior Assistant Principals for reduction, because those 
Assistant Principals have credentials that are different from those possessed by the more 
senior Assistant Principals who were partially released, those more junior Assistant 
Principals would not have been able to bump respondents Amy Kraft and Florencio Guzman. 
 

6. 

Section 44951 provides: 

 

 

 

Unless a certificated employee holding a position requiring an 
administrative or supervisory credential is sent written notice 
deposited in the United States registered mail with postage 
prepaid and addressed to his or her last known address by March 
15 that he or she may be released from his or her position for the 
following school year, or unless the signature of the employee is 
obtained by March 15 on the written notice that he or she may 
be released from his or her position for the following year, he or 
she shall be continued in the position.  The provisions of this 
section do not apply to a certificated employee who holds a 
written contract with an expiration date beyond the current 
school year, or to a certificated employee holding a position that 
is funded for less than a school year, or to a certificated 
employee assigned to an acting position whose continuing right 
to hold this position depends on being selected from an eligible 
list established for the position, or to the termination of 
employment pursuant to Section 44955.  (Bolding added.)  

7. 

By its express terms, the provisions of section 44951 cannot be used when an 

Assistant Principal’s employment is being terminated pursuant to a layoff under section 
44955.  The PKS Resolution, in section C, explicitly provides for the reduction of the 
Assistant Principals’ FTE’s. (Finding 2.)  Although the District asserted that the more senior 
Assistant Principals were partially released pursuant to a separate resolution adopted by the 
Board, the District did not offer that separate resolution into evidence or otherwise establish 
reasons for the partial release other than this layoff.  Given the seniority dates of the affected 
Assistant Principals and their credentials (Finding 45), it appears that the more senior 
Assistant Principals were chosen for partial FTE reductions because the more junior 
Assistant Principals did not have either the seniority or the credentials to effectuate the layoff 
reductions that the District was seeking.  Given the plain language of section 44951, the 
District could not utilize that section’s release provisions when, as in this case, it was 
terminating the Assistant Principals’ employment under section 44955.  Because .17 FTE of 
Ms. Kraft’s employment and .33 FTE of Mr. Guzman’s employment would not have been 
reduced had the District complied with section 44955 in reducing the FTE’s of its Assistant 
Principals, these respondents’ reductions must be rescinded.  Because Ms. Kraft’s FTE was 
reduced from 1.0 to .83 pursuant to the preliminary layoff notice served upon her, her notice 
must be rescinded. 
 

15

8. 

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 3, 4 and 7, cause exists to reduce 

certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or elimination of particular kinds 
of services.  Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 3, 4 and 7, the District properly 
identified the certificated employees to be laid off as directed by the Board. 
 

9. 

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 3, 4 and 7, no junior certificated 

employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services that a more senior respondent is 
certificated and competent to render. 
 

10.  Other than for Ms. Fork (Legal Conclusion 3) and Ms. Kraft (Legal 

Conclusion 7), and as reduced for Ms. Shishido (Legal Conclusions 3 and 4), Mr. Armstrong 
(Legal Conclusion 3), and Mr. Guzman (Legal Conclusion 7), cause exists to give notice to 
respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2010-2010 
school year because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

Pursuant to Legal Conclusion 3, the District shall rescind the preliminary 

layoff notice served upon Jessica Fork. 
 

Armstrong from 1.0 FTE to .50 FTE. 
 

2. 

Pursuant to Legal Conclusion 3, the District shall reduce the layoff of Mark 

3. 

Pursuant to Legal Conclusion 3, the District shall reduce the layoff of Amy 

Shishido from 1.0 FTE to .50 FTE.  Pursuant to Legal Conclusion 4, the District shall reduce 
the layoff of Amy Shishido by an additional .33 FTE if the committee on assignments 
determines that she has the qualifications and experience to teach the Leadership class at 
Antelope High School during the 2010-2011 school year.  If the committee on assignments 
determines that Ms. Shishido does not have the qualifications and experience to teach the 
Leadership class at Antelope High School during the 2010-2011 school year, the District 
shall comply with Legal Conclusion 4. 
 

4. 

Pursuant to Legal Conclusion 7, the District shall rescind the preliminary 

layoff notice served upon Amy Kraft. 
 

5. 

Pursuant to Legal Conclusion 7, the District shall reduce the preliminary 

notice of layoff served upon Florencio Guzman by .33 FTE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16

 

 

6. 

Except as provided in Recommendations 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, notice may be given 

to respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 13, 2010 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
KAREN J. BRANDT 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

17

