BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE ALHAMBRA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

     OAH Case No. 2010030589 
 
 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certificated Employees of the Alhambra  
Unified School District, 
 
                               Respondents. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard, but the record 

 
 
The hearing in the above-captioned matter was held on April 15, 2010, at Alhambra,  
California.  Joseph D. Montoya, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), presided.  Complainant was represented by James B. Fernow and L. Carlos 
Villegas, Fagen, Freidman, and Fulfrost, LLP.  Jean Shin, Rothner, Seagall, Greenstone &  
Leheny, represented the following Respondents:  Bary Abrams, Rose Barron, Lee Chen-
Norman, Jennifer Canzano, Sharyn Fujimoto, Jacqueline Herrera, Sonja Holladay, Janet 
Hsia, Nadean Juarez, Carol Lam-Jones, Patricia Mace, Josephine Majul, Goharig Matosian, 
Mary Nelson, Vincent Ngo, Tina On, Margaret Padilla, Naomi Peavey, Carol Salas, Ana 
Santomauro, Christine Schwehr, Mary Torregrossa, Martin Vedova, and James Won.   
 
 
was held open until April 22, 2010, so that the parties could file written briefs.  
Complainant’s brief is identified as Exhibit 17, and Respondents’ brief is identified as 
Exhibit A.1   
 
 
Judge hereby makes his factual findings, legal conclusions, and order, as follows. 
 
// 
 
// 
 
// 
 
// 
                                                
 
by the 22nd, but identifying the 22nd as “Friday,” which was in fact the 23rd.  Complainant’s 
brief was faxed on the 23rd, just before 5:00 p.m.  It was not logged in by OAH staff until 
the morning of the April 26.  In the circumstances, it will be deemed a timely submission.   

1  The ALJ caused some uncertainty regarding the deadline, by asking for the briefs 

The case was submitted for decision on April 26, 2010.  The Administrative Law 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 

1.  Complainant Donna M. Perez filed and maintained the Accusation2 in the above-

 
captioned matter while acting in her official capacity as Superintendent of the Alhambra 
Unified School District (District).    
 
 
Respondents in this case: 
 

2.  The following persons are certificated employees of the District and are the 

Barry Abrams, Rose Marie Barron, Jennifer Canzano, Lee Chen-
Norman, Mary Comstock, Sharyn Fujimoto, Jacqueline Herrera, Sonja 
Holladay, Janet Hsia, Nadean Juarez, Carol Lam-Jones, Patricia Mace, 
Julia Macys, Josephine Majul, Goharig Matosian, Mary Nelson, 
Vincent Ngo, Qui Nguy, Tina Quyen On, Margaret Padilla, Carol 
Salas, Ana Santomauro, Christine Schwehr, Naomi Tambara-Peavey, 
Mary Torregrossa, Martin Vedova, James Won, Huimin Zhou. 

 

3. 

(A)  On February 16, 2010, the Governing Board of the District (Board) 

 

(B)  The FTEs that the Board determined to reduce are described in the 

adopted  Resolution number 09-10-14, entitled “In the Matter of the Reduction or 
Discontinuance of Certain Particular Kinds of Services” (Reduction Resolution). The 
purpose of the Reduction Resolution was to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of 
certificated services no later than the end of the 2009-2010 school year.  Specifically, the 
resolution requires the reductions of 26.7 “FTE”—Full Time Equivalents—by reducing 
various types of services.  This decision was based on financial concerns as the District faces 
a budget shortfall.  All of the services to be reduced are within the District’s Adult Education 
program.   
 
 
Reduction Resolution, as follows: 
 
 
Adult Basic Ed/GED Prep 
 
Adult Secondary Ed/Adult Learning Ctr. 
 
Adult Secondary Ed/Independent Study 
 
Adult with Disabilities 
 
 
Brush Painting 
 
 
 
Citizenship 
                                                
2 The term “accusation” refers to a type of pleading utilized under the Administrative 
 
Procedure Act, Government Code sections 11500 and 11503; that statutory scheme governs 
the hearing procedures in this case.  The Respondents are not “accused” in the every-day 
sense of that word; they have done nothing wrong, and all appear to be dedicated 
professionals.  It might be said that they are simply accused of not having enough seniority 
or other qualifications to retain their positions with the District in the face of a resolution to 
reduce positions.     
 

0.7 
2.0 
1.8 
0.6 
0.2 
0.8 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
Computer 
DET Prep Distance Learning 
 
ESL Distance Learning 
 
ESL 
 
Office Occupations 
 
Older Adult 
 
Parent Education 
 
Spanish 
 
Welding 
 
Counselor 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.2 
 
0.2 
 
 
1.2 
          13.5 
1.4 
 
1.2 
 
1.0 
 
0.2 
 
0.2 
 
1.5 
 

Total FTE to be reduced: 
  

 
 
 
 
4.  The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are particular kinds 

          26.7 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

6.  The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 

5.  The decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was neither arbitrary 

of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.3   
 
 
nor capricious but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s discretion given the 
uncertainty regarding the state budget and the District’s financial resources.  
  
 
District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees as determined by the Board. 
 
7.  The Board also adopted two other resolutions relevant to this matter.  One 
 
resolution, number 09-10-15 set forth tie breaking criteria, to be used in the event that two or 
more teachers shared the same seniority date.  The other resolution, number 09-10-16, set 
forth Kindergarten through 12th grade competency criteria.  That resolution provided that to 
be deemed competent for assignment to teach in those grades, a teacher would have to have  
academic training and one semester of full-time experience within the last five years in K-12 
education at the grade level to which the District would be able to assign that teacher.  
Further, self-contained and departmentalized programs were to be considered separate 
competencies.   
 
 
pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955 their services would not be required in the 2010-2011 
school year (hereafter the preliminary notices).4  Thereafter, Respondents requested a 
hearing and then each was served with an Accusation and other documents pertaining to the 
hearing process.  Each Respondent filed a notice of defense.     
 
                                                
 
 
 
request a hearing, and was not served with an accusation packet.   

4   One other teacher, James Moyer, received a preliminary notice, but he did not 

3   All further statutory references are to the Education Code.  

(A)  On or about March 1, 2010 each Respondent was given written notice that 

8. 

3

 

  

  

8. 

(C)  All jurisdictional requirements have been met.   

(A)  In the course of the reduction in force process, the District created a 

(B)  It was stipulated that the seniority date of Respondent Sharyn Fujimoto 

(B)  Following the service of the preliminary notices, and at the outset of the 
 
hearing, the District rescinded notices that had been served on two certificated employees, 
Carol Lam Jones and Jacqueline Herrera, and they are deemed dismissed from this 
proceeding, as is Martin Vedova, who retired after filing his notice of defense and before the 
hearing. 
 
 
 
 
seniority list.   That seniority list took into account a number of factors, including first date of 
paid service and the tie-breaking criteria.   
 
 
should be September 1, 1999, and that the seniority date of Respondent Sonja Holladay 
should be September 14, 1998.   
 
 
9. The District has a large percentage of “English Learner” students among its 
students, approximately 35 per cent, and thus every elementary class has at least one English 
Learner student.  As such, all teachers at the elementary level must have a CLAD.  If a 
teacher does not have such a certificate, they can apply for and obtain an emergency CLAD, 
which is of one year duration.  During that time, they must enroll in and complete the course 
of study for such a certificate, or pass the qualification examination, which leads to issuance 
of the certificate.   
 
 
of the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB). 
 
 
11. Respondents Janet Hsia, Julia Macys, and Ana Santomauro testified on their own 
behalves.  Although all three Respondents are very experienced teachers, none of them were 
able to establish that they held CLAD certificates, or were NCLB highly-qualified, as of 
March 15, 2010, or even the hearing date.  None of those three witnesses were able to 
establish that they came within the Board’s competency criteria, as they have not taught in a 
K-12 class for one semester during the past five years.  No other respondent demonstrated 
that they had such experience.   
 
12.  No junior certificated employee is being retained in a position that a more senior 
 
employee is certificated and competent to fill.  No junior teacher established that they should 
have been skipped either.   
 
 
 

10.  Under federal law, every teacher must be “highly qualified” within the meaning 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
 
and 44955, based on Factual Findings 1 through 7(C). 

1.  Jurisdiction was established to proceed in this matter, pursuant to sections 44949 

 

4

 

2.   

(B)  The services to be discontinued are particular kinds of services within the 

 
 
(A)  A District may reduce a particular kind of service (PKS) within the 
meaning of section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of 
service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce 
services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of 
Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)   The Court of Appeal has made clear that a 
PKS reduction does not have to lead to less classrooms or classes; laying off some teachers 
amounts to a proper reduction.  (Zalac v. Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. 
(2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 853-85; see also San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627, 631, 637 [reduction of classroom teaching can be a reduction of a PKS; as 
long as there is a change in the method of teaching or in a particular kind of service in 
teaching a particular subject any amount in excess of the statutory minimum may be 
reduced]; California Teachers Assn. v. Board of Trustees (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)   
 
 
meaning of section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. 
Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.  This Legal Conclusion is 
based on Factual Findings 3 through 6 and the aforementioned statutes. 
 
 
a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  At the same time, junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers—may be “skipped” in favor of 
that senior employee—if the junior teacher possesses superior skills or capabilities not 
possessed by their more senior colleagues.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School 
District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. 
Governing Bd. of Santa Clara Unified School Dist. (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) 
 
 
(B)   Respondents Comstock, Padilla, Fujimoto, Hsia, and Macys assert that 
they are credentialed to teach in K-12 education, and should be allowed to bump into such 
positions due to their seniority.  The District has asserted its competency criteria, which 
requires some experience in teaching in the class that a respondent would bump into.   
Respondents assert that the District should be required to give the teachers a competency 
exam of the type mentioned in section 44944, subdivision (c).  (Ex. A, p. 2.)   
 
 
decision of the Court of Appeal in Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 
Cal.App.3d 555, upheld a community college’s right to define “competence” by resolution, 
and that the statute relied on was virtually identical to the pertinent provisions of section 
44955.  As in Duax, the competency requirement here is not drawn in too narrow a manner 
and must be upheld.   

(C)  The weight of authority favors the District.  It rightly points out that the 

(A)  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to 

3. 

 

 

 

5

   

(B)  No Respondent established that they had the right to bump a junior 

 
 
employee or that they should have been skipped, based on the foregoing and Factual 
Findings 9 through 12.      
 
 
 

ORDER 

1.  Respondents Carol Lam Jones and Jacqueline Herrera are dismissed based on the 

 
 
rescission of the preliminary notices to them.   
 
 
2.  The remaining Respondents may receive final layoff notices in inverse order of 
seniority, those Respondents being:  Barry Abrams, Rose Marie Barron, Jennifer Canzano, 
Lee Chen-Norman, Mary Comstock, Sharyn Fujimoto, Sonja Holladay, Janet Hsia, Nadean 
Juarez, Patricia Mace, Julia Macys, Josephine Majul, Goharig Matosian, Mary Nelson, 
Vincent Ngo, Qui Nguy, Tina Quyen On, Margaret Padilla, Carol Salas, Ana Santomauro, 
Christine Schwehr, Naomi Tambara-Pearey, Mary Torregrossa, James Won, and Huimin 
Zhou..   
 
 
 
April ____, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________ 
Joseph D. Montoya 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

6

