BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE 
CHULA VISTA ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Layoff/Accusation 
Against: 
 
 368 CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES, 
 
                                       Respondents. 
 
 
 

 
    OAH No. 2010020611 
 
     

PROPOSED DECISION 

Dean T. Adams, Esq. of Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost LLP represented the Chula Vista 

This matter came on regularly for hearing before Roy W. Hewitt, Administrative Law 

 
 
Judge, at Chula Vista, California on April 15, 2010. 
 
 
Elementary School District (the district). 
 
 
Fern M. Steiner, Esq. of Tosdal, Levine, Smith, Steiner & Wax represented all of the 
respondents except for 44 respondents who are currently teaching Dual Immersion classes in 
the district and who were served with “Precautionary” Layoff Notices. 
 
 
the 44 Dual Immersion respondents who were served with “Precautionary” Layoff Notices. 
 
 
2010. 
 
 

Henry M. Willis, Esq. of Schwartz, Steinsapir, Dohrmann & Sommers LLP represented 

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the matter was submitted on April 15, 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

On March 9, 2010, the Board of Education of the district (the board) adopted 

 
 
Resolution number 2009-10.69, determining that it would be necessary to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) at the end of the current school year.  The 
board determined that the PKS that must be reduced for the 2010-2011 school year were the 
following full-time equivalent (FTE) positions: 
 

 

1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

PKS 
 
K-6 General Education Teachers 
 
Associate Principals   
 
Coordinators of Instructional Tech. & Media 
Services, and Student, Family & Community 
Services 
 
 
Directors of Human Resources 
 
Executive Director of Curriculum & Instruction 
 
Part-Time Program Support Teachers 
 
Project Specialist 
 
Resource Teachers 
 
Site Resource Teachers 
 
Site Teacher on Special Assignment 
 
Special Education: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teachers on Special Assignment: 
 
 
 

Coordinators   
 
Director 

Teachers, Behavioral Specialist 

Chula Vista Nature Center 

Program Specialists   

Resource Specialists   

Psychologists  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Teachers, Special Day Class- Mild/Moderate 

Teachers, Special Day Class-Moderate/Severe 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FTE 

374 

   10 

     2 

     2  

     1 

     4 

     1 

     6 

  20 

     1 

    6 

    1 

    2 

    4 

    2 

    2 

  10 

    5 

    1 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

3. 

2. 

    1 

_________ 
 455 

On March 10, 2010, based on the board’s resolution, the Assistant 

The district’s recommendation and the board’s decision to reduce or 

The services listed above are PKS, which may be reduced or discontinued within the 

Olympic Training Center 
 
 

 
  
 
Total FTE positions to be reduced or eliminated 
 
 
meaning of Education Code section 44955. 
 
 
Superintendent of the district, by delegation of authority from the Superintendent, 
recommended, with regard to the ensuing school year, that the board reduce or eliminate the 
specified PKS provided by the district for the 2010-2011 school year by notifying the 
certificated employees listed in Hearing Exhibit 1A that their services will not be required for 
the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
discontinue the services listed in Finding 1, above, were neither arbitrary nor capricious; 
rather, the recommendation and decision were based on a projected 15.21 million dollar 
budget deficit.  Thus, the board’s decision represents a proper exercise of its discretion. 
 
 
district and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees as determined by the board. 
 
 
probationary teachers employed by the district, by creating a seniority list, first selecting 
teachers to be laid off in the inverse of the order in which they were employed, then 
assigning and reassigning employment in such a manner that all employees to be retained 
will be retained so as to render services which their seniority and qualifications entitle them 
to render. 
 
 
certificated employees affected by the layoffs, received written notices/precautionary notices 
notifying them that, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, their services 
“will not be required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year:” 
 
 
an accusation in her official capacity. 

On March 16, 2010, the Assistant Superintendent of the district made and filed 

The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 

Prior to March 15, 2010, the 368 respondents, listed in Hearing Exhibit 1A, 

The Assistant Superintendent designated the respondents, permanent or 

7. 

5. 

6. 

4. 

 
8. 

 
9. 

Prior to March 15, 2010, the board adopted tie-breaking and skipping criteria 

to be used in this reduction in force matter. 

Prior to March 15, 2010, all respondents were served with board resolution 
number 2009-10.69, a Notice of Recommendation that Services Will Not Be Required, a 
Statement to Respondent, the Accusation, a Notice of Defense, a Request for Hearing, and 
copies of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, and Government Code sections 11506, 

 

3

11507.5, 11507.6, 11507.7, and 11520.  Additionally, the Notice of Recommendation that 
Services Will be Terminated advised respondents as follows: 

 

 
11. 

“Pursuant to Education Code section 44949 (a copy of which is 

attached, together with section 44955) you may request a hearing to 
determine if there is cause for not reemploying you for the 2010-2011 
school year.  Your request for a hearing must be in writing and must be 
received in Human Resources, [address omitted], no later that 5:00 
p.m., Thursday, March 18, 2010.  If you fail to request a hearing on or 
before that date, your failure to do so shall constitute a waiver of your 
right to a hearing and your services will accordingly be terminated as 
indicated above and for the reasons indicated above, without a hearing; 
if you desire a hearing, you may use that form or another form as you 
desire.  (Exh. 1C.)” 
 
10.  All 368 respondents listed in Hearing Exhibit 1A timely submitted their 

notices of defense requesting a hearing to determine if cause exists for not re-employing 
them for the ensuing year.  

Each respondent who requested a hearing and filed a Notice of Defense was 

properly noticed of the date, time and place of the instant hearing.  

 
12.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.  
 
13. 

14. 

Respondents are certificated permanent or probationary employees of the 

 
district. 
 
 
The following concern was raised during the hearing:  44 Dual Immersion 
teachers were skipped, and more senior teachers who contend they can perform the Dual 
Immersion teaching functions were slated for layoff.1
 
 
February 9, 2010 board resolution, Resolution Number 2009-10.69, the board adopted 
criteria to be applied to deviate from terminating certificated employees who may otherwise 
be terminated by order of seniority, as allowed by California Education Code section 44955, 
subdivision (d).2  Board Resolution Number 2009-10.69 sets established the following 
“skipping” criterion:  

In connection with this concern, the evidence established that as part of the 

15. 

Out of an abundance of caution the district served 44 “skipped” Dual Immersion teachers with 

                                                 
1  
“Precautionary” lay off notices so that if the district’s application of the skipping criterion was erroneous, its ability 
to lay off the appropriate number of teachers to implement the board’s resolution would not be prejudiced. 
  
2  
California Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1) allows a school district the discretion to 
deviate from strict seniority determinations if the “district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 
specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee [who is skipped] has special training and 
experience necessary to teach that course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do 
not possess.”  

 

4

 

 

“Teachers of bilingual/dual immersion classes constitute a 
special and specific need in this District and shall be considered for this 
purpose as personnel teaching a specific course or course of study, and 
teachers teaching bilingual/dual immersion classes have special training 
and experience necessary to teach bilingual/dual immersion classes for 
purposes of Education Code section 44955(d).  (Exh. 1C.)” 

Although certain bilingual respondents testified that they also possess the necessary 

 
 
special training and experience to teach Dual Immersion classes,3 the evidence failed to 
support their contention(s).  Teaching in the Dual Immersion program requires training and 
experience above and beyond that possessed by bilingual teachers who have not taught Dual 
Immersion in the District during the past year.  Dual Immersion is a highly specialized form 
of teaching that requires constant interaction with the program and its attendant training 
programs, conferences and seminars, to maintain proficiency in applying teaching techniques 
that are constantly evolving.  The 44 teachers in the district who were served with 
“Precautionary” lay off notices are currently teaching Dual Immersion classes, and will be 
teaching Dual Immersion classes next year.  The district and those teachers have invested a 
great deal of resources in the special training and experience necessary for those teachers to 
reach their current levels of special competency and the desire to retain those teachers is 
warranted.  Under subdivision (d)(1), the District may skip a junior teacher being retained for 
specified reasons.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 
131.)  Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior 
teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)  In the present instance, the 44 
skipped Dual Immersion teachers possess superior skills and capabilities in implementing 
current Dual Immersion techniques that their more senior counterparts lack.  Consequently, 
the 44 Dual Immersion respondents were properly skipped by the district pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d).  
 
 
probationary employee, or any permanent employee with less seniority, is being retained to 
render services which such permanent employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 

The services of no permanent employees are being terminated while any 

16. 

The district has considered, and continues to consider all positively assured 

The layoffs will not reduce any of the district’s offerings in code mandated 

 
courses below the level required by law.  
 
                                                 
3  
course of study,” within the meaning of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d) was not challenged by the 
bilingual respondents who questioned the appropriateness of the district’s “skipping;” rather, the focus was on 
whether the other, more senior bilingual teachers, had the requisite special/ superior skills and capabilities required 
to assume teaching positions in the district’s Dual Immersion program.  

The fact that there is a specific need for personnel to teach Dual Immersion classes, as a “specific course or 

5

17. 
attrition.  

 
18. 

 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

3. 

1. 

The services listed in Factual Finding 1 are PKS that can be reduced or 

Jurisdiction for the instant proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code 

Based on the Factual Findings, considered in their entirety, cause exists to 

 
 
sections 44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been 
provided/met, as required. 
 
 
discontinued pursuant to Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper 
exercise of its discretion.  
 
 
reduce the number of certificated employees of the District by 455 FTE positions, due to the 
budget crisis described in Factual Finding 3. 
 
 
District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
 
 
which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
lay off notices were properly skipped by the district and shall be dismissed from the 
Accusation.  The Accusation shall be sustained as to the remaining respondents, and they 
shall be notified that their services will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school year due 
to reduction or discontinuance of PKS. 
 
 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

The 44 respondents who teach Dual Immersion and received “Precautionary” 

Cause to reduce or discontinue services relates solely to the welfare of the 

5. 

4. 

6. 

6

ADVISORY DETERMINATION 

 

made: 

WHEREFORE, THE FOLLOWING ADVISORY DETERMINATION is hereby 

 
The Accusation is sustained in part.  The Accusation is dismissed as to the 44 Dual 

 
Immersion respondents, and the district shall notify the remaining respondents that their 
services will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school year due to lack of funds and the 
resulting need to reduce or discontinue PKS. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April ___, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
ROY W. HEWITT 
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

7

