BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
SACRAMENTO CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SACRAMENTO 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

   
OAH No. 2010020831 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE SACRAMENTO 
CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
 
                                                   Respondents. 
 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Margaret Geddes and Christina Y. Medina, Attorneys at Law, of Beeson, Tayer and 

 
This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Jonathan Lew, State of 
 
California, Office of Administrative Hearings, on April 26 through 30, 2010, in Sacramento, 
California. 
 
 
Karen M. Rezendes, Dulcinea A. Grantham, Jane Harrington and Leah J. Won, 
Attorneys at Law, of Lozano Smith, represented the Sacramento City Unified School District 
(District). 
 
 
Bodine, APC, represented respondents identified in Attachment A attached hereto and 
incorporated herein by reference. 
 
 
appeared on their own behalf.   
 
 
closed.  The case was submitted for decision on April 30, 2010.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondents Javier Cervantes and Tony Marine were not represented by counsel and 

Evidence was received, closing oral argument was considered and the record was 

 

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 

1. 

The District is a large urban school district that provides services to 

approximately 48,000 students at 85 school sites in and surrounding the City of Sacramento.  
The District employs approximately 2,300 certificated employees. 
 

2. 

Jonathan P. Raymond is the Superintendent of the District.  Carol Mignone 

Stephen is the District’s Associate Superintendent, Human Resource Services.  The actions 
of Mr. Raymond and Ms. Mignone Stephen, and the actions of the District Governing Board, 
were taken in their official capacities. 
 

3. 

The District has experienced declining enrollment, increasing costs, as well as 
projected funding cuts from the State, leading to budget cuts of more than $100 million over 
the past seven years.  It is now facing a $30.6 million deficit for school year 2010-2011.  The 
District must make difficult fiscal decisions in order to remain solvent, and to receive a 
positive budget certification.  The Associate Superintendent noted that if this current deficit 
is not addressed, the District will receive a negative certification from the Sacramento 
County Office of Education, placing the District at risk of being placed into receivership, and 
having to make even deeper cuts next year.  The Associate Superintendent and her staff met 
and developed proposals for programs and services to be reduced and/or eliminated to 
address the anticipated budget deficit. 
 

4. 

The Associate Superintendent presented her findings and alternative 

recommendations to the Board at its regular meeting on March 4, 2010, along with a 
proposed resolution specifying criteria to be used to determine the order of termination of 
certificated employees with equal seniority (Resolution #2600 – tie-breaking criteria) and 
criteria for deviation from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority 
(Resolution #2601 – skipping criteria).  As a result of the District’s current financial 
situation, the Board determined that it must reduce particular kinds of services throughout the 
organization. 
 

5. 

On March 4, 2010, the Associate Superintendent recommended to the Board 

that particular kinds of services being offered by the District be discontinued or reduced.  
The Associate Superintendent stated the reasons for the recommendation.  The Board 
approved the recommendations and, following the adoption of the Resolution set forth 
below, directed the Superintendent or designee to implement the recommendations.  The 
Board also charged the Superintendent and his staff to identify an equivalent number of 
certificated personnel and give those certificated employees notice in writing of the 
Superintendent’s recommendation that their services would not be required for the ensuing 
school year.  The recommendation of certificated personnel to be identified for layoff from 
employment with the District was not related to their skills or performance as teachers. 
 

6. 

In response to the Associate Superintendent’s recommendation above, the 
Board adopted Resolution #2599 on March 4, 2010.  The Board resolved that the District 
needs to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services as recommended by the Associate 

 

2

Superintendent and, accordingly, it was resolved that it is necessary to terminate the 
employment of an equivalent number of certificated employees of the District due to the 
reductions.  Resolution #2599 authorized the Superintendent or designee to take action to 
reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2009-10 school year: 
 

Particular Kind of Service (PKS) 

Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)

Elementary Class Size Reduction 
Teachers 

 

 

 

 

Counselors 
 
Psychologists  

 

 

  91.0 

  26.0 

     

    4.6 

Sub Total: 

            144.0  FTE

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
Counselors 
 
 
ROTC  
 
Industrial Arts 
Computers  
 
 
Middle School Core   
 
Art 
 
Children’s Center 
 
English 
 
Spanish 
     
Health  
Home Economics 
 
Elementary Teachers  
 
PE 
 
Resource Teacher 
 
ROP 
 
 
 
Psychologists   
 
Social Science 
Social Worker  
 
Program Specialists   

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
    
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

   

   

 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

3

  18.6 
    1.0 
    2.0 
    1.0 
  11.0 
    3.0 
    3.0 
  24.6 
    3.0 
    1.0 
    1.0 
  84.0 
    4.0 
  38.0 
    2.0 
    2.2 
  10.0 
    7.0   
  10.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sub Total: 

 226.4     FTE

Adult Education Teachers 

   82.0    FTE   

 

TOTAL 

 

 

 430.0    FTE 

The proposed reductions total 430.0 FTE, with an equivalent number of certificated 

positions. 
 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

F. 

7. 

Resolution #2601 specified skipping criteria where there was a specific need 
within the District for certificated employees qualified to serve the needs of K-12 students 
with respect to the following programs, services and qualifications:   
 

Individuals fully credentialed to serve in special education assignments; 

Individuals fully credentialed to serve in classes requiring Bilingual Cross-
Cultural Language and Development (BCLAD) certification; 

Individuals who have been trained in the Waldorf-method of teaching; 

Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in secondary physical science, 
chemistry, biology, physics, and/or earth science assignments; 

Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in secondary math, algebra, 
geometry, trigonometry and/or calculus assignments; 

Individuals who have two or more years of experience teaching and/or 
specialized training in a home or hospital setting.  

 
  The Board noted a special need to retain certificated employees who possess these 

qualifications, regardless of seniority, pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
(d). 

 
8. 

At the same meeting, the Board also adopted Resolution #2600.  This 

Resolution set forth criteria for breaking ties when two or more certificated employees with 
the same first day of paid service were facing potential layoff.  The Board listed categories 
for consideration, and assigned weights to each category, as follows:  Category I – 
Professional Preparation, including each single subject, multiple subject or service credential 
(3 points each), each supplemental or subject matter authorization (1 point per authorization), 
each limited assignment permit (1/2 point per permit), doctorate degree (1 point), masters 
degree (1/2 point each), and National Board certification (1 point); and Category II – 
certificated experience under contract with the District not reflected by the employee’s date 
of hire (e.g., an employee who may have resigned and was later rehired by the District) (1 
point for each year of service).  Each category of criteria was to be applied independently, 
with criteria in Category I constituting a first level tiebreaker, and so on.  In case of ties 
continuing through listed criteria, Category III – Lottery, was to be used to break such ties. 
 

9. 

The services set forth in Resolution #2599 are “particular kinds of services” 
that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  
There was no evidence that the Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular 
kinds of services was arbitrary or capricious.  The reduction or elimination of the particular 
kinds of services set forth in Resolution #2599 constituted a proper exercise of the Board’s 
discretion, within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

 

 

10.  On March 11, 2010, the District served via certified mail a written preliminary 

notice that advised permanent and probationary certificated employees, pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that their services would not be required for the 
next school year.  The preliminary notices were served on 733 certificated permanent and/or 
probationary employees of the District.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation and noted that the Board had adopted Resolution #2599, which was 
attached to the preliminary notice.  Of the 733 employees served a preliminary notice, 401 
certificated employees timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is cause for 
not reemploying them for the ensuing school year. 
 

11.  On March 4, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution #2010-D, in which the 
Board resolved pursuant to Education Code section 44954 to release or nonreelect 122 
certificated employees identified as temporary.  Of those employees designated as 
temporary, 104 were hired either directly into categorically funded programs or to fill in for 
permanent certificated employees serving in categorically funded programs pursuant to 
Education Code section 44909.  These 104 certificated employees each received a Notice of 
Termination/Layoff for Certificated Temporary Employees, which was served by certified 
mail on March 11, 2010 (dual notice).  This precautionary or dual notice notified the 
recipients that they had been released as temporary employees by the District; however, if 
the recipient disputed his or her temporary employment status, he or she was being given 
notice of layoff pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, and could request a 
hearing to determine if there was cause for not reemploying him or her for the 2010-11 
school year.   
 

12.  On March 4, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution #2010-B for possible 
release/reassignment of certificated administrative employees.  A list of all certificated 
management/administrative employees was attached to Resolution #2010-B; all of these 
administrative employees received a Notice of Possible Release/Reassignment, which was 
served by certified mail on March 5, 2010.  At hearing, 55 certificated administrators were 
identified as having possible return rights to a classroom teaching position.  Some 
administrators were notified that their credential(s) and seniority did not qualify them for a 
classroom teaching position, and they were given preliminary notices of layoff pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.   
 

13. 

The Associate Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each of the 

certificated employees of the District who timely requested a hearing after receipt of the 
preliminary notice or double notice.  It was not disputed that the Accusations, with required 
accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense, as well as Notices of Hearing, were 
timely served on these certificated employees.  The District prepared a 14-page “2010 
Summary Layoff Data” that provided an accounting for all certificated employees who 
received a notice of layoff or precautionary notice of layoff.  (Attachment B)  This summary 
also accounts for certificated employees who timely requested a hearing, and filed notices of 
defense.        
 

5

14.  Of the 733 District employees served with a notice of recommendation that 

services will be terminated, 401 requested a hearing.  Notices of defense were filed by, or on 
behalf of, 419 District employees.  The parties stipulated that, with two exceptions, 
certificated employees represented by attorneys Margaret Geddes and Christina Medina were 
properly and timely served with a Notice of Layoff, and timely requested a hearing.  They 
further stipulated that these certificated employees were properly and timely served an 
Accusation, Statement to Respondent, Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing and relevant 
statutes; and that these certificated employees submitted a timely Notice of Defense.  Other 
certificated employees who failed to file a request for hearing and/or a Notice of Defense, 
except those specifically discussed below, have waived their right to a hearing, and may be 
laid off by the District.   
 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

44949 and 44955. 
 

Individual Service Issues 

15. 

Erik R. Beckett appeared at the hearing.  He did not receive the preliminary 

notice packet by March 15.  The packet was mailed to his former address, and returned 
unopened to the District.  Mr. Beckett moved in January 2010.  On February 12, 2010, he 
completed and returned a change of address form to the District indicating his new address.  
This information was faxed to the District at that time.  The District confirmed this 
information, and rescinded the layoff notice to Mr. Beckett.       

 
Juan Perez received the preliminary notice packet after March 15.  The envelope was 

postmarked April 23, 2010.  The District rescinded the layoff notice to Mr. Perez.  

 
James Downing appeared at hearing.  Ms. Geddes noted that he had inadvertently not 

been included with Mr. Beckett and Mr. Perez as individuals excepted from the stipulation 
relating to service.  (See Finding 14.)  The preliminary notice packet was sent by the District 
to Mr. Downing’s correct mailing address.  It was postmarked March 12, 2010, and delivered 
on March 17, 2010.  A “James Wilson” signed for the packet, and the “addressee” box was 
checked next to this name.  Mr. Downing avers that he did not receive this packet and that he 
does not go by, and does not know anyone named James Wilson.  Mr. Downing resides with 
other relatives.  Mr. Downing went to the post office and was advised that the certified mail 
article number was either invalid, or the number was not from the same grouping (sequence) 
used by the District for other District notices.   

 
The District noted that the packet was sent to the correct address, as indicated by the 

official stamp of the United States Postal Service.  Mr. Downing does not contest this.  He 
only objects to the signature of the individual signing for the packet not being his name.  Mr. 
Downing acknowledged attending meetings with the labor relations organization, along with 
other teachers in the District, and having a request for hearing and notice of defense filed on 
his behalf.  He has suffered no prejudice, even if he did not sign for the preliminary layoff 
notice packet.  It does appear that the packet was sent to his correct address.  Under 

 

 

6

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), “[a]ny notice or request shall be deemed 
sufficient when it is delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or when it is 
deposited in the United States registered mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the last 
known address of the employee.”    The District has complied with its service obligation to 
Mr. Downing by sending the packet to his correct address.  He is a proper respondent in 
these proceedings.       

 
Rescissions 

16. 

Prior to or at the time of hearing, the District rescinded the preliminary notices 

of layoff to 526 certificated employees.  The names of these employees are set forth in 
Attachment B, under the column “Layoff Notice Rescinded.”   
 

As noted in Finding 11, the District identified employees who were hired either 
directly into categorically funded programs or to fill in for permanent certificated employees 
serving in categorically funded programs pursuant to Education Code section 44909.1  The 
District classified them as temporary employees, and served them with the double notice of 
release/nonreelection as temporary employees, with a right to request a hearing to challenge 
their status as temporary employees.  The District also issued precautionary notices to certain 
certificated employees in adult education programs.  The adult education precautionary 
notices were sent because it had yet to be determined whether certain employees would have 
served 60 percent of the hours of a regular assignment, or 75 percent of the school year.2   

                                                 

1 Education Code section 44909 states: 
 
The governing board of any school district may employ persons possessing an appropriate 
credential as certificated employees in programs and projects to perform services conducted under 
contract with public or private agencies, or categorically funded projects which are not required by 
federal or state statutes. The terms and conditions under which such persons are employed shall be 
mutually agreed upon by the employee and the governing board and such agreement shall be 
reduced to writing. Service pursuant to this section shall not be included in computing the service 
required as a prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a permanent employee 
unless (1) such person has served pursuant to this section for at least 75 percent of the number of 
days the regular schools of the district by which he is employed are maintained and (2) such 
person is subsequently employed as a probationary employee in a position requiring certification 
qualifications. Such persons may be employed for periods which are less than a full school year 
and may be terminated at the expiration of the contract or specially funded project without regard 
to other requirements of this code respecting the termination of probationary or permanent 
employees other than Section 44918. 
 
Whenever any certificated employee in the regular educational program is assigned to a 
categorically funded project not required by federal or state statute and the district employs an 
additional credentialed person to replace that certificated employee, the replacement certificated 
employee shall be subject to the provisions of Section 44918. 
 
This section shall not be construed to apply to any regularly credentialed employee who has been 
employed in the regular educational programs of the school district as a probationary employee 
before being subsequently assigned to any one of these programs. 
 
2 Education Code section 44929.25, relating to adult class teachers, provides: 

7

 

 

At hearing, the District rescinded all of the precautionary layoff notices that it had 

issued.  However, the District noted that the temporary release notices issued to these same 
employees are still in effect.  Given the District’s rescission of the precautionary layoff 
notices, no issues in these proceedings remain for these employees.    
 
 
 

Method of Effectuating the Reduction in Services/Identifying Affected Employees 

17. 

The Board’s Resolutions delegated to the Superintendent and his designees the 
authority to implement the reduction and elimination of the listed particular kinds of services, 
to identify and determine which District employees would be affected by the reductions and 
to draft and serve the preliminary notices upon those identified employees.  The Associate 
Superintendent and District analyst Janet Fong gained experience in previous years analyzing 
the District’s master seniority list and effectuating District reductions in force.  They were 
provided with copies of the Resolutions in this case for reference, and obtained the master 
seniority list for the District in two formats, by alphabetical order and by inverse seniority 
order.  They were also able to obtain “sublists,” which were lists of certificated employees in 
a particular PKS or certificated job class, such as middle school teachers, high school 
teachers, or school social workers.  In addition, they had access to the District’s ESCAPE 
computerized data system, which contained information about certificated employees such as 
education, advanced degrees, status as full or part-time employees, assignment information 
and credentials.   
 
 
Respondents take strong issue with the District’s seniority list and the difficulty that 
individual respondents experienced when they attempted to obtain or track information.  For 
example, the seniority list generated by the District did not include certificated employees 
who were on leave of absence, substitute teachers, per diem employees, inactive teachers or 
teachers in temporary positions.  This information was tracked on the District’s ESCAPE 
database, but it was not readily accessible to certificated employees.  Unfortunately, this 
made it very difficult for respondents to determine why certain individuals received layoff 
notices and others did not.  Other respondents seeking to review their own personnel files in 
the weeks preceding the hearing were unable to do so, making it very hard for them to obtain 
documents to support individual challenges to seniority dates or other matters.         
 

                                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 

¶ . . . ¶  

Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, any person who is employed to teach adults 
for not more than 60 percent of the hours per week considered a full-time assignment for 
permanent employees having comparable duties shall be classified as a temporary employee, and 
shall not become a probationary employee under the provisions of Section 44954.”   
 
Education Code section 44954 provides that governing boards of school districts may release 
temporary employees requiring certification qualifications under the following circumstances:  
“(a) At the pleasures of the board prior to serving during one school year at least 75 percent of the 
number of days the regular schools of the district are maintained.”   

 

8

18. 

The District concedes that its seniority list was “cumbersome.”  The District’s 

computer program has its limitations.  It did not allow for generation of the more 
comprehensive seniority list that would readily provide the information/comparisons sought 
by respondents.  However, the computer system was used in tandem with other available 
information.  For example, Ms. Fong indicated that for every teacher subject to layoff a 
number of steps were followed to insure that seniority rights were protected, credentialing 
information was accurate and there was compliance with relevant provisions of the 
Education Code.  In each case, Ms. Fong checked both the District’s ESCAPE system and 
the Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) website for credentialing information for 
purposes of skipping, bumping and tie-breaking.  For each PKS group Ms. Fong pulled 
separate reports detailing seniority dates, credentials and master schedules.  She confirmed 
credentials with the CTC website to insure that she had updated credentialing information.  
She contacted principals and site administrators to verify assignments, or to ask other 
questions.  Multiple checks and audits were in place.  Although the District’s seniority list 
was in less than an ideal format, it does appear that the other steps taken by District staff to 
obtain accurate and relevant information compensated for the deficiencies noted by 
respondents.                 
 
 
 

Verification of Seniority Date and Employment Status 

19. 

Tenure is the relationship between a teacher and the District which gives the 

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school district.  Among the 

teacher greater job security. 
 
 
teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority in the District gives a 
greater legal entitlement to a position.  (See Ferner v. Harris (1975) 45 Cal.App.3d 363.) 
 

Seniority date is defined as the date upon which an employee first rendered paid 

service in a probationary position. (Ed. Code, § 44845.) 
 

20. 

Employees were given the opportunity to correct and verify their seniority 

dates.  In January and February 2010, the District’s Human Resources Services sent 
verification forms to all site and department administrators of the District.  This comprised a 
list of all certificated employees at each site or department; verification statements for each 
certificated employee, for distribution to the named employee; and a proof of service, to be 
signed and returned when all employees had received and returned their Employee 
Information Verification Statements to the site or department administrator.  The deadline for 
submission of the completed verifications sheets was February 19, 2010. 
 

The Employee Information Verification Statement for each employee listed the 

employee’s name; seniority date; classification (first year probationary, second year 
probationary, or permanent); school assignment; position (e.g. elementary teacher, high 
school, nurse); and credential (including issue date, expiration date, and “subjects 
authorized”).  The Employee Information Verification Statement stated, in part: 
 

 

9

Please verify the information shown on Employee Information 
Report  298b regarding your seniority date, credential, address, 
and phone number, and make any corrections as needed.  Attach 
a copy of your credential(s) to Employee Information Report 
298b and this form to correct or update our records.    
 
Please return the Employee Information Report 298b and this 
form to your site, School Office Manager, or department 
administrator so that the entire school or department staff can be 
returned in a single envelope to Human Resources Services, 
Box 770, no later than February 19, 2010.     

I certify the information shown on Employee Information 
Report 298b is true and accurate.  [Underlining in original.] 

 

 

 

The Verification Statement contained a line for the employee to sign and date, 

certifying the truth of the information provided.   

21. 

Seniority Dates for Adult Education Teachers 

 
The District reasonably relied upon the verifications provided by certificated 
employees in updating the District’s seniority list, which it used to determine the order of 
layoff. 
 
 
 
The District’s entire Adult Education program is being eliminated.  This 
 
means that adjustments to seniority dates or employment status will not impact layoff 
decisions.  However, such adjustments will guide and impact District reemployment 
decisions.  Counsel for the District and respondents agreed that the District needs additional 
time to investigate contentions made by certain adult education teachers relating to their 
seniority dates.  Six adult education teachers made a record at hearing of their individual 
contentions regarding seniority.  These individuals included Regina Brooks, Gwendolyn 
Decker, Ernestina Madriles, Barbara Pattow-Vigil, Mary Selseleh and Ernest Stringfellow.              
 
 
The District is committed to working outside these proceedings to confirm or not 
confirm information provided by these adult education teachers regarding their District 
 
seniority dates, and making the appropriate adjustments as needed.    
 
 
 
 
employees.  They were not given probationary or permanent status.  For example, Christina 
Borgman is currently working under her sixth temporary contract with the District as a 
school social worker assigned to four different sites.  Ms. Borgman began working with the 
District on January 25, 2005.  She was advised that she remains a temporary employee 
because funding sources for her position have changed from year to year.  She and four other 

22.  Many District school social workers have been hired year to year as temporary 

Issues Raised by School Social Workers 

 

 

10

school social workers have raised fairness issues regarding this situation.3 They point to two 
other school social workers in their same program who have been granted probationary or 
permanent status.  Ms. Borgman and others complain that they were released as categorically 
funded employees while two others hired after them were hired into permanent or 
probationary school social worker positions.  At hearing, the District and respondents 
stipulated that it would be more appropriate to confer outside this process, and not have this 
issue resolved here.  The District wishes to make its decision process regarding school social 
worker positions as transparent as possible.  The District noted that there was no opportunity 
during these proceedings to articulate to respondents legitimate reasons for its decisions. 
 
23.  District school social workers testified that they believe program funding for 
 
various social worker positions has not ceased.  Ellen Sorkin has worked as a school social 
worker with the District since August 26, 2002.  She works in the foster youth services 
program and is assigned to different school sites.  Ms. Sorkin noted that the foster youth 
services program receives no school district funding.  Foster youth (age 16+) are entitled to 
services through an Independent Living Program (ILP) contract between the County of 
Sacramento and the District.  Ms. Sorkin explained that the ILP contract has been renewed 
every year since she has been with the District.  She noted that the District has been 
designated a “core” district, meaning that funding for this and other programs is just a matter 
of completing paperwork and reapplying for funds.  Similarly, Ms. Borgman made reference 
to other funding sources which she noted were available to fund school social workers 
including the McKiney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, MediCal and Title 1.     
 
 
allowing school districts greater discretion in the use of categorical funds.  Specifically, Tier 
3 funding for programs such as adult education may now be “swept” into the general fund 
and used to balance the District’s budget in its regular K-12 programs.  Here, the District 
eliminated its entire adult education program, and now plans to transfer categorical program 
funds previously used in the adult education program into its general fund.  It is not clear to 
what degree this has occurred, or which categorical program funds were actually swept into 
the general fund.  In this respect the funding situation is somewhat confusing.  Still, no 
reliable evidence was offered to establish that funding for school social worker positions will 
continue for school year 2010-2011.  The decision to reduce and/or eliminate school social 
worker positions was not an abuse of the discretion placed in the District’s governing board.                
 
 
 
 
Associate Superintendent indicated that the District will insure that mandated services will 
continue to be fulfilled.  No specific plan for providing mandated services has yet been 
formulated, but it may include the rehiring of counselors.  A school district is authorized to 
eliminate a particular kind of service even though the service continues to be performed or 
provided in a different manner.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Abbott (1978) 76 

             
Issues Raised by School Counselors/School Psychologists 

The Associate Superintendent explained that the Legislature recently enacted laws 

The District is eliminating all counseling positions for next year.  The 

24. 

 

 

                                                 
3 The four other school social workers include: Danielle Martin, Mirna Perez, Kelly Thompson and Heather Wagers. 

 

11

Cal.App.3d 796, 812; Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 177.)  The 
fact that the district does not yet have a plan specifying how counselors’ duties will be 
performed the following year does not mean the district’s elimination of the positions is 
arbitrary or capricious.  It is presumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the District will 
comply with its legally mandated obligations.  (Evid. Code, § 664; Degener v. Governing 
Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689, 696.)  In this case, the evidence did not establish that the 
District would not be able to provide all mandated services for next year.   
 
 
25.  District school psychologists assigned to special education complain that they 
were bumped by senior school psychologists, notwithstanding the fact that they hold special 
education credentials.  These include school psychologists Emily Ochoa, Llecenia Navarro 
and Brandi Schlegel.  They believe that they should be skipped pursuant to Resolution # 
2601 as “[i]ndividuals fully credentialed to serve in special education assignments.”  The 
District explained that psychologists assigned to special education assignments require only 
PPS credentials, and for that reason counselors holding special education credentials were 
not skipped.  In contrast, certificated employees holding special education credentials who 
were not counselors were skipped regardless of their assignment.  The District’s decision not 
to skip counselors holding special education credentials was proper.          
 
 
 
 
gave Janet Fong a list of 55 certificated administrative employees with possible return rights 
to classroom teaching positions.  Ms. Fong calculated the seniority of administrators using 
the District’s ESCAPE computerized data system, and personnel records.  She determined 
which administrators could be reassigned to classroom teaching positions.  Twenty-three (23) 
certificated employees were displaced by reassigned administrators; 15 of these employees 
are respondents in this case.  Administrators were also placed into four vacant positions.  
There was perhaps one issue regarding whether the reassignment of an individual 
administrator was appropriate, and/or whether the administrator being reassigned was 
certificated and competent to take the reassignment made.  However, respondents generally 
assert that the reassignments of administrators and consequent bumping of certificated 
employees were simply not authorized in this case.   
 
 
Respondents contend that because District administrators were not included in the 
PKS reductions, the layoff of displaced certificated employee would not be authorized or 
“necessary” under Education Code section 44955.  The District’s governing board acted 
pursuant to Education Code section 44951 in releasing the administrators.4  This section 

26.  After the Board adopted Resolution #2010-B, the Associate Superintendent 

Reassignment of District Administrators 

                                                 
4 Education Code section 44951 provides:  “Unless a certificated employee holding a position requiring 
 
an administrative or supervisory credential is sent written notice deposited in the United States registered mail with 
postage prepaid and addressed to his or her last known address by March 15 that he or she may be released from his 
or her position for the following school year, or unless the signature of the employee is obtained by March 15 on the 
written notice that he or she may be released from his or her position for the following year, he or she shall be 
continued in the position. The provisions of this section do not apply to a certificated employee who holds a written 

 

12

27. 

The District’s procedural error is found to be nonsubstantive.  In fact, the District’s 

allows for the release of certificated employees in administrative positions provided that a 
district complies with specific notice provisions and deadlines.  This section does not afford 
a right to hearing under section 44949 or other provisions of the Education Code.  By its own  
terms, section 44951 operates independent of section 44955, and does not apply “to the 
termination of employment pursuant to Section 44955.”  (Ed. Code, § 44951.)      
 
 
The District erred in not including the administrators as part of the PKS 
resolution.  Had it done so, Education Code section 44955 would have authorized the 
District’s Governing Board to make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that 
administrators were retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications 
entitle them to render.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (c).)  It also would have authorized 
administrators to bump into junior positions for which they were certificated and competent 
to render service.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)   
 
 
Governing Board issued its PKS resolution (Resolution #2599) and Resolution of Release and 
Reassignment of Certificated Administrators (Resolution #2010-B) the very same evening.  The 
meeting was presumably open.  The process was transparent.  The number of administrators 
who were released was a matter of public record.  The list of administrators with possible return 
rights to classroom positions was immediately incorporated into the section 44955 layoff 
process, and specifically included in the bumping analysis.  The actions of the District strongly 
suggest that the administrators were intended to be included in the section 44955 layoff process, 
notwithstanding the District governing board’s resolution to release administrators under section 
44951.        
 
 
under Education Code section 44955, and the District’s failure to include administrators under 
its PKS resolution, are viewed as nonsubstantive errors.  Education Code section 44949, 
subdivision (c)(3) instructs:  “Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district 
or governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the charges 
unless the errors are prejudicial errors.”  Here, there was no showing of prejudice occasioned by 
the District’s failure to specifically include the administrators in the PKS resolution.  
Respondent’s contention that administrators have no authority to bump into junior positions for 
which they are certificated and competent to render service is therefore overruled.         
 
 
 
 
called for elimination of Art 3.0 FTE, art teachers occupying 3.70 positions were noticed.  

The District engaged in over-noticing.  For example, where the PKS resolution 

For all these reasons, the District’s failure to provide notice to administrators 

Over-noticing 
 
29. 

28. 

                                                                                                                                                             
contract with an expiration date beyond the current school year, or to a certificated employee holding a position that 
is funded for less than a school year, or to a certificated employee assigned to an acting position 
whose continuing right to hold this position depends on being selected from an eligible list established for the 
position, or to the termination of employment pursuant to Section 44955.” 
 
  

 

13

The District provided a reasonable explanation for its practice of over-noticing.  It 

Where the PKS resolution called for elimination of 24.6 FTE English, English teachers 
occupying 26.0 positions were noticed.  The Associate Superintendent explained that this 
was intentional.  The District issued additional notices to account for uncertainty over 
application of tiebreak criteria, partial FTE reductions, administrators bumping into teaching 
positions, and assignments/reassignments into partial positions.  The converse was also true 
with respect to under-noticing.  For example, because the District swept categorical funds 
into the K-6 teaching program, the District was able to rescind a significant number of 
notices.  Thus, while the PKS resolution called for elimination of 175 FTE elementary school 
teachers, only 40 elementary school teachers actually received notice.  The District also 
explained why some partial FTE reductions were rounded up.  Many teachers were not 
assigned to positions held by junior teachers, especially at the secondary level, where the 
junior teacher was teaching multiple subjects and the senior teacher’s credentials did not 
allow for teaching in all the subject areas.   
 
 
was not unreasonable for the District to round up partial FTE reductions where it determined 
not to split full time positions held by junior teachers.  It is “within the scope of a school 
district’s discretion … to define a position as full time if the district concludes that the 
assignment cannot be as well performed on a part-time basis….So long as the determination 
is reasonable and made in good faith, neither section 44955 nor any other provision of the 
Education Code precludes a school district from defining a position, or ‘service,’ as full 
time.” (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343-
344.)       
 
 
 
 
reelections of certificated employees as part of the layoff process.  The District identified 63 
FTE positions based upon attrition over the 2009-2010 school year.  However, the attrition 
list dates back to June 30, 2009, and many of the positions were filled during the same school 
year.  At this time, there are only 12 retirements that are true vacancies, and that impact the 
layoff calculation.  The District is committed to its stated goal of rescinding as many notices 
as possible.  It intends to consider post-March 15, 2010 attrition, though not required to do 
so.  The District has satisfied its obligation to take attrition into account.   
 
 
 
 
Economic layoffs are generally to be carried out on the basis of seniority.  A 
teacher with more seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment than a junior 
teacher.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to a position held by a 
junior teacher if the senior teacher is properly credentialed and competent.  That 
displacement of a junior teacher is known as “bumping.”  In general, the District has an 
affirmative obligation to reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions 
held by junior teachers if the senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to 
occupy such positions.   

The District considered resignations, retirements, dismissals and non-

Skipping 

Attrition 

30. 

31. 

 

14

33. 

32. 

Home and Hospital Skip 

Paulette Meeks is the Health Services Director for the District.  There are three 

Resolution #2601 proposed to retain individuals fully credentialed to serve in 

The seniority rule is not absolute, and a junior teacher with a needed credential or 

In order to depart from a seniority-based economic layoff, Education Code section 

 
skills may be retained even if a more senior teacher is terminated.  Such “skipping” is 
recognized by statute and appellate law.  (See Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1); Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of the Santa Clara Unified School 
District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831).   
 
 
44955, subdivision (d)(1), requires the District to “demonstrate a specific need for personnel 
to teach a specific course or course of study… and that the certificated employee [to be 
skipped] has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of 
study…which others with more seniority do not possess.” 
 
 
special education assignments, and individuals fully credentialed to serve in classes requiring 
Bilingual Cross-Cultural Language and Development (BCLAD) certification.  Respondents 
do not contest the skipping of these two classes of employees.     
 
 
 
 
credentialed teachers who work as teachers on special assignment in the health services 
department, as home and hospital teachers at U.C. Davis Medical Center, Sutter Memorial 
Hospital, and Sutter Psychiatric Hospital.  According to Ms. Meeks, the home and hospital 
teacher at Sutter Hospital must provide educational services to students of various ages, 
many of whom come from outside of the District for treatment.  The home and hospital 
teacher must be prepared to respond rapidly to changing circumstances, and able to manage 
medically fragile and potentially dangerous students.   
 
Sharon Rickert is the only certificated employee who was skipped under this 
 
particular provision.  Ms. Rickert’s District seniority date is September 2, 2008.  She holds a 
multiple subject teaching credential.  She is currently employed as the home and hospital 
teacher at Sutter Psychiatric.  Prior to her employment as a teacher, she was an office clerk in 
the health services department for approximately 10 years.  Ms. Rickert was hired into the 
position of home and hospital teacher based on her response to interview questions, 
experience, and qualifications/credentials.  Ms. Meeks did not participate in the interview 
process that led to the hiring of Ms. Rickert. 
 
 
layoff proceedings she described Ms. Rickert as “level headed” and “astute,” and as having 
“sound judgment.”  Ms. Meeks commented on Ms. Rickert’s ability to deal with parents and 
students in a reassuring manner; she has observed Ms. Rickert deal with medication issues, 
and stated that she “knows the appropriate questions to ask.”   
 
 
34.  Home and hospital teaching was not a service that was reduced as part of the 
District’s PKS reduction.  Ms. Rickert was not served with a notice of layoff.  The District 

Ms. Meeks is familiar with Ms. Rickert’s abilities and qualifications.  In the 2009 

 

15

“skipped” Ms. Rickert based upon “a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course” 
(i.e., the home and hospital program), and its belief that Ms. Rickert “has special training and 
experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, 
which others with more seniority do not possess.” (Ed. Code § 44955, subd. (d)(1).)  Ms. 
Meeks noted that Ms. Rickert has received training in managing aggressive behaviors, CPR, 
HIPAA, restraining children and puppet therapy.  District personnel did not attempt to 
ascertain whether any certificated employee with a multiple subject credential slated to be 
laid off had the training and experience necessary to serve as a home and hospital teacher.  
 
 
 

Education Code section 44865 provides, in pertinent part: 

35. 

A valid teaching credential issued by the State Board or the 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing, based on a bachelor's 
degree, student teaching, and special fitness to perform, shall be 
deemed qualifying for assignment as a teacher in the following 
assignments, provided that the assignment of a teacher to a 
position for which qualifications are prescribed by this section 
shall be made only with the consent of the teacher: 
 
(a) Home teacher. 
 
[¶]…[¶] 
 
(c) Hospital classes. 
 
[¶]…[¶] 
 
The District established that Ms. Rickert possesses “special fitness to perform” 

36. 

 
the duties of home and hospital teacher, based on her experience and temperament.   
 
 
Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127 is instructive.  
The court in Bledsoe addressed the issue of special fitness to perform under Education Code 
section 44865, as it related to bumping and skipping under Education Code section 44955.  
In that case, the court held that Mr. Bledsoe fell within the pool of qualified teachers 
available under the terms of the statute if he consented to the assignment.  Thus, he was 
deemed “certificated and competent” to render the service under Education Code section 
44955, subdivision (b).5  However, the court further stated, that “[s]uch conclusion does not, 
however, end our inquiry. [¶]  Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 expressly allows a district 
to demonstrate its specific ‘needs’ and there is nothing in the statute that requires such needs 

                                                 

5 Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), states, in pertinent part:  “Except as otherwise provided 
by statute, the services of no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said 
permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.” 
 

 

 

16

to be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job descriptions, or program 
requirements.” (Id. at pp. 137-138.)   
 

The court permitted testimony from the superintendent of the Biggs Unified School 

37.  Here, the District made a sufficient showing that Ms. Rickert has special 

District concerning the specific need for teachers with special qualifications for its 
community day school.  However, the court also held that, “[i]n order to retain a certificated 
employee under section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), … a district must not only establish a 
specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study, but establish the certificated 
employee it proposes to retain ‘has special training and experience necessary to teach that 
course or course of study or to provide those services[.]’ (§ 44955, subd. (d)(1).)” (Id. at p. 
138.) 
 
 
fitness to perform the duties of a home and hospital teacher at Sutter Psychiatric Hospital.  
Respondents provided no evidence that any certificated employee noticed for layoff with a 
multiple subject credential, and with greater seniority than Ms. Rickert, possessed the special 
training and experience necessary to serve as a home and hospital teacher at Sutter 
Psychiatric.   
 
 
Because no other employees were skipped under this provision, it is unnecessary to 
determine whether the District met its burden of establishing a “specific need for personnel 
to teach a specific course or course of study” at Sutter Memorial Hospital and U.C. Davis 
Medical Center. 
 
 
 
 
Waldorf Methods Schools – John Morse (K-8) and George Washington Carver High School.  
She determined that, based on her conversations with the principals, the District had specific 
needs for teachers with specialized training and experience to teach at these two schools.  
Approximately ten teachers were skipped based upon their current assignments as Waldorf 
teachers.  The Associate Superintendent assumed that they all had specialized training and 
experience in the Waldorf methods of instruction.  However, she acknowledged that last year 
individuals were rehired into certificated positions at the Waldorf schools regardless of their 
training in the Waldorf methods of instruction.  The District has suggested that absent 
evidence that its governing board acted arbitrarily or capriciously in its decision to identify 
the Waldorf program as requiring specialized training and skills, the skip of teachers in this 
program should be upheld.  (Evid. Code, §§ 660, 664.)  
 
 
specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study, and to further establish that 
the certificated employees it proposes to retain have special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services.  (Bledsoe v. 
Biggs Unified School District, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th at p. 138.)  The District must present 
evidence upon which findings can be made that the District has specific need for teachers in 

The District has the burden under Education Code section 44955 to establish a 

The Associate Superintendent spoke with the principals at the District’s two 

Waldorf Skip 

38. 

 

17

the Waldorf program with specialized training and experience.  This evidentiary burden 
cannot be satisfied by merely presuming that an “official duty has been regularly performed” 
by the District’s governing board.  (Evid. Code, § 664.)  Nor can it be satisfied by the 
testimony of the Associate Superintendent that she had conversations with principals, after 
which she determined it was appropriate to skip such employees.  Absent a greater showing 
by the District in this case, the skip of Waldorf teachers must be disallowed.   
 

39. 

40. 

Secondary Math and Science Skip 

The District should confirm the number of Waldorf teachers who were skipped 
in these proceedings.  It must then identify a corresponding number of teachers who are next 
most senior and subject to layoff, and who possess credentials that would allow them to be 
assigned to the elementary and secondary Waldorf programs.  If necessary, the District may 
conduct interviews with teachers who are interested in serving in these positions, and shall 
retain the most senior teachers who are able to establish their experience and training, so long 
as they have more seniority than the certificated employees currently serving in these 
positions. 
 
 
 
 
District is fully staffed in both secondary science and math, and that there was therefore no 
showing that this particular skip is necessary.  The Associate Superintendent indicated that 
individuals in this category were skipped regardless of their current assignment.   
 
 
The District’s decision to skip teachers holding secondary science and math 
credentials was proper, but only to the extent that skipped teachers are assigned, or will be 
assigned next school year, into positions requiring these credentials.  If individuals were 
skipped who are not now, and will not be teaching a specific course or course of study 
requiring secondary science or math credentials, such skipping should be disallowed.  It was 
not otherwise an abuse of the District governing board’s discretion to skip individuals 
holding these credentials. 
    

Respondents noted that the Associate Superintendent confirmed that the 

 
Adult Education 

41. 

Resolution #2599 identified 82.0 FTE reductions in adult education teachers, 

essentially eliminating the District’s adult education program.   
 

The adult education program maintains a separate seniority list from the K-12 

program.  Per the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) between the District and the 
Sacramento City Teachers Association (SCTA), a teacher cannot have permanent status in 
both the adult education program and the K-12 program.  The District maintains its adult 
education program separate from its K-12 program.  There are separate seniority lists for the 
two programs, due in part to the different methods by which permanent status is achieved in 
each program under the Education Code.   

 

 

 

18

In addition, the CBA between the District and SCTA addresses Hourly Adult 
Education Teachers (CBA, section 5.12.10), and specifies that “Employees with permanent 
status in the K-12 program of the District who become eligible for permanent status in adult 
education shall at the time of becoming eligible for permanent status in adult education elect 
as to whether they shall have permanent status in the K-12 program or in the adult education 
program.  Permanent status may not be attained in both programs.” (CBA, section 
5.12.10.2.7.)   

42. 

The CBA is consistent with Education Code section 44929.26, which provides 

that an employee who obtains permanent classification in the evening program and later 
becomes eligible for permanent classification in the day school, “he or she shall be given his 
or her choice as to which he or she shall take.”  Furthermore, service in one program shall 
not be included in computing the service required as a prerequisite to attainment of, or 
eligibility to, classification as a permanent employee in the other program, unless the district 
has directed or specifically requested that the employee provide service in the other program. 
 

Reassignment of Adult Education Teachers to K-12 Program 

43. 

In last year’s layoff proceedings, respondents contended that there were 
certificated employees noticed for layoff from the District’s K-12 program who were 
certificated and competent to teach adult education, and that they were therefore entitled to 
be reassigned to the adult education program because they had greater seniority with the 
District than adult education teachers who did not receive layoff notices.  Respondents 
contend in these proceedings that the converse is also true – certificated employees noticed 
for layoff from the District’s adult education program who are certificated and competent to 
teach in the District’s K-12 program, are entitled to be reassigned to the K-12 program where 
they have greater seniority with the District than K-12 teachers who did not receive layoff 
notices.  This year appears to be a mirror image of last year’s layoff proceedings regarding 
adult education teachers, and the reasoning and conclusions set forth in Judge Catherine 
Frink’s 2009 decision rejecting respondent’s contentions apply equally as well here.        
 

44.  As noted in Finding 41, the District maintains separate seniority lists for 
teachers in adult school and in the regular education program.  The adult education teachers 
are now seeking to “cross-bump” from one list to the other.  Although Education Code 
section 44955 does not draw a distinction between teachers in the two programs, that 
distinction is made elsewhere in the Education Code.  Thus “service in the evening school 
[adult school] shall not be included in computing the service required as a prerequisite to 
attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a permanent employee in the day school 
[regular education program].”  (Ed. Code, § 44926.26.)  Since the adult school and regular 
educational program are not interchangeable for purposes of counting service in one program 
toward permanent status in the other, it follows that a teacher in one program should not be 
able to assert seniority rights over a teacher in the other.  Employees in one program should 
not be allowed to bump into positions in the other.            
 
 
longstanding.  For example, Garry E. Klein is a teacher whose hire date with the District was 

The practice of maintaining separate District seniority lists for the two programs is 

 

 

19

October 23, 1986.  He gained permanent status as a teacher in the regular K-12 program.  He 
is now an adult education teacher assigned to Fremont School.  His District seniority date is 
January 26, 1998, reflecting the time that his assignment changed, and when he became a 
permanent employee in the adult education program, approximately 12 years after he began 
employment with the District.   
 

45. 

Education Code section 44865, subdivision (b), provides that an individual 

teaching in the K-12 program may be assigned to teach classes organized primarily for adults 
“only with the consent of the teacher,” further supporting the separation between the two 
programs.  Mr. Klein and other adult education teachers have indicated their agreement to 
being reassigned to the K-12 program if asked.  What is problematic, however, is the fact of 
having two separate District seniority lists.  Seniority defines the relationship of teachers to 
each other, and teachers with greater seniority generally have more secure rights to 
employment.  When, as here, employees must choose between attaining permanent status in 
either the Adult Education program or the K-12 program, the seniority attained in one 
program cannot be transferred from one program to the other.  Respondents suggest that 
provisions regarding permanency in one program or the other relate only to attaining tenure.  
Assuming this is correct the District has still had a longstanding practice of maintaining 
separate seniority lists for the two programs.  Under these circumstances, bumping between 
the two programs cannot be countenanced.  There must be a single District seniority date for 
all purposes, and such simply does not exist here.     

 
For all these reasons, certificated employees in the Adult Education program are not 

entitled to displace teachers in the K-12 program, because they have no seniority in the K-12 
program.  The claims of respondents Garry Klein and other adult education teachers to 
positions in the District’s regular K-12 program are therefore rejected. 
 

District’s Tiebreaker Criteria 

46. 

The analysts applied the tiebreaker criteria set forth in Resolution #2600 based 

on past District practice.  They were provided information in a spreadsheet format for each 
category of PKS in which the tiebreaking criteria needed to be applied.  The analysts 
determined the order of seniority based on points awarded under the tiebreaking criteria.  
Where individual employees had the same number of points after application of all other 
criteria, the analysts conducted a lottery within each PKS category to determine which 
employee(s) would be subject to layoff.  Tiebreak criteria were applied to Spanish and 
English teachers with a same date of hire.   
 
 
criteria to English teachers with a September 5, 2006 District seniority date.  There was a tie 
between teachers Joanna Evans and Mary Luca which will be resolved through lottery.     
 
 
 
 

The District acknowledged and corrected an error relating to application of tiebreak 

 

 

20

ROTC 

47. 

Resolution #2599 identified a 1.0 FTE reduction in ROTC.  Ten respondents 
were noticed because it was initially unclear what type of ROTC service would be reduced.  
The District has since identified one basic military drill instructor position associated with a 
school closure.  The District further determined that a commissioned officer cannot bump 
into a non-commissioned officer position.  Based upon this information, Charles Love was 
identified as the commissioned ROTC officer to be noticed for layoff.  The District has 
rescinded notices to the remaining ROTC teachers.    
 

Individual Respondents 

48.  Diana L. Cerezo.  Ms. Cerezo is an elementary school teacher.  Her District 

seniority date is September 4, 2007.  She was a “probationary one” first grade teacher during 
the 2007-2008 school year, and returned the following school year (2008-2009) as a 
“probationary two” kindergarten teacher.  She was rehired this school year as a third grade 
teacher and reported to work on October 16, 2009.  She suffered a stroke and went out on 
long term leave.  Ms. Cerezo requested that her status be changed from probationary two to 
permanent.  The District has agreed to change her status from probationary to permanent.   

 
49. 

50. 

Joan A. Liuzzi.  Ms. Liuzzi is a counselor assigned to Albert Einstein Middle 

Joan M. Cochrane.  Ms. Cochrane is a teacher at John H. Still Middle School.  
Her District seniority date is September 4, 2007.  She was asked to take a writing course for 
English teachers when she was first hired.  The course was given on August 21 and 22, 2007.  
Ms. Cochrane recalls that all English teachers were told to attend.  She believes that she 
received salary schedule credit for attending this training program, but this was not reflected 
on her District personnel records where salary units for education were recorded.  Ms. 
Cochrane has not provided adequate documentation to support adjustment of her District 
seniority date at this time.                           
 
 
School.  Her District seniority date is September 9, 2002.  She holds two Pupil Personnel 
Services (PPS) credentials, only one of which was indicated on the District’s bump chart.  
She would like the chart to reflect the fact that she holds a separate PPS in social work.  The 
District has agreed to make this change.   
 
 
noted that when he was assigned to the adult education program, the District did not give him 
the option of choosing to have permanency in the adult education program, or in the K-12 
program.  From the time that Mr. Klein’s District seniority date was changed to January 26, 
1998, he has had many opportunities to correct it if he believed that it should have instead 
related back to his earlier service in the District’s K-12 program, roughly 12 years before.  
Other contentions relating to his being able to cross-bump into the regular K-12 program 
were discussed in Findings 43 through 45.   
 

51.  Garry Klein.  Mr. Klein’s circumstances were referenced in Finding 44.  He 

 

 

 

21

52. 

Peter A. Budge.  Mr. Budge is a kindergarten teacher at Elder Creek 

Elementary School.  His District seniority date is August 1, 2006.  He began service with the 
District on September 1, 2005, as a substitute teacher for two days.  He then moved into a 
long term substitute position for a teacher on maternity leave, and avers that he remained in 
that assignment for the balance of the 2005-2006 school year.  He did so under an emergency 
30-day substitute teaching permit, valid for the period September 27, 2005 to October 1, 
2006.  Mr. Budge has provided documentation for substitute service for January, February, 
April and May 2006.  He also indicated that he worked for the District from June 2005 
through a Sacramento State University program, but he is not clear whether he held an intern 
certificate at that time.     
 
 
Mr. Budge has not provided adequate documentation or otherwise demonstrated that 
he worked a consistent year of service (75 percent of the number of days the regular schools 
of the District were maintained) over the 2005-2006 school year for purposes of tacking an 
additional year to his seniority date under Education Code section 44918.6  The District has 
also opted not to count his service as a substitute teacher for purposes of tacking an 
additional year under Education Code section 44914, which relates to computation of service 
for classification as a permanent employee of the District.              
               
 
 
53.  Mirna I. Perez.  Ms. Perez is a school social worker with the Integrated 
Community Program at McClaskey High School.  Her District seniority date is November 
16, 2006.  She would like her seniority date to be changed to September 20, 2005.  Ms. Perez 
is employed under a temporary contract with the District.  (See Finding 22.)  Because she has 
not worked as a probationary employee, she is not entitled to tacking under provisions of the 
Education Code.      
 
 
High School.  His District seniority date is September 7, 2004.  He holds a single subject 
teaching credential in industrial technology education (ITE).  Teaching subjects falling under 
an ITE credential include automotive mechanics, carpentry, computer technology, 
construction, drafting, electricity, electronics, industrial crafts, industrial design, metals, 
millwork, photography, plastics, radio and television, technical science/power mechanics, 
welding and woods.  
 
 
are teaching subjects falling within his ITE credential, five of whom he specifically identified 
at hearing.  The District has investigated his contentions and determined that all the teachers 
he referenced are working in split assignments.  They each hold credentials that allow them 
to teach in the variety of subject areas to which they are assigned.  Mr. Garrison does not 

54.  Dennnis K. Garrison.  Mr. Garrison is an industrial arts teacher at Rosemont 

Mr. Garrison avers that he has identified no less than 50 teachers junior to him who 

                                                 

6  Education Code section 44918, subdivision (a) provides:  “Any employee classified as a substitute or 
temporary employee, who serves during one school year for at least 75 percent of the number of days the regular 
schools of the district were maintained in that school year and has performed the duties normally required of a 
certificated employee of the school district, shall be deemed to have served a complete school year as a probationary 
employee if employed as a probationary employee for the following school year.”   

  

 

22

57. 

Llecenia Navarro.  Ms. Navarro is a school psychologist.  Her District 

55.   Tony Marine.  Mr. Marine is a temporary certificated employee in the adult 

56.  Heather Edwards.  Ms. Edwards is first year probationary high school teacher.  

hold the additional credentials that would allow him to bump into their positions.  The 
District is not required to split a position in order for Mr. Garrison to be reassigned into a 
position for which he is credentialed to teach.  (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School 
District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343-344.)                  
 
 
education program.  He believes that he should be classified as a probationary employee 
based on his working in excess of 60 percent of the hours per week considered a full-time 
assignment for permanent employees having comparable duties.  (Ed. Code, § 44929.25)  
The District intends to investigate further and work to ensure that he receives proper status.   
 
 
Her District hire date is September 6, 2009.  She would like this date to be changed to 
August 31, 2009, corresponding to her attendance at a new employee orientation, and for 
which she was paid $37.00.  The orientation was three hours.  The pay was characterized as 
“classified” time.  It does not appear that the amount paid to Ms. Edwards for her attendance 
at the orientation was related to a teacher salary.  A certificated employee’s seniority begins 
with the date she “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”  (Ed. Code, § 
44845.)  Ms. Edwards has not established that she is entitled to an earlier seniority date by 
reason of her attending the August 31, 2009 orientation.   
 
 
seniority date is August 18, 2008.  She worked the previous year as an intern and believes 
she should be given credit for that time.  The District agreed.  Ms. Navarro’s District 
seniority date has been changed to August 27, 2007.   
 
 
seniority date is January 18, 2007.  She believes it should be September 30, 2006, her date of 
hire with the District.  She worked as a long-term substitute with the District between 
September 30, 2006, and January 17, 2007.  The teacher for whom she was substituting 
resigned, and Ms. Villegas entered a contract to continue as a teacher in that same 
assignment.  Ms. Villegas has not demonstrated that she worked a year of service (75 percent 
of the number of days the regular schools of the District were maintained) over the school 
year prior to January 18, 2007, for purposes of tacking an additional year to her seniority date 
under Education Code section 44918.          
 
 
Burbank High School.  Her District seniority date is September 15, 2009.  Her District hire 
date is September 19, 2008, when she began working as a long-term substitute teacher.  The 
District agreed to credit her with one year service and change her seniority date to September 
15, 2008. 
 
 
seniority date is August 20, 2007.  Ms. Sandoval is bilingual and bi-literate.  She would like 
the District to consider this in any tiebreak affecting her.  The District identified BCLAD for 

Laura Villegas.  Ms. Villegas is an elementary school teacher.  Her District 

Tammy Y. Abdo.  Ms. Abdo is a first-year probationary teacher at Luther 

Evelyn Sandoval.  Ms. Sandoval is a school psychologist.  Her District 

59. 

60. 

58. 

 

 

23

61. 

Elaine V. Bruce.  Ms. Bruce is an adult education teacher.  Her District 

purposes of skipping certificated employees, but has not included bilingual skills as part of 
the tiebreak criteria for this layoff.  It may consider doing so in the future.     
 
 
seniority date is July 1, 2007.  Ms. Bruce teaches in the nursing program for certified nurse 
assistants (CNA) and licensed vocational nurses (LVN).  She provided credentialing 
information which the District has promised to incorporate into, and update her District 
records.  Ms. Bruce detailed reasons why the District should not discontinue its CNA and 
LVN instructional programs, including the fact that the District will have to refund tuition 
amounts already paid by students enrolled in the program. 
 
 
Joel C. Sutton.  Mr. Sutton is an adult education teacher.  His District seniority 
date is July 1, 2009.  He would like the District’s bump chart to reflect both his seniority date 
and the credential he holds in hospitality, tourism and recreation.  The District has promised 
to do so.   
 

62. 

Welfare of the District and Its Students 

63.  Other than that set forth particularly above, the Superintendent’s designees 

correctly identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that 
the Board directed be reduced or discontinued.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled 
to be retained to perform services which a more senior employee is certificated and 
competent to render, unless skipped, as set forth above. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955.  All notices and other jurisdictional requirements of sections 44949 and 
44955 were met. 
  

2. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  The burden is on the District to demonstrate that the reduction or elimination of 
the particular kinds of services is reasonable and that the District carefully considered its 
needs before laying off any certificated employee.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers 
Association v. Abbott, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at pp. 807-808.)   
 

3. 

Legal cause exists to reduce or eliminate 430.0 FTE of particular kinds of 

services offered by the District as set forth in detail in the Factual Findings.  Cause for the 
reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and 
pupils, within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 

 

 

 

24

 

 

4. 

Cause exists to retain teachers who are fully-credentialed to serve in special 

education assignments, and teachers who are fully credentialed to serve in classes requiring 
BCLAD certification, as set forth in Resolution #2601, regardless of seniority.  (Finding 32.)   
 

Cause also exists to retain teachers who are fully-credentialed to serve in secondary 

math and science assignments, but only to the extent that retained (skipped) teachers are 
assigned, or will be assigned next school year, into positions requiring these credentials.  
(Finding 40.) 
 
5. 

Cause exists to retain Sharon Rickert as a home and hospital teacher at Sutter 

Psychiatric per Resolution #2601, providing that individuals who have specialized training in 
a home or hospital setting may be skipped.  (Finding 33.)  
 

6. 

The District has not demonstrated a specific need for teachers with specialized 

training and experience to teach at its two Waldorf Methods Schools, and therefore the 
application of skipping criteria to teachers currently in the Waldorf program is disallowed.  
(Findings 38 and 39.)  As set forth in Finding 39, the District shall rescind the layoff notices 
to a corresponding number of certificated employees who are next most senior and subject to 
layoff, and who possess credentials that would otherwise allow them to be assigned to the 
elementary and secondary Waldorf programs.        
 

7. 

As set forth in Finding 16, the preliminary notices of layoff issued to 526 

certificated employees are rescinded.  The names of these teachers are set forth in 
Attachment B, under the column “Layoff Notice Rescinded.”  The District rescinded all of 
the precautionary notices that it had issued.  However, the temporary release notices issued to 
employees receiving dual notices remain in effect.   
 

8. 

As set forth in Finding 21, the District is committed to working outside these 

proceedings to confirm information provided by adult education teacher regarding their 
District seniority dates, and making appropriate adjustments as needed.  Similarly, the parties 
agreed to address fairness issues raised by school social workers outside these proceedings.  
(Finding 22.)       
 

9. 

The District erred in not including administrators as part of the PKS resolution 

and section 44955 layoff process.  The District’s governing board issued a separate 
resolution under Education Code section 44951 authorizing release and reassignment of 
certificated administrators.  A list of 55 certificated administrators with possible return rights 
to classroom teaching positions was subsequently included and incorporated into the 
District’s section 44955 layoff process.  The process was open and transparent.  The failure 
to include administrators in the PKS resolution was a nonsubstantive procedural error.  (See 
Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (c)(3).)  Because there was no prejudice to respondents, the error 
does not constitute cause for rescinding notices relating to respondents being displaced by 
reassigned administrators.  (Findings 26 through 28.)   
 

25

10. 

The District engaged in over-noticing.  The matters set forth in Finding 29 
were considered.  After consideration of the District’s need to account for administrators 
bumping into positions, application of tiebreak criteria, rescinded notices, positively assured 
attrition, and assignments/reassignments into partial positions, the number of layoff notices 
issued by the District was neither unreasonable nor an abuse of its discretion.  The District 
has provided a reasonable explanation and accounting for its practice of over-noticing in this 
case.    
 

11. 

Certificated employees in the Adult Education program are not entitled to 

displace teachers in the K-12 program, because they have no seniority in the K-12 program.  
(See Findings 43 through 45.)   
 

12.  As set forth in Findings 57 and 59, the District will make corrections to 
seniority dates for Llecenia Navarro and Tammy Y. Abdo.  It will also change the individual 
employment status for Diana Cerezo from probationary to permanent.  (Finding 48.)  Finally, 
the District will update its personnel records to include credentialing and other information 
brought to its attention by Joan A. Liuzzi, Elaine V. Bruce and Joel C. Sutton.  (Findings 50, 
61 and 62.)          

 
13. 

14 

The District applied bumping rules with some consistency, and generally 

The District was required to exercise tiebreak criteria with respect to Spanish 

 
allowed bumping based upon the more senior employee holding a credential or authorization 
to teach the assignment of the less senior teacher.  The District articulated the rationale for its 
bumping rules.   
 
 
and English teachers.  Corrections were made to account for earlier error relating to 
application of tiebreak to English teachers with a September 5, 2006 seniority date.  (Finding 
46.) 
 
 
Cause exists for the reduction of the particular kinds of services and for the 
reduction of full-time equivalent certificated positions at the end of the 2009-2010 school 
year pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  Other than the foregoing, no 
employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to render a service which 
any respondent is certificated and competent to render.  Except as set forth above, the 
District’s Governing Board may give final notice to remaining respondents whose 
preliminary notices have not been rescinded before May 15, 2010, that their services will not 
be required for the ensuing school year, 2010-2011. 
 
 

15. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

26

 

RECOMMENDATION 

Cause exists for the reduction of 430.0 full-time equivalent certificated positions at 

 
 
the end of the 2009-2010 school year.  After making the adjustments set forth in the Factual 
Findings and Legal Conclusions, notice shall be given to remaining respondents that their 
services will be reduced or will not be required for the ensuing school year, 2010-2011, 
because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  Notice shall be 
given in inverse order of seniority.   
 
 
 
DATED:  May 6, 2010 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

___________________________ 
JONATHAN LEW 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

27

