 
BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
TRAVIS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
SOLANO COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 
 
MERIDITH ARMSTRONG, KRISTIN BUMP,  
JOHN OLEARY, RHONDA YUNG,  
MARGORIE MARTINSON,  
MARY ELLEN QUINE, NORMAN DEPONTE, 
KAREN COLEMAN, and MARANDA HANSON 
 
 
 

                                Respondents. 

 

     
 

     
    
     
 

 
 
PROPOSED DECISION 

 OAH No.  2010030681 

On April 15, 2010, in the City of Fairfield, Solano County, California, Perry O. 

Costa Kerestenzis, Attorney at Law of Beeson, Tayer and Bodine, 520 Capitol Mall, 

Lawrence Schoenke, Esq., of Dannis Woliver Kelly, Attorneys at Law, 71 Stevenson 

 
 
Johnson, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California 
(OAH), heard this matter. 
 
 
Street, 19th Floor, San Francisco, California 94106, represented Kate Wren Gavlak, 
Superintendent, Travis Unified School District.   
 
 
Suite 300, Sacramento, California 95814-4714, represented Respondents Meridith 
Armstrong, Kristin Bump, John Oleary, Rhonda Yung, Margorie Martinson, Mary Ellen 
Quine, Norman DePonte, Karen Coleman, and Maranda Hanson. 
 
 
The record was held open to afford opportunities to the parties to file with OAH 
 
written closing arguments and, if necessary, reply briefs.  On April 21, 2009, OAH received, 
via telefacsimile transmission (telefax), from respondents’ attorney a five-page letter, which 
had an attachment consisting of a 19-page proposed decision in OAH No. N2003010592, 
which pertained to a teacher layoff proceeding before the Governing Board for the Oakland 
Unified School District.  Respondents’ post-hearing letter brief, was marked as Exhibit “B,” 
and received as argument.  On April 22, 2010, OAH received, by telefax, from the 
Superintendent’s attorney a brief titled “Closing Memorandum of Points and Authorities,” 
which was marked as Exhibit “11,” and received as argument.  On April 26, 2010, OAH 
received, via telefax, a closing argument titled “District’s Reply Brief to Respondents’ 

 

-1-

Closing Letter Brief,” which was marked as Exhibit “12,” and was received as argument.  
And on April 27, 2010, OAH received, via telefax, a letter from respondents’ counsel in the 
way of a reply to the Superintendent’s written closing arguments.  The letter was marked as 
Exhibit “C” and received as argument.      

 
On April 27, 2010, the parties were deemed to have submitted the matter and the 

record closed.  

 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

 
 On March 24, 2010, Kate Wren Gavlak, Superintendent (the Superintendent) 
 
for the Travis Unified School District (the District), in her official capacity, made and filed 
the accusations that pertained to respondents. 
 

 Respondents are either probationary or permanent certificated employees of 

On March 2, 2010, the District’s Governing Board adopted Resolution 

No. 2009-10-35.  The resolution recites that it has become necessary for the District to 
reduce or to discontinue, no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year, particular 
kinds of services in 13 categories for a total of 7.77 full time equivalent (FTE) certificated 
positions as follows: 

2. 
the District.     
 
3. 

NUMBER OF 
FULL-TIME EQUIVALENT 
POSITIONS 

              

 

 

 
PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES 

1.    High School Assistant Principal  
2.    High School Career Tech (ROP) 
 
3.    Middle School English   
4.    Middle School Math 
 
 
5.    Middle School Social Science   
 
6.    Middle School Science   
 
7.    Middle School Spanish   
8.    Middle School Woodshop  
 
9.    Middle School Home Economics 
10.  Middle School Band 
11.  Middle School Art 
12.  Middle School Physical Education 
13.  Categorical Programs 
             BTSA Coordinator   
             Title I Coordinator   
             Title I Coordinator    
 

                   
  
Total Full-Time Equivalents  

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

-2-

 

 

            1.0   
1.5   
 
0.33 
 
0.33 
 
0.33 
 
0.49 
 
0.49 
 
0.33 
 
0.16 
 
0.16 
 
0.16 
 
0.49 
 

 
 
 

 

0.50 
1.0 
0.5 

7.77   

 

4. 

By individual letters, dated March 12, 2010, the Superintendent caused to 

be dispatched, by certified mail, preliminary notices1 to a number of FTE position holders, 
including each respondent, who had status as a permanent or probationary employee.   
The letter stated that the District’s Board had an intention to reduce or to discontinue the 
particular service provided by each person who received the notice.  By the letter, each of 
the recipient respondents learned the District would not reemploy the named individuals in 
the certificated positions each had worked.   

The written preliminary notices to each respondent, as issued by the 

Superintendent, along with the Board’s resolution set out legally sufficient reasons for the 
Board’s intent to eliminate the positions occupied by each affected respondent for the school 
year of 2010-2011. 

Each respondent timely requested in writing a hearing to determine whether or 

not cause exists for not reemploying each respondent for the ensuing school year.   

The District’s Superintendent caused to be timely served upon each respondent 

a respective accusation, dated March 24, 2010, and related documents.  Each respondent 
filed a timely notice of defense.   

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.    

 

 
5. 

 
6. 

 
7. 

 
8. 

9. 

At the hearing of this matter, the District rescinded the notice of layoff action, 

or portions thereof, regarding three respondents.  Those individuals, along with the FTE 
positions held by those persons, are: 

 
Stipulations by the Parties   
 

 

 
Certificated Employees 
Who Had Layoff 
 
Rescinded in Whole   
Or in Part 
 
 
Oleary, John   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yung, Rhonda 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                
 

 
 
 

 

 

1  “Notice of Non-reemployment for 2011-11.”  

-3-

Type of 
Initially  
Proposed 
Action 

Layoff    
Notice  
0.7 FTE 

Layoff  
Notice  
  
0.33 

 Current   
Proposed 
Reduction 

0.19 
 
 

 
 
 

Rescission 
Entirety 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

FTE To Be 
Held 2010-11 

Reduction/ 
Reassignment 
 
     0.51 

     0.33 

 
 

 
 
 

0.67 
 
 

Layoff  
Notice  
 
1.0 

  
Coleman, Karen 
 
 
 
 
 
By its rescission, or partial rescission, of the respective layoff notices of the subject 
three certificated employees, the District will retain the services of Mr. Oleary, Ms. Yung 
and Ms. Coleman in a certificated position at the FTE level indicated in the last column set 
out immediately above. 
 
Respondents’ Contentions 

Reduction/ 
Reassignment 
      0.33 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
10. 

Further, respondents contend that the Superintendent, through her designee, failed 

 
Respondents, collectively, contend that the District’s proposed layoff action, 
as contemplated by the accusations filed regarding each Respondent, should be dismissed.   
Respondents aver that the Superintendent, through her designees, improperly “over-noticed” 
individual certificated employees for the prospective layoff action for the ensuing school 
year because the noticed individuals occupy more than the number of FTEs that were 
specified by the Board in its Resolution No. 2009-10-35.  Respondents argue that the 
Governing Board may only terminate the services of “not more than a corresponding 
percentage of the certificated employees of the District.”  Respondents aver that the 
contemplated layoff action will lead to termination of more individuals being laid off 
in a greater number than is necessary. 
 
 
attribute certain Respondents with proper placement on the District’s Seniority List and 
failed to correctly note tenure credit for some respondents.  Respondents also contend that 
the Superintendent failed to reassign or grant “bumping” rights to certain teachers as 
prescribed by Education Code section 44955.   
 
 
Also, respondents argue that the Superintendent improperly retained junior teachers 
to perform services for which senior teachers, who are the subject of the layoff action, are 
credentialed and qualified to teach.  
 
 
And, respondents contend that the Superintendent cannot demonstrate that the 
reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services was lawful in that the District failed 
to provide a rationale basis for the Superintendent’s refusal to “split assignments” between 
school sites.  In essence, respondents reject the proposition that distances between various 
school sites and differing lengths of class time render it impractical or infeasible to assign 
teachers to different school sites.   
      

 
Individual respondents advanced contentions of particularized import as follows: 
 

i. 

Respondent Mary Ellen Quine contends the reduction of services action 

should not result in her loss of the 0.2 FTE position in the Cyber High program.  She argues 

 

-4-

that she was improperly “bumped” from the Cyber High because of excessive displacement 
of personnel by way of “over noticing” of affected employees for the layoff action.  

 
ii. 

Respondent Meridith Armstrong avers also that the Superintendent’s 

method of carrying out the Board’s directive to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of 
services resulted in too many teachers being bumped so that after all the movement of 
certificated personnel all of her teaching assignments at the high school level were 
improperly taken from her.  She notes that, at most, the layoff action should have deprived 
her of only a 0.49 FTE position, which would have corresponded with the position that was 
reduced at the middle school level.      

iii. 

Although Respondent DePonte did not testify at the hearing, 

respondents argue that he should not be laid off by 0.3 FTE from his currently held physical 
education assignment due to bumping by a middle school teacher whose service is being 
eliminated for the ensuing school year.  The argument for Respondent DePonte advanced 
that he could have been assigned a 0.6 FTE at Cambridge Elementary School and a 0.4 FTE 
at Vanden High School.  Second, respondents argue that Respondent DePonte is competent 
to teach the 0.2 FTE position in the Cyber High course because the Cyber High program 
begins at 6:45 a.m., and Respondent DePonte could leave that high school course in order to 
reach the physical education classes that do not begin before 8:30 a.m. 

 
11. 

Respondents’ contentions and arguments are without merit and are rejected. 

 
Evidence of Individual Certificated Employees at the Hearing of this Matter 
 
a.  Ms. Mary Ellen Quine  
 
 
first date of paid service to the District of August 23, 2006.   For the current school year, 
Respondent Quine teaches physical education, health and “Cyber High.”  

 Respondent Mary Ellen Quine is a teacher at Vanden High School.  She has a 

12. 

 

Cyber High is a 0.2 FTE position.  (Cyber High is an Internet-online educational 
 
program that is offered to high school seniors from 6:45 a.m. through 7:30 a.m. The program 
is designed to provide seniors with the means to earn up to five credits in order to meet 
graduation requirements.)  Respondent Quine has been the teacher in Cyber High only for 
the current school year (2009-2010).  Respondent Quine is subject to reduction of 0.6 FTE of 
her current assignments, including the Cyber High position.  But she is being retained in a 
0.4 FTE physical education assignment.  
 
 
On cross-examination, Respondent Quine acknowledged that as a physical education 
teacher Ms. Zenbrosky, who is being retained to work in the Cyber High program, is senior 
to her on the District’s Seniority List.   

 
 

 

 

-5-

Notwithstanding her displeasure with the District’s determination regarding her 

diminished assignment for the coming school year, Respondent Quine provided no 
competent evidence that the District has retained any teacher junior to her to perform 
services for which Ms. Quine possesses a credential and is currently competent to provide.  
Nor did Respondent Quine establish that the Superintendent, or her designee, committed a 
procedural error in the execution of the layoff action that adversely affects her teaching 
position with the District. 
 
b.  Respondent Meridith Armstrong 
 
Respondent Armstrong is a chemistry and biology teacher at Vanden High 
 
School.  She has a first date of paid service to the District of August 21, 2007.  During the 
2009-2010 school year, Respondent Armstrong worked in 0.2 FTE for chemistry and 
0.6 FTE for biology.  Her total FTE position for the current school year totaled 0.8 FTE.   
 
 
completely eliminate her teaching position with the District. 
 

Respondent Armstrong received preliminary notice that the layoff action would 

13. 

Respondent Armstrong, however, provided no competent evidence that the District 

  

has retained any teacher junior to her to perform services for which Ms. Armstrong possesses 
a credential and is currently competent to provide.  Nor did Respondent Armstrong establish 
that the Superintendent, or her designee, committed a procedural error in the execution of the 
layoff action that adversely affects her teaching position with the District. 
 
Evidence on Behalf of Respondents Generally 
 
 
treat respondents fairly.  No evidence was offered to support respondents’ general argument 
that the District failed to engage in an intelligent and rational process in deciding which 
employees to retain and which employees to layoff.  No competent evidence shows that the 
District knowingly set out to distort data or statistical information to reach the preliminary 
decision in this matter.  The findings and determinations of the Superintendent, and her 
designee, did not render this layoff action fatally flawed.   
 

Respondents did not offer competent evidence that the District has failed to 

14. 

Respondent DePonte did not offer testimony at the hearing of this matter.  And, 

through respondents, credible evidence was not offered on his behalf to support the 
arguments made for him. 

 
Respondent DePonte has a first date of paid service to the District of August 22, 

2001.  Respondent DePonte now holds a 1.0 FTE high school physical education teacher 
assignment.  By reason of bumping, he will lose 0.3 FTE of his full-time assignment.  
Although respondents argue, on behalf of Respondent DePonte, that he can serve at 
different school sites so that he can maintain a full-time position next year, the evidence did 
not establish that splitting assignments between the middle school and the high school so 

 

-6-

that Respondent DePonte may work as a full-time physical education teacher would be 
beneficial to the District or its students.  Further, respondents did not offer competent 
evidence to demonstrate that Respondent DePonte is competent to teach the Cyber High 
course, which entails a 0.2 FTE position.   

 
Respondents provided no competent evidence that the District has retained any 
teacher junior to Respondent DePonte to perform services for which Mr. DePonte possesses 
a credential and is currently competent to provide.  Furthermore respondents did not establish 
that the Superintendent, or her designee, committed a procedural error in the execution of the 
layoff action that adversely affects Respondent DePonte’s physical education teaching 
position with the District. 
 
The District’s Reasonable Basis to Proceed 

 
15. 

 
The Superintendent appeared at the hearing of this matter to provide credible 

and persuasive evidence. 

 
The Superintendent is responsible for advising the District’s Board on pertinent aspects 
of the District’s practices and procedures for personnel issues, hiring procedures, credentialing 
considerations, and the status of employees in certificated positions at five elementary schools, 
a middle school, a comprehensive high school and a continuation/alternative high school.  
(The District’s schools serve about 5,300 students.)  The Superintendent is charged by the 
Board with contract management for the certificated units.  In addition to the foregoing, the 
Superintendent is vested with knowledge, expertise, and experience to offer competent and 
reliable evidence regarding the basis for the proposed layoff action that will take effect for 
the ensuing school term.  (The Superintendent also serves as the District’s senior personnel 
management officer because during a past year’s layoff the position of Human Resources 
manager was eliminated.) 
 

16. 

The Superintendent persuasively expressed that the determination to initiate 

the layoff action arose as a result of the absolute need to balance the District’s budget in light 
of the fact that the District is a “negatively-certified” district.  As such, the District must 
establish that it can meet financial obligations for the coming school year.  The reductions 
and elimination of particular kinds of services are essential for the District’s certification of 
its fiscal stability for the ensuing school year.  Also, the Superintendent noted that projected 
student enrollment for the coming school year affected the decision to reduce certificated 
employees at the middle school level.    

 
17.  Upon learning that the District was required to initiate layoff proceedings 

for teacher employees of the District, the Superintendent and her designee took reasonable 
and lawful steps to develop the District’s seniority list for the District’s teachers.  The 
Superintendent studied and set forth on the District’s seniority list the names of probationary 
and permanent employees as well as the dates that established the first day of paid service to 
the District.  And the Superintendent in her official capacity was reasonable in the exercise of 

 

-7-

discretion in executing the procedures associated with the layoff action as required by the 
Board’s resolution.  The Superintendent was not arbitrary, capricious nor fraudulent in 
carrying out the District’s Resolution No. 2009-10-35.     

 
18.  Ms. Danyel Conolley offered persuasive evidence in the hearing of this matter.  
 
Ms. Conolley is the District’s Certificated Personnel Specialist.  Her duties pertain to 
all District functions that revolve around certificated employees including payroll questions, 
monitoring assignments relative to credentials held by employees, maintaining accurate 
records of certificated employees, addressing auditing questions propounded by the Solano 
County of Education, interacting with school site administrators regarding the needs of 
schools for services performed by various certificated employees and preparing various 
documents and charts that aid in accurately matching certificated employees to assignments 
in District schools.  

 
Ms. Conolley offered a credible explanation regarding the effect of bumping of 
respondents by senior middle school teachers, whose teaching positions are being eliminated.  
Ms. Conolley created various charts that aided in analyzing seniority dates, credentials, 
school sites and assignments that led to making recommendations with regard to the loss of 
high school positions by respondents.   

 
As to the matter of whether “splitting” assignments in a way that respondents suggest 
would “save” jobs of teachers, Ms. Conolley demonstrated the rational basis of the District’s 
decision-making process that rejected the idea of splitting teacher assignments between school 
sites.  Ms. Conolley was persuasive that splitting assignments was highly impracticable and 
simply cannot work.  For example, respondents argued for placing Ms. Zendrosky into a 
partial assignment at Golden West Middle School and a partial assignment at Vander High 
School.  But, such assignment would make Ms. Zendrosky a 0.49 FTE employee at Golden 
West Middle School and a 0.51 FTE at Vander High School.  First such partial assignments 
do not conform with the distinct school schedules because Vander High School has five-
period days which equate to 0.20 FTE positions being apportioned to high school teachers, 
while Golden West Middle School has six-period days that amount to 0.16 FTE positions 
serving as the unit that defines middle school teacher work loads.  Second, respondents’ 
formula for Ms. Zendrosky to hold split assignments between a middle school and a high 
school would mean that she would be a 1.09 FTE employee, which is improper.  Other 
suggested patterns of teacher assignments as offered by respondents were shown by 
Ms. Conolley to be not feasible.  

Ultimate Findings  

 

 
19. 

The recommendation of the District’s Superintendent and the Board’s 

preliminary decision to eliminate or discontinue 7.77 FTE positions, including the 
positions held by each Respondent, were neither arbitrary nor capricious.  Rather, the 

 

-8-

Superintendent’s recommendation and the Board’s decision to authorize the layoff 
action were within the proper exercise of the District’s discretion.  

 
20. 

 
21. 

 

The District’s proposed elimination or discontinuation of the prescribed FTE 

positions, including the positions held by Respondents, for the ensuing school year is related 
to the welfare of the District and its overall student population.    

The Board determined that it will be necessary, due to the elimination of 

 
particular kinds of services, to decrease the number of teachers before the beginning of the 
next academic year.  The Board lawfully directed the notification to Respondents of the 
elimination of the certificated positions held by each Respondent. 
 

22.  No competent and credible evidence establishes that as a result of the proposed 
elimination of the full time equivalent positions respectively held by Respondents herein, the 
District will retain any certificated employee who is junior to such Respondents to perform 
services for which Respondents have been certificated or found to be competent to provide 
for the next school year. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Respondents made a motion for dismissal of the accusations as against all 

 
Motions by Respondents for Dismissal All Accusations  
 
 
affected certificated employees alleging the Superintendent’s designee “over-noticed” a large 
number of credentialed employees who occupy many more full-time equivalent positions 
than prescribed in the Board resolution.  Also, Respondents seek dismissal of the accusations 
because of a purported fatal defect with the entire process because of supposed wholesale 
miscalculation of bumping rights.  For the reasons noted immediately below, respondents are 
mistaken.  Also, respondents argue for dismissal on the ground that a decision in a layoff 
action by the Oakland Unified School District approves splitting of teacher assignments in 
order to save jobs of teachers who were subject to layoff.  
 
Claim of “Over-noticing” 
 
Respondents demand the dismissal of the entire layoff action be granted 
 
because the Superintendent’s designee sent accusations to several individuals holding 
certificated positions with the District when the Board’s resolution prescribed an elimination 
of 7.77 FTEs.  
 
 
certificated employees into teacher positions for the ensuing years, current junior certificated 
teachers were given layoff notices that resulted in a number of teachers being subject to 
layoff that exceeded the 7.77 FTE elimination as set out in the Board’s resolution. 
 

Evidence at the hearing showed that to properly account for the bumping rights of 

i. 

 

-9-

The District is not required to match exactly the FTE positions with those persons 

 
receiving the notice of layoff.  Only an average daily attendance reduction action requires a 
“corresponding percentage” of certificated employees to be identified in such a reduction 
of staff.  A governing board’s decision to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services 
need not be tied to any statistical computation, such as a projected decline in the number 
of students in the affected district.  The number of terminations by a PKS reduction of 
certificated employees depends entirely on a district’s governing board’s decision regarding 
how many, or which, services to reduce or to eliminate.  It is wholly within the Board’s 
discretion to determine the numbers by which the District will reduce a particular service.  
(San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)  
 

Further Hilderbrant v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 

ii. 

Respondents’ use of a decision in a layoff action before the Oakland 

334, supports the proposition that the District is not compelled to split an existing full-time 
FTE position into parts so as to accommodate certificated employees who are subject to a 
layoff action.   
 
Unpersuasive Nature of Another School District’s Decision on Splitting Assignments 
 
 
Unified School District, County of Alameda, was not persuasive.  First, in administrative 
adjudication an earlier issued decision only has precedential value under the explicit 
requirements of Government Code section 11425.60, which includes the requirement that 
the agency seeking to rely on an agency decision as precedent must first promulgate a 
regulation that creates an index of determinations made in precedent decisions.  The District 
has no index of precedential decisions.  Second, the 2003 decision in the Oakland Unified 
School District layoff action dealt with a reduction of 1054 FTE positions contains a now 
inapplicable analysis that is rendered wholly invalid in light of the 2009 decision in  
St. Helena Unified School District, supra, 172 Cal.App.4th 334. 
 
Ruling on Motion to Dismiss Accusations 
 
 
because of reductions and the elimination of particular kinds of service is for the welfare of 
the District and its students.  Accordingly, the motion for dismissal due to “over-noticing” to 
certificated employees and the supposed failure of the District to split assignments to save 
jobs of affected employees is denied.   

As indicated by the factual findings above, the proposed layoff of teachers 

iii. 

Lawful Basis for the Reduction or Elimination of Particular Kinds of Services 
 

2. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

44949 and 44955.    

 

 

 

-10-

3. 

The District provided all notices and other requirements of Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955.  This conclusion of law is made by reason of the matters set forth 
in Factual Findings 1 through 8, inclusive.   
 

4. 

Judgments entered by a tribunal on the stipulations of the parties have the 

same effect as acts tried on the merits.  (John Siebel Associates v. Keele (1986) 188 
Cal.App.3d 560, 565.)  The District stipulated to rescind the layoff notices and to withdraw 
the accusations regarding the certificated employees named in Factual Finding 9.  The 
stipulations are binding on the parties. 

 
5. 

Evidence Code section 664 establishes a presumption that the action or official 

6. 

Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a), requires that no later than March 15 

The preliminary notices are intended to assure that affected employees are informed 

duties of a public entity, such as the District and its governing board, have been regularly 
performed.  Respondents offer no evidence to rebut the presumption that the District has 
properly performed actions related to the procedures that seek the non-reemployment of 
Respondents.  
 
 
Board Resolution No. 2009-10-35, as adopted on March 2, 2010, stated that it 
was the Board’s determination that it was necessary to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of 
services for the 2010-2011 school year.    
 
 
an employee is given notice that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year, 
the governing board and the employee will be given notice by the superintendent that it has 
been recommended that preliminary notices be given to employees and the reason for that 
recommendation. 
 
 
of the facts upon which they can reasonably assess the probability that they will not be 
reemployed.  The preliminary notices must state the reasons for the recommendation. 
(Karbach v. Board of Education (1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 355.)  That goal was attained by the 
Superintendent’s designee’s conscientious performance.  
 
 
need not be tied to any statistical computation, such as a projected decline in the number 
of students in the affected district.  Rather the number of terminations by a PKS reduction 
of certificated employees depends entirely on the district’s governing board’s decision 
regarding how many, or which, services to reduce or to eliminate.  It is wholly within the 
Board’s discretion to determine the numbers by which the District will reduce a particular 
service.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen, (1983), 144 Cal.App.3d 627.)  
 
 
positions for the 2010-2011 school year was a discretionary decision that constituted a valid 
basis for reduction in particular kinds of services under the Education Code. 
 

  
The Travis Unified School District Governing Board’s decision to eliminate 7.77 FTE 

 
A governing board’s decision to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services 

 

-11-

Ultimate Determinations  
 

 
8.  

 
2. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

7. 

Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 cause exists for the 

District to eliminate or reduce particular kinds of services for the ensuing year.  And cause 
exists to give certain Respondents notice that for the ensuing school year they will not be 
reemployed to provide services now rendered by such Respondents.  These determinations 
are made by reason of the matters set out in Factual Findings 15 through 19, 21, and 22.    

The discontinuation of the subject particular kinds of service provided by each 
Respondent relates solely to the welfare of the District and its students within the meaning of 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, by reason of the matters set out in Factual 
Finding 20.   
 
 
9. 
 
consistent with the law.  And, the District’s contemplated layoff action is reasonable in its 
execution.  
  

The District’s layoff action is necessary.  The District’s proposed action is 

RECOMMENDED ORDER 
  

1. 

The accusations served on Respondents Meridith Armstrong, Kristin Bump, 

Margorie Martinson, Mary Ellen Quine, Norman DePonte, and Maranda Hanson are 
sustained. 

 The layoff notice is rescinded, and the resultant accusation is dismissed, as to 

Respondent Rhonda Yung. 

The layoff notice is partially rescinded as to Respondent John Oleary and 

Karen Coleman.  The accusations are sustained, in part, as to these respondents in that the 
District may eliminate 0.19 FTE from the teacher assignment held by Respondent Oleary and 
0.67 FTE from the teacher assignment held by Respondent Coleman.  

Except as indicated above, notice may be given to respondents that their 

services, or portions thereof, will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year by the Travis 
Unified School District. 
 
 
DATED:  May 6, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
____________________________ 
PERRY O. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-12-

