BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD 
PATTERSON JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF STANISLAUS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
   
OAH No. 2010021031 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE PATTERSON 
JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
 
                                                Respondents. 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Philip Alfano, Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources, appeared as the 

Administrative Law Judge Stephen J. Smith, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

 
 
of California heard this matter in Patterson, California at the District Office of the Patterson 
Joint Unified School District on April 12, 2010. 
 
 
representative of the Patterson Joint Unified School District (District), all of whom were 
represented by Chesley D. Quaide, Attorney at Law, Partner, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, 
Ruud and Romo, Attorneys at Law. 
 
 
Nunnemaker, Local Association President, all of whom were represented by Ernest H. Tuttle, 
IV, Attorney at Law. 
 

Certificated teacher respondents named in Attachment A were represented by Chris 

No unrepresented respondents were identified who receiving preliminary notices of 

layoff.  One respondent receiving a preliminary notice of layoff, Irma Hupe, did not appear at 
the evidentiary hearing.  The parties stipulated and agreed that Ms. Hupe withdrew her 
previously filed Notice of Defense and withdrew her Request for a Hearing.   
 

The matter was submitted based on an oral stipulation placed on the record in open 

court, together with the list of rescissions of preliminary notices of layoffs affecting some but 
not all of the respondents, announced on the record by Mr. Alfano during the hearing.  The 
matter was submitted on April 12, 2010. 
 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

2. 

1. 

All respondents listed in Exhibit A to this Decision are, and at all times 

 
 
relevant to this Decision were, certificated employees of the District.   
 
 
On or just before March 1, 2010, in accordance with Education Code section 
44949 and 44955, Patrick Sweeney, Ed.D., Superintendent of the District (Superintendent) 
notified the Governing Board of the District (Board) in writing of his recommendation that 
certain particular kinds of services (PKS) would have to be reduced or eliminated for the 
upcoming school year.  The Superintendent’s recommendation specified the PKS to be 
reduced or eliminated, as set forth below.  The Superintendent also notified the Board that a 
corresponding number of certificated employees of the District, in this instance and at this 
point in time, 29.6 full time equivalents (FTE), would have to be laid off to effectuate the 
PKS reduction or elimination.  The Superintendent notified the Board that respondents had 
been identified as persons to whom notice should be given that their services would not be 
required for the ensuing school year.  The recommendation that respondents’ services for the 
District would not be required for the upcoming school year was not related to their skills, 
abilities or competencies as teachers.   
 
Reductions/Eliminations Of Particular Kinds Of Services 
 

3. 

The Board adopted Resolution 03-01-10 (a) on March 1, 2010.  The Board 

resolved to follow the Superintendent’s recommendation to reduce 29.6 FTE PKS.  The 
Resolution authorized and directed the Superintendent or her designee to give notice to a 
corresponding number of certificated employees of the District that their services would not 
be required for the upcoming school year in order to effectuate the reduction.  The 
Resolution authorized the elimination of the following services now offered in the District: 
 

PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES (PKS) TO BE REDUCED 
OR ELIMINATED 
AT CLOSE OF 2010/2011 SCHOOL YEAR1
 

24.0  FTE   Elementary Teachers  
  1.0     FTE   Science Teacher 
  2.0  FTE   English Teachers 
  1.0  FTE  Math Teacher 
  1.0  FTE  Spanish Teacher 
  0.6  FTE  Home Economics Teacher 

   TOTAL:  29.6 FTE 

                                                 
1 Copied verbatim from the Resolution. 

2

 

 
 

 

4. 

The Superintendent caused each of the respondents listed in Attachment A to 
this Decision with a written Notice of Intention to Dismiss (preliminary notice) on or before 
March 15, 2010.  The written preliminary notices advised each respondent that his or her 
services would not be required for the upcoming school year.  The preliminary notice set 
forth the reasons for the Superintendent’s recommendation and the Governing Board’s 
action. 
 

5. 

All respondents identified in Exhibit A timely filed Requests for Hearing in 

response to receipt of preliminary notice of layoff.   
 
Accusations 
 

6. 

The Superintendent made and filed the Accusations in his official capacity as 

7. 

8. 

9. 

The District timely served Accusations on each respondent identified in 

Notice of the date, time and place of the evidentiary hearing was timely served 

Superintendent of the Paterson Joint Unified School District (District). 
 
 
Exhibit A, each of whom had timely filed a Request for a Hearing with the District.  Each 
respondent served an Accusation timely filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation. 
 
 
on all respondents and counsel.  All respondents except Irma Hupe appeared at the 
evidentiary hearing.  Ms. Hupe notified the District before the commencement of the hearing 
that she was withdrawing her Notice of Defense and Request for a Hearing, and that she was 
not contesting the action.  She did not appear at the hearing, consistent with her withdrawal 
of her Notice of Defense and Request for a Hearing. 
 
Stipulation 
 
 
teacher’s association and their respective representatives, the parties entered into two 
Stipulations (the Stipulations).  The Stipulations form the basis for the remainder of this 
Decision.  The Stipulations were put on the record and are here fully incorporated by 
reference into this Decision. 
 
Jurisdiction 
 
 
this matter. 
 
 
Attachment A. 
 
 
withdrawn by any respondent. 
 

12.  Other than Ms. Hupe, no other Requests for Hearing/Notices of Defense were 

10.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.  Jurisdiction exists for 

Counsel for the represented respondents represents each individual listed on 

Following lengthy negotiations and exceptional efforts by all parties, the 

11. 

 

3

13. 

The District rescinded Preliminary Notices of Layoff that had been issued to 

respondents as follows;  
 

Ernesto Calderon; 
Millie Dahlgren; 
Ana Davilla; 
Peiman Hojjatijou; 
Eugenio Iniguez; 
Lia Cisneros-Barajas; 
Balena Lominario; 
Grace Villalobos; 
Carlos Jiminez; 
Jayne Lobao; 
Deyanira Lopez; 
Martha Sandoval; 
Sandra Silva-Cisneros; 
Jessica Souza; 
Tiffany Hood; 
Kellene Madruga; 
Marianne Zamzow;  
Jorge Pinedo;  
Karen Fauss; and 
April Weaver. 

Irma Hupe; 
Marlene Avila; 
Angela Frank; 
Donna Clarke;  
Denise Copeland; 
Julie Du Priest; 
Jennifer King; 
Shivaughn Alves; and 
Natalie Hayes. 
 
 

 

 

4

Upon the approval and adoption of this Proposed Decision by the Board pursuant to 

Government Code section 11517, subdivision (b), the rescission of preliminary notices of 
layoff issued to each person listed above shall be endorsed and approved. 
 

14.  All remaining respondents (listed below) named on Attachment A are the 

proper subject of these proceedings. 
 

15. 

The remaining respondents still subject to this layoff and whose preliminary 

notices remain in full force and effect after the rescissions are as follows: 
 

PKS Reduction Action And Layoffs Unrelated To Skill Or Competence 
 

16. 

The issuance of preliminary notices of layoff to each respondent was not 

related to any respondent’s competence, skill or ability as a certificated employee serving in 
the District.  The cause for issuance of the preliminary notices of layoff was exclusively 
related to the grounds and causes set forth in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
Entire Agreement And Limitations To Present Parties 
 

17. 

The Stipulations and the agreements reflected in this Proposed Decision reflect 

the entire agreement of the named parties.  Any remaining issue regarding any respondent 
properly served with a preliminary notice of layoff not reflected in this Decision is dismissed 
with prejudice. 
 

18.  All respondent/employees of the District receiving a preliminary notice of 

19. 

The District is facing financial pressure necessitating the reduction or 

layoff and properly subject to the jurisdiction of these proceedings shall be entitled to all the 
protections set forth in Education Code sections 44956 and 44957.   
 
Necessity Of PKS Reduction/Elimination And Layoffs 
 
 
elimination of the particular kinds of services set forth in the Resolutions.   
 
All Known Attrition Considered 
 
 
considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements, effects of furloughs and other 
agreements and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff 
notices to be delivered to its employees.   
 
Compliance With State And Federal Mandates 
 
 
21. 
federally mandated. 
 
 

The Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent, on behalf of the District, 

The District does not propose to eliminate any services that are State or 

20. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.  
The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the proposed 
reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and the preliminary notice of layoff 
served on respondent is factually and legally appropriate.2  The parties stipulated the District 

                                                 
2 Education Code section 44944. 

 

5

2. 

4. 

3. 

Other than that reflected in the Stipulations and the rescinded preliminary 

The services the District seeks to eliminate in this matter are “particular kinds 

met its burden with respect to the remaining respondents.  All claims and issues raised by the 
giving of preliminary notices of layoff are resolved here, by the Stipulations or by waiver or 
default. 
 
 
of services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of 
services was not demonstrated to be arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise 
of discretion. 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
 
welfare of the District and its pupils.  The District’s reduction in particular kinds of services 
proposed is necessary to avert the District operating in a deficit in the upcoming school year. 
 
 
notices of layoff, there was no evidence any person receiving a preliminary notice of layoff is 
being laid off in favor of a junior employee being skipped, or that any employee being laid 
off is entitled to bump into a position held by a more junior employee where the employee 
being laid off has the credentials and competence to take the position of the more junior 
employee being retained.  There was no evidence that any certificated employee of the 
District is being retained to provide a service any of the remaining respondents still subject to 
this layoff are certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
the Lodi Unified School District to reduce or discontinue 29.6 FTE of particular kinds of 
services, as set forth in the District’s Resolution.  The cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services relates solely to the welfare of the schools and 
the pupils thereof.  Legal cause therefore exists to sustain the remaining Accusations.  The 
Board may give the remaining respondents still subject to layoff final notices that their 
services will not be required by the District in the upcoming school year, in inverse order of 
seniority, as governed by the Stipulations and Attachments. 
 
 

Legal cause exists pursuant to Education Code section 44949 and 44955 for 

5. 

ORDER 

The Accusations are SUSTAINED. 

The Patterson Joint Unified School District action to reduce or eliminate 29.6 Full 

Time Equivalents of particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year is 
AFFIRMED. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

6

Final notice may be given by the District to the remaining respondents still subject to 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
STEPHEN J. SMITH 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

this layoff identified above that their services will not be required for the upcoming school 
year.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 20, 2010 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

7

Exhibit A 

 
 
Alves, Shivaugn 
Avila, Marlene 
Calderon, Ernestro 
Clarke, Donna 
Copeland, Denise 
Dahlgren, Millie 
Davila, Ana 
DuPriest, Julie 
Fauss, Karen 
Franck, Angela 
Hayes, Natalie 
Hood, Tiffany 
Hupe, Irma (late receipt) 
Iniguez, Eugenio 
Jimenez, Carlos 
King, Jennifer 
Lobao, Jayne 
Lopez, Deyanira 
Madruga, Kellene 
Pinedo, Jorge 
Sandoval, Martha 
Silva-Cisneros, Sandra 
Souza, Jessica 
Villalobos, Grace 
Weaver, April 
Zamzow, Marianne 
 

 

8

