BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF  
THE EL SEGUNDO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
Certificated Employees of the El Segundo  
Unified School District,  
 
 
 
 
 
 

             Respondents. 

 

 

 

    OAH No. 2010030321 
     
    
     
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Chris Ruiz, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative 

Hearings, heard this matter on April 20, 2010, in El Segundo, California.    
 

Salvador O. Holguin, Jr., Esq., represented the El Segundo Unified School District 

(District).    

 
Daniel J. Kolodziej, Esq., represented Respondents.  
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

      

 

1.      Dr. Geoff Yantz, Superintendent of the District, acting in his official capacity, 
caused all pleadings, notices and other papers to be filed and served upon each Respondent 
pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.    The  “layoff 
packet”  sent  to  all  Respondents  included  a  Notice  of  Recommendation  That  Services  Will 
Not  Be  Required,  the  Accusation,  and  all  other  forms  required  to  be  sent  with  the 
Accusation.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.      
 

2.     Respondents are employed by the District as permanent, probationary, intern, 
pre-intern,  emergency  permitted,  waiver,  and/or  temporary  certificated  employees  of  the 
District.  There are 14 Respondents’ positions at issue.  Those 14 teachers’ names are listed 
on Exhibit 7, page 3, which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.   

3.     On March 9, 2010, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the 
Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  issued  Amended  Resolution  number  11/2009-10, 
which  approved  the  recommendation  by  the  Superintendent  that  notice  be  given  to 

Respondents that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year and stating 
the reasons for that recommendation.  

4.     On  March  12,  2010,  Respondents  were  given  written  notice  of  the 
recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year 
and stating the reasons for that recommendation.  

5.     

It  was  established  that  cause  exists,  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, for not reemploying Respondents for the ensuing school year for 
all of the reasons set forth below.  

6.        The District decided the following:  

The following particular kinds of services of the District will be 
reduced or eliminated no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 
school year: 

                       K-5 Instruction  

 

Elementary Physical Education  

12 

1 

FTE1

FTE 

Elementary Assistant Principal                              1 

FTE 

Elementary Special Education  

.5 

FTE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Middle School Physical Education   

Middle School Art 

High School Intervention Counseling 

 

 

High School Math 

High School English  

High School Drama   

High School Dance 

 

High School Academic Decathlon   

High School Journalism 

High School French   

1 

1 

1  

.8 

2 

.2 

.2 

.2 

.8 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

.4  

FTE 

                                                

1  Full- Time Equivalent position(s).  

 

2

High School Social Science   

2.2 

FTE 

High School Choir 

 

High School Physical Education 

High School Earth Science   

High School AVID 

Elementary Music 

 

 

High School Yearbook 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.4 

1 

.4 

.8 

.5 

.2 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

 

 

 

 

             ___________________________________________ 

 

             TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS     

27.6  FTE 

7.      The Board decided that it is necessary to decrease the number of certificated 

employees as a result of the reduction in services.  These services are “particular kinds of 
services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious, but rather, constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  The Board 
is faced with a budget shortfall and with the potential loss of additional State funding.  

8.     The reduction or discontinuation of these particular kinds of services is related 

to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular 
kinds of services is necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District 
as determined by the Board.   This reduction is necessary because of budget reductions.   

 
9.     The Board properly considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements 
and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees as of March 13, 2010.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen 
(1983) 144 Cal.App. 3d 627 at 636).  The District further stated its intent to withdraw layoff 
notices to the most senior teachers if additional attrition occurs. 
 

10.     The District properly created its seniority list by determining the first date of 

paid service of each certificated employee and properly utilized reasonable “tie-breaker” 
criteria when necessary.   The District did not “skip” any teachers and the District properly 
utilized a “bump” list whereby a displaced teacher can “bump” a more junior teacher who is 
teaching a subject for which the more senior teacher is credentialed.  Respondents did not 
challenge the seniority list or the “bumps” which the District utilized.    
 

11.   Respondents raised three challenges at hearing and those challenges are 

discussed below.      
 

 

3

13.  It was established that the District has financial reserves in excess of the 

12.   In order to simplify the process, for both the District and its personnel, the District 

Notice /Layoff Package  
 
 
simultaneously served the Accusation, the resolutions, the request for hearing forms, and the 
Notice of Defense forms on Respondents, along with the notice that their services would not be 
required.  The 14 Respondents timely requested hearings and filed notices of defense.  
Respondents contended that the District’s service method did not comply with Education Code 
sections 44955 and 44949.  Respondents did not show that the District failed to comply with the 
Education Code; nor did they demonstrate that they suffered actual prejudice from its use of 
simultaneous service.  Accordingly, the District’s service was proper.  (See California 
Teachers Assn. v. Butte Community College Dist.  (1996) 48 Cal.App.4th 1293, 1305-06.)   
 
The Budget  
 
 
minimum required by the State.  Respondents contended that those reserves should be 
utilized to save Respondents’ positions.  However, it was not established that the District 
lacks discretion to spend, or save, its financial resources as it believes are in its best interest.  
Respondents’ did not offer any authority that would require the District to reduce its financial 
resources to the State “minimum” before being allowed to proceed with layoffs.  It was not 
established that the District’s decision to maintain its reserves was arbitrary or capricious.   
 
No Child Left Behind Requirements 
 
 
Left Behind” (NCLB) requirements if the layoffs at issue occur.  While it was established 
that the District did not consider the effect of the layoffs on its ability to meet NCLB 
requirements, it was not established that the District will be unable to meet said 
requirements.  The only person who testified was David Lubs, Director of Human Resources 
and Maintenance.  He testified that he “expects” the District can comply with its NCLB 
obligations despite the layoffs, but he also testified that he “was not really familiar” with said 
requirements.  While his testimony did reveal that the District did not specifically consider 
how it will meet its obligations under NCLB, his testimony did not establish that the District 
will be unable to meet said obligations.     
 
      

14.  Respondents contended that the District will be unable to comply with “No Child 

 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 

Jurisdiction for these proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

2.    

 Each of the services set forth in Findings 5 and 6 is a particular kind of 

service which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and 
case law.   

 
1.     
44949 and 44955.   
      

 

 

4

3. 

The District’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither  

4. 

The District’s service method did comply with Education Code sections 44955 

arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.  
 
 
and 44949.  Respondents did not show that the District failed to comply with the Education 
Code; nor did they demonstrate that they suffered actual prejudice from its use of simultaneous 
service.  Accordingly, the District’s service was proper.  (See California Teachers Assn. v. 
Butte Community College Dist.  (1996) 48 Cal.App.4th 1293, 1305-06.)    

 
5. 

Cause exists to reduce the District's teaching positions as described above and 
to give notice to the affected teachers pursuant to Education Code section 44955.  (Campbell 
v. Abbot (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796; Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 
689).  Based on the above Findings, including the preamble to this Proposed Decision, the 
names of the affected teachers, those as to whom final notices of layoff may be given, are as 
follows: 
 
All 14 Respondent teachers listed in exhibit 7, page 3, may be laid off by the District.   

 
Because of the reductions of services, the District may give notice to the teachers 
identified in Legal Conclusion No. 5 that their services will not be required for the 2010-
2011school year. 
 
 
Dated: April ___, 2010. 
                        
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

___________________________ 
CHRIS RUIZ 
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  

 
                         
                                    
                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
ORDER 

5

 

 

