 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Kevin  R.  Dale,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Roberto  Cardenas  (Cardenas), 

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  2010040432  
 
 

BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ALLENSWORTH ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF TULARE  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reelection Of: 
 
MOLLY CLOER, 
 
                                         Respondent.  
 
 
 
 
 
this matter on April 28, 2010, in Allensworth, California. 
 
 
Superintendent of the Allensworth Elementary School District (District). 
 
 
Wakefield.  
 
 
The  District  has  decided  not  to  reemploy  Respondent  for  the  2010-2011  school  year. 
Respondent requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying 
her for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing. The record was left open 
for the submission of written closing argument. On April 30, 2010, the District submitted a Post 
Hearing Brief, and Respondent submitted a Written Closing Argument, which documents have 
been marked as Exhibits 7 and B, respectively. Respondent submitted a further written closing 
on May 4, 2010, which document has been marked as Exhibit C. The matter was submitted for 
decision on May 4, 2010.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Molly Cloer (Respondent) represented herself with the assistance of her mother, Martha 

Superintendent Cardenas filed the Accusation in his official capacity. 

Respondent is a certificated employee of the District. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

2. 

1. 

3. 

4. 

6. 

5. 

7. 

Respondent commenced her employment in August 2007, and taught a Fifth and 

The  District  has  an  average  daily  attendance  of  less  than  250  pupils,  and, 

 
therefore, is subject to the procedures set forth in Education Code section 44948.5.1  
 
The  District  has  one  elementary  school.  Instruction  is  provided  in  Pre-School, 
 
and  in  Grades  Kindergarten  to  Eighth,  typically  in  multiple-grade  classrooms.  The  District 
employs four certificated employees, including Respondent. Cardenas also acts as the Principal 
of the school. 
 
 
Sixth Grade combination class.  
 
 
Cardenas  conducted  several  informal  classroom  observations  during  the  2007-
2008  school  year.    He  observed  insufficient  student  engagement  and  participation,  as 
Respondent  lectured  and  did  not  always  check  that  the  students  understood  the  material. 
Cardenas  also  noticed  that  students  were  not  well  behaved.  He  provided  suggestions  for 
Respondent to engage the students, for Respondent to check for understanding, and for her to 
improve her classroom management.  
 
 
On May 28, 2008, Cardenas prepared an “Evaluation of Teaching Performance” 
for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  in  which  he  rated  Respondent’s  performance  “Satisfactory.” 
Cardenas concluded that Respondent needed improvement in the following areas of evaluation: 
facilitating a learning experience that promote[s] autonomy, interaction, and choice; creating a 
physical  environment  that  engages  all  students;  and  promoting  social  development  and  group 
responsibility. He wrote the following comments: “Ms. Cloer needs to develop better classroom 
management skills. I understand that [it] is her first year, therefore we expect growth in this area 
for the second year.” (Exhibit 4, at p. 2.) 
 
During  the  2008-2009  school  year,  Respondent  again  taught  the 
 
Fifth/Sixth  Grades  combination  class.  Cardenas  conducted  additional  informal  classroom 
observations  during  the  following  school  year.  He  did  not  see  improvement  in  the  areas  in 
which deficiencies were previously noted. Classroom management continued to be a problem. 
Students left their seats without permission and argued with Respondent. Students still did not 
seem  to  be  engaged  in  the  lessons  being  imparted.  In  addition,  Cardenas  noticed  that 
Respondent moved from one subject to another without an apparent plan. Cardenas reviewed 
Respondent’s lesson plans, and concluded that her lesson plans were deficient, a fact that may 
have contributed to the lack of organization. 
 
 
 
 
                    

8. 

a. 

 

 

1 All further references are to the Education Code. 

 

 
 
 

2

 

9. 

b. 

10. 

The  Superintendent  discussed 

After his observations during the early part of the 2008-2009 school year, 
 
Cardenas  again  provided  suggestions  and  techniques  to  improve  classroom  management.  He 
also told Respondent that it was not appropriate to argue with students. He suggested that she 
adhere  to  a  schedule  and  a  plan.  However,  Cardenas  noticed  the  same  shortcomings  during 
observations in the latter part of the year. 
 
 
Cardenas  received  several  complaints  from  parents  who  believed  that  their 
children  were  being  excessively  detained  after  school.  Cardenas  brought  the  complaints  to 
Respondent’s attention, and again suggested classroom management control techniques to avoid 
having to resort to detentions. Respondent agreed to try to do better. 
 
 
the  2008-2009  year-end  evaluation  with 
Respondent on June 2, 2009. In addition to the three areas rated as “Needs Improvement” in the 
2007-2008  evaluation,  Cardenas  added  six  other  areas  needing  improvement.  The  written 
comment section at the end of the evaluation also  contained  more  extensive  criticism:  “Ms[.] 
Cloer  needs  to  develop  better  classroom  management  skills.  You  need  to  understand  that  I 
didn’t see the growth in classroom management. This in turn, caused you to be less effective in 
your delivery of instruction. Furthermore, this creates a serious concern for me. I had expected 
that you would have a firm control of this concept in your second year. In your third year, you 
will  need  to  demonstrate  better  instructional  strategies.  This  will  [sic]  evaluation  will  be 
negative  in  nature.”  (Exhibit  5,  at  p.  2.)    The  overall  evaluation  rating  was  “Needs 
Improvement.”  
 
 
Cardenas concluded that he had cause to terminate Respondent’s employment at 
the  conclusion  of  the  school  year,  but,  in  part  because  he  had  missed  the  March  15,  2009, 
deadline  to  issue  the  non-reemployment  notice,  he  decided  to  give  Respondent  another 
opportunity to improve her performance. He, therefore, recommended Respondent’s retention. 
 
 
Respondent was on a leave of absence at the start of the following school year, 
and returned on February 17, 2010. Cardenas conducted two informal observations during the 
week  of  Respondent’s  return.  He  again  noticed  poor  classroom  management  and  control. 
Students  were  leaving  their  desks  without  permission.  They  were  shouting  out  answers  to 
questions without being called to do so.  Respondent moved from a Language Arts lesson to a 
Math  one  without  apparent  transition.  Cardenas  also  concluded  that  Respondent  was 
unprepared because she told a student who had given the correct answer to a problem that it was 
the wrong answer, only to reverse herself after checking the answer in a book.  
 
 
Cardenas discussed his observations with Respondent. She expressed frustration 
about the students not respecting female teachers and told Cardenas that she did not know what 
to do.  
 
 

12. 

11. 

13. 

 

 
 
 

3

14. 

Respondent generally testified that she did not think the District had proven that 
 
her  job  performance  was  deficient,  but  did  not  directly  contradict  many  of  Cardenas’ 
observations.  She  testified  that  her  lesson  plans  were  “perfectly  fine,”  and  that  Cardenas  had 
approved earlier lesson plans which followed the same format.  Respondent also asserted that 
the District did not provide her with sufficient training and support. When in conflict, Cardenas’ 
testimony has been credited. His testimony was supported by the contemporaneous evaluations, 
and  was  partially  corroborated  by  Respondent’s  own  testimony.  Cardenas’  testimony 
establishes Respondent’s teaching deficiencies and the District’s repeated efforts to work with 
Respondent to improve her performance, as set forth in factual finding numbers 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 
and 13. 
 
 
15.  On  March  2,  2010,  Cardenas  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
District  (Governing  Board)  that  Respondent  not  be  reemployed  by  the  District.  On  the  same 
date,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  number  3320-25,  terminating  Respondent’s 
employment. 
 
 
16.  On March 3, 2010, Cardenas personally served on Respondent notice that he had 
recommended to the Governing Board her non-reemployment for the 2010-2011 school year. 
As  the  basis  for  his  recommendation,  Cardenas  cited  her  poor  performance  during  the  2008-
2009  and  2009-2010  school  years,  and  stated  that  his  recommendation  related  solely  to  the 
welfare of the school and the pupils of the District. On March 9, 2010, Respondent requested a 
hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying her for the 2010-2011 
school year.   
 
17.  On April 6, 2010, the District served on Respondent the Accusation and all other 
 
required  documents.  On  the  same  date,  Respondent  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense,  seeking  a 
determination of whether there is cause for not reemploying her for the 2010-2011 school year. 
The District issued a Notice of Hearing on April 16, 2010, and served it on Respondent. 
 
 
 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

18 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44948.5,  by 

 
 
reason of factual finding numbers 1, 2, 3, 15, 16, 17, and 18. 
 
 
Cause exists under section 44948.5 for the District not to reemploy Respondent 
for the 2010-2011 school year, which cause relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools 
and its pupils, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 18.  
// 
// 
// 

 

 
 
 

4

The  Accusation  is  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondent  that  her  services 

ORDER 

 
 
will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
DATED:________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 

                                 
         
 

 
 

SAMUEL D. REYES 

 
Administrative Law Judge 
 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 
 
 

5

