BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
AZUZA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Layoffs of: 
 
CINDY AGUILAR, et al., 
 
                                       Respondents. 

OAH No. 2010030326 

 
 

 
 

 
PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard by Mark E. Harman, Administrative Law Judge of the Office 

 
 
of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 14, 2010, in Azusa, California. 
 
 
Sharon J. Ormond and Jabari A. Willis, Attorneys at Law, represented the Azusa 
Unified School District (District).  Lawrence B. Trygstad, Attorney at Law, represented 
Cindy Aguilar, Lesley Allizadeh, Maria Arias, Maria Beaton, Meredith Beyer, Lorenia 
Cabello, Laura Camarena, Rena Esther Campos-Ball, Angela Cory, Stacy Cuberly, Francisco 
Diaz, Patricia Jimenez, Andrew Meyers, Maria Michel, Wendy Moutray, Erika Olsen, Maria 
Sims, Rebecca Smith, Laura Solorzano, and Tracy Spencer (collectively, Respondents).1
  

The District decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and gave 
Respondents and other certificated District employees notice of its intent not to reemploy 
them for the 2010-2011 school year.  Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of 
whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received.  The matter was submitted for decision 

on April 14, 2010. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
1. 

2. 
 

 
The District operates 18 schools for 11,000 students.  Cynthia Cervantes 
McGuire is the Superintendent of the District.  She filed the Accusation in her official 
capacity.  Corey James, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, and his staff were 
responsible for implementation of the technical aspects of the layoff. 
 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

                                                

1 All Respondents except Tracy Spencer were present at the hearing.  

3. 

On March 9, 2009, the Superintendent recommended to the Governing Board 

of the District (Governing Board) that it reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services for 
the 2010-2011 school year and, for that reason, that it give notice to certain certificated 
employees that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  On the 
same date, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 09-10:50 to reduce or discontinue 
the following services: 
 

 
PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES 

 
NO. OF FULL-TIME 
EQUIVALENT 
(FTE) 
POSITIONS 
 

 

 

K-5 Classroom Teaching Services 
 
High School English Teaching Services 
 
High School Math Teaching Services 
 
High School Science Teaching Services 
 
High School Social Science Teaching Services 
 
High School Business Teaching Services 
 
High School Art Teaching Services 
 
High School Home Economics Teaching Services 
 
At-Risk/1802 Counseling Services 
 
Literacy Coach Teaching Services 
 
K-5 Intervention Teaching Services 
 
Elementary Principal Services 
 
Adult Education Vice Principal Services 

        29 
 
          1 
 
          2 
 
          1 

          1 

 

 

 

 

             1 

                   1 

             1 
 
             3 
 
             2 
 
             7.8 
 
             1 
 
             1 
          _____ 
  
           51.8 

 
 
Total FTE Reduction 

 
 

2 

4. 

Pursuant to this resolution, on or before March 15, 2010, the District served 

preliminary layoff notices, via personal service, to 22 certificated employees currently 
serving as K-12 teachers or management, including Respondents, that the District’s 
Superintendent had recommended to the Governing Board that the District give notice to 
these employees that their services will not be required in the 2010-2011 school year.  
Anticipating that most of those receiving the notices would request a hearing, the District 
also served upon each of the specified employees an Accusation and related materials, 
including the Governing Board’s resolution adopting the Superintendent’s recommendation. 

The Preliminary Layoff Notice/Accusation packets included a Request for 

Hearing/Notice of Defense form that, if returned to the District by March 29, 2010, would 
constitute a request for hearing.  On or before March 29, 2010, twenty individuals returned 
this form.  Counsel for Respondents also timely submitted a Request for Hearing and Notice 
of Defense pursuant to Government Code section 11506. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of 

services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code (the 
Code) section 44955.2

The Governing Board took action to reduce the services set forth in factual 

finding number 3 primarily because of the State’s proposed reduction of funding for 
education.  The decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services is neither 
arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s discretion. 

The reduction or discontinuance of services set forth in factual finding number 

3 is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to 
decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board. 

 
10.  On February 2, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution 09-10:40 

which includes criteria for determining the order of seniority of those employees with the 
same first date of paid service (tie-breaking criteria).  These tie-breaking criteria included:  
credentialing; authorization to teach English Language Learners; experience within the 
District; and number of higher education credits/degrees.  The District applied these criteria 
to determine the order of seniority among employees who had the same seniority date. 

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

dates (first date of paid service), current assignments, and credentials.  The District used the 
seniority list to develop a proposed lay-off list of the least senior employees currently 
assigned to the various services being reduced.  In determining who would be laid off for 
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by 
                                                
 
  

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

 
5. 

 
6. 
 
7. 

 
8. 

 
9. 

 
11. 

3 

the known vacancies and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of 
seniority.  The District then determined whether these employees held credentials in another 
area and were entitled to “bump” other, more junior employees. 

 
12a.  Respondent Rena Esther Campos-Ball (Campos-Ball) holds a clear multiple 
subject credential3 and a supplementary/subject matter subject and authorization4 to teach 
introductory social science.  She is teaching sixth grade core classes, in which .4 is devoted 
to language arts, .4 is devoted to social science, and .2 is devoted to a study skills class.  
Victoria Velasquez (Velasquez) is currently employed by the District as a literacy coach.  
Her position will be discontinued at the end of this school year.  The District determined that 
Velasquez, who is more senior to Campos-Ball, may bump into Campos-Ball’s position 
because Velasquez holds a clear multiple subject credential and has taught in a District K-5 
classroom setting for one complete year out of the past 10 years.  Campos-Ball maintains, in 
turn, that she has the credentials and competence to “bump” less senior employees who are 
being retained by the District to teach middle school history classes under single subject 
social science credentials. 

 
12b.  The District has assigned August 28, 2003, as Campos-Ball’s first date of paid 

service in a probationary position.  Campos-Ball began teaching for the District in October 
2001.  She served as a long-term substitute or contract teacher during the 2001-2002 school 
year.  In addition to her other teaching duties, between February 4 and June 21, 2002, she 
was assigned to teach one unit of social science.  In the 2002-2003 school year, she was 
employed as a substitute teacher by the District.  Since 2005, Campos-Ball has taught core 
subjects to fifth and sixth graders. 

 
12c.  The Governing Board’s Resolution No. 09-10:50 provides that, in order for 

Campos-Ball to be eligible for reassignment to a position held by an employee with less 
seniority, she must be both credentialed and competent to render the services currently being 
performed by the junior employee.  “For purposes of implementing this Resolution, a more 
senior employee is defined as competent for reassignment into a position currently held by a 
more junior employee, if he or she:  (a) currently possesses a clear or preliminary credential 
which authorizes instruction in each subject(s) or grade level to which the employee will be 
assigned at the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year; (b) has previously taught the 
subject(s) taught by the junior employee, under the credential(s) required for that assignment, 
in the District for one complete school year within the last 10 school years; . . . In no event 
                                                

3 A clear multiple subject credential authorizes the holder, among other things, to 

teach core classes consisting of two or more subjects to the same group of students in grades 
five through eight, and to teach any of the core subjects she is teaching to a single group of 
students in the same grade level as the core for less than fifty percent of her work day. 

 
4 This credential authorizes the holder to teach only the subject matter content 
typically included for the introductory subject or subjects listed, in curriculum guidelines and 
textbooks approved for study in grades 9 and below, to students in preschool, kindergarten, 
grades 1-12, or in classes organized primarily for adults. 

4 

may a more senior employee displace a more junior employee unless the more senior 
employee is both competent and credentialed for the entire assignment of the more junior 
employee.”  (Exhibit 1.) 

 
12d.  Campos-Ball did not teach in a District departmentalized history classroom for 

one complete school year within the last 10 school years, which is necessary under the 
District’s competency criteria to enable her right to bump any middle school history teachers 
with less seniority.  Although Campos-Ball has been teaching .4 social science in a core sixth 
grade curriculum since 2005, she has used her multiple subject credential to authorize her to 
perform this assignment, not her supplementary authorization to teach introductory social 
science.  Campos-Ball does not meet the District’s competency criterion requiring her to 
have teaching experience under her supplementary authorization for one complete school 
year within the last 10 school years, and thus, she is not “competent” to bump into a middle 
school history assignment requiring such credential.  In contrast, Velasquez taught in a K-5 
classroom setting using her multiple subject credential, which is the credential required to 
teach a core sixth grade classroom.  Campos-Ball failed to establish that teaching a core sixth 
grade classroom is substantially different from teaching a K-5 self-contained classroom.  
Velasquez, therefore, has the teaching experience within her credential that is required for 
reassignment, and thus, she is competent to “bump” into Campos-Ball’s position. 

The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to Respondents 

Cindy Aguilar, Lesley Allizadeh, Maria Arias, Maria Beaton, Meredith Beyer, Lorenia 
Cabello, Laura Camarena, Rena Esther Campos-Ball, Angela Cory, Stacy Cuberly, Francisco 
Diaz, Patricia Jimenez, Andrew Meyers, Maria Michel, Wendy Moutray, Erika Olsen, Maria 
Sims, Rebecca Smith, Laura Solorzano, and Tracy Spencer, to render a service which these 
Respondents are certificated and competent to render.   

 
13. 

 

 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

3. 

1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 6. 
 
 
that could be reduced or discontinued under section 44955. 
 
 
Cause exists for the District to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of 
services listed in factual finding number 3, which cause relates solely to the welfare of the 
District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949, as set forth in factual finding 
numbers 1 through 9. 
   
 
Allizadeh, Maria Arias, Maria Beaton, Meredith Beyer, Lorenia Cabello, Laura Camarena, 
Rena Esther Campos-Ball, Angela Cory, Stacy Cuberly, Francisco Diaz, Patricia Jimenez, 
Andrew Meyers, Maria Michel, Wendy Moutray, Erika Olsen, Maria Sims, Rebecca Smith, 

Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondents Cindy Aguilar, Lesley 

4. 

5 

Laura Solorzano, and Tracy Spencer for the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of 
particular kinds of services, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 11 and 13, and legal 
conclusion numbers 1 through 3. 
 

ORDER 

The Accusation is sustained and the District may notify Respondents, Cindy Aguilar, 

 
 
Lesley Allizadeh, Maria Arias, Maria Beaton, Meredith Beyer, Lorenia Cabello, Laura 
Camarena, Rena Esther Campos-Ball, Angela Cory, Stacy Cuberly, Francisco Diaz, Patricia 
Jimenez, Andrew Meyers, Maria Michel, Wendy Moutray, Erika Olsen, Maria Sims, 
Rebecca Smith, Laura Solorzano, and Tracy Spencer that their services will not be needed 
during the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. 
 
  
Dated: May ____, 2010 

 

 

_______________________________ 
MARK E. HARMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

6 

