BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
ALAMEDA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
OAH No. 2010030531 

 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
BROOKE SUSSMAN, et al. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Elizabeth B. Mori, Attorney at Law, Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost LLP, represented the 

Administrative Law Judge David L. Benjamin, State of California, Office of 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Alameda, California, on April 28, 2010. 
 
 
Alameda Unified School District. 
 
 
respondents except Hank Duderstadt, Bianka Hamill, and Tara Yudenfreund. 
 

Dale L. Brodsky, Attorney at Law, Beeson, Tayer & Bodine, represented all of the 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of respondents Hank Duderstadt, Bianka 

Hamill, or Tara Yudenfreund. 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 28, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

2. 

1. 

Kirsten Vital issued the accusation in her official capacity as Superintendent of 

Respondents are listed on Appendix A, attached hereto and incorporated 

 
 
the Alameda Unified School District (district). 
 
 
herein by this reference.  Each respondent is a certificated employee of the district. 
 
 
10-0032 (the PKS resolution).  In that resolution, the board determined that it is necessary to 
decrease certain programs and services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school 
year.  The resolution states that the particular kinds of services to be reduced or eliminated 
are as follows: 
 

On March 9, 2010, the district’s governing board adopted Resolution No.  

3. 

 

1

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

F.T.E.1

 40.20 

   2.63 
   8.50 
   1.33 
 10.40 
   1.00 

   2.67 
   2.67 

 11.50 

   1.00 
   1.00 
   1.00 

   1.00 
   1.00 

   5.40 

CORE – Eng/LangArt/History 

Elementary Teaching Services: 

Middle and High School: 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

Foreign Language 
Spanish 
 
 
Art 
 
 
Music   

Administrative Services: 
Principal 
Assistant Principal 

 
 

 

Physical Education 
 
English 
Social Science 
Mathematics   
 
Humanities 
Science: 
 
 

Life 
Physical 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SERVICES 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 

 SUBTOTAL  

Counselors 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

1  “F.T.E.” means full-time equivalent. 

 

2

 

 

 

91.30 

East Bay ROP Coordinator   

   1.00 

 

 
 

 
 

ROP Teaching Services: 
Web/Game/Design/Animation/Computers     1.00 
   0.80 
TV Media 
   0.60 
Auto Technology 
   2.20 
Developmental Psychology of Children 
   1.60 
 
Marketing 
   0.40 
 
Sound Engineering 
   1.40 
Fashion Design and Merchandising  
   0.80 
 
Construction   
 
   0.80 
 
Medical Occupations  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

F.T.E.

SERVICES 

Journalism 
 
Media Studies  
Biology Tech  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The resolution directs the superintendent to send appropriate notices to all employees whose 
positions may be lost by virtue of the board’s action. 
 

  0.20 
  0.40 
  0.20 

 SUBTOTAL  

 TOTAL 

 102.70 

11.40  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

4. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district gave written notice to respondents of 

5. 

6. 

Respondents filed timely requests for hearing to determine if there is cause for 

The district and the represented respondents reached stipulations on various 

the recommendation that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  
The reasons for the recommendation were set forth in these preliminary layoff notices. 
 
 
terminating their services for the 2010-2011 school year.  An accusation was served on 
respondents, all of whom filed or are deemed to have filed timely notices of defense.  All 
prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 
 
 
matters, including the rescission of certain layoff notices, the proper seniority dates and 
classification of certain respondents, the application of tie-breaking criteria, the 
reemployment rights of respondents in the ROP program, and the reemployment rights of 
respondents in categorically-funded positions.  Those stipulations are set out in the parties’ 
Joint Exhibit I. 
 
 
The district has rescinded the layoff notices it issued to Steven Allen, Grace 
Liu-Smith and Stephen Ramos.  The accusation against these employees will be dismissed. 
 
 
it was not required to determine the relative seniority of teachers with the first date of paid 
service to implement the PKS resolution. 
 
Skip of Romeo Ponsaran 
 

The district has not applied any tie-breaking criteria to date.  It concluded that 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), probationary and 

permanent employees must be laid off in the inverse order of their seniority.  Subdivision 
(d)(1) of that section provides, however, that a district may deviate from terminating an 
employee in order of seniority and “skip” that employee if  
 
                                                 

2  The resolution contains cost data associated with these services, which has been omitted. 

 

3

[t]he district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach 
a specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated 
employee has special training and experience necessary to teach 
that course or course of study or to provide those services, 
which others with more seniority do not possess. 

In this case, the board’s PKS resolution establishes skipping criteria.  It states:  

10. 
 

[I]t will be necessary to retain the services of certificated 
employees in the 2010-2011 school year regardless of seniority, 
who possess the qualifications needed for the following 
programs and/or subject matters: 
 

A. 
B. 
C. 

Special Education Mild to Moderate 
Special Education Moderate to Severe 
Clinical of [sic] Rehabilitative – Language, 
Speech, Hearing or Visual Impairment 
D.  Multiple Science Certification within single 

subject Authorizations of Biology, Chemistry, 
Physics, Earth Science, Integrated, General, and 
Introductory Life or Physical Science. 

11. 

The district skipped Romeo Ponsaran and did not issue him a preliminary 

layoff notice; he is not a respondent in this proceeding.  Ponsaran holds a multiple subject 
credential and a CLAD and is currently assigned to teach middle school (seventh grade) core.   

 
12. 

her office administered the layoff. 

Laurie McLachlan-Fry is the Chief Human Resources Officer for the district; 

 
McLachlan-Fry testified that Ponsaran was not issued a preliminary layoff notice 
because, prior to March 15, he presented evidence satisfactory to the district that he had 
passed the California Subject Examination for Teachers (CSET) Multiple Subject 
examination.  Passing this test, McLachlan-Fry states, “established his competence” to teach 
middle school core.  She states that Ponsaran has been “tentatively assigned” to teach 
seventh grade core next year.  Ponsaran has not yet registered a new credential with the 
district.  (A teacher who passes a CSET examination can expect to receive a single subject 
credential or a supplemental credential from the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing.) 
 
McLachlan-Fry testified that there are no other employees who are being laid off who 
are “qualified to teach seventh grade core under No Child Left Behind.”  One of the goals of 
NCLB is to provide students with “highly qualified teachers.”  A teacher can demonstrate 
that he is highly qualified to teach middle school core by passing the CSET examination, as 
Ponsaran has done.  McLachlan-Fry feels that it would be a “misassignment” if she were to 

 

 

 

4

assign a teacher to seventh grade core who has not passed the CSET.  She did not state what 
she means by a “misassignment” and did not state the basis for her opinion. 

 
Prior to sending out preliminary layoff notices in March, the district did not inform its 

core teachers that they should take the CSET examination if they wished to avoid layoff.  
McLachlan-Fry does not know if all core teachers in the district have passed CSET, but 
stated that it is the district’s “intention” that they pass it. 

Respondents challenge the validity of the skip.  They emphasize that the 

board’s resolution does not justify skipping Ponsaran, and that Ponsaran has not yet 
registered a new credential with the district.  Neither of these facts, standing alone, makes the 
skip invalid.  There is no legal requirement that skipping criteria be stated in a resolution.  
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), requires only that the district “demonstrate” 
the basis for the skip.  And section 44955 does not state that skips must be based on a 
credential.  Employees may be skipped by virtue of “special training and experience.” 

 
The skip is invalid, however, because the district failed to demonstrate that passing 

the CSET is necessary to teach middle school core.  There is no evidence that a teacher must 
pass the CSET to teach middle school core.  On the contrary, the evidence establishes that it 
is not necessary: Ponsaran taught middle school core this year, and it appears that there are 
other teachers in the district, assigned to teach core, who have not passed the CSET.  
Similarly, the evidence fails to establish that it is necessary to be highly qualified under 
NCLB to teach middle school core.  It may be desirable for many reasons to attract and retain 
teachers who are highly qualified under NCLB, but the statutory standard for deviating from 
seniority in an economic layoff is higher.  The district must show that such special training or 
experience is necessary to teach middle school core.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1); 
Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567.)  The district did not meet its 
burden of proof on this issue. 

 
13. 

 
14. 

Ponsaran should have received a layoff notice.  It is not clear from the 

evidence who, if anyone, was prejudiced by the district’s decision to skip him.  Ponsaran’s 
seniority date is August 23, 2006.  There are other teachers with the same seniority date who 
hold a multiple subject credential and a CLAD who have been issued preliminary layoff 
notices.  Whether they have greater or less relative seniority than Ponsaran is not known, 
because the district has not applied its tie-breaking criteria to these employees.  There is one 
respondent, Diane Alexander, who possesses a preliminary multiple subject credential and 
who has an earlier seniority date than Ponsaran’s.  She holds an elementary school 
assignment; it is not clear whether she would have avoided layoff if Ponsaran had been 
noticed.  It is not clear from the evidence whether there are other employees who were given 
preliminary notices, and who are not respondents, who might have avoided layoff had 
Ponsaran been noticed. 

 
  The appropriate remedy, which will be ordered, is to direct the district to take the 
necessary steps to identify the most senior teacher who was prejudiced by the decision to 

 

5

skip Ponsaran.  If there was such a teacher, the district may not lay off that employee.  (See 
Alexander v. Board of Trustees, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at p. 576.) 

 

15. 

The district has classified certain certificated employees as temporary 

Temporary employees 
 
 
employees.  Temporary employees are not entitled to the due process protections afforded by 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  (Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union 
High School Dist. (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911, 916-918.)  Nevertheless, the district sent 
“precautionary” layoff notices to at least some of its temporary employees in the event any 
such employee wished to challenge his or her classification.  The respondents classified by 
the district as temporary are identified on the district’s Exhibit 10.   
 

Respondent Marissa Giovacchini teaches second grade at Amelia Earhart 

 
16. 

Giovacchini testified that when she was first hired she was told by Joie Garcia, a 

Elementary School.  She is classified as a temporary employee.  She was first hired by the 
district for the 2008-2009 school year on a one-year contract, which stated that she was being 
hired as a temporary employee for a term ending June 15, 2009.  Giovacchini was released at 
the end of that year, and she was also given a layoff notice.  She was rehired for the 2009-
2010 school year on a temporary contract that is identical in all material respects to the first 
contract, except that the second contract ends on June 14, 2010.  Giovacchini has again been 
given a release from her temporary position at the end of the year, and a layoff notice.  
 
 
human resources technician for the district, that she had been hired to replace a teacher who 
had retired and that “I should be moved up quickly to prob [probationary status].”  
Giovacchini was not made a probationary employee during the 2008-2009 school year.  
Giovacchini testified that, when she signed her second temporary contract for the 2009-2010 
school year, the district again told her that she would be moved up to probationary status 
quickly.  She was never made a probationary employee.  Other teachers who were hired at 
the same time as Giovacchini have been made probationary; Giovacchini feels that she 
should have been supported better by the district. 
 

The evidence fails to establish that Giovacchini has been misclassified.  It is within 
the district’s discretion to decide who it will offer a probationary position.  Even assuming, 
for the sake of argument, that the district failed to make good on assurances that it would 
make her a probationary teacher quickly, that is not sufficient to estop the district from 
maintaining that she is a temporary employee.  The evidence does not establish that the 
district knew its assurances were false at the time it made them, or that Giovacchini relied on 
such misrepresentations to her detriment.  These are essential elements of an estoppel claim. 

 
17.  No other temporary employee challenged his or her classification. 
 

 

6

Other matters 
 

18. 

The cause for the reduction in particular kinds of services relates to the welfare 

of the schools and the pupils thereof. 

 
19.  No permanent employee is being terminated while any probationary employee, 

or any other employee with less seniority, is being retained to render a service which the 
permanent employee is certificated and competent to render. 

 
20. 

 Any contentions raised by respondents and not discussed above have been 

found to be without merit and are hereby rejected. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
 
layoff notice to Steven Allen, Grace Liu-Smith or Stephen Ramos. 
 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 7, no cause exists to issue a final 

2. 

By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 9 through 14, cause exists to 

require the district to identify the most senior employee, if there is one, who has been 
prejudiced by the district’s invalid skip of Ponsaran.  If there is such an employee, cause does 
not exist to issue him or her a final layoff notice. 
 

3. 

By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 15 through 17, the employees 
identified on the district’s Exhibit 10 are temporary employees.  Because the provisions of 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 apply only to probationary and permanent 
employees, they are not entitled to the protections afforded by those sections and it is not 
necessary to decide whether there is cause for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 
school year.  The district may, but is not required to, give them notice that their services will 
not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

Cause exists because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of 

services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to all other respondents in 
102.70 FTE positions that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  
The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the 
meaning of Education Code section 44949. 

 
4. 

 

The accusation against Steven Allen, Grace Liu-Smith, and Stephen Ramos is 

ORDER 
 

1. 

 
dismissed. 
 

2. 

The district shall identify the most senior employee who was prejudiced by the 

district’s invalid skip of Ponsaran, as set forth in Legal Conclusion 2.  If there is such an 
employee, he or she may not be given a final layoff notice. 
 

 

7

3. 

Notice may be given to all remaining respondents in 102.70 FTE positions that 

 
their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
elimination of particular kinds of services. 
 
DATED: _________________________ 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
DAVID L. BENJAMIN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

8

1.  Alcala, Danielle 
2.  Alexander, Diane 
3.  Allen, Steven 
4.  Armon, Kimiko 
5.  August, Julian 
6.  Baddell, Andrea 
7.  Bailey, Monica 
8.  Bakal, Debra 
9.  Braze, Joan 
10. Breidinger, Erin 
11. Bryant, Lisa 
12. Catipovic, Maja 
13. Cheshire, Ryan 
14. Chung, Jeanee 
15. Corbally, Tracy 
16. Corpuz, Jo 
17. Dalton, John 
18. Dhaliwal, Amardeep 
19. Dickerson, Ingrid 
20. Duderstadt, Hank 
21. Esmat, Gatee 
22. Friedlander, Laura 
23. Galan, Cheri 
24. Garnica, Amanda 
25. Garza, Marina 
26. Giovacchini, Marissa 
27. Gonzalves, Janay 
28. Gordon, Jeffrey 
29. Greden, Mary 
30. Haddon, Michael 
31. Hamill, Bianka 
32. Hartigan, Jennifer 
33. Higashi, Todd 
34. Hsu, Marie 
35. Hyman, Audrey 
36. Johnson, Joshua 
37. Kayler, Marie 
38. Kelley, Erin 

 

 
 

 

Appendix A 

39. Kernkamp, Carolyn 
40. LaBarre, Andrew 
41. Lee, Joanne 
42. Lewis, Judi 
43. Lewis-Warnock, Janet 
44. Liu-Smith, Grace 
45. Lorezco, Rizaldy 
46. Lyons, Derrick 
47. Marsh, Cynthia 
48. McClish, Sophie 
49. Moats, Ingrid 
50. Nakatani, Akemy 
51. Nunn-Needham, Lise 
52. Nolan, John 
53. Parodi, Ron 
54. Patil, Sayalee 
55. Peiler, Karen 
56. Power, Stella 
57. Ramos, Stephen 
58. Rider, Amanda 
59. Spencer, Paizley 
60. Struble, Elizabeth 
61. Sullivan, Charles 
62. Sussman, Brooke 
63. Sydow, JoAna 
64. Taylor, Deborah 
65. Thom, David 
66. Thomas, Michelle 
67. Varghese, Victoria 
68. Vogel, Patricia 
69. Wall, Lela 
70. Weber, Lara 
71. Williams, Jane 
72. Williams, Lorna 
73. Wocicki, Scot 
74. Yudenfreund, Tara 
75. Zeldin, Sasha

9

