BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE ANTELOPE VALLEY UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certificated Employees of the Antelope 
Valley Union High School District, 
 
                               Respondents. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

     OAH Case No. 2010031481 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
The hearing in the above-captioned matter was held on May 5, 2010, at Lancaster,   
California.  Joseph D. Montoya, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), presided.  Complainant was represented by James B. Fernow, Fagen, 
Freidman, and Fulfrost, LLP.  Michael R. Feinberg and Amy M. Cu, Schwartz, Steinsapir, 
Dohrmann & Sommers represented the following Respondents:  Michael Bernard, Natalie 
Brooks, Matthew Cole, Daphene Cowan, Cynthia Gadomski, Daniel Gorman, Jeanette 
Hjelm, William Holmes, Teresa Kinderman, Stella Konisek, Akilah Lyons-Moore, Sheron 
Nauzo, Kristine Parsons, Joseph Perez, Garret Root, Christopher Saucke, Muriah Shanklin, 
Joseph South, Alesia Stonerock, Alicia Viera, Shannon Williams, and Malinda Wittkopf.   
 
 
was submitted for decision on the hearing date.  Because the matter had been continued from 
its originally scheduled hearing dates, the deadlines set out in the Education Code were 
extended.  However, the parties stipulated that this Proposed Decision would be issued by 
May 12, 2010, that the Governing Board of the District would act on the decision on May 19, 
and that any final notices would be given by May 26, 2010.  Based on the foregoing, the 
Administrative Law Judge hereby makes his factual findings, legal conclusions, and order, as 
follows. 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, argument was heard, and the matter 

 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 
1.  Complainant Mark Bryant filed and maintained the Accusation1 in the above-
 
captioned matter while acting in his official capacity as Assistant Superintendent, Personnel 
Services, of the Antelope Valley Union High School District (District).    
                                                
1 The term “accusation” refers to a type of pleading utilized under the Administrative 
 
Procedure Act, Government Code sections 11500 and 11503; that statutory scheme governs 
the hearing procedures in this case.  The Respondents are not “accused” in the every-day 
sense of that word; they have done nothing wrong, and all appear to be dedicated 

 
 
2.  The following persons are certificated employees of the District and are the 
respondents in this case:  Michael Bernard, Natalie Brooks, Matthew Cole, Daphene Cowan, 
Cynthia Gadomski, Daniel Gorman, Jeanette Hjelm, William Holmes, Teresa Kinderman, 
Stella Konisek, Akilah Lyons-Moore, Sheron Nauzo, Kristine Parsons, Joseph Perez, Garret 
Root, Christopher Saucke, Muriah Shanklin, Joseph South, Alesia Stonerock, Alicia Viera, 
Shannon Williams, and Malinda Wittkopf. 
 

3. 

(A)  On March 10, 2010, the Board of Trustees of the District (Board), the 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Number of FTE

(B)  The FTEs that the Board determined to reduce are described in the 

governing body of the District, adopted  a resolution entitled “Resolution number 2009-10-
20 Intention to Layoff Certificated Employees” (Reduction Resolution). The purpose of the 
Reduction Resolution was to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of certificated services 
no later than the close of the 2009-2010 school year.  Specifically, the resolution requires the 
reductions of 44.7 “FTEs”—Full Time Equivalents—by reducing various types of services.  
This decision was based on financial concerns as the District faces a budget shortfall of 
several million dollars.     
 
 
Reduction Resolution as follows: 
 
Personnel 
 
Teachers: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adult Education—Teacher at Desert Havens 
                                                                                                                                                       
professionals.  It might be said that they are simply accused of not having enough seniority 
or other qualifications to retain their positions with the District in the face of a resolution to 
reduce positions.     
 

 
 
 
English   
 
 
 
Math    
 
 
 
 
Social Science  
 
 
Science—Biology 
 
 
 
 
Science—Geoscience 
 
Foreign language—Spanish   
 
Foreign Language—German 
 
 
 
Art 
 
Physical Education 
 
Behavioral Science (Health)  
 
Special Education (Mild/Moderate)  
 
Business 

3.0 
3.0 
4.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
  .2 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

                                            18.2 FTE 

Total Teachers 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  .5 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

 
Continuation Teachers 
 
Total Reduction 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

26.0 FTE 

44.7 FTE 

4.  The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are particular kinds 

6.  The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 

5.  The decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was neither arbitrary 

of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.2   
 
 
nor capricious but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s discretion given the 
uncertainty regarding the state budget and the District’s financial resources.  
  
 
District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees as determined by the Board. 
 
 
7.  As part of the Reduction Resolution, the Board established and set forth tie 
breaking criteria, to be used in the event that two or more teachers shared the same seniority 
date.  Fifteen tie breaking criteria were laid out in the resolution, the last being a lottery in the 
case that ties still were not broken after application of the other 14 criteria.    
 
(A)  On or about March 11, 2010, each Respondent was given written notice 
 
that, pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, their services would not be required in the 2010-
2011 school year (hereafter the preliminary notices).  The preliminary notices were served on 
36 certificated employees.  This is less than the amount needed to meet the target of the 
Reduction Resolution, but the District had released temporary employees, and there had been 
some attrition among the ranks of the teachers.3  Thereafter, Respondents requested a hearing 
and then each was served with an Accusation and other documents pertaining to the hearing  
process. 4  Each Respondent filed a notice of defense.  To the extent any notice of defense 
was not timely filed, the District waived objection to such late notices.   
 
 
the hearing, the District rescinded preliminary notices that had been served on 15 employees.  
During the hearing, it gave notice that it was rescinding the preliminary notices as to four of 

(B)  Following the service of the preliminary notices, and prior to the start of 

8. 

  

2   All further statutory references are to the Education Code.  

3   For example, the District did not need to serve preliminary notices on any English 

                                                
 
 
 
teachers, because all 10 FTE slated for reduction were accounted for by attrition that 
occurred before March 15.  
  
4   Three certificated employees did not request a hearing.  They are Tina Chadwick, 
 
Annette Dehorney, and Therese Young.  However, the preliminary notice to Ms. Chadwick 
was later rescinded.  (Ex. 19.)   
 

 

3

 

(C)  All jurisdictional requirements have been met.   

9.  In the course of the reduction in force process, the District created a seniority list.   

the respondents:  Cynthia Gadomski, William Holmes, Christopher Saucke, and Muriah 
Shanklin.  Thus, the preliminary notices to 19 certificated employees were rescinded.     
 
 
 
 
That seniority list took into account a number of factors, including first date of paid service 
and the tie-breaking criteria.5     
 
 
10.  During the process of determining which staff should receive notice, the District 
skipped certain junior personnel who it deemed necessary to teach certain programs because 
the programs were necessary, and because the teacher had specific skills and training 
necessary for those classes.  Thus, for instance, three junior special education teachers, 
Lefler, D’Errico, and Cvijanovich, were retained because they had special education 
credentials, were teaching special day classes, and discharged other duties in connection with 
special education.  In another instance, Mr. Storrs was skipped because he is a continuing 
work experience teacher.  He was skipped due to the District’s need for such a teacher, and 
because he has special skills and training in that area, which were documented by the 
District.  No other teacher has his skills, training, and qualifications.    
 
 
11.  It was established during the hearing that some teachers at some school sites 
have, during the current school year, and in prior years, carried assignments equal to 1.2 
FTE, in that they are assigned a sixth class during the day, five classes being the normal load,  
and five classes constituting one FTE.  None of the teachers who received preliminary 
notices were assigned a sixth class.  Such assignments are normally made in August, shortly 
before the school year begins, and such assignments are subject to reduction at anytime.   
 
 
(A)  It was not established that any teacher shown on the District’s exhibits as 
being entitled to displace, or “bump” a junior teacher from the junior teacher’s position was 
doing so improperly.   
 
 
and competent to bump some or all of Mr. Roberts’ assignment.   
 
 
employee is certificated and competent to fill.  No junior teachers established that they 
should have been skipped either.   
 
// 
 
// 
 
                                                
 
breaking process and thereby determine their relative seniority.    

5   Three groups of teachers had to utilize the lottery process to complete the tie 

13.  No junior certificated employee is being retained in a position that a more senior 

(B)  Respondent Alicia Viera was unable to establish that she is credentialed 

 
12. 

 

 

4

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 

2.   

(B)  The services to be discontinued are particular kinds of services within the 

1.  Jurisdiction was established to proceed in this matter, pursuant to sections 44949 

 
 
and 44955, based on Factual Findings 1 through 8(C). 
 
 
(A)  A District may reduce a particular kind of service (PKS) within the 
meaning of section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of 
service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce 
services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of 
Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)   The Court of Appeal has made clear that a 
PKS reduction does not have to lead to less classrooms or classes; laying off some teachers 
amounts to a proper reduction.  (Zalac v. Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. 
(2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 853-85; see also San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627, 631, 637 [reduction of classroom teaching can be a reduction of a PKS; as 
long as there is a change in the method of teaching or in a particular kind of service in 
teaching a particular subject, any amount in excess of the statutory minimum may be 
reduced]; California Teachers Assn. v. Board of Trustees (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)   
 
 
meaning of section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. 
Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.  This Legal Conclusion is 
based on Factual Findings 3 through 6 and the aforementioned statutes. 
 
 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  At the same time, junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers—may be “skipped” in favor of 
that senior employee— if a district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 
specific course or to provide a specific service, and if it is demonstrated that the junior 
employee has special training or experience necessary to teach that course or provide that 
pupil service.  (§ 44955, subd. (d); Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 
184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Bd. of 
Santa Clara Unified School Dist. (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) 
 
 
employee or that they should have been skipped, based on the foregoing and Factual 
Findings 9 through 13.    
 
 
teachers who held more than one credential to positions that those senior teachers are not 
now assigned to and in which vacancies exist, so as to open positions that some Respondents 

3.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

(A) No Respondents established that they had the right to bump a junior 

(B)  Some Respondents asserted that the District should reassign senior 

4. 

 

 

5

 

(C)  This position is unavailing.  A junior teacher can not force a senior from 

could take.  Hence it was asserted, on behalf of Respondent Root, that Mr. Cuevas, who is 
senior to Respondent Root by approximately seven years, should be taken out of his current 
assignment as a history teacher, and assigned to teach Spanish, because Mr. Cuevas is 
certificated to teach that language.  Then, it was asserted, Respondent Root could teach the 
social studies classes held by Mr. Cuevas.  A similar argument was made on Mr. South’s 
part, vis-à-vis Ms. Wolen, who is bumping him from his social studies position.   
 
 
his or her position, even if that senior teacher is certificated for other assignments, so that the 
junior can make room for him or herself.  This concept, known as inverse bumping, is not 
justified by section 44955, subdivision (c), which speaks to the obligation of districts to make 
assignments according to seniority.  Duax v. Kern Community College Dist. (1987) 196 
Cal.App.3d 555, 568-569, the concept of inverse bumping was rejected.  That case construed 
a statute pertaining to community college layoffs, which statute had language identical to the 
key part of section 44955, subdivision (c), pertaining to assignments.  The court made it clear 
that the obligation to make assignments did not support inverse bumping.  .       
   
 
employee is certificated and competent to fill.   
 
 

5.  No junior certificated employee is being retained in a position that a more senior 

ORDER 

1.  Respondents Cynthia Gadomski, William Holmes, Christopher Saucke, and 

2.  The remaining Respondents may receive final layoff notices in inverse order of 

 
 
Muriah Shanklin are dismissed based on the rescission of the preliminary notices to them, 
which rescission was made on the record during the proceeding.   
 
 
seniority, those Respondents being:  Michael Bernard, Natalie Brooks, Matthew Cole, 
Daphene Cowan, Cynthia Gadomski, Daniel Gorman, Jeanette Hjelm, William Holmes, 
Teresa Kinderman, Stella Konisek, Akilah Lyons-Moore, Sheron Nauzo, Kristine Parsons, 
Joseph Perez, Garret Root, Christopher Saucke, Muriah Shanklin, Joseph South, Alesia 
Stonerock, Alicia Viera, Shannon Williams, and Malinda Wittkopf.   
 
May 12, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
Joseph D. Montoya 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings   

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

6

