BEFORE THE 
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 
SACRAMENTO COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
COUNTY OF SACRAMENTO, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

In the Matter of the Reduction of Particular 
Kinds of Services Affecting: 
 
Persons Occupying  
27.5 Certificated Full Time Equivalent 
Positions. 

 
 
                                                   Respondents. 
 
 

 

 
 
 
OAH No. 2010030285 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Ann Elizabeth Sarli, State of California, Office of 

 
 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Sacramento, California, on April 15, 2010. 
 
 
represented the Sacramento County Office of Education (SCOE). 
 

Michelle L. Cannon, Attorney at Law, of Kronick, Moskovitz, Tiedmann & Girard, 

Christina Y. Medina, Attorney at Law, of Beeson, Taylor & Bodine represented the 

following respondents: Jaime Calderon, Kevin Elkington, Jonathon Freer, Pedro Marquez, 
Patricia Millings, Bryan Teafatiller, James Scarlett and Frank Lopez. 
 

Respondent, Darren Law, represented himself. 

 
Respondent, Patricia Smith filed a Notice of Defense, but did not appear at hearing.  
 
On proof of compliance with Government Code sections 11505 and 11509, and Education 
Code sections 44949 and 44955, this matter proceeded as a default in respect to Patricia 
Smith, pursuant to Government Code section 11520. 
 

Evidence was received, the hearing was closed and the matter was submitted on April 

15, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

On March 1 2010, David Gordon, Superintendent of Schools of Sacramento 
County, State of California, (SCOE) made and filed the Accusation in his official capacity. 
 

2. 

On March 1, 2010, the Superintendent adopted Resolution No. 2010-A 

(Resolution).  The Resolution was based on the Superintendent’s determination that it was 
necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services no later than the beginning of 
the 2010-2011 school year.  Accordingly, he determined that the following particular kinds 
of services and corresponding number of full time equivalent (FTE) positions should be 
reduced or discontinued. 
 

Services 

 

 

Number of FTE Positions 

 

Academic Intervention Teacher 

 5.0 FTE 

Teacher, Juvenile Institutions 

          11.0 FTE 

Resource Specialist 

 

                        1.0 FTE 

Counselor, Student Programs                          

   .5 FTE 

Teacher, County Community Schools 

ROP Instructor, Auto Specialist  

 

1.0 FTE 

 1.0 FTE 

ROP Instructor, Dental Assistant  

                                    1.0 FTE 

ROP Instructor, Heavy Duty Truck Driver                           2.0 FTE 

ROP Instructor, Hospital/Community Health                     1.0 FTE 

ROP Instructor, Nursery and Landscape                         

 1.0 FTE 

ROP Instructor, Warehouse/Forklift                        

 1.0 FTE 

ROP Instructor, Welding 

                        1.0 FTE 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

2 

Principal 
 
Total 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

  1.0 FTE 
_________ 
27.5 FTE 

3. 

 
 
community schools and ROP programs.  The ROP programs provide direct vocational 
services to students, including job readiness skills, and are located primarily in Sacramento 

SCOE Assistant Superintendent Tim Taylor oversees juvenile court schools, 

4. 

County (County) run facilities.  The juvenile court schools are located in County juvenile 
facilities and serve youth who are confined to these facilities.  The community schools 
primarily serve youth who have been expelled from school.  SCOE provides certificated 
personnel who teach in these programs. 
 
 
Mr. Taylor testified that the County is experiencing a significant budget deficit 
and intends to close juvenile court schools at Sacramento County Boys Ranch (Carson Creek 
Jr./Sr. High School) and River Oaks.  As a result, the County directed SCOE to reduce 
instructional staff at juvenile facilities.  Accordingly, Mr. Taylor and the Superintendent 
determined that it was necessary to eliminate the juvenile institution teaching, counseling, 
and principal positions and academic intervention positions1 identified in the Resolution. 
 

5. 

The County has also reduced its funding for ROP programs by 21.5 percent.  

Additionally, SCOE has determined, for several reasons, to close or relocate several ROP 
programs to school district facilities.  Those school districts have the responsibility and 
authority to hire instructors.  Mr. Taylor explained that SCOE had made the decision to close 
or relocate several ROP programs because they did not attract enough students and were not 
fiscally prudent.  Many ROP programs were serving too many adults.  The Legislature has 
mandated that by 2011, 90 percent of the students in ROP programs must be non-adult 
students.  Accordingly, Mr. Taylor and the Superintendent determined that it was necessary 
to eliminate the ROP services identified in the resolution.  Additionally, Academic 
Intervention Positions had been funded only for the 2009-2010 school year, and that funding 
is almost exhausted.  Accordingly, Mr. Taylor and the Superintendent determined that it was 
necessary to eliminate the 5.0 FTE Academic Intervention Positions. 
 
The evidence established that it is necessary to decrease SCOE’s services by 
 
27.5 FTE with reduction in a corresponding number of certificated employees of SCOE.  The 
evidence established that the services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of 
services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The decision to reduce the services is neither arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a 
proper exercise of the SCOE’s discretion.  The reduction or discontinuation of services is 
related to the welfare of the SCOE and its pupils. 
 

6. 

7. 

The Resolution set forth “competency criteria” designed to assist SCOE in 

determining whether affected employees could displace junior employees.  The Resolution 
stated in pertinent part: “… for purposes of potential displacement rights, competency shall 
mean, at a minimum, possession of a preliminary, clear, professional clear, lifetime or other 
full credential, and at least one semester actual teaching experience in the subject area.  For 
outdoor education, competency shall require one semester full time teaching experience in an 
outdoor education setting within the last five years.” 
 

                                                 

1 The academic intervention positions were created for the 2009-2010 school year to accommodate five 

teachers who had been displaced by the closing of another juvenile court school. 

3 

8. 

SCOE’s Chief Administrator for Human Resources, Effie Crush, and her staff 
were charged with identifying the certificated employees who were affected by the reduction 
and elimination of the particular kinds of services identified in the Resolution.  They first 
took into account attrition in the 2010-2011 school year.   They updated the SCOE seniority 
list and sent the list to all certificated personnel, advising them to verify their information and 
update any credentials or other information.  After receiving input from the certificated 
employees, Ms. Crush and her staff identified the employees with the least seniority 
occupying the affected positions, reviewed their credentials and determined whether they had 
rights to displace (bump) junior SCOE employees, after taking into account the competency 
criteria for displacement. 
 

9. 

By letter dated March 8, 2010, Ms. Crush provided respondents with a written 

“Notice of Nonreemployment” (Notice or Preliminary Layoff Notice).  The Notice advised 
that the Superintendent had recommended that Notice be given to them, pursuant to 
Education Code sections 1294 and 44955, that their services would not be required for the 
2010-11school year.  The Resolution setting forth the reasons for the recommendation was 
attached to the notice. 
 

10. 

Respondents made timely written requests for a hearing to determine if there is 

cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.  The Accusation was timely 
served on respondents and respondents timely filed Notices of Defense.  All pre-hearing 
jurisdictional requirements have been met. 
 
Defenses Raised - General 
 

11. 

Respondents acknowledge the fiscal crisis faced by the State of California and 

the County of Sacramento.  Respondents maintain that elimination or reduction of ROP 
programs will only worsen the economic crisis, in that students will no longer be able to gain 
the skills necessary for entry-level employment in automotive repair, welding, dental 
assisting and the other careers ROP prepares its students for.   
 

There are long-range implications to any budget cuts an entity makes.  However, it is 

12. 

within the discretion of SCOE to determine how best to allocate scarce resources.  The 
decision to reduce and eliminate ROP services was a proper exercise of SCOE’s discretion.   
 
Defenses Raised – Frank Lopez 
 
 
vocational credential in a designated subject-diesel equipment mechanics and automotive 
mechanics.  He is subject to layoff pursuant to the Resolution’s direction to reduce ROP  
Instructor, Auto Specialist by 1.0 FTE.  His current assignment is to the EL Hickey Jr../Sr. 
High School.  He is not currently assigned to a particular class but provides project-based 
learning to classes on most of the SCOE campuses. 
 

Frank Lopez has a seniority date of August 22, 1994.  He holds a clear 

4 

Mr. Lopez is concerned because the ROP Automotive classes he was teaching at the 

community school never really had a chance to achieve full enrollment.  The classes were 
scheduled during the time core courses were offered and very few students could sign up for 
his classes.  He believes that the automotive classes could achieve adequate enrollment if 
there was more flexibility with the hours the classes were available.  Additionally, the first 
year in which he taught at EL Hickey the program did not have a shop.  Accordingly, the 
class consisted of 70 percent auto design and 30 percent lecture.  His students are generally 
kinesthetic learners and were more interested in hands-on experience.  After the shop facility 
was provided, it was not equipped for months.  When the equipment arrived it was not 
hooked up for half a year and currently there is no car in the shop.  Accordingly, there is no 
enrollment. 
 
 
Mr. Lopez’s point is that it is unfair and erroneous to discontinue an ROP program 
because its enrollment is historically low, when the program discourages enrollment.  He 
points out that at junior colleges, automotive programs are full to capacity. 
 

As set forth above, declining enrollment was just one of the factors SCOE took into 

consideration in determining to eliminate the ROP Instructor, Auto Specialist position, and in 
fact, most ROP positions.  SCOE’s decision does not reflect upon Mr. Lopez’s teaching 
ability or his ability to attract students.  It is very clear that Mr. Lopez is not responsible in 
any way for the decline in enrollment in the automotive classes.  In fact, Mr. Lopez was 
voted teacher of the year three times.   However, it is within the discretion of SCOE to 
determine how best to allocate scarce resources.  The decision to reduce and eliminate the 
ROP Instructor, Auto Specialist services was a proper exercise of SCOE’s discretion.   
 
Defenses Raised – Darren Law 
 
 
Education Credential in a Designated Subject-Dental Services.  He is subject to layoff 
pursuant to the Resolution’s direction to reduce ROP Instructor, Dental Assistant by 1.0.  Mr. 
Law maintains that his classes always had full attendance and sometimes are over-enrolled.  
His students are very successful and often are able to successfully complete the California 
boards for dental assisting.   His clinic is currently located at Encina High School.  San Juan 
School District assisted with remodeling costs of the clinic.  He anticipated he would 
continue to have a very high success rate with the remodeled clinic. 
 

13.  Darren Law has a seniority dated January 25, 2006.  He holds a vocational 

SCOE intends to move the dental assisting program to the San Juan School District.  
Mr. Law provided suggestions as to how SCOE could continue to keep the dental assisting 
program within its purview.  As noted above, attendance in ROP programs is just one of the 
factors SCOE took into account in determining to discontinue or move ROP programs to 
school districts.  However, it is within the discretion of SCOE to determine how best to 
allocate scarce resources.  The decision to move the Dental Assistant services program to the 
San Juan School District was a proper exercise of SCOE’s discretion.   
 

5 

Mr. Law also challenged SCOE’s failure to bump him into another position within 
 
SCOE.  He testified that if he had known his dental assisting program would be moved to 
another district, he could have approached the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing and requested that he be issued additional credentials.  He pointed out that he 
has over 130 units toward a biology degree.  He believes he could have bumped into one of 
the outdoor education courses taught at the Sly Park Recreational program. 
 
Vocational credentials are specific credentials which only permit their holders to 
 
teach the class specified on the credential.  There is no class within SCOE, including the 
outdoor education position, which Mr. Law is credentialed to teach.  He has clearly not 
completed the course work and credentialing process necessary to obtain a multiple subject 
credential or a single subject credential.  Even if he were poised to obtain such a credential, 
SCOE can and must make its assignments and reassignments based upon the credentials that 
the certificate employee holds at the time of assignment. 
 
Defenses Raised – Jonathan Freer   
 
14.  Mr. Freer has a seniority date of August 30, 2004.  He holds a multiple subject 
 
credential and currently teaches 1 FTE in a self-contained classroom at Carson Creek, one of 
the juvenile court schools whose program is going to be eliminated in the 2010-2011 school 
year.  Mr. Freer maintains that he can move into (bump) a position occupied by one of the 
following junior teachers who are assigned to teach outdoor conservation and environmental 
education (outdoor education) at Sly Park: 
 

Ginger Schlavin holds a multiple subject credential and a CLAD certification and has 
a seniority date of October 17, 2005.   

 

 

 

 

Patrick McIntosh holds a multiple subject credential and has a seniority date of 
October 2, 2006. 

Todd Gillihan holds a single subject credential in science/ geosciences and has a 
seniority date of November 16, 2007. 

Steffani Lazier holds a multiple subject credential and has a seniority date of August 
20, 2008.   

15. 

SCOE maintains that Mr. Freer is not “competent” to teach outdoor education 
because he does not meet the competency criteria set forth in the Resolution.  Further, SCOE 
maintains that it may prevent senior teachers from displacing Schlavin, McIntosh, Gillihan 
and Lazier, because these teachers possess special training and experience necessary to teach 
the specific course, outdoor education, and others with more seniority do not possess these 
skills.  
 
 

6 

The Resolution’s “competency criteria” requires that for purposes of potential 
displacement rights into an outdoor education program, competency shall mean, at a 
minimum; (1) possession of a preliminary, clear, professional clear, lifetime or other full 
credential; (2) at least one semester actual teaching experience in the subject area; and (3)  
one semester full time teaching experience in an outdoor education setting within the last five 
years. 
 

Mr. Freer possesses a multiple subject teaching credential and thus meets the first 

requirement of the competency criteria. 
 

In order to meet the second requirement of the competency criteria, Mr. Freer must 

have taught at least one semester in the “subject area.”  The “subject area” of outdoor 
education is science and includes biology, life science, environmental education, natural 
resources, wildlife management and forestry.  Mr. Freer is NCLB qualified in science.  He 
received Bachelor’s degrees in 1981, in Psychology and Recreational Administration.  His 
bachelors in recreational administration focused on wildlife and biology interpretation.  He 
has taught recreation, field biology and environmental biology for many years.  For the past 
six years he has taught multiple subjects, including science at the Boy’s Ranch/Carson Creek 
Jr./Sr. High.  His classes contain science components. 
 

Mr. Freer meets the second requirement that he have at least one semester of actual 

teaching experience in the subject area (science). 
 

SCOE maintains that Mr. Freer does not meet the third requirement of one semester 
full-time teaching experience in an outdoor education setting within the last five years.  Mr. 
Freer acknowledged that he has not taught one semester full-time in an outdoor education 
setting within the last five years.  However, he has conducted innumerable classes in the out 
of doors for his students at Boys Ranch.  His suggestion is that the time accumulated 
outdoors during his class work over the last six years would constitute one semester of full-
time outdoor education in the last five years.  The minimum qualifications for the position, as 
stated in the SCOE classification for “Outdoor, Conservation & Environmental Education 
Teacher” do not require that the incumbent have worked for a semester teaching outdoor 
education.  Rather, that classification statement indicates “Consideration will be given to 
candidates with background in a regular classroom, outdoor education, and camp experience 
as well as coursework or experience ….”   
 

SCOE maintains that it is necessary to place only teachers with one full semester of 

outdoor teaching experience and special skills in outdoor education in the Sly Park program.  
SCOE put on substantial evidence that the Sly Park program is unique.  It is a total 
immersion program for fifth and sixth-graders.  Student groups rotate into the program and 
spend a week in residence.  Ninety percent of their time is spent outside during fall, winter 
and spring months.  Teachers need enthusiasm, physical stamina, the ability to work well 
with groups of students who are constantly in motion and knowledge of all areas of science.  
Those teachers that have been hired had extensive outdoor experience and have taught as 
substitute teachers in the Sly Park outdoor program before being hired.  However, there is no 

7 

evidence that any one of these junior teachers taught a semester in an outdoor science 
program before they were ultimately hired for the Sly Park program. Their substitute service 
appears to have been intermittent.  
 

Mr. Freer testified as to his extensive background working in recreating in the out of 
doors.  He led one hundred mile hikes for the American Lung Association.  He has hiked in 
the Alps and other mountain ranges.  He has guided hikes.  He is an avid outdoors person and 
birder.  The only thing that distinguishes Mr. Freer from the four junior teachers currently 
occupying the outdoor education program is his age.  There is no argument or evidence that 
Mr. Freer is physically incapable of undertaking the demands of the outdoor education 
program. 
 

While a governing board (or superintendent) has latitude in determining what factors 

contribute to competency for provision of a particular service, those factors must be 
reasonable.  There must be a rational relationship between the competency criteria and 
performance of a particular service.  The governing board, too, has latitude in choosing to 
skip junior employees who provide specialized services.  But, the board must show these 
junior employees have special training and experience necessary to teach outdoor education, 
and others with more seniority do not possess these skills.  Mr. Freer has the credential, the 
outdoor experience in the subject matter and vast experience teaching and motivating groups 
of students. 
 

SCOE may prefer to keep its junior teachers in place in the Sly Park outdoor 
education program.  These junior teachers appear to have adapted well to the program and 
have brought much to the program.  Even though they may be the ideal teachers for this 
program, they are not the only SCOE teachers who can effectively teach outdoor education.  
Even though they may be the ideal candidates in a recruiting situation, this is not a 
recruitment.  Mr. Freer is a senior employee who is certificated and competent to render 
service teaching science in outdoor education.  As set forth below in the Legal Conclusions, 
the very clear intent of the Education Code,2is to prevent the termination of permanent 
employees while probationary employees or employees with less seniority are retained to 
render services which the senior employee is certificated and competent to render.  
Establishing a preference for existing staff, by enacting competency criteria designed to 
exclude senior teachers, violates the intent of the Education Code. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 

1. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been 
provided as required. 
 

                                                 

 

8 

2. 

The notices sent to respondents indicated the statutory basis for the reduction of 

 
services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due process.  (San Jose 
Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation of 
Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  The description of services to be 
reduced, both in the Superintendent’s Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe 
particular kinds of services.  (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.  See, also, 
Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)   
 
 

3. 

The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next school 

year is an appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955.  As stated in San 
Jose Teachers Assn v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of particular 
kinds of services on the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that section, 
and, “in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, 
section 44955 is the only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that 
reduction.”  The County must be solvent to provide educational services, and cost savings are 
necessary to resolve its financial crisis.  The Superintendent’s decision to reduce particular 
kinds of services was a proper exercise of its discretion. 
 
 
services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The 
Superintendent’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause exists to reduce 
the number of certificated employees of the County due to the reduction and discontinuation 
of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates 
solely to the welfare of the County’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44949. 
 

The services identified in Resolution No. 2010-A, are particular kinds of 

4. 

5. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
 
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides: 

6. 

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services are no 
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this 
section while any probationary employee, or any other employee 
with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said 
permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.  

 
 
 

9 

7. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides in pertinent part: 

… service of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse order in which 
they were employed… The governing Board shall make assignments and 
reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any 
service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render…. 

8. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), provides in pertinent part: 

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either 
of the following reasons: 

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course or course of study… and that the certificated employee has special 
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study … 
which others with more seniority do not possess. 

 

[¶]…[¶] 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

9. 

Cause does not exist, pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivisions 
(b) and (c), to give notice to respondent Jonathon Freer that his services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year.  As set forth in the Findings, junior employees are being 
retained to render services which Jonathon Freer’s seniority and qualifications entitle him to 
render. 
 

10. 

Cause does not exist, pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
(d), to give notice to respondent Jonathon Freer that his services will not be required for the 
2010-2011 school year.  As set forth in the Findings, SCOE has not demonstrated that it must 
retain junior employees, Schlavi, McIntosh, Gillihan and Lazier, because they have 
necessary training or experience that Jonathon Freer does not possess. 
 

11. 

Cause exists because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 

services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to the remaining 
respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year, as set forth 
in the Findings.  No certificated employees with seniority dates junior to the remaining 
respondents are being retained to teach classes for which respondents are certificated and 
competent to teach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 

 

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice shall be given to respondents, with the exception of Jonathon Freer, that their 

The Accusation against Jonathon Freer is dismissed. 

services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated: April 17, 2010 
 
 
 

___________________________ 
ANN ELIZABETH SARLI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

11 

