BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
TURLOCK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STANISLAUS COUNTY 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 
 

 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE TURLOCK UNIFIED 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
                                                          Respondents. 

 

 
 

 

OAH No. 2010031652 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Karen J. Brandt, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, State of California, in Turlock, California, on May 20, 2010. 
 

Roberta L. Rowe, Attorney at Law, represented the Turlock Unified School District 

(District). 
 

Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents who are listed on 

Attachment A hereto (represented respondents). 
 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of the respondents listed on Attachment B 

hereto (unrepresented respondents). 
 

decision on May 20, 2010. 
 

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for 

Because this matter was continued pursuant to Education Code section 44949, 
subdivision (e),1 the May 7 date set forth in section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), was extended 
to June 7, 2010, and the May 15 date set forth in section 44955, subdivision (c) was extended 
to June 15, 2010. 
 
 

                                                 
 

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise indicated.   

1 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

On March 2, 2010, the Governing Board of the District adopted Resolution 

#16/2009-2010 (PKS Resolution), by which it determined that it was necessary to reduce or 
discontinue certain identified particular kinds of services (sometime referred to herein as 
PKS).  By reason of this reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services, the 
Governing Board determined that it will be necessary to terminate, at the end of the 2009-
2010 school year, the employment of certain certificated employees of the District, and 
directed the Superintendent or his designee to send appropriate notices to all employees 
whose services will be terminated by virtue of the Governing Board’s action.   The PKS 
reductions and discontinuances are based solely upon economic reasons, and are not related 
to the skills, abilities or work performance of the affected teachers. 
 

2. 

The PKS Resolution identified the following particular kinds of services for 

reduction or discontinuance: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

Position 
 
Adapted PE 
SDC/LH 
Resource Specialist 
Language Arts  
Math/Science   
 
Drafting 
Foreign Language 
Math 
Opportunity 
English 

 
 
 

Grade Level 
 
K-6 
 
K-12 
 
K-6 
 
7-8 
 
7-8 
 
9-12 
 
9-12 
 
9-12 
 
9-12 
 
9-12 

FTE2
1.0 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
  .6 
1.0 
2.0 
1.0 

Classroom Teachers  K-8 

 

 

Total 7-12 

        11.6 

 

 

64.0

75.6 

TOTAL 

 

 

3. 

Pursuant to the PKS Resolution, on March 10, 2010, Mike Trainor, Assistant 

Superintendent, Human Resources, sent preliminary layoff notices to the certificated 
employees identified for layoff.  The preliminary layoff notices informed the certificated 
employees of their right to request a hearing, and enclosed copies of the PKS Resolution, 
sections 44949 and 44955, and a blank request for hearing form. 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

 

2 “FTE” stands for full-time equivalent.   

2

 

 

4. 

The District did not receive requests for hearing from the unrepresented 

respondents.  The unrepresented respondents did not appear and were not represented at the 
hearing.  The hearing proceeded by way of default pursuant to Government Code section 
11520 against the unrepresented respondents. 
 

5. 

In response to the preliminary layoff notices, the District received requests for 

hearing from the represented respondents.  On March 23, 2010, the District served the 
Accusation, Statement to Respondent, form Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing, and 
Request for Discovery on the represented respondents.  On March 29, 2010, a Notice of 
Defense was served on behalf of the represented respondents. 
 

6. 

The represented respondents are certificated employees of the District.  The 

District timely served the represented respondents with all notices required by sections 44949 
and 44955.  The Notice of Defense was timely filed on behalf of the represented respondents. 
 

7. 

Prior to the hearing, after reviewing new information from the May Revise and 
considering additional attrition, the District rescinded a number of preliminary layoff notices. 
Although the District rescinded a number of preliminary layoff notices, the Governing Board 
has not modified the number of PKS reductions it approved in the PKS Resolution. 
 

8. 

At the hearing, the District corrected the seniority date of respondent Jennifer 

Babakhan from August 18, 2009, to August 27, 2008.  This change in Ms. Babakhan’s 
seniority date does not affect her layoff status. 
 

9. 

The represented respondents raised the following issues in opposition to the 
proposed layoff: (1) whether the resignation of Susan Milligan, a Math/Science teacher at 
Dutcher Middle School, satisfied the 1.0 FTE reduction of Math/Science set forth in the PKS 
Resolution, thereby requiring the rescission of the preliminary layoff notice served on 
respondent Charlyn D. Selee; and (2) whether respondent Carol Aleson, who has a Multiple 
Subject teaching credential with a supplementary authorization in English, should be allowed 
to bump a more junior certificated employee and be assigned to teach ninth-grade English in 
the next school year.  These issues are addressed below.  
 
Charlyn D. Selee 
 

10. 

  As set forth in the PKS Resolution, the Governing Board has decided to 

reduce Math/Science in the seventh and eighth grade by 1.0 FTE. 
 

11. 

Represented respondent Charlyn D. Selee is a 1.0 FTE permanent certificated 
District employee with a seniority date of August 17, 2007.  She has a clear Multiple Subject 
teaching credential and a Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Development (CLAD) 
certificate.  She also has a general education limited assignment single subject teaching 
permit (Permit) in Math.  She is currently teaching Math/Science in grades seven and eight at 
Dutcher Middle School. 
 

 

3

12.  When Ms. Selee was initially hired by the District, she was asked to obtain a 

Permit in Math in order to teach the Math/Science classes she is currently teaching.  Because 
she had enough college credits for a minor in science, she was not asked to obtain a Permit in 
Science.  The Permit provides that, after issuance, it may be renewed for two additional one-
year terms as long as the holder maintains a valid teaching credential, and either: (a) 
completes a minimum of six semester units of applicable coursework; or (b) passes two 
sections of an appropriate examination.  Ms. Selee has complied with these requirements and 
her Permit in Math has already been renewed twice.  Her Permit in Math will expire on 
October 1, 2010. 
 

13. 

Even though her Permit in Math will expire shortly after the beginning of the 

2010-2011 school year, Ms. Selee does not need the Permit to continue teaching 
Math/Science at Dutcher Middle School.  As both Mr. Trainor and Ms. Selee testified, Ms. 
Selee is credentialed and competent to teach Math/Science at Dutcher Middle School with 
her Multiple Subject teaching credential. 
 

14. 

Susan Milligan was a teacher of Math/Science at Dutcher Middle School.  

Effective January 5, 2010, she resigned her position.  Her classes are currently being taught 
by a substitute. 
 

15.  Unrepresented respondent Amanda Brazil is a .66 FTE probationary 2 

certificated District employee.  Her seniority date is July 1, 2008.  She has a preliminary 
Multiple Subject teaching credential and a CLAD certificate.  She is currently teaching 
Math/Science at Dutcher Middle School. 
 

16. 

The evidence presented at the hearing about Ms. Selee’s layoff was 

contradictory and confusing.  Prior to the hearing, the District’s counsel confirmed to the 
represented respondents’ counsel that the 1.0 FTE reduction in Math/Science set forth in the 
PKS Resolution was satisfied by the resignation of Ms. Milligan.  The District’s counsel 
provided represented respondents’ counsel with a document entitled, “Turlock USD 
Layoffs.”  That document lists, in typing, the particular kinds of services identified for 
reduction in the PKS Resolution.  In handwriting next to “Math/Science 7-8 (1.0),” the 
District’s counsel wrote, “Susan Milligan midyear retiree.”  There is nothing on that 
document to indicate that Ms. Selee’s layoff was related to the 1.0 FTE reduction in 
Math/Science in the seventh and eighth grade. 
 

17.  During the hearing, before lunch, Mr. Trainor testified that he believed that the 

PKS Resolution’s 1.0 FTE reduction in Math/Science was satisfied by the attrition of Ms. 
Milligan.  After lunch, Mr. Trainor testified that, prior to the resignation of Ms. Milligan, the 
District was considering reducing Math/Science by 2.0 FTE; after Ms. Milligan resigned, the 
District decided to reduce Math/Science by 1.0 FTE, and Ms. Selee was noticed for layoff to 
satisfy that 1.0 FTE reduction.  The District did not present any documentary evidence to 
substantiate Mr. Trainor’s afternoon testimony.  Mr. Trainor also testified that Ms. Brazil 
was being laid off as part of the 64.0 FTE reduction in Classroom Teachers K-8. 
 

 

4

18.  Given the contradictory evidence that was submitted at the hearing, the 
District did not meet its burden of establishing that Ms. Selee’s preliminary layoff notice was 
issued to satisfy the 1.0 FTE reduction of Math/Science set forth in the PKS Resolution.  
Instead, the preponderance of the evidence established that the District was relying upon the 
resignation of Ms. Milligan to satisfy that PKS reduction.  The District did not assert or 
establish that Ms. Selee was being laid off pursuant to any other reductions set forth in the 
PKS Resolution.  Given the District’s failure to establish by a preponderance of the evidence 
that Ms. Selee was being laid off to satisfy the 1.0 reduction in Math/Science, Ms. Selee’s 
preliminary layoff notice must be rescinded. 
 
Carol Aleson 
 

19.  On March 2, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 17/2009-10 

(Competency Resolution).  The Competency Resolution states, in relevant part, that, “the 
Governing Board recognizes that, to make effective layoff decisions, objective criteria as to 
competency must be established” and that “the District may deviate from the order of least 
seniority when laying off a certificated employee, to fill a demonstrated specific need for 
fully credentialed personnel and for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study 
which others with more seniority do not possess.”   In the Competency Resolution, the 
Governing Board, in relevant part, resolved that: 
 

…deviation from the layoff or reappointing in order of least 
seniority can include, but shall not be limited to: 

1. 
 

Teachers who currently hold a preliminary or clear 
credential.  

20. 

Represented respondent Carol Aleson is a permanent certificated District 

employee.  Her seniority date is August 17, 2007.  She is currently a kindergarten teacher.3  
She holds a clear a Multiple Subject teaching credential and a CLAD certificate.  She also 
has a supplementary authorization in English.  Her supplementary authorization allows her to 
teach English in a single subject classroom to students in the ninth grade and below.  It does 
not allow her to teach English in a single subject classroom to students in the tenth through 
twelfth grades.  Certificated employees with preliminary or clear credentials in English may 
teach in the tenth through twelfth grades. 
 

21. 

The District did not serve preliminary layoff notices on four teachers 

(Christopher Beebout, Michael Watson, Justin Clark and Ellen Newman) currently teaching 
English at the high school level.4  All four of these teachers have seniority dates of July 1, 

                                                 
 
notice.  It appears that she was laid off as part of the reduction of 64.0 FTE Classroom Teachers K-8.   

3 There was no evidence presented at the hearing as to why Ms. Aleson was given a preliminary layoff 

4 The PKS Resolution reduces English in the ninth to twelfth grades by 1.0 FTE.  There was no evidence to 
 
establish that any of the four teachers identified by Ms. Aleson were designated for layoff to satisfy this reduction.  
According to the evidence presented by the District, a probationary teacher who is teaching English at Turlock High 
School was non-reelected.  It appears that this non-reelection satisfies the 1.0 FTE English teacher reduction.   

 

 

 

5

2008, hold single subject teaching credentials in English, and are probationary 2 employees.  
Ms. Aleson argued that, because she is senior to these four teachers, she should be allowed to 
bump one of them and be assigned to teach ninth-grade English in the 2010-2011 school 
year. 
 

22. 

The evidence did not establish which grades the four identified English 

teachers are currently teaching.  Mr. Trainor testified that the District had not yet made its 
final assignments for the 2010-2011 school year.  Given the four more junior teachers’ 
credentials, they could be assigned to teach in any of the high school grades, nine through 
twelve.  Given her supplementary authorization, Ms. Aleson could only be assigned to teach 
ninth grade at the high school level.  Mr. Trainor testified that, given the Governing Board’s 
Competency Resolution, the District gave priority to certificated employees with single 
subject teaching credentials when determining which teachers to lay off.  But Mr. Trainor 
conceded that the District would consider Ms. Aleson, with her supplementary English 
authorization, to be credentialed and competent to teach English at the ninth grade level and 
below if the District did not have sufficient English teachers with single subject teaching 
credentials.  Ms. Aleson is not, however, credentialed and competent to teach English in the 
tenth through twelfth grades. 
 

23. 

There was argument at the hearing about whether this was a “skipping” or 
“bumping” issue, and whether the Competency Resolution stated competency or skipping 
criteria.  A senior teacher may “bump” a more junior teacher when the senior teacher 
establishes that the junior teacher has been “retained to render a service which [the senior 
teacher] is certificated and competent to render.”  (§ 44955, subd. (b).)  A school district may 
“skip” a more junior teacher – i.e., either not lay off a junior teacher who is serving in a PKS 
identified for reduction or not allow a senior teacher to “bump” a more junior teacher – when 
the school district “demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or 
course of study.”  (§ 44955, subd. (d)(1).) 
 

24.  Although the Competency Resolution is not a model of clarity, its requirement 
that a certificated employee must possess a preliminary or clear credential to displace a more 
junior employee applies generally, and not just to a specific course or course of study.  It 
establishes a competency criteria that a certificated employee must meet in order to “bump” a 
more junior employee.  Thus, any respondent wishing to displace a teacher at the secondary 
level must hold a preliminary or clear single subject credential to do so.  It was within the 
discretion of the Board to establish this competency criteria.  There was no evidence to show 
that the Board acted arbitrarily or capriciously in doing so. 
 

25. 

In this case Ms. Aleson seeks to “bump” a more junior employee and be 

assigned to teach a ninth-grade English class.  She therefore bears the burden of establishing 
that she is credentialed and competent to render the service that the four identified more 
junior teachers are currently providing.  Ms. Aleson did not establish that she has a 
preliminary or clear credential in English.  In addition, she did not establish that any of the 
four identified junior teachers are currently teaching ninth-grade English or have been 
assigned to teach ninth-grade English in the next school year.  Consequently, Ms. Aleson did 
not establish that she is credentialed and competent to “bump” any of the four identified 

 

6

teachers.  As a result, the evidence did not establish that Ms. Aleson’s preliminary layoff 
notice should be rescinded. 
 

26. 

There was no evidence that the District proposes to reduce any services that 

are mandated by state or federal laws or regulations below mandated levels. 
 

27. 

There was no evidence that the District proposes to retain junior employees to 

render services that more senior respondents are certificated and competent to perform. 
 

28. 

The District’s reductions and discontinuances of particular kinds of services 

relate solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils. 
 

29.  Any other assertions put forth by respondents and not addressed above are 

found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth 

in sections 44949 and 44955. 
 

2. 

The services identified in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of services 
that may be reduced or discontinued under section 44955.  The Governing Board’s decision 
to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was 
a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of services relates 
solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949. 
 

3. 

Cause exists to reduce certificated employees of the District due to the 

reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  Except as set forth in Legal 
Conclusion 5 below, the District properly identified the certificated employees to be laid off 
as directed by the Governing Board. 
 

4. 

As set forth in Finding 8, the District shall correct the seniority date of 

respondent Jennifer Babakhan to August 27, 2008. 
 

notice served on respondent Charlyn D. Selee. 
 

5. 

As set forth in Finding 18, the District shall rescind the preliminary layoff 

6. 

As set forth in Finding 25, respondent Carol Aleson did not establish that she 

should be allowed to bump a more junior certificated employee or that her preliminary layoff 
notice should be rescinded. 
 

7. 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

that a more senior respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 

 

 

7

8. 

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusion 5, cause exists to give notice to all the 

represented and unrepresented respondents in accordance with this decision that their 
services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the 
reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

In accordance with Legal Conclusion 4, the District shall correct the seniority 

date of Jennifer Babakhan to August 27, 2008. 
 

layoff notice served on Charlyn D. Selee. 
 

2. 

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 5, the District shall rescind the preliminary 

3. 

Cause exists to reduce or discontinue certificated positions at the end of the 

2009-2010 school year in accordance with the PKS Resolution. 
 

4. 

Except as set forth in Recommendation 2, notice may be given to the 

represented and unrepresented respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
 
 
DATED:  May 27, 2010 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
KAREN J. BRANDT 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

8

ATTACHMENT A 

TURLOCK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
REPRESENTED RESPONDENTS 

Newell, Christine S. 
Patterson, Katherine G. 
Selee, Charlyn D. 
Tovar, Jaime V. 
Ulrich, Tiffany G. 
Valgos, Stephen P. 
 
 

 

 

 
 
Aleson, Carol 
Amaya, Nicole K. 
Anderson, Michele  
Babakhan, Jennifer M. Nyquist 
Beyer, Marshall L. 
Lowe, Angela M. 
Moreno, Erin L. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9

ATTACHMENT B 

TURLOCK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
UNREPRESENTED RESPONDENTS 

Rowell, Brad M. 
Valadez, Sophia A.  
Waterson, Tiffany A.  
 

 
 
Bishop, Dennis 
Brazil, Amanda L. 
Leigh, Kristen M. 
 
 

 

 

10

