BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE MODESTO CITY SCHOOLS  
STANISLAUS COUNTY  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE MODESTO CITY 
SCHOOLS, 
 
 
                                                  Respondents. 
 
 

OAH No. 2010030948 
 

 
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Marilyn Anne Woollard, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on May 27, 2010, in Modesto, 
California.1
 

Roman Munoz and Ryan Davis, Attorneys at Law, Lozano Smith, represented 

the Modesto City Schools (District).  Deputy Superintendent Chris G. Flesuras, Jr. 
was also present on behalf of the District. 
 

Thomas J. Driscoll, Jr., Attorney at Law, represented respondents who are 

members of the Modesto Teachers Association (Represented Respondents).  These 
respondents are listed on Exhibit A to the “Stipulation Between the Parties” 
(Stipulation). 
 

Barney A. Hale, Executive Director, Modesto Teachers Association, appeared 

on behalf of Individual Respondents Seth Bledsoe, Mandy Carranza, Billie Chhan, 
Melinda Cogburn, Marla Conteh (formerly known as Marlene Garcia), Ricardo 
Gonzalez, Madelyn Kerlee, Judith Ludlow, Christina Rojas, and Wesley Taylor who 
were not present. 
 

                                                 

1 Pursuant to the March 24, 2010 Order Granting Continuance, the statutory dates specified in 

Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c), for the proposed decision and in 44955, subdivision (c), for 
final notice of termination were extended for a period of time equal to the continuance, from the original 
April 1, 2010 hearing date to the May 27, 2010 hearing date.  (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (e); see May 28, 
2010 Order Regarding Case Status.) 
 

1

The Stipulation between the District and Represented Respondents and the 

District’s bumping analysis were admitted in evidence.  The record was then closed 
and the matter was submitted for decision on May 27, 2010.  
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

The Stipulation (Attachment A) is incorporated by reference.  Pursuant 
to the Stipulation, Represented Respondents “agree not to challenge the remainder of 
the District’s layoff and all Parties agree that there no longer exists any need for a 
hearing” in this matter.  The Stipulation fully resolves all issues between the District 
and the Represented Respondents. 
 

2. 

No evidence or argument was submitted on behalf of the Individual 

Respondents.  There was no challenge to the Governing Board’s resolutions reducing 
or discontinuing particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year.  There 
was no challenge to the District’s compliance with the procedural notice requirements 
of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  There was no dispute that the 
particular kinds of services the Board resolved to reduce or discontinue are particular 
kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued.   
 

3. 

There was no evidence that employees junior to respondents are being 
retained to perform the services which respondents are certificated and competent to 
render. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular  

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another 
manner. (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California 
Teachers Association v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 
Cal.App.3d 32.)  A school board may reduce services within the meaning of the 
statute either by determining that a certain type of service shall not be performed at all 
or by reducing the number of district employees who perform such services.  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 
Cal.App.3d 167.) 
 

2. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings, the services identified in the 

resolutions are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of 
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the 
meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 

 

 

 

2

3. 

No employees junior to respondents are being retained to perform the 

services which respondents are certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

ORDER 

1. 

 
 
Consistent with the terms of the Stipulation, notice may be given to 
Represented Respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
 
be reduced or will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Notice shall be 
given in inverse order of seniority. 

Notice may be given to Individual Respondents that their services will 

2. 

DATED:  May 30, 2010 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

       ___________________________ 
  MARILYN A. WOOLLARD 

                    Administrative Law Judge 

                       Office of Administrative Hearings    

 

3

