BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ARVIN UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF KERN, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
OAH No. 2010040174 

 
In The Matter of the Accusations 
Against: 
 
ROSEMARIE BORQUEZ; NORMA J. 
BEIBER; GUADALUPE CALDERON; 
CHRISTIE MARIE CALDWELL; 
MARIA M. DURAN; ARCELI 
HERRERA; ADAM TROXEL; and 
VANESSA VALTIERRA, 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Ernest H. Tuttle III, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents.    

Peter C. Carton, Attorney at Law, represented the Arvin Union School District 

H. Stuart Waxman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on May 3, 2010, at the Kern High 
School District, Bakersfield, California. 
 
 
(District). 
 
 
 
 
At the outset of the hearing, the District announced that the preliminary notice 
of Recommendation Not to Reemploy served on Respondent Adam Troxel had been 
withdrawn, and that Adam Troxel would be retained for the upcoming school year. 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

1

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

The record was held open until 5:00 p.m. on May 4, 2010 for the District to 

 
submit the case citation for Peoples v. San Diego Unified School District.  On May 4, 
2010, the District’s attorney faxed a three-page “letter brief” to the Administrative 
Law Judge containing additional argument.  The letter brief began:  “As agreed 
yesterday, the Administration submits this letter brief with the case citation regarding 
whether Respondent Valtierra became permanent upon commencement of the 2009-
10 school year.”   
 
 
No such agreement was made.  The record was held open at the request of the 
District’s attorney solely to provide a single case citation.  Counsel’s three-page brief 
violated the order and is completely improper.  The document was neither marked for 
identification nor considered. 
 
 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

The Governing Board of the Arvin Union School District (Board) determined 

 
 
to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers and other 
certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the 
competency and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be 
reduced or eliminated.   
 
 
involving review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  However, the application of the 
tie-breaker criteria was arbitrary and capricious as to certain certificated employees, 
resulting in a dismissal of the Accusations against those employees.  In addition, the 
seniority date of one certificated employee was found to be erroneous. 
 
  

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.  Jerelle Kavanagh is the Superintendent of the District. 

 
 
 
 
2.  On or before March 15, 2010, the District served on each respondent a 
written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to respondents 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not 
be required for the next school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation and noted that eight full-time equivalent (FTE) positions would be 
reduced and/or discontinued.  Of that sum, six full-time equivalent positions were in 
self-contained, multiple-subject classrooms.  Eight preliminary notices of layoff were 
sent to teachers working in such classrooms. 
 

 

2

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

7.  On February 16, 2010, in Resolution No. 10:2009/2010, the Board took 

5.  A timely Notice of Defense was filed on behalf of those respondents who 

6.  Respondents in this proceeding are probationary or permanent certificated 

3.  Notice was served on all respondents by either personal service or certified 

4.  The Superintendent of the District made and filed Accusations against each 

 
mail.  Certificated employees timely requested, in writing, a hearing to determine if 
there is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.   
 
 
of the certificated employees who requested a hearing.  The Accusations, with 
required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense, were timely served 
on those certificated employees.   
 
 
desired a hearing.   
 
 
employees of the District. 
 
 
action to reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2010-
2011 school year: 
 
SERVICES 
 
 
District Level Administrator  
Student Support Services 
 
Self-Contained Multiple 
Subject Classrooms 
 
Departmentalized Social Studies 
Single Subject 
 
Total   
 
 
vacancies in School Year 2010-2011 due to retirements, release of temporary 
teachers, and resignations.  Three teachers with multiple subject credentials submitted 
retirement notices after March 15, 2010.  No resignation or retirement notices were 
received before that date.  The three retiring teachers will complete the current school 
year. 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

8.  Subsequent to adoption of the Board’s Resolution, the District identified 

NUMBER OF FULL-TIME
EQUIVALENT POSITIONS

8.0 

1.0 

1.0 

6.0 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

9.  Board Resolution No. 9:2009/2010 established tie-breaker criteria for 

 
determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid 
service on the same date.  It provided that the order of termination shall be based on 
the needs of the District.  The seven criteria established by the resolution were 
credentialing, experience, training, special education needs, evaluations, NCLB 
highly-qualified status, and BCLAD/CLAD credential needs.  Those criteria were 
preceded by the following statement:  “The specific criteria used in determining this 
need [the needs of the District] shall be as follows, but not necessarily listed in order 
of importance:” 
 
10.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 
 
dates (first date of paid service as a probationary employee), current assignments and 
locations, advanced degrees, credentials, and authorizations.  Credential and 
authorization data are obtained from the records of the County Office of Education, at 
which certificated employees must register such documents.   
 
 
11.  The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and 
“bumping” list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services 
being reduced.  In determining who would be laid off for each kind of service 
reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by the vacancies 
known as of March 15, 2010, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse 
order of seniority.  The District then checked the credentials of affected individuals 
and whether they could “bump” other less senior employees.   

 

12.  The District used information from its seniority list to apply the tie-

Application of Tie-Breaker Criteria 
 
 
breaker criteria of the Board Resolution.  No objective means of applying the tie-
breaker criteria were identified in the tie-breaker resolution.  Superintendent 
Kavanagh testified that she had discretion to apply the criteria in any way she saw fit.  
She admitted that, under that tie-breaking method, a teacher could not objectively 
determine where he/she would be placed on the seniority list with respect to others 
sharing the same first date of paid service.   Superintendent Kavanagh considered the 
primary tie-breaker criterion to be “credentialing.”  She therefore gave more 
importance to a clear credential than to a preliminary credential. 
 
 
13.  According to the seniority list, 13 permanent teachers holding multiple 
subject credentials share the same first date of paid service of August 2, 2007.  Of 
those 13 teachers, two hold preliminary credentials (Rosemarie Borquez and Vanessa 
Valtierra).  The remainder hold clear credentials.  Except for Respondents Christie 
Caldwell, Guadalupe Calderon and Arceli Herrera, those teachers holding clear, 
multiple subject credentials, whose first date of paid service was August 2, 2007, 
were not given preliminary layoff notices. 
 
/// 

 

4

 
 
14.  Respondents Caldwell, Calderon and Herrera did receive preliminary 
layoff notices.  Superintendent Kavanagh reasoned that those three teachers had 
undergone less AB 472 training than the others and therefore did not rank as high 
with respect to the “training” criterion in the tie-breaker resolution.  She considered a 
master’s degree held by Respondent Caldwell to be “education” rather than 
“training.”   
 
 
(DAIT) as part of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, and is therefore subject to 
specific accountability requirements.  As explained in a letter from Assistant 
Superintendent Marilyn Thompson: 
 

15.  The District is overseen by the District Assistance and Intervention Team 

On December 15, 2009, the Arvin Union School District was required 
to submit a Corrective Action Plan to the State Board of Education 
(SBE).  In developing this plan, it was highly recommended by the 
California Department of Education (CDE), to ensure all our staff was 
highly trained in the most current instructional strategies for our 
English Learner population, and in Reading Language Arts and math.  
On February 12, 2010, the President of the State Board of Education, 
Mr. Ted Mitchell, and Ms. Lura Wagner, from CDE, visited our district 
as part of the DAIT process.  The purpose of the visit was to determine 
if Arvin was on the right track for program improvement and 
improvement of state test scores, or if the state needed to intervene.  At 
that time, Mr. Mitchell recommended that the district continue to 
complete training in SB 472 math and Reading Language Arts, as well 
as in English Language Professional Development (ELPD) for 100% of 
our staff.  The recommendation was further emphasized by Mr. 
Mitchell at the State Board of Education meeting in Sacramento on 
March 10, 2010.  In compliance with this recommendation, the district 
is working towards fulfilling our accountability for DAIT. . . . Based on 
the information mentioned above, it is imperative that all our teachers 
participate in these trainings, not only as a benefit to our students, but 
as part of the expectation of the State Board of Education. 

 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 

 

5

Arceli Herrera 

17.  In addition to the issues raised in Paragraph 16, above, Respondent 

16.  It was for that reason that Superintendent Kavanagh chose to emphasize 

 
the tie-breaker criteria of “credentialing” and “training,” respectively, in breaking the 
ties in the August 2, 2007 group.  However, the training for DAIT compliance was 
not always scheduled during teachers’ contracted hours, and the scheduling of the 
training raised issues with the teachers’ union regarding whether the District could 
make after-hours training “mandatory.”  Because of the differences between the 
District and the union in that regard, it was never clear to some of the teachers 
whether the training was mandatory or voluntary.  In addition, certain teachers, such 
as Respondents Maria Duran and Vanessa Valtierra, were not given the same 
opportunity to participate in the DAIT compliance training as were others.  Both 
teachers signed up for the training but were removed from the training list upon their 
receipt of preliminary layoff notices.  When they were rehired for the following 
school year, they had missed the training and were unable to make it up.  At least one 
other teacher, Respondent Arceli Herrera, was not permitted to take the training 
because she lacked certain prerequisites.  She was unable to satisfy the prerequisites 
because they had last been offered in 2003 and 2004, well before Respondent 
Herrera’s hire in 2007. 
 
 
 
 
Herrera argued that the fact that she holds a BCLAD certificate in Spanish, which 
required course work, examinations, and skills beyond that required for a CLAD, 
should have placed her ahead of another teacher with the same first date of paid 
service who possesses only a CLAD certificate but who was retained.  Superintendent 
Kavanagh testified that 75-80 percent of the student population consists of English 
language learners, and that the majority of those students are Spanish-speaking.  
However, she also testified that she did not consider possession of a BCLAD 
certificate high on the tie-breaker criteria list because, although parents are permitted 
to request bi-lingual instruction, they have not done so for many years. 
 
 
 
 
18.  Respondent Rosemarie Borquez is listed on the seniority list as having a 
preliminary multiple subject credential.  She completed all of the requirements for a 
clear credential before March 15, 2010, and the District was so notified.  However, 
Ms. Borquez was precluded by state regulation from applying for the clear credential 
before May.  Although she applied for the credential when she was permitted to do 
so, according to the Commission on Teacher Credentialing’s website, the credential 
had not been issued as of May 2, 2010. 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

Rosemarie Borquez 

 

6

Maria Duran 

Vanessa Valtierra 

19.  Respondent Vanessa Valtierra disputes her seniority date of August 2, 

Seniority Date Disputes
 
 
 
 
2007.  However, the issue of her seniority date was litigated and established in a 
“summer layoff” proceeding on July 16, 2009.  The ruling on that issue was not 
appealed.   
 
 
 
 
20.  The District assigned Respondent Maria Duran a seniority date of July 31, 
2008.  Ms. Duran began teaching in the District at the beginning of school year 2007-
2008 with a Provisional Internship Permit and, in January 2008, she received a district 
internship credential of which the District was notified on March 4, 2008.  On May 
22, 2008, Ms. Duran received a preliminary multiple subject credential.  Ms. Duran 
taught a third grade class for the entire 2007-2008 school year.  In so doing, she was 
not substituting for any other teacher.  Ms. Duran was hired again for the 2008-2009 
school year and taught that entire year except during her maternity leave. 
 
 
the July 16, 2009 “summer layoff” proceeding.  The Administrative Law Judge ruled 
that her seniority date had been miscalculated, and that it should be August 2, 2007.  
He then dismissed the Accusation as to Ms. Duran. 
 
 

21.  The issue of Ms. Duran’s seniority date was litigated and established in 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 

 
 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 
 
2.  All of the identified services are particular kinds of services that could be 
 
reduced or discontinued under Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce 
or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services 
relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of 
Code section 44949. 
 
3.  A District may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code 
 
section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to 
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce 
services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because 
fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. 
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)   
 

 

7

7.  Although a school district is granted broad discretion in determining how to 

5.    No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

4.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 
 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the 
Board directed be reduced or discontinued.   
 
 
services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
6.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, 
the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 
position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)   
 
Tie-Breaker Criteria 
 
 
apply its tie-breaker criteria, it may not do so in an arbitrary or capricious manner.  
Tie-breaker criteria should be accompanied by some weighing mechanism and 
ultimate tie-breaking device that will ensure objectivity and provide for review of the 
criteria’s application for fairness and accuracy.   
 
 
apply the tie-breaker criteria in any manner she chose, so as to reach a result 
reflecting her preferences, rather than a result based on an objective determination.  In 
emphasizing the criteria of “credentialing” first and “training” second, Superintendent 
Kavanagh was attempting to ensure compliance with the DAIT requirements.  
However, the District was well-aware of that priority no later than December 2009, 
well before the Governing Board passed the tie-breaker resolution. The Governing 
Board could easily have formulated its priorities to maximize the chances of DAIT 
compliance without rendering it impossible for a teacher to determine where he/she 
might be placed among his/her peers with the same first date of paid service.  The 
failure to do so, coupled with Superintendent Kavanagh’s reliance on training that 
certain teachers were precluded from taking, renders the application of the tie-breaker 
criteria arbitrary and capricious as to those teachers with a seniority date of August 2, 
2007, who hold multiple subject credentials.  Because some of those teachers were 
retained while others received notices of lay-off, the Accusation will be dismissed as 
to all respondents with an August 2, 2007 seniority date who hold multiple subject 
credentials. 
 
/// 
 

8.  In this case, the District’s superintendent was given complete discretion to 

 

8

9.  Ms. Herrera challenges the manner in which the tie-breaker criteria were 

Arceli Herrera 
 
 
applied, claiming that her possession of a BCLAD certificate should have placed her 
over another teacher with the same first date of paid service who possesses only a 
CLAD certificate.  Although the District may or may not have agreed with Ms. 
Herrera had it prioritized the tie-breaker criteria, Ms. Herrera’s argument provides 
another example of the arbitrary and capricious manner in which the tie-breaker 
criteria were applied. 
 
Rosemarie Borquez 
 
 
10.  Ms. Borquez timely completed the requirements for a clear credential but, 
through no fault of her own, was unable to file the credential with the District before 
March 15, 2010 deadline for serving preliminary layoff notices.  Her predicament is 
most unfortunate, but no relief can be granted to her on that basis.  The District was 
not required to request a waiver from the Commission on Teacher Credentialing on 
Ms. Borquez’s behalf pursuant to Education Code section 44225, subdivision (m) 
and/or section 44225.7, subdivision (a).  Further, the District was entitled to rely on 
the information it had as of March 15, 2010, concerning teachers’ credentials, in order 
to take that information into account in determining the identities of the certificated 
employees who would receive preliminary layoff notices, and it could not add to 
those notices after that date.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers Association, Inc. v. 
Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 814-815; Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 
Cal.App.3d 689, 698.)  However, Ms. Borquez’s seniority date is August 2, 2007, and 
she holds a multiple subject credential.  Therefore, as indicated in Legal Conclusion 
No. 8, the Accusation shall be dismissed as to her because of the improper manner in 
which the tie-breaker criteria were applied. 
 
Vanessa Valtierra 
 
 
seniority date.  In order to establish collateral estoppel, several threshold requirements 
must be met.  First, the issue sought to be precluded from litigation must be identical 
to that decided in a former proceeding.  Second, this issue must have been actually 
litigated in the earlier action.  Third, it must have been necessarily decided in the 
earlier action.  Fourth, the decision in the former proceeding must be final and on the 
merits.  Finally, the party against whom preclusion is sought must be the same as, or 
in privity with, the party to the former proceeding.  (See Zapata v. Department of 
Motor Vehicles (1991) 2 Cal.App.4th 108, 112.)  Even in the absence of collateral 
estoppel, the reasoning of the Administrative Law Judge in last year’s hearing is 
applicable this year.   
 
/// 
 

11.  Ms. Valtierra is collaterally estopped from again raising the issue of her 

 

9

13.  The privity requirement for collateral estoppel is satisfied when the 

14.  The elements of collateral estoppel are met in this case, and Respondent 

12.  Collateral estoppel may be applied to prior decisions made by 
 
administrative agencies when the agency acts in a judicial capacity and resolves 
disputed issues of fact properly before it.  The prior proceeding should possess a 
judicial character, be conducted in an impartial manner, provide the parties with the 
opportunity to examine and cross-examine witnesses under oath and offer other 
evidence and argument.  A record of the proceedings should be maintained.  The 
resulting decision should be adjudicatory in nature.  (People v. Sims (1982) 32 Cal.3d 
468.) 
 
 
relationship between the party against whom collateral estoppel is asserted and the 
unsuccessful party in the earlier action are sufficiently close to justify the imposition 
of collateral estoppel.  In this case, the respondents are either the same in both actions 
or are sufficiently close by virtue of their being probationary or permanent certificated 
employees of the same school district who have been served notices that their services 
will not be required for the following school year because of reductions or 
eliminations of particular kinds of services, and who received the District’s one-step 
packet. 
 
 
Valtierra is precluded from raising the issue again.   
 
Maria Duran 
 
15.  Collateral estoppel also applies to the issue of Respondent Duran’s 
 
seniority date but, in this case, it is the District that is estopped from re-litigating the 
issue.  The administrative law judge who heard the “summer layoff” case in July 
2009, found that her seniority date should be August 2, 2007, but the District assigned 
her a seniority date of July 31, 2008 this year.  The following is additional analysis on 
the issue. 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

 

10

16.  The District miscalculated Ms. Duran’s seniority date.  Provisional 
 
internship permits and internship credentials are similar to emergency teaching 
permits for purposes of determining seniority.  In California Teachers Association v. 
Governing Board of Golden Valley Unified School District (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 
369, the Court held that a teacher with an emergency permit could be classified as a 
probationary employee.   In Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. 
Bakersfield City School District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, the Court stated: 
 

We could not have held in Golden Valley that emergency-permitted 
teachers must be classified as probationary employees because, as we 
have said, their classification, and the classification of all other 
certificated employees (with the single exception of district interns), is 
not determined by what type of credential or certification they have.  If 
a certificated employee occupies a position the Education Code defines 
as temporary, he or she is a temporary employee; if it is not a position 
that requires temporary classification (or permanent or substitute), he or 
she is a probationary employee. [Citation.]  The [Education] Code 
grants school districts no discretion to deviate from this statutory 
classification scheme.  [Citation.]  (Id. at 1299.)  (Emphasis in text.) 

17.  Ms. Duran taught the entire 2007-2008 school year, beginning with a 

18.  The result would be the same even if Ms. Duran taught the 2007-2008 

 
 
provisional internship permit, then with a district internship credential, and finally 
with a preliminary multiple subject credential.  Nothing in the Education Code 
established that her position was that of a temporary employee, but it is undisputed 
that she had not attained tenure.  Because she was neither a temporary nor a 
permanent employee, she is deemed to have been a probationary employee.  Further, 
as a district intern, she was statutorily defined as a probationary employee.  (Ed. 
Code, § 44885.5.)  Accordingly, her seniority date must be revised to August 2, 2007, 
the first day of the 2007-2008 school year.   
 
 
school year in a temporary capacity.  Because the District recognized her first date of 
paid service as a probationary employee as the beginning of the 2008-2009 school 
year, and because Ms. Duran taught more than 75 percent of the 2007-2008 school 
year, the temporary status of the 2007-2008 school year would convert to 
probationary status pursuant to Education Code section 44918, subdivision (a). 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 

 

11

18.  Respondents argued that the six self-contained classroom, multiple subject 

19.  Respondents argued that, by serving eight self-contained, multiple-subject 

Positively Assured Attrition 
 
 
FTE positions in the Board’s resolution should be reduced to three because of the 
three retirements of teachers holding multiple subject credentials.  The District 
received those teachers’ retirement notifications after March 15, 2010, and all three 
teachers intend to finish the current school year.  The District need not consider any 
attrition occurring after the March 15 deadline for serving preliminary notices of 
layoff.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627.) 
 
Over-Noticing 
 
 
classroom teachers with preliminary notices of layoff, when the Governing Board 
authorized the reduction or elimination of only six full time equivalent positions in 
that area, the District over-noticed those teachers.   
 
 
manner in pursuing and implementing the layoff by issuing more preliminary notices of 
layoff than the number of FTE positions being reduced or eliminated.  No statutory, 
regulatory, or case authority was offered for the proposition that the number of 
certificated employees who receive preliminary notices must equal the number of FTE 
positions being reduced or eliminated.  Further, even if one were to accept Resolution   
10:2009-2010 as an order to the Superintendent, the resolution does not require notices 
to only enough employees to cover the number of FTE positions being reduced or 
eliminated.  It provides the Superintendent with discretion to notice additional 
employees.  The resolution reads in part:  
 

20.  It was not established that the District acted in an arbitrary or capricious 

The Superintendent is directed to determine which employees’ services 
may not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of this 
reduction in services and to give those employees notice of the 
Superintendent’s recommendation that they not be reemployed not later 
than March 15, 2010, as required by the Education Code.  (Emphasis 
added.) 

 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 

 

12

ORDER 

2.  The Accusations against the other respondents are sustained.  Notice may 

 
 
1.  The Accusations against Respondents Guadalupe Calderon, Christie Marie 
Caldwell, Arceli Herrera, Rosemarie Borquez, and Vanessa Valtierra are dismissed. 
 
 
be given to those respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year because of reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of 
services. 
 
 
  
  
DATED:  May 5, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
H. STUART WAXMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

3.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

13

