BEFORE THE LOS ANGELES COUNTY 
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 
 

     OAH Case No. 2010030098 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:  
 
CERTIFICATED STAFF OF THE LOS 
ANGELES COUNTY OFFICE OF 
EDUCATION, 
 
                                                  Respondents. 
 
 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Aaron V. O’Donnell, Attorney at Law, represented the Los Angeles County 

Administrative Law Judge Ralph B. Dash heard this matter on April 29 and 30, 2010, 

 
 
in Downey, California. 
 
 
Superintendent of Schools (referred to herein as the Los Angeles County Office of Education 
(LACOE)). 
 
 
Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof. 

Richard J. Schwab, Attorney at Law, represented all Respondents identified on 

 
The matter was continued until May 28, 2010, for the purpose of permitting the 
parties to file closing and reply briefs.  All briefs were timely submitted.  LACOE’s closing 
and reply briefs were marked as Exhibits 45 and 46, respectively.  Respondents’ closing and 
reply briefs were marked as Exhibits H and I, respectively.1  The record was closed on May 
28, 2010. 

 
Evidence having been received and the matter having been submitted, the 

Administrative Law Judge makes the following Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and 
Order. 
 

FINDINGS OF FACT 

1. 

 
 
Carolina H. Pavia, LACOE’s Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, 
filed the Accusations in her official capacity.  LACOE timely served the Accusations on all 
Respondents. 
 
                                                
1  The parties were permitted to attach exhibits to their briefs, which would be received in evidence.  At the hearing 
16 exhibits were identified and admitted in evidence on behalf of LACOE, whose hearing brief was marked Exhibit 
17 for identification.  In its briefs, LACOE submitted additional exhibits, marked 18 through 45, were admitted.  
Respondents’ attached additional exhibits as well, some of which were duplicative of those already received.  The 
new/additional exhibits were marked J through M and admitted. 

 

1

4. 

2. 

3. 

Respondents are employed as probationary or permanent certificated 

LACOE further determined that it was necessary by reason of said reductions 

On February 23, 2010, by Resolution 18, LACOE determined to reduce and/or 

 
employees of LACOE. 
 
 
discontinue certain services within the school district, by a total of 243 full time equivalent 
(FTE) positions, and directed the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources to give 
notice to certificated employees that their services would not be needed for the 2010-2011 
school year.   
 
 
or discontinuance of services to decrease the number of certificated employees at the close of 
the present school year, by a corresponding number of FTE and directed the Assistant 
Superintendent, Human Resource Services, or her designees to proceed accordingly by 
notifying the appropriate employees to implement the Resolution.  The Assistant 
Superintendent acted in accordance with this directive and prepared a recommendation that 
Respondents be given notice that their services would not be required for the ensuing school 
year. 
 
 
44955, LACOE served each Respondent with the Accusation and notice that a hearing must 
be requested, in writing, by March 29, 2010, and that failure to request a hearing would 
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 
 
for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

On or before March 15, 2010, pursuant to Education Code2 sections 44949 and 

Respondents requested administrative hearings to determine if there was cause 

5. 

6. 

 

7. 

All Respondents, as identified on Exhibit A, timely requested a hearing and all 

9. 

8. 

The recommendation that Respondents be terminated from employment was 

The services at issue are “particular kinds of services” that could be reduced or 

jurisdictional requirements have been met. 
 
 
not related to their competency as teachers. 
 
 
discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.  LACOE’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted 
a proper exercise of discretion. 
 
 
the welfare of LACOE and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of those particular 
kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of LACOE. 
 
 
(first date of paid service), current assignments and locations, credentials, and authorizations. 
                                                
2  Unless otherwise specified, all further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

The reduction or discontinuation of those particular kinds of services related to 

LACOE maintains a seniority list that contains employees’ seniority dates 

10. 

11. 

 

2

LACOE used the seniority list to determine who would be laid off for each kind of service 
reduced or eliminated.  LACOE then checked all Respondents’ credentials to determine 
whether they could “bump” other employees. 
 

12. 

In their closing and reply briefs, the parties set forth their arguments as 

to why certain specified employees should or should not have been retained.   

 

 

A.  Bon Larsonsilva  

Mr. Larsonsilva is a permanent employee with a seniority date of  August 28, 2009, 

teaching in a special education assignment.  Notwithstanding that the usual period of service 
required to obtain permanent status is two years, Mr. Larsonsilva is classified as permanent 
because he was formerly employed by LACOE as a permanent certificated employee, 
resigned, and then returned to certificated employment with LACOE within 39 months of his 
resignation.  Mr. Larsonsilva is presently employed in a special education teaching 
assignment, working as a teacher of emotionally disturbed students.  At the time of initial 
preparation of LACOE’s seniority list, Mr. Larsonsilva was employed pursuant to a district 
intern credential authorizing him to serve in the special education assignment.  Subsequent to 
initial preparation of the seniority list, however, on February 4, 2010, Mr. Larsonsilva 
registered with LACOE a preliminary education specialist teaching credential authorizing 
instruction of students with moderate/severe disabilities issued by the California Commission 
on Teacher Credentialing on November 1, 2009.  [Exhibit 20]   

Counsel for Respondents argue that Mr. Larsonsilva’s retention was improper 
because when Mr. Larsonsilva returned to employment with LACOE in August, 2009, it was 
pursuant to an intern credential.  Respondents’ position in this regard is based upon Smith v. 
Governing Board of Elk Grove Unified School District (2004) 120 Cal.App.4th 563. 

Section 44931 requires that if a permanent employee resigns and is reemployed 

within 39 months of the date of his resignation, the employee must be restored to all of the 
“rights, benefits, and burdens of a permanent employee, except as otherwise provided in this 
code.”  Section 44848 requires that the date of employment of a certificated employee who 
resigns and returns to employment be deemed to be the date on which the employee first 
rendered paid service after reemployment.  In accordance with the requirements of Sections 
44848 and 44931, Mr. Larsonsilva was restored to permanent status, but with a new seniority 
date upon his return to employment with LACOE following his resignation. 

Respondents contend that it was improper for LACOE to retain Mr. Larsonsilva while 

laying off other employees whose seniority dates run from January 22, 2008 through 
November 6, 2008.  However, all of the employees claimed by Respondents to be entitled to 
bump into Mr. Larsonsilva’s position are probationary.   

It is axiomatic in a certificated layoff that probationary employees must be laid off 

before permanent employees.  Section 44955 unambiguously provides, in pertinent part, “the 
services of no permanent employee may be terminated …while any probationary employee, 

 

3

or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said 
permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.”  LACOE was therefore 
required to retain Mr. Larsonsilva over any probationary employees, and no probationary 
employee, regardless of seniority date, could be retained in Mr. Larsonsilva’s present 
assignment while Mr. Larsonsilva was laid off.  Thus, none of the Respondents identified 
was entitled to “bump” Mr. Larsonsilva. 

The Elk Grove case relied upon by Respondents considered the application of section 

44911 to an employee who was initially hired pursuant to an emergency permit.  Section 
44911 provides that service “under a provisional credential shall not be included in 
computing the service required as a prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to, 
classification as a permanent employee of a school district.”  In that case, Smith, who held a 
social studies teaching credential, was hired as a special education teacher and taught for two 
years in that capacity pursuant to an emergency permit authorizing that service.  The court 
held that her service in the special education assignment under the emergency permit did not 
count towards the acquisition of permanent status, notwithstanding that Smith also possessed 
a social studies credential while serving under the emergency permit. 

Elk Grove addressed only the tenure status of an employee initially hired pursuant to a 

provisional credential, and did not consider the circumstance of an employee such as Mr. 
Larsonsilva, who was permanent, resigned, and then returned within 39 months.  Section 
44911 concerns only “service required as a prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to” 
classification as permanent.  Nothing in Elk Grove authorized or required LACOE to 
disregard the mandate of section 44931 that Mr. Larsonsilva, having already fulfilled the 
service requirements for tenure, be restored to permanent status upon his reemployment after 
resignation.  No probationary Respondent was or could have been entitled to bump Mr. 
Larsonsilva.  (Educ. Code § 44955(b).) 

B. 

Araceli Torres 

Respondents contend it was improper to retain Peter Labarba over Araceli Torres.  

Ms. Torres is not certificated and competent to render the service provided by Mr. Labarba, 
as demonstrated by their credentials and the personnel requisitions for their current positions.  
Mr. Labarba has a district intern credential authorizing instruction of K-12 and also adult 
students with moderate to severe disabilities.  [Exhibit 21]  He is presently in an assignment 
working with 18 to 22 year-olds.  The personnel requisition for this assignment indicates 
"this position for the low functioning, non-ambulatory 18 to 22 year-old students."  [Exhibit 
22]  Ms. Torres, however, has only an early childhood special education credential, 
authorizing instruction of students from age birth through pre-kindergarten.  [Exhibit 23]  
Consistent with this credential, Ms. Torres’ present assignment is in a pre-school setting.  
The personnel requisition for her assignment indicates “Potrero Heights Elem. - Grade PS-
K.”  [Exhibit 24]  Ms. Torres’ credential does not authorize her to provide instruction to 18 
to 22 year-olds, and LACOE’s retention of Mr. Labarba therefore does not invalidate Ms. 
Torres’ layoff. 

 

4

C. 

Joy Aeschbocker 

Ms. Aeschbocker testified at the hearing that there were two employees junior to her,  
Stephanie Pirojnikoff and Robin Simmons, who were being retained and whose assignments 
she is certificated and competent to perform. 

Ms. Aeschbocker holds a multiple subject teaching credential.  She also holds a 

learning handicapped teaching credential issued in 1996.  [Exhibit 25].  Ms. Pirojnikoff is a 
tenured employee who is presently serving as an administrator.  Because she is being 
bumped by another administrator with greater seniority as an administrator, Ms. Pirojnikoff 
is bumping into a vacant special education teaching position teaching students with moderate 
to severe disabilities - a “special day class” as indicated by the coding “SDC” on the 
personnel requisition for the position.  [Exhibit 26]  Denise Anaya, LACOE’s credentials 
analyst, testified without contradiction that LACOE’s special day classes are for emotionally 
disturbed students.  As Ms. Anaya testified, however, and as indicated by the CTC 
Administrator’s Assignment Manual, a learning handicapped credential authorizes 
instruction of students whose primary disability is emotional disturbance only if the holder of 
the credential has “taught full time for at least one year prior to September 1, 1991, in a 
special day class in which the primary disability was (serious) emotional disturbance.” 
[Exhibit 16, p. F-3]  Ms. Aeschbocker does not have such experience, and indeed could not, 
since her learning handicapped credential was not issued until 1996. 

Ms. Simmons presently serves as a “pool teacher,” but as indicated by the seniority 

list and impact report, her present position is being eliminated.  She is being retained, 
however, because she is bumping into a vacancy created by the voluntary separation of 
DeFarge Hanson.  [Exhibit 13, p. 20]  Ms. Hanson’s present assignment is also that of an 
SDC teacher.  [Exhibit 27] 

Ms. Aeschbocker is not credentialed to serve in an SDC position teaching emotionally 

disturbed students.  Her layoff therefore is proper. 

D. 

Jacqueline Levine 

Respondents argue Ms. Levine should have been retained.  Ms. Levine’s only 
contention at the hearing was that she was credentialed to perform the assignment of another 
employee, Phyllis Allen, who was being retained.  Ms. Levine asserted that Ms. Allen is not 
properly credentialed for her present assignment.  Although there was some dispute as to the 
exact nature of Ms. Allen’s present assignment, there was no dispute that Ms. Allen, whose 
seniority date is September 1, 1973, is senior to Ms. Levine, whose seniority date is October 
10, 2007.  Thus, Ms. Allen’s retention is simply irrelevant to the only issue to be decided, 
whether any employee with less seniority than Ms. Levine was retained to render a service 
that Ms. Levine was certificated and competent to render.  There is no such employee, and 
Ms. Levine’s layoff therefore was correct. 

 

 

5

E. 

Diana Hernandez 

Respondents assert that Ms. Hernandez should have been retained.  Although Ms. 

Hernandez testified that she had received various training, and there is no dispute as to her 
dedication as a teacher, she identified no junior employee being retained whose assignment 
she believes she is certificated and competent to perform.  There is thus no basis for the 
invalidation of her layoff notice. 

F. 

James Kern 

Respondents assert that Mr. Kern should have been retained.  Mr. Kern holds a 

special education credential authorizing instruction of students with mild/moderate 
disabilities.  He did not identify any junior employee being retained whose assignment he 
believes he is certificated and competent to perform.  Moreover, he conceded that his 
credential does not authorize service in any of the following assignments: deaf and hard of 
hearing, visually handicapped, adaptive physical education, autism teacher, language speech 
specialist.  He was unsure whether his credential would authorize service in an assignment 
teaching students identified as trainable mentally retarded, but he made no contention that it 
does.  Ms. Anaya, referring to page F-2 of the Assignment Manual, testified without 
contradiction that it does not,.  Thus, Mr. Kern was identified correctly for layoff. 

G. 

Eddie Oliphant 

Respondents assert that Mr. Oliphant should have been retained.  Mr. Oliphant did not 

identify any junior employee being retained whose assignment he believes he is certificated 
and competent to perform.  Rather, made only vague assertions that he believed it was 
possible that a mistake had been made by LACOE in identifying him for layoff.  The impact 
report demonstrates that Mr. Oliphant received a layoff notice not through mistake, but 
because his position was identified for elimination, and there was no employee with less 
seniority whom he was eligible to bump.  [Exhibit 13, p. 18]  No evidence to the contrary 
was presented.  Mr. Oliphant correctly was identified for layoff. 

H. 

Lola Skelton 

Respondents assert that Ms. Skelton should have been retained due to alleged 

untimely service of the Accusation. The evidence demonstrated that Ms. Skelton’s layoff 
notice was timely.  Like the other Respondents identified in the March 12, 2010, Accusation, 
LACOE served Ms. Skelton with a preliminary layoff notice via certified mail, return receipt 
requested, on March 12, 2010.  [Exhibit 5, p. 141]  Ms. Skelton admitted that the notice was 
sent to the correct address, and that she received it in the mail on March 16, 2010.  There is 
no way the notice could have been mailed any later than March 15, 2010, which would have 
been timely, in order for Ms. Skelton to have received it on March 16, 2010.  Education 
Code Section 44949 requires only that the preliminary notice be sent by March 15, 2010.   

Nor can there be any question that Ms. Skelton was properly identified for layoff.  
She identified no specific junior employee who had been retained whose assignment she 

 

6

believes she is certificated and competent to perform.  She asserted, however, that her 
seniority date should have been August, 2005, i.e., earlier than the October 21, 2005 date 
assigned by LACOE, and that there were employees with seniority dates between August, 
2005 and October 21, 2005, who are being retained to render services that she is certificated 
and competent to render.  There were no such employees.  Ms. Skelton admitted that her 
credential does not authorize service in any of the assignments for which junior employees 
with seniority dates in this timeframe are being retained.  Ms. Skelton admitted that her 
credential does not authorize service as a teacher of emotionally disturbed students, as a 
teacher of developmentally handicapped students, as a language speech specialist, as a 
Spanish teacher, as a teacher of the trainably mentally retarded, as a high school physical 
education teacher in a departmentalized setting, as a teacher of visually handicapped 
students, as an adaptive physical education teacher, or as a teacher of students with multiple 
disabilities.  Ms. Skelton identified no employee with less seniority being retained for an 
assignment she is credentialed to fill.  Her layoff was proper. 

I. 

Luis Corrales 

Mr. Corrales presently serves as a juvenile court school (JCS) teacher and has been 
identified for layoff because his position has been eliminated and he is ineligible to bump 
any junior employee.  [Exhibit 13, p. 18]  Mr. Corrales argued, however, that he should have 
been permitted to bump other employees with less seniority because is credentialed to teach 
virtually any subject in any setting.  Mr. Corrales claimed this was so by virtue of his lifetime 
secondary credential.  He identified various employees in single-subject teaching 
assignments junior to him, whose assignments he asserted he is credentialed to fill. 

However, Mr. Corrales’ standard secondary credential is limited in the assignments it 

authorizes at the secondary level in a departmentalized setting.  At the hearing, it was 
established that the partial copy of this credential that Mr. Corrales printed from the CTC 
website and brought with him identified only music as the subject that he was authorized to 
teach in a departmentalized setting.  He claimed, however, that the back of the original 
document established that he was credentialed to teach other subjects.  

Contrary to Mr. Corrales’ testimony, the reverse of the document [Exhibit 28] does 

not identify any subject other than music that Mr. Corrales is credentialed to teach in a 
secondary departmentalized setting.  The document does indicate as a general matter that 
other subjects in which Mr. Corrales has sufficient coursework units may be taught with 
local board authorization.  However, it was not established at the hearing that he had 
sufficient units in any other subject to meet this requirement.  In any event, even if it had 
been established that he had sufficient coursework, he has not been given local authorization 
to teach outside of his music major.   

As Ms. Anaya explained in her testimony, Mr. Corrales is authorized to teach subjects 

other than music as a JCS teacher, but only because this is a self-contained setting to which 
he can be assigned with his consent.  Educ. Code §44956(e).  This authorization, however, is 
inapplicable to single-subject teaching assignments in departmentalized high schools.  Mr. 

 

7

Corrales made various assertions that he has been certified as “highly qualified” in various 
subjects within the meaning of the federal No Child Left Behind Act; however, this is 
irrelevant, as NCLB certification and credentialing are two completely different things.  
While it might have bearing on whether he can meet the requirements of NCLB when 
teaching those subjects in a JCS setting, it has no bearing on whether he is credentialed to 
teach in a departmentalized high school. 

There was no evidence of any employee junior to Mr. Corrales whose assignment Mr. 
Corrales is actually credentialed to perform.  Mr. Corrales was correctly identified for layoff. 

J. 

Robyn Brown 

Ms. Brown did not testify, apparently due to illness, nor was there any documentary 

evidence other than LACOE’s exhibits or testimony adduced regarding her at the hearing.  In 
Respondents’ briefs, Ms. Brown asserts that her seniority date should have been earlier than 
that assigned by LACOE, October 25, 2005.  Ms. Brown’s seniority date is correct.  Ms. 
Brown signed a contract of employment as a first-year probationary employee effective 
October 25, 2005.  [Exhibit 29]  Prior to that, Ms. Brown had worked as a temporary 
employee under a “limited term contract” that expired June 30, 2004, at which time she 
requested to continue working for LACOE as a day-to-day substitute employee.  [Exhibit 30]  
She did work in that capacity prior to her retention as a probationary employee.  [Exhibit 31]  
Her first date of paid probationary service, however, was October 25, 2005.  Her seniority 
date is therefore correct. 

K. 

Bonnie Garcia 

Ms. Garcia contends that her layoff was improper.  This contention is based on 

LACOE’s retention of Mr. Larsonsilva, and the discussion as to him presented above are 
dispositive. Ms. Garcia, whose seniority date is September 1, 2008, is a probationary 
employee, and therefore could not have bumped Mr. Larsonsilva.  Insofar as this contention 
may be based on the retention of any other employee, LACOE reserves the right to respond it 
is reply brief. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

The parties met all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 

 
 
1. 
44949 and 44955. 
 
 
equivalent positions, as set forth by resolution, for the 2010-2011 school year, pursuant to 
sections 44949 and 44955, as set forth in Factual Findings 1-12, and Legal Conclusions 3-7. 
 
 

Cause exists to sustain LACOE’s action to reduce or discontinue 243 full-time 

Section 44955 states, in pertinent part: 

2. 

3. 
 
 
 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

 

8

(b) 

whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 

 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year, or . . . 
when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have become 
necessary by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of 
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate the 
services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated 
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the 
school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section 
while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is 
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and 
competent to render. 
 
4. 

Section 44949 states, in pertinent part: 

(c) 

(a) 

(b) 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is 

No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice 

 
by the governing board that his or her services will not be required for the 
ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section 44955, the governing board 
and the employee shall be given written notice by the superintendent of the 
district or his or her designee, or in the case of a district which has no 
superintendent by the clerk or secretary of the governing board, that it has 
been recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the 
reasons therefor. 
 
 
 
 
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. 
 
 
In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the 
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in accordance with 
Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 
of the Government Code. 
 
 
 
 
who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a 
determination as to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related 
to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  The proposed decision 
shall be prepared for the governing board and shall contain a determination as 
to the sufficiency of the cause and a recommendation as to disposition.  
However, the governing board shall make the final determination as to the 
sufficiency of the cause and disposition.  None of the findings, 
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed decision 

The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(3) 

9

 
 

 

prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding on the governing 
board.  Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or 
governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing 
the charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.  Copies of the proposed 
decision shall be submitted to the governing board and to the employee on or 
before May 7 of the year in which the proceeding is commenced. 

5. 

The services identified in LACOE’s Resolution number 18 are particular kinds 

 
 
of services that it can reduce or discontinue under Section 44955.  LACOE’s decision to 
reduce or discontinue the identified services was not arbitrary or capricious; it was a proper 
exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely 
to the welfare of LACOE’s schools and pupils within the meaning of sections 44949 and 
44955.  LACOE correctly identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds 
of services that it directed to be reduced or discontinued. 
 
 
A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 
 
that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

7. 

6. 

LACOE may serve final notices to all Respondents identified on Exhibit A that their 

ORDER 
 

 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Dated:_______________________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

____________________________ 
RALPH B. DASH 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

10

 

 

1.   
2.   
3.   
4.   
5.   
6.   
7.   
8.   
9.   
10.  
11.  
12.  
13.  
14.  
15.  
16.  
17.  
18.  
19.  
20.  
21.  
22.  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26.  
27.  
28.  
29.  
30.  
31.  
32.  
33.  
34.  
35.  
36.  
37.  
38.  
39.  
40.  

EXHIBIT A 
 

Aeschbocker, Joy 
Anyia, Fidelia 
Arbuckle, RuthAnn 
Arellanes, Geraldine 
Armijo, Javier 
Atkinson, Stephanie 
Avilas, Julie 
Avognon, Florence 
Barrera, Jennifer 
Brown, Robyn 
Brown, William 
Cali, Ronald 
Cho, Kimberly 
Clayton, John 
Colburn, Sarah 
Collier, Karen 
Corrales, Luis 
Cruces, Sylvia 
Doyle, Troy 
Eadens, Caroline 
Earl, Robert 
Ferrell, Margaret 
Fisher, Steven 
Flores, Gerardo 
Garcia, Bonnie 
Garcia, Valeria 
George, Saji 
Givens, Marvis 
Harris, Loretta 
Hastings, Gina 
Hernandez, Alexandra 
Hernandez, Diana 
Hernandez, Karl 
Hill, James 
Hira, Harbhajan 
Hossum, Cheryl 
Jimenez, Hady 
Kang, Eunsik 
Kern, James 
Kirby, Bob 

11

Leveron, Thomas 
Levine, Jacqueline 
Lizardo, DeAnn 
Loell-Hull, Bettina 

41.  
42.  
43.  
44.  
45.   Macias, Laura 
46.   Madrigal, Teresa 
47.   Maldonado, Jeanette 
48.   Mason, Zan 
49.   McCloud, Richard 
50.   McConnell, Michelle 
51.   Mejia, Miriam 
52.   Miller, Anthony 
53.   Mizrahi, Lara 
54.   Murray, Irene 
55.  
56.  
57.  
58.  
59.  
60.  
61.  
62.  
63.  
64.  
65.  
66.  
67.  
68.  
69.  
70.  
71.  
72.  
73.  
74.  
75.  
76.  
77.  
78.  
79.  
80.  
81.  
82.  
83.  

Navaroli, Martin 
Norman, Vernon 
Obiako, Harry 
Okunna, Gloria 
Okwuokei, Jude 
Oliphant, Eddie 
Olivares, David 
Olivas, Raymond 
Ortiz, Mark 
Owens, Tiffany 
Ozor, Ethelbert 
Palomo, Ramiro 
Pellegrini, Anna 
Phelps, Charlie 
Piggott, Darryl 
Pinelo, Celinna 
Portillo, Norma 
Pullens, Reginald 
Purther, Carlo 
Ransome, Astral 
Reed, Jessica 
Rusk, Timothy 
Sandoval, Teresa 
Satterwhite, Angela 
Scepan, Patricia 
Scott, Kimberly 
Shafer, James 
Skelton, Lola 
Spivery, Rudy 

 

12

Stevens, Robin 
Strand, Shawn 
Stump, Gail 
Tomlin, Patricia 
Torres, Araceli 
Torres, Arcelia 
Umukoro, Patricia 
Vinski, Sonia 

84.  
85.  
86.  
87.  
88.  
89.  
90.  
91.  
92.   Walker, Kenneth 
93.   Warner, Judy 
94.   Williams, Anthony 
95.   Winitsky, Marvin 
96.   Wong, Vivian 
97.   Woods, Gayle 

13

 
 
 

 
 

 

