BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD  
TORRANCE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 
 
In the Matter of  the Accusation 
Against:   
 
 
SHIRIN ABYANEH, and Other Certificated 
Permanent and Probationary Employees of 
the Torrance Unified School District,  
 
 
                                    Respondents. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
OAH Case No. 2010031440 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
This matter was heard by Vincent Nafarrete, Administrative Law Judge, on April 26, 
2010, at Torrance.  Complainant Mario Liberati, Senior Director, Human Resources, of the 
Torrance Unified School District was represented by Spencer E. Covert, Attorney at Law.      
 

Respondent Denise Leonard was represented by Michael J. Deniro, Attorney at Law, 

only on the first day of hearing.  All other respondents were represented by Daniel J. 
Kolodziej, Attorney at Law.  The Administrative Law Judge marked the List of Respondents 
as Exhibit I and admitted the exhibit into evidence. 
 
 
Because there was not sufficient time to complete the hearing on April 26, 2010, the 
parties’ request for a continuance of the hearing was granted.  On April 29, 2010, the parties 
appeared for a telephonic trial setting conference before the Office of Administrative Hearings 
and the continued hearing was scheduled for May 20 and 25, 2010.  As a result of the 
continuance, the dates provided in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for issuance of a 
proposed decision and for notifying certificated employees were extended for a period of time 
equal to the continuance.     
 
 
conclusion of the continued hearing, the parties’ request to file written argument was 
granted.   On May 25, 2009, complainant’s counsel filed a Closing Brief, which was marked 
as Exhibit 21.  On May 25, 2010, counsel for respondent Denise Leonard filed a Post 
Hearing Brief and counsel for all other respondents filed a Post Hearing Brief, which were 
marked as Exhibit G and Exhibit H, respectively. 
 
 

The continued hearing commenced and was concluded on May 20, 2010.  At the 

 

Oral, documentary, and stipulated evidence having been received and written 

arguments reviewed, the Administrative Law Judge submitted this matter for decision on 
May 25, 2010, and finds as follows: 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.   

The Administrative Law Judge takes official notice that, on March 25, 2010, 

 
 
the Accusation was made and filed by Mario Liberati in his official capacity as Senior 
Director, Human Resources, Torrance Unified School District, State of California (District).   
 

2.   

Respondents, and each of them, are employed by the District as permanent or 

3. 

4. 

Due to the ongoing state budget crisis and its concomitant effect upon its 

probationary certificated employees.   
 
The District is a unified school district comprised of four high schools, 
 
continuation and adult schools, a community day school, eight middle schools, and 17 
elementary schools.  The District serves and educates approximately 24,500 pupils in 
kindergarten through grade 12 who reside in the Torrance and South Bay areas of Los 
Angeles County.   
 
 
budget, the District has determined that it must reduce expenditures to maintain a balanced 
budget and its reserve.  On March 1, 2010, the Deputy Superintendent of Administrative 
Services gave a presentation of the District’s current fiscal status and made budget 
recommendations to the Governing Board of the District.  The Deputy Superintendent 
prepared a Second Interim Report for the 2009-2010 fiscal year for which he took into 
consideration the January 2010 Governor’s proposed budget for the state which 
recommended reductions in central administration costs, personnel, cost of living 
allowances, and average daily allowances.  In addition, the Deputy Superintendent was 
required to take into account an increase in class size in kindergarten through third grade in 
the elementary schools, which had been previously approved by the Governing Board in 
November 2009 and required a reduction of 54 full-time equivalent positions, as well as 
proposed larger class sizes in grades six through 12.  Based on his projections and financial 
analysis, the Deputy Superintendent recommended budget cuts of $7 million for the 2010-
2011 school year and $18.6 million for the two school years from 2010 through 2012.   The 
Deputy Superintendent discussed the budget cuts with the Deputy Director of Human 
Resources, who, in turn, identified particular kinds of services that were recommended for 
reduction or discontinuance.   On March 1, 2010, the Governing Board adopted the Second 
Interim Report and resolved to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services for the 
ensuing school year.   
 
 
(A) On March 1, 2010, in Resolution No. 1-09/10, pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955 and based upon the recommendation of the Deputy Superintendent 
and Deputy Director of Human Resources, the Governing Board determined that it was in the 
best interests of the District and its students to reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds 

5. 

 

2

 

 
6. 

Beginning on or about March 10, 2010, and pursuant to Resolution No. 1-

of services at the close of the 2009-2010 school year and to layoff the concomitant number of 
probationary and permanent certificated employees.  The Governing Board determined that 
the layoff of probationary and permanent certificated employees would be in addition to the 
layoff of all temporary and categorically-funded certificated employees of the District and 
would not be decreased by the resignations, non-reelections, and retirements occurring on or 
before the date of the resolution.      
 
(B) The Governing Board directed the Superintendent and/or his designee to 
 
serve notices of layoff on probationary or permanent certificated employees in accordance 
with and in the manner prescribed by Education Code sections 44955 and 44949 in order to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services specified in the resolution. 
 
 
09/10 and the provisions of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the Senior Director 
of Human Resources as the designee of the Superintendent gave written notices by personal 
service to respondents that their services will not be required for the ensuing 2010-2011 
school year because the Governing Board had determined to reduce or discontinue certain 
particular kinds of services at the end of the current school year and had resolved that it was 
necessary to layoff certificated employees under Education Code section 44955.  
Respondents timely requested a hearing to determine if there is cause for not re-employing 
them for the ensuing school year.   There were approximately 26 certificated employees 
served with preliminary notices who did not file requests for hearing.   
 
 
sufficient in providing notice to respondents under Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955.  Respondents were not prejudiced by errors in the notices, if any, with respect to the 
description of the spelling of their names, work site or school locations, listing of particular 
kinds of services to be reduced or discontinued, or any other matters.   No claims or 
complaints were raised in the hearing that the preliminary notices or contents thereof were 
deficient in any respect. 
 
 
certified mail with an Accusation, Statement to Respondent, Resolution No. 1-09/10, copies 
of Government Code sections 11507.5-11507.7, a blank Notice of Defense form, Request for 
Discovery, and Notice of Hearing.  All respondents served with the Accusation filed timely 
notices of defense, requesting a hearing to determine if there is cause not to employ them for 
the ensuing school year and objecting to the Accusation.  Earlier, on March 23, 2010, 
respondents’ counsel filed a Joint Notice of Defense for respondents.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements have been met by the parties.    
 
 
adopted a tie-breaker resolution, which set forth criteria to be used in determining the order 
of termination or layoff of certificated employees who have the same first date of paid 
service with the District.  Under the tie-breaking criteria, the Governing Board gave the 
highest tie-breaking priority to possession of Bilingual Cross-cultural Language and 

On or about March 25, 2010, the District properly served respondents by 

On April 12, 2010, in Resolution No. 2-09/10, the Governing Board of 

The District’s preliminary notice of layoff dated March 10, 2010, was 

7.  

9. 

8. 

 

3

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

      Full-Time 
Equivalent Positions   
          54.0 

10.  On March 1, 2010, pursuant to Resolution No. 1-09/10 and its findings, the 

 
 
 
Elementary Schools (K-5) 
Multiple Subject Classroom Teachers (K-5) 

Academic Development (BCLAD) and Cross-cultural Language and Academic Development 
(CLAD) certificates by March 15, 2010.  The Governing Board found that the tie-breaking 
criteria were based solely on the needs of the District and its students.1  
 
 
Governing Board resolved and took action to reduce or discontinue certain services or 
programs offered by the District for the 2010-2011 school year in the following FTE 
positions:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 

Secondary Schools 
8.0 
Multiple Subject Classroom Teachers (6th Grade)  
1.0 
 
 
Art Teacher 
1.0 
 
 
Business Teacher 
1.0 
 
 
Chinese Teacher 
8.0 
 
English Teacher 
 
1.0 
 
English Language Development Teacher 
1.0 
 
French Teacher 
 
 
 
3.0 
 
 
Home Economics Teachers   
4.0 
 
Industrial and Technology Teachers 
2.0 
 
 
 
Japanese Teachers 
1.0 
 
 
 
Korean Teacher 
8.0 
 
 
Math Teachers 
 
6.0 
 
 
Physical Education Teachers 
3.0 
 
 
Science Teachers (Biological) 
3.0 
 
 
Science Teachers (Chemistry) 
 
 
Science Teachers (Geosciences) 
3.0 
          10.0 
 
Social Studies Teachers 
2.0 
 
 
Spanish Teachers 
4.0 
 
 
High School Counselors 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

1 Under Resolution No. 2-09/10, the Governing Board resolved that its eighth and 

final criteria for breaking ties between certificated employees having the same seniority date 
is the last four digits of the certificated employees’ Social Security number.  During the 
hearing, the District averred that the assignment of the last four digits of a person’s Social 
Security number is random.  Nevertheless, the District should take proper precautions to 
protect the privacy and/or confidentiality of certificated employees’ Social Security numbers 
inasmuch as financial institutions frequently use the last four digits to identify clients and 
their accounts.  The Administrative Law Judge has redacted or obliterated these numbers in 
the Tie-Breaker Worksheet (Exh. 10).  Respondents made no claims that the District’s 
application of this tie-breaker criteria or use of Social Security numbers to rank respondents 
was erroneous or arbitrary and capricious in any respect.    

 

4

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

Adult Education 
Child Care Teacher 

 

 

 

Administration
Director, Child Welfare and Attendance 
Special Education Coordinator 
Elementary School Assistant Principal 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

1.0 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

 

12 

11 

The services set forth in Finding 10 above are particular kinds of services 

(A) The District prepared a Seniority List (Exh. 5) which contains the names 

The reduction or discontinuance of the services set forth hereinabove constitute a total of 
128.0 full-time equivalent positions.   
 
 
performed by certificated employees of the District which may be reduced or discontinued 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The determination of the Governing 
Board to reduce or discontinue these services is within its sound discretion and not arbitrary 
or capricious.   The District demonstrated that the reduction or discontinuance of these 
particular kinds of services is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils and is 
necessary in order for the District to maintain a balanced budget and a sufficient reserve as 
well as to provide essential services.   
 
 
of certificated employees and their seniority dates or first dates of paid service, current 
assignments or work locations, job titles, and FTE positions, employment status, and 
credentials and authorizations.  Earlier, on or about December 1, 2009, the District sent 
letters to certificated employees, stating their seniority dates, employment status, credentials, 
and certificates as shown in District records.  Certificated employees were asked to submit 
any corrections.  The District received 10 responses and, after reviewing personnel files, 
made some corrections and updates to the records.   The District also prepared a List of 
Credentials for Probationary and Permanent Certificated Employees (Exh. 6), which includes 
authorizations as well as expiration dates of credentials and authorizations.   
 
 
rendered paid service in a probationary position on the same dates beginning with the date of 
August 31, 2005, and ranked them in order of termination on a Certificated Layoff Tie-
Breaker Worksheet (Exh. 10).   The District also developed certificated layoff worksheets of 
respondents in inverse order of seniority (Exh. 11) and by the particular kinds of service to 
which they are currently assigned and which are subject to reduction or discontinuance in 
this layoff proceeding (Exh. 13).   The District determined whether the respondents hold 
credentials in other areas of service or teaching and are entitled to bump other certificated 
employees and whether certain certificated employees should be skipped and retained.   
 
Further, the District has obviated the need to reduce or discontinue all of the 
 
particular kinds of services described in Finding 10 above and to terminate the employment 
of all respondents given preliminary notice and accusations by taking into account personnel 

(B) The District applied the tiebreaking criteria to respondents who first 

13. 

 

5

15. 

(A) On the second day of the hearing, the District rescinded the preliminary 

14.  On the first day of the hearing, the District rescinded the preliminary notice 

changes and attrition due to reassignments, retirements, and/or resignations of individual 
certificated employees within the District.   The District has reasonably determined and 
accounted for what will be positively assured attrition among its certificated staff for the 
ensuing 2010-2011 school year and reduced by corresponding number the number of 
certificated employees whose employment must be terminated be due to the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.    
 
 
and dismissed the Accusation against respondent Richard Mulligan, a math teacher at South 
High School.  Mulligan has a seniority date of September 5, 2006, and possesses standard 
secondary credentials in mathematics and life physical science or physics as well as a CLAD 
certificate.  
 
 
notices and dismissed the Accusation against the following respondents, who are elementary 
school teachers holding clear multiple subject credentials and CLAD certificates:  Shawna 
Peacock, Anissa Shbaro, Andrea King, Holly Evans, Claudine Valot, Amber Martin, Jeffrey 
Jamile, Christine Christian, Michelle Senechal, Lanae Maeda, Lisa Kim, Timothy Magnus, 
Maria Ruth, Karen Kasper, Rubina Ahmed, Keri Kendall, Debra Owens, Candy Mintz-
Moreno, Lori Perez, Katherine Johnson, Cheryl Thom, Robert Flanders, Carolyn Keeney, 
Kimberly Gauna, Allen Chin, Jamie Gendrano, April Pages, Denise Palmieri, Steve 
Jennewein, Rachel Kimmel, Judy Kawazoe, and Lucia Doty.   
 
 
(B) The District also rescinded the preliminary notices and dismissed the 
Accusation issued to the following respondents:  secondary art teachers Jessica Cheung, 
Joyce Byean, Aja Elkind, and Linsey Herrera; English teachers Salina Eick and Kevin Van 
Waardenbug; French teacher Marie Forel; home economics teachers Holly Hall and Lisabeth 
Diliberto; industrial and technology teachers Michael Ellena, Christy Evans, and Abraham 
Rivera; Japanese teachers Keita Kadono and Sachie Horita; and Korean teacher Grace Pak.   
 
 
preliminary notices and dismissed the Accusation issued to respondents Barbara Zondiros, 
Harold Rasmussen, Danny Jimenez, and Douglas Raizk, who are secondary math teachers 
and hold single subject credentials in mathematics.   
 
(D) The District likewise rescinded the preliminary notices and dismissed the 
 
Accusation issued to the following respondents:  physical education teachers Scott Peppard, 
Janet Chase, and Michael Caporaso; biological science teacher Bridget Ely; chemistry 
teacher James Estabrook; social studies teachers Christine Kruse, Brooke St. Hilaire, and 
Nathan Jones; and high school counselors Courtney Matz and Jennifer Radie. 
 
 
undetermined number of additional resignations from certificated employees due to a 
retirement incentive program.  The District accounted for this additional assured attrition, in 
part, by dismissing the Accusation issued to the respondents set forth in Finding 15 (A) – 

(A) Between the first and second days of the hearing, the District received an 

(C) On the second day of the hearing, the District also rescinded the 

16. 

 

 

 

 

6

(D).   Moreover, four respondents, Jennifer Williams, Abraham Rivera, Scott Peppard, and 
Nathan Jones, applied for and/or received emergency CLAD permits after March 15, 2010.  
On the second day of the hearing, the District dismissed the Accusation against Rivera, 
Peppard, and Jones; respondent Jennifer Williams remains subject to layoff based on her 
seniority date.  As such, all of the respondents who had their preliminary notices and the 
Accusation dismissed during the hearing possess CLAD certificates or emergency CLAD 
permits  
 
 
CLAD certificates or emergency CLAD permits and remain subject to layoff pursuant to the 
reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.   
 
 

(B) Two respondents, Ronald Ambro and Chad Williams, do not possess 

 

Cross-cultural Language and Academic 
Development--CLAD 

17. 

(A) California law requires that teachers must have certifications or 

 
 
authorizations of their knowledge, skills, and abilities to provide instruction to English 
Language Learner (ELL) pupils.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44001, 44830, subd. (a), 44831, 44253, and 
44253.1.)  Fourteen percent of the District’s pupils are English Language Learners or speak a 
first language other than English and have been designated as Limited English Proficient.  
Since an undetermined date, the District has had a Master Plan for Educational Services for 
English Language Learners (Master Plan).  The Master Plan assists the District’s staff, 
administrators, teachers, and parents to understand the program and services for ELL 
students in kindergarten through grade 12.   The Master Plan follows regulations of the 
Department of Education and state and federal law.  The goal of the Master Plan is to help 
develop ELL students to develop proficiency in English and in the District’s core curriculum 
as rapidly and effectively as possible in an established English language classroom or in an 
alternative (e.g. dual language) program with a curriculum designed for them.   All ELL 
students are to be placed in age-appropriate English Language classrooms where they can 
receive a program of English Language Development (ELD) and Specially Designed 
Academic Instruction in English (SDAIE).     
 
 
(B) Under the Master Plan, all teachers of the District, who are assigned to 
provide ELD or access to core curriculum instruction for ELL students, must have, or be 
actively in training to receive, an English learner authorization.  In other words, teachers who 
provide ELD or SDAIE instruction for ELL pupils must be authorized to do so by the 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing or be in training to receive state certifications for or as 
a Language Development Specialist, California Teacher of English Learners (CTEL), 
BCLAD, or CLAD.  Teachers who are not certified to provide ELD or SDAIE instruction to 
ELL students are required to complete a Document of Commitment showing a timeline 
towards receiving certification.    
 
 
Ambro, Nathan Jones, Scott Peppard, Abraham Rivera, Stephen Schmitz, Chad Williams, 

By a letter dated November 18, 2008, the District advised respondents Ronald 

18. 

 
 

 

7

 

19. 

(A) In implementing Resolution No. 1-09/10 to reduce or discontinue 

(B) As of March 15, 2010, multiple subject elementary classroom teacher 

and Jennifer Williams that state law required teachers with identified ELL students in their 
classrooms and providing services to ELL students to have an appropriate English Learner 
authorization.  At that time, these seven respondents had ELL students in their classrooms 
but did not possess certifications to teach them.  The District advised these respondents that 
they were each required to obtain at a minimum an emergency CLAD permit from the 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing for the 2008-2009 school year.  Six semester units of 
appropriate coursework in a CTEL program or passage of two sections of the examination 
for the CLAD certificate were required for renewal of the emergency CLAD permit.      
 
 
particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year, the District determined to use 
possession of a CLAD certificate as a skipping criterion.  The District placed certificated 
employees who did not possess a CLAD certificate at the top of the layoff list for their 
service area regardless of their seniority dates.    
 
 
Jennifer Williams; industrial and technology teachers Ronald Ambro and Abraham Rivera; 
physical education teacher Scott Peppard; social studies teacher Nathan Jones; and biological 
science teacher Chad Williams did not possess a CLAD certificate.  Accordingly, the District 
placed Jennifer Williams, Ambro, Rivera, Peppard, Jones, and Chad Williams at the top of 
the layoff list for their respective service areas, noting that each of them did not possess a 
CLAD certificate.   Certificated employee and physical education teacher Stephen Schmitz 
also did not possess a CLAD certificate either but he resigned from his employment with the 
District.   
 
 
and Jones each obtained an emergency CLAD permit.  Thereupon, the District removed the 
designation on the Certificated Layoff Worksheet that each of them had “NO CLAD” and 
moved them to their places on the seniority list for their service area based on their actual 
first dates of paid service.   When the District accounted for additional positively assured 
attrition, the District then rescinded the preliminary notices and dismissed the Accusation 
against respondents Rivera, Peppard, and Jones due to the seniority of their employment with 
the District.  Jennifer Williams remains subject to layoff based on her seniority date.   
 
 
emergency CLAD permits since March 15, 2010, respondents Ambro and Chad Williams 
remain subject to layoff and are at the top of the seniority list in their respective service areas 
of industrial and technology and biological science.   
 
 
(A) Respondent Chad Williams is a biological science teacher at West High 
School.  He holds a clear single subject credential in biological science and has a seniority 
date of September 1, 1999.  Because he does not have a CLAD certificate or emergency 
CLAD permit, Chad Williams is subject to layoff.  He has more seniority with the District 
than two other biological science teachers who remain subject to layoff, respondents Silvia 
Cuevas and Marie Nonato, who share the seniority date of September 4, 2007.  Chad 

(C) After March 15, 2010, respondents Jennifer Williams, Rivera, Peppard, 

(D) Because they do not possess CLAD certificates and did not obtain 

20. 

 

 

 

8

 

 

21. 

(B) In November 2008, the District notified Chad Williams that he had 

(B) In November 2008, Ambro received the District’s notification that he was 

(A) Respondent Ronald Ambro is an industrial and technology teacher at Hull 

Williams is senior to respondent and fellow biological science teacher Bridget Ely whose 
preliminary notice and Accusation were withdrawn by the District.   
 
 
identified ELL students in his classroom and was required to apply for an emergency CLAD 
certificate.  Subsequently, Williams applied for and received an emergency CLAD permit.  
He did not make progress towards obtaining the certificate and was not able to renew the 
emergency permit.  He enrolled in classes at the University of Phoenix to complete 
coursework for the CLAD certificate but stopped taking the classes in March 2010.  As of 
March 15, 2010, Chad Williams did not have a CLAD certificate or an emergency CLAD 
permit.  When the District asked him in April 2010 for his plans or timeline to obtain CLAD 
authorization, he did not indicate having any plans or a timeline to obtain a CLAD certificate 
or to be considered a teacher in training for such certificate.  
 
 
Middle School.  He possesses a life single subject credential in industrial arts and has a 
seniority date of September 20, 1999.  He is the most senior of industrial and technology 
teachers but does not have a CLAD certificate or emergency CLAD permit.   
 
 
required to apply for an emergency CLAD permit to be able to teach ELL students in his 
classroom.  On November 19, 2008, Ambro acknowledged receipt of the requirements for 
issuance and renewal of an emergency CLAD permit.   In lieu of taking six semester units of 
coursework, Ambro was made aware that he had to pass two of the three tests of the CTEL 
examination or complete three semester units of coursework for a CLAD certificate in lieu of 
each test not taken.   Ambro advised the District of his intent to complete the CLAD 
requirements by completing CLAD coursework offered by a professional preparation 
institution accredited by the Commission for Teacher Credentialing or by passing the CTEL 
examination.  
 
 
permit after passing one of the three tests of the CTEL examination.  Because he did not 
make progress towards obtaining a CLAD certificate by the end of that school year, Ambro 
did not qualify for renewal of his emergency CLAD permit and the emergency permit was 
not renewed.  He did not take the CTEL examination for a CLAD certificate during the 
2009-2010 school year.  Instead, Ambro enrolled in an internet course of study with the 
Grand Canyon University of Arizona for a master of arts degree in education.  He assumed 
that the coursework would meet the coursework requirements for a CLAD certificate 
although he did not consult with the District or the Commission on Teacher Credentialing.  
On or about March 5, 2010, Ambro learned that his master’s coursework did not meet the 
requirements for issuance of a CLAD certificate.   
 
(D) As of March 15, 2010, Ambro did not possess a CLAD certificate or an 
 
emergency CLAD permit.  In April 2010, the District notified Ambro that its records show 
he does not have a CLAD certificate and asked him for a timeline of his plans to obtain such 

(C) During the 2008-2009 school year, Ambro obtained an emergency CLAD 

 

 

 

9

 

22. 

authorization.  The District indicated that, to be considered a teacher in training for a CLAD 
certificate, he must complete some portion of the process towards obtaining a CLAD 
certificate.  On April 16, 2010, Ambro replied that he planned to take the CTEL examination 
scheduled for June 12, 2010.  He has, in fact, registered to take that scheduled CTEL 
examination.  He hopes to complete requirements for a CLAD certificate by June 2011.   As 
such, respondent Ambro has not qualified and would not qualify for a CLAD certificate or 
emergency permit for the upcoming 2010-2011 school year.  Ambro is the only industrial 
arts teacher at his middle school site.  There are ELL students in his classroom this year.  
ELL students are expected to be enrolled in his classroom in the next school year.   
 
(A) Respondent Scott Larson is a woodshop teacher at North High School.  He 
 
possesses a single subject credential in industrial arts and technology and a CLAD certificate.  
His seniority date is September 9, 2002.  Based on his seniority date and CLAD certificate, 
Larson is the most senior of the three industrial and technology teachers who possess a 
CLAD certificate and remains subject to layoff due to the reduction of industrial and 
technology teachers.   
 
(B) When he was hired eight years ago, Larson was told by District personnel 
 
that he needed to obtain a CLAD certificate to keep his teaching job.  He then spent time and 
money to fulfill the requirements for the certificate.  Larson asserts that he and other teachers 
followed the District’s directions by obtaining CLAD certificates and that it is not fair that 
the District is allowing a few teachers to be skipped after they received emergency CLAD 
permits after March 15, 2010. 
 
(A) Respondent Scott Peppard is a physical education teacher and water polo 
 
and swimming coach at Torrance High School.  He holds a clear single subject credential in 
physical education, a supplemental authorization in social science, and an emergency CLAD 
permit.  His seniority date is September 7, 2001.  Due to the additional retirements of 
certificated employees and Peppard having obtained an emergency CLAD permit, the 
preliminary notice and Accusation against Peppard were withdrawn and he will be retained 
to teach for the next school year.   
 
 
ELL students in his classroom and was required to apply for an emergency CLAD certificate.  
During the 2008-2009 school year, Peppard was advised by his school site principal that he 
needed a CLAD certificate to continue teaching in the District.  On March 15, 2010, Peppard 
first applied for an emergency CLAD permit.  He is now enrolled in related coursework at 
UCLA and plans to complete the requirements for issuance of a CLAD certificate by October 
2010.   
 
 
Middle School.  He possesses a clear single subject credential in physical education and a 
CLAD certificate.  His seniority date is September 25, 2007, and he is subject to layoff due 
to the reduction of secondary physical education teachers.  When he was first hired by the 
District, Teaney was advised by his school site principal that he needed to obtain a CLAD 

(B) In November 2008, the District notified Peppard that he had identified 

Respondent Matthew Teaney is a physical education teacher at Madrona 

24. 

23. 

 

 

10

 

25. 

(A) Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), a school district 

(B) For the past two years, the District has advised its certificated employees 

certificate in order to remain employed by the District   He then completed the requirements 
for the certificate to try to ensure his job security.   As the most junior of physical education 
teachers, respondent Teaney may be laid off from his employment with the District due to 
the reduction of physical education teachers.   
 
 
may deviate from terminating certificated employees in order of seniority when it 
demonstrates having a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study or to 
provide services and that certificated employees have special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course of study or to provide those services which other certificated 
employees with more seniority do not possess.  Here, the District showed that 14 percent of 
its students are English Language Learners.  State law requires that teachers possess the 
proper credentials and authorizations to provide instruction to ELL pupils and the District 
has promulgated a Master Plan to comply with state laws regarding the teaching of ELL 
pupils.   
 
 
that a CLAD certificate or emergency CLAD permit was required not only to teach ELL 
pupils but also as a condition of continued employment.  The preponderance of the evidence 
suggested that most, if not all, classrooms include ELL pupils and showed that almost all of 
the certificated employees have obtained CLAD certificates.  As such, the facts of this matter 
are distinguishable from those in Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal. App. 3d 
567, where the Court of Appeal found that the Delano Joint Union High School District erred 
in skipping junior teachers having bilingual abilities.   
 
 
particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year, the District has demonstrated that 
it has a program need for teachers who possess the special training and/or experience to teach 
ELL pupils as evidenced by their having CLAD certificates.  Possession of a CLAD 
certificate has been required of certificated employees for the past two years.  The District 
initially determined to skip all certificated employees who hold a CLAD certificate and to 
place those certificated employees who do not possess a CLAD certificate at the top of the 
layoff list in their service areas regardless of their seniority.  Since March 15, 2010, the 
District has determined to also skip those respondents who have applied for emergency 
CLAD permits.  Under the circumstances of this matter, the possession of CLAD certificates 
or emergency permits as a basis to skip certificated employees and respondents from the 
initial determination of layoff or order of layoff constituted proper exercises of the District’s 
discretion under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d).   Both respondents Ambro 
and Chad Williams may be given notice that their services will not be needed for the 
upcoming school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.   
 
 
// 
// 
// 

Based on Findings 17 – 25 above, with respect to the current reduction of 

26. 

 

11

Claims of Other Respondents 

 

 

28. 

27. 

(C) The District also changed the seniority date of respondent Aja Roberts 

(B) After their seniority dates were modified, respondents Dikilato and Loew 

(A) Pursuant to a stipulation, and for purposes of this layoff proceeding for the 

 
 
2010-2011 school year only, the District determined to change or modify the first dates of 
paid service or seniority dates of certain respondents.  The seniority date of respondent Jean 
Henshall was changed to December 5, 2003.  The seniority dates of respondents Andrea 
Dikilato and Elizabeth Loew were both changed to October 13, 2003.  The seniority date of 
respondent Kathy Black was changed to March 19, 2004.  The seniority date of Kristin 
Kihara was changed to November 24, 2003.   
 
 
were found to share the same seniority date of October 13, 2003.  After applying the tie-
breaking criteria, the District determined that Loew should have a higher ranking and higher 
seniority than Dikilato.   
 
 
from December 7, 2004, to April 7, 2004.   Roberts still remains subject to layoff due to the 
reduction of multiple subject elementary classroom teachers and the change in her seniority 
date only affects her standing with respect to employment recall rights.    
 
 
(A) Respondent Jean Henshall is an elementary teacher at Towers Elementary 
School.  She holds a clear multiple subject credential in general subjects and a supplementary 
authorization in English (Not Highly Qualified).  With her modified seniority date of 
December 5, 2003, Henshall remains subject to layoff pursuant to the reduction of multiple 
subject credentialed elementary classroom teachers.    
 
 
that demonstrates that she should be regarded as a highly qualified teacher under the No 
Child Left Behind Act.  As a highly qualified teacher, she would be credentialed and 
competent to teach English and language arts to pupils in ninth grade and below and eligible 
to bump Catherine Cheney, an English teacher at Jefferson Middle School.  Cheney has a 
seniority date of September 5, 2006, and possesses a clear single subject credential in 
English.  The preliminary notice and Accusation issued to Cheney is subject to possible 
dismissal which would result in her retention.   
 
 
office of education by March 15, 2010, however, respondent Henshall cannot be considered 
credentialed as a highly qualified English teacher and the District may rely upon her failure 
to timely file her transcript to terminate her employment in her credentialed service area as 
elementary classroom teacher.  (Ed. Code, § 44949; Campbell v. Abbott (1978) 76 
Cal.App.3d 796, 814-815.)  As such, respondent Henshall is not entitled to bump respondent 
Cheney from her middle school English position and may be laid off pursuant to the 
reduction of multiple subject credentialed elementary teachers.   
 

(B) On April 28, 2010, Henshall submitted her college transcript to the District 

(C) Because she did not file her transcript with the District and/or county 

 

 

 

12

 

 

29. 

(B) Certificated employee Marissa L. Whitmore is a life science teacher at 

(A) Respondent Andrew Kissner is a geoscience teacher at Richardson Middle 
 
School.  He possesses a clear single subject credential in geoscience and has a seniority date 
of September 6, 2005.   He is the most senior of the three geoscience teachers subject to 
layoff due to the reduction of geoscience teachers by 3.0 FTE.  With his single subject 
geoscience credential, Kissner is certificated and competent to teach life science but only in 
grades seven and eight and not in high school or grades nine through twelve. 
 
 
Madrona Middle School.  She has a single subject credential in biology and a supplemental 
multiple subject authorization.  Her seniority date is also September 6, 2005.  With her single 
subject biology credential, Whitmore is certificated and competent to teach life science in 
grades seven through twelve, or in middle school as well as high school.  Whitmore is not 
subject to layoff inasmuch as her service area of life science is not being reduced by the 
resolution to reduce particular kinds of services.  She was not served with a preliminary 
notice.     
 
 
(C) Respondents’ counsel contends that, because respondent Kissner with his 
geoscience credential can teach life science at the middle school level and both Kissner and 
Whitmore share the same seniority date, the District should first apply tie-breaker criteria and 
determine if Kissner has a higher ranking or priority than Whitmore.  If he does have a 
higher ranking, then counsel argues that Kissner should be found eligible to bump into 
Whitmore’s position.  Because Whitmore was not given a preliminary notice and is being 
retained as a certificated employee, counsel argues that Kissner should likewise be retained 
under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d).  The argument of respondents’ counsel 
is not persuasive, for under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), the Governing 
Board has discretion to determine the order of termination solely on the basis of the needs of 
the District and its students.  Here, unlike respondent Kissner, Whitmore is not subject to 
layoff inasmuch as the Governing Board has determined not to reduce middle school life 
science teachers and, because neither she nor her service area is to be reduced, the District 
need not apply tie-breaker criteria to Whitmore.  Since he has the same seniority date of 
September 6, 2005, and is not senior to Whitmore, respondent Kissner is not entitled to bump 
into Whitmore’s life science position at the middle school under Education Code section 
44955, subdivision (b), and may be laid off pursuant to the reduction of geoscience teachers.    
 
 
(A) Respondent Patricia Lois Carvalho is a child care teacher at Hamilton 
Adult Center, which is part of the District’s Adult Education program.  She holds a clear 
physically handicap credential in special education and a clear multiple subject credential.  
She does not possess a CLAD certificate.   Her seniority date is April 15, 2002.  Carvalho 
received a preliminary notice and the Accusation due to the Governing Board’s 
determination to reduce a 1.0 FTE child care teacher under the Adult Education program.  
 
 
handicap credential is limited and she does not have a CLAD certificate.  She has not been 
able to transfer to another position within the District, such as a teaching position in special 
education or adult education.   However, Carvalho claims that she can teach English as a 

(B) In this proceeding, Carvalho admits that the scope of her physically 

30. 

 

 

13

 

(C) Respondent Carvalho failed to demonstrate that the facts of her 

Second Language (ESL) in the Adult Education program due to her 30 years of teaching 
experience and academic coursework.   Her claims are not persuasive.  At the University of 
Kansas and California State University Los Angeles, she completed courses in education, the 
teaching of reading, and language arts, which are prerequisites for applying for a credential 
to teach ESL in an adult education program.  As of March 15, 2010, Carvalho did not 
possess, and has not applied for, a credential authorizing her to teach ESL or adult education.  
She has no experience teaching adult education or ESL.  In her current position, she provides 
child care and supervision to children, ages two and one-half to five years, while their 
parents attend adult education classes.   As such, respondent Carvalho is not certificated and 
competent to teach ESL or adult education and is not entitled to bump a fellow certificated 
employee in adult or general education.  The District may rely upon respondent Carvalho’s 
lack of an appropriate credential in ESL or adult education as of March 15, 2010, and lay her 
off pursuant to the 1.0 FTE reduction of an adult education child care teacher.   
(Ed. Code, § 44949; Campbell v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 814-815.)  
 
 
employment and credentialing situation warrant her retention under the doctrine of equitable 
estoppel.  (See City of Long Beach v. Mansell (1970) 3 Cal. 3d 462, 489.)  Carvalho did not 
show that she provided information to the District indicating that she was eligible for an ESL 
or adult education credential or that the District engaged in any conduct to discourage or 
prevent her from applying for a credential by March 15, 2010.  In fact, the transcripts and 
testimony that Carvalho presented at the hearing demonstrated that she was not eligible for 
an ESL or adult education credential.   
 
(A) Respondent Denise Leonard is a resource teacher for student achievement 
 
in the District’s Title I program.  Her seniority date is March 3, 2008.  She possesses a clear 
multiple subject credential and administrative and CLAD certificates.  Leonard is working in 
a federally-funded program for a two-year, limited term for the 2009-2010 and 2010-2011 
school years.  She is one of four student achievement resource teachers for the District and 
not working as a classroom or single subject teacher.   
 
 
provides guidance and coaching to teachers and staff at the District’s schools which have 
greater than 25 percent of students at the federal poverty level.  In general, a student 
achievement resource teacher coordinates efforts of teachers and staff to improve both 
teaching and learning.  The resource teacher designs, organizes, and presents professional 
development and in-service training to teachers and staff so that they can facilitate student 
achievement and learning.  The resource teacher models lessons, assists teachers and 
administrators in making decisions by use of data, assists in implementing and evaluating 
projects and programs, and helps to develop new programs.  The resource teacher in student 
achievement helps disseminate information and demonstrate innovative practices.   
 
 
be a resource teacher for student achievement.   After being selected, Leonard and three other 
teachers underwent extensive training.  In the summer of 2009, these four student 

(B) As a student achievement resource teacher in the Title I program, Leonard 

(C) On or about July 17, 2009, respondent Leonard applied for promotion to 

31. 

 

 

 

14

 

(D) Based on Findings 31(A) – (C) above, the evidence established that 

achievement resource teachers received two days of training on assessments, intake, and 
observation protocols.   During the 2009-2010 school year, Leonard and her three colleagues 
have participated in approximately 40 days of training, which include sessions on daily 
curriculum planning, facilitating workshops, and coaching and collaborating with teachers 
and principals.  In addition, the resource teachers have participated and gained experience in 
coaching teachers to be more effective.  Without the extensive training and experience, a 
certificated employee with similar credentials would not be able to perform the duties of a 
student achievement resource teacher.   
 
 
respondent Leonard is employed by the District as a resource teacher for student 
achievement for the Title I program and not as a multiple subject elementary classroom 
teacher.  The Governing Board determined to reduce multiple subject classroom teachers in 
kindergarten through grade 6 but not student achievement resource teachers.   The evidence 
further demonstrated that the District has a specific need for student achievement resource 
teachers for its Title I schools and respondent Leonard has undergone extensive training and 
possesses special training and experience to perform the duties of a student achievement 
resource teacher which other certificated employees and/or respondents with more seniority 
do not possess.  As such, respondent Leonard is entitled to be skipped from the District’s 
layoff process pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), and should be 
retained as a student achievement resource teacher for the ensuing school year.   
 
 
 

*  *  *  *  *  *  * 

Pursuant to the foregoing findings of fact, the Administrative Law Judge makes the 

 
 
 
following determination of issues: 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.   

Jurisdiction exists for the subject proceedings pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, based on Findings 1 – 31 above.  All notices, accusations, and 
other related papers and reports required by these Education Code sections have been 
provided in timely manner and, as such, the parties have complied with the statutory 
requirements.   
 
 
Cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to reduce 
by 128.0 full-time equivalent positions the concomitant number of certificated employees of 
the District due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services, as set forth 
in Findings 1 – 31 above.   With respect to those respondents whose employment have been 
found to be terminable by the District and any other certificated employees who received 
notices but did not request a hearing, if any, the causes set forth in the Accusations relate 

2.   

 

 

15

3. 

Cause does not exist pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to 

solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils within the meaning of Education 
Code section 44949.   
 
 
terminate the employment of the following respondents and/or certificated employees:  
Richard Mulligan, Shawna Peacock, Anissa Shbaro, Andrea King, Holly Evans, Claudine 
Valot, Amber Martin, Jeffrey Jamile, Christine Christian, Michelle Senechal, Lanae Maeda, 
Lisa Kim, Timothy Magnus, Maria Ruth, Karen Kasper, Rubina Ahmed, Keri Kendall, 
Debra Owens, Candy Mintz-Moreno, Lori Perez, Katherine Johnson, Cheryl Thom, Robert 
Flanders, Carolyn Keeney, Kimberly Gauna, Allen Chin, Jamie Gendrano, April Pages, 
Denise Palmieri, Steve Jennewein, Rachel Kimmel, Judy Kawazoe, Lucia Doty, Jessica 
Cheung, Joyce Byean, Aja Elkind, Linsey Herrera, Salina Eick, Kevin Van Waardenbug, 
Marie Forel, Holly Hall, Lisabeth Diliberto, Michael Ellena, Christy Evans, Abraham Rivera, 
Keita Kadono, Sachie Horita, Grace Pak, Barbara Zondiros, Harold Rasmussen, Danny 
Jimenez, Douglas Raizk, Scott Peppard, Janet Chase, Michael Caporaso, Bridget Ely, James 
Estabrook, Christine Kruse, Brooke St. Hilaire, Nathan Jones, Courtney Matz, and Jennifer 
Radie inasmuch as the District withdrew or dismissed the Accusation against them, based on 
Findings 14 and 15, and respondent Denise Leonard, based on Finding 31 above.     
 
 
respondents Jean Henshall, Andrea Dikilato, Elizabeth Loew, Kathy Black, Kristin Kihara, 
and Aja Roberts, based on Finding 27 above.   
 
 
Based on Findings 1 – 31, there is no certificated probationary or permanent 
employee with less seniority than any one of respondents or the certificated employees who 
is being retained by the District for the 2010-2011 school year to render services which any 
one of respondents or certificated employees is certificated and competent to render.  
 
 
 

Cause exists to change the seniority dates and/or seniority rankings of 

4. 

5. 

*  *  *  *  *  *  * 

WHEREFORE, the Administrative Law Judge makes the following Order:  

ORDER 

1. 

The Accusation issued against respondents named in Finding 14 and 15 must 

 
 
be dismissed, based on Conclusion of Law 3 above, respectively.  These respondents may 
not be given notice that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
based on Conclusions of Law 1, 2, and 5 above.   The District may give notice to these 
respondents, and each of them, in the inverse order of seniority that their services will not be 

The Accusation issued against all of the remaining respondents is sustained, 

2. 

 
 
 
 
 

 

16

3 

4. 

Before giving notice to respondents, the District shall further determine and 

required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code section 44955.   
 
The District may give notice to any respondents and certificated employees, 
 
who were served with notices and/or accusations that their services will not be needed next 
year but did not file requests for hearing or did not appear at the hearing, that their services 
will not be required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955.   
 
 
take into account any additional positively assured attrition among certificated employees in 
deciding how many and when respondents should be terminated before the ensuing 2010-
2011 school year.   
 
 
 
Dated:    
 
 
 
 
 
  

Vincent Nafarrete 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

17

