BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
KEPPEL UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT  
 

OAH No. L2010031480 

In The Matter Of The Accusations Against: 
 
Matthew Brockway, Monetta Carter-
Duckett, Randi Cooper, Challen David, 
Tara Goines, Erin Gregorio, Ventura 
Herrera, Charlighne Lee, Camille Lynn, 
Lisa Martinez, Dimas Molina, Deena 
Nostrant, Anna Paliza, Nicole Pieniaszek, 
Priscilla Salgado, Ana Sanabria, Rob 
Sinclair, Gwendolyn Strean, and Joyce 
Wallace,  
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
Julie Cabos-Owen, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 5, 2010, at the Keppel Union School District 
Offices in Pearblossom, California. 
 
 
Union School District (District).  Richard Schwab of Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad 
represented all Respondents.   
 

James B. Fernow of Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost, L.L.P., represented the Keppel 

Although there were additional Respondents listed in the Accusation, at the 

administrative hearing, the District rescinded the notices of termination of, and dismissed the 
Accusations against, the following Respondents:  Kristan Adams, Timothy Alves, Ana 
Castellon, Audrey Hill, Cullen McNeill, Rosa Michaels and Maria Molina.  The notices were 
rescinded due to retirements and resignations.   
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard.  The record 

was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on April 5, 2010. 
 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
1.     Complainant, Steve Doyle, Superintendent, filed the Accusation while acting 

in his official capacity as the Superintendent of the District.   
 

2.     Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

1 

 

 
 

 

3.     On February 25, 2010, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted a 

resolution to reduce and discontinue the following particular kinds of services provided by 
the District no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year:   

 
Services 

Number of Full-Time 
Equivalent Positions

 
Elementary School Teacher   
Teacher on Special Assignment:  

BTSA       

      

 

Teacher on Special Assignment:   
Intervention Teacher   

 

 

 

18.0 

    .5 

  2.5  

 
Total Full Time Equivalent [FTE] reduction 

 21.0  FTE 

 

 

 

 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 

The Board further determined that the reduction in services necessitated a 

decrease in the number of certificated employees at the close of the 2009-2010 school year 
by a corresponding number of FTE positions, and directed the Superintendent to notify the 
appropriate employees to implement the Board’s determination. 
 

 

On or before March 15, 2010, the District gave notice to each Respondent of 
the potential elimination of his/her position for the 2010-2011 school year.1  On March 24, 
2010, the District served the Accusation on each Respondent who requested a hearing.  

 

6. 

All Respondents served with the Accusation timely filed requests for hearing 

and Notices of Defense to determine if there was cause for not reemploying them for the 
2010-2011 school year.   

7. 

8. 

The services set forth in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services 

 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code  section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified particular kinds of 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  
 
 
solely to the needs and welfare of the District and its pupils.   
 
 
The Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements and 
requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees. 
 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services was related 

9. 

                                                 

1 Caryn Banks, Priscilla Becerra, Felicity LaRue and Melanie Pumphrey were sent a 
Notice of Recommendation that Services Will be Terminated, but did not submit Requests 
for Hearing.   

2 

 
11. 

10. 

The District maintains a Seniority List which contains employees’ seniority 

 
dates, current assignments, and credential and certificate information. 
 

The District used the Seniority List with seniority dates to develop a proposed 

layoff list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being 
reduced.  The District also considered each teacher’s credentials and certifications.  The 
District determined that nobody less senior than Respondents was being retained to render 
services which Respondents are certificated and competent to render.  
 

12. 

In making this determination, the District skipped less senior employees 

whose particular kind of services were being reduced, because the District determined that 
the less senior, skipped employees were rendering services which the more senior Respon-
dents were not certificated and competent to render.  These skipped employees included: 
Dimas Molina, Tara Goines, Caryn Banks, Priscilla Becerra, Ana Sanabria, Gwendolyn 
Strean and Anna Paliza. 
 
  
In making the determination to skip Respondent Molina and to disallow bump-
ing by more senior employees, the District applied the legal competence standard adopted by 
the Board, as follows:   
 

13.  

[F]or the purpose of assignment and reassignment to a position of 
Teacher on Special Assignment Instructional Coach (English Learner), 
those persons assigned or reassigned to a position of Teacher on Spe-
cial Assignment Instructional Coach (English Learner) must have one 
year of full-time experience within the last ten years training teachers in 
the delivery of instruction utilizing specific strategies for English Lan-
guage Learners.   
 
(Exhibit 1 - Board Resolution 2009-10-2007.) 

 

14.    Respondent Molina (seniority date 7/26/07) is employed by the District as a 

TOSA - EL Learners.  He acts as an instructional coach at several sites.  He holds a 
professional clear multiple-subject credential, with a Bilingual, Cross-cultural, Language and 
Academic Development (BCLAD) certification – emphasis in Spanish.  Respondent Molina 
has 12 years of classroom teaching experience and three years of experience as an 
instructional coach.  Respondent Molina was “skipped,” but was still identified as subject to 
the reduction in force by way of a “precautionary notice . . .  in case competency criteria is 
not upheld.”    
 

15. 

There was no evidence that any Respondents senior to Respondent Molina 
possess the special qualifications and experience necessary to hold the position of TOSA 
Instructional Coach (EL).   
 

16. 

In formulating the layoff list, the District decided to skip junior teachers with 

Gifted and Talented Education (GATE) certification and lay off more senior teachers without 

3 

GATE certification.  These junior teachers were Caryn Banks and Tara Goines.  Ms. Banks 
and Respondent Goines were “skipped,” but were still identified as subject to the reduction 
in force by way of a “precautionary notice.”   

 
17(a).  In making the determination to skip Ms. Banks and Respondent Goines, and to 

17(b).  The District has 106 students who are eligible for the GATE program, and 

disallow “bumping” by more senior employees, the District determined that Ms. Banks and 
Respondent Goines possessed special qualifications necessary to hold the position of GATE 
instructors by way of their GATE certification.  This determination was incorrect, since the 
District did not establish that the GATE certification was “necessary” to teach GATE 
students.  The District did establish this certification was necessary to act as District GATE 
coordinator.   
 
 
they have specific program needs and education strategies.  GATE strategies can be obtained 
by way of training, in order to be more effective with GATE students.  Both Ms. Banks and 
Respondent Goines have completed 120 hours of coursework offered by the University of 
California, San Diego, to obtain GATE certification.  Additionally, Respondent Goines is 
serving as the District’s GATE coordinator and a GATE site coordinator and teaches a 
course entitled “Critical Thinking,” centered around GATE strategies.  The District believes 
that the additional 120 hours of training “does make a difference” in meeting the needs of 
GATE students.   
 
 
17(c).   However, in his testimony, Assistant Superintendent for the District, Bart 
Hoffman, admitted that teaching in the GATE program does not require any special licensing 
or credential.  Although the District prefers to have its instructors GATE certified, this 
certification is not necessary to teach GATE students, and the District acknowledges that 
“you take what you have.”    
 
 
seniority than Ms. Banks and Respondent Goines, but have not obtained GATE certification.  
However, they are credentialed to teach GATE students.  Additionally, Respondents Sinclair 
and Gregorio have previously taught GATE students, and Respondent Sinclair was a site 
coordinator for the District’s GATE program.  Based solely on the GATE certification, Ms. 
Banks and Respondent Goines should not be “skipped” in order to teach GATE students. 
 

 Respondents Rob Sinclair, Erin Gregorio and Charlighne Lee have greater 

18. 

19.  Nevertheless, Respondent Goines’ GATE certification is specialized training 

which is necessary for her to perform her duties as the District’s GATE coordinator, since 
such certification enables her to run the GATE program more effectively to meet the needs 
of the GATE students.  Therefore, the District appropriately “skipped” Respondent Goines, 
and she may be retained.        
 

20. 

In formulating the layoff list, the District decided to skip junior teachers with 

BCLAD certification and lay off more senior teachers without BCLAD authorization.  These 
junior teachers were Priscilla Becerra (seniority date 7/26/07), Ana Sanabria (seniority date 
7/26/07) and Gwendolyn Strean (seniority date 7/30/08).  Respondents Becerra, Sanabria and 

4 

Strean were “skipped,” but were still identified as subject to the reduction in force by way of 
a “precautionary notice.”   
     

21(a).  The District has a significant number of students whose primary language is 
not English and who need language assistance in order to learn the required subjects.  Sixty 
seven percent of the District’s students are Hispanic and one third of its students are English 
Language Learners (EL).  There is at least one EL in each classroom.     

 
21(b).  In its “Master Plan for English Learners” for the school year 2009/2010, the 

District has specified instructional delivery models which require that teachers possess a 
BCLAD or CLAD certificate, or “have been trained in accordance with SB 1969, SB 395, or 
are in the process of being trained.”  Additionally, in its offers of employment, as well as its 
memoranda of understanding, the District specifies the requirement that teachers “obtain a 
CLAD certificate or equivalent and/or BCLAD certificate or equivalent within three years of 
employment” with the District.   

 
21(c).  A CLAD requires competency in three domains as follows:  Domain 1: 
Language – Linguistics, first and second language acquisition; Domain 2: Teaching – 
Principles and methods of teaching English to English Language Learners; Domain 3:  
Culture – Cultural diversity and equity in education.  A BCLAD requires competency in 
three additional domains of knowledge, as follows:  Domain 4:  Teaching – Principles of 
bilingual education and methods of teaching two languages; Domain 5: Culture – The culture 
of the specific population of emphasis; and Domain 6: Language – Professional 
comprehension, speaking reading and writing in language of emphasis.   

 
21(d).  Although the MOU and Master Plan for English Learners do not indicate a 

preference of BCLAD over CLAD, in his testimony, Assistant Superintendent Hoffman 
indicated that the District prefers and needs teachers who hold a BCLAD.  Obtaining a 
BCLAD involves more in depth classes than obtaining a CLAD, and offers additional 
competency in all testing areas, including culture and language.  This makes the BCLAD 
holders more adept at teaching students, with fluency in Spanish being an important factor.  
A CLAD holder is not necessarily fluent in Spanish, but BCLAD holders have been tested 
for fluency in comprehension, speaking, reading and writing in Spanish.  The District’s 
parents have been vocal about the need to have Spanish speaking teachers in the classrooms.  
When students have limited English, BCLAD holders are able to provide support to both 
students and parents.  There was no evidence that CLAD holders would be able to provide 
equal support to students and parents.   

 
21(e).  The District has demonstrated a specific need for its teachers to provide 

21(f).  The District has also demonstrated that BCLAD holders have special training 

support to EL students, which includes a fluency in Spanish, in order to meet their needs.   
 
 
and necessary to teach EL students, which other Respondents with more seniority do not 
possess. 
 

5 

22. 

Respondent Ventura Herrera (seniority date 7/30/08) is fluent in Spanish, but 

does not hold a CLAD or BCLAD.  She believes that she should be retained because she 
“uses [her] Spanish abilities to communicate without the BCLAD,” and “because [she] grew 
up in the community, which helps her to relate to the students and know[s] what it like for 
them.”  Respondent Herrera did not establish that she should be “skipped,” since she does 
not have the have special training (BCLAD) necessary. 

 
23. 

Respondents Becerra, Sanabria and Strean are BCLAD holders and have 

special training to teach EL students that Respondents with more seniority do not possess.  
Therefore, the District appropriately “skipped” Respondents Becerra, Sanabria and Strean, 
and they may be retained.        
 

24. 

In formulating the layoff list, the District decided to skip a junior teacher with 
a single subject credential in order to accommodate the reconfiguration of the District.  The 
“skipped” junior teacher, Ana Paliza, was still identified as subject to the reduction in force 
by way of a “precautionary notice.”   
 

25. 

The reconfiguration of the District involves restructuring all schools from a K-

6 model to a K-7 model next year, and then a K-8 model thereafter.  The plan calls for the 
closing of a middle school and reopening it as an Advancement Via Individual 
Determination (AVID) academy at Almondale.  Since the District did not want to relocate 
the seventh graders advancing to eighth grade, they will stay at their current sites.  The eighth 
graders will need to have teachers with the content knowledge to meet their needs.  A teacher 
with a multiple subject credential cannot do so.  Therefore, the District skipped to retain a 
teacher with a single subject credential to teach eighth grade at Almondale.   
 

26. 

Respondent Paliza (seniority date 9/10/2009) holds a clear multiple subject 

credential with CLAD emphasis, and a clear single subject credential with English and with 
CLAD emphasis.   Respondent Paliza has 11 years of experience teaching middle school 
students and as an EL Coach.   
 

27. 

Respondent Paliza has special training and certification to teach single subject 

English to eighth graders that Respondents with more seniority do not possess.  Therefore, 
the District appropriately “skipped” Respondent Paliza and she may be retained.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 

       

1. 

 
 
44949 and 44955 were met.   
 
 
 

2(a).    Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: 

[W]henever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued 
not later than the beginning of the following school year . . . , and when 
in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have 

6 

become necessary by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the 
number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board 
may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding 
percentage of the certificated employees of the district, permanent 
as well as probationary, at the close of the school year.  (Emphasis 
added.) 

2(b).  Based on the need to reduce or terminate 21.0 FTE of particular kinds of 

 
 
services, the Board initially directed the Superintendent to send appropriate notices to all 
employees whose services were to be terminated.  The District sent out 30 notices as a 
“precautionary measure,” resulting in the over-noticing of 9 FTEs/employees.  Although 
seven notices were rescinded at the hearing, those rescissions were due to retirements or 
resignations, not over-noticing.  Therefore the rescissions decreased the 21.0 FTE/employees 
to be reduced/terminated to 14 FTE/employees.   
 
 
Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees in the District due 
to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils 
within the meaning of Education Code sections 44955.   
 
  
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part:  

 
3. 

4.  

  

[T]he services of no permanent employee may be terminated . . . while 
any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, 
is retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certi-
ficated and competent to render.   

[¶] . . . [¶] 
 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on 
the same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termi-
nation solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students 
thereof. 

5. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), allows the District to devi-

 
 
ate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority, if the District demonstrates 
that there is a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, and 
that the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that 
course or course of study which others with more seniority do not possess.     

 
6. 

The District demonstrated that there was a specific need to retain Respondent 
Molina to as a TOSA Instructional Coach (EL Learners) and that Respondent Molina has the 
special training and certification necessary to hold this position, which no Respondent with 
more seniority possessed.  Therefore, the District appropriately “skipped” Respondent 
Molina, and he may be retained.         

7 

 
8.  

 
9. 

 
7(a).  The District demonstrated that there was a need to employ specific education 

strategies in order to meet the needs of its GATE students.  However, the District did not 
demonstrate that Ms. Banks and Respondent Goines should be skipped to provide GATE 
instruction/teaching by reason of their GATE certification.  The District failed to establish 
that GATE certification was “necessary” to teach GATE students.  Skipping is allowed if no 
senior employee is certificated and competent to render the service.  Respondents Rob 
Sinclair, Erin Gregorio and Charlighne Lee have greater seniority than Ms. Banks and 
Respondent Goines, and have the credentials and experience necessary to teach GATE 
students.   

 
7(b).  However, Respondent Goines may be skipped in order to provide services as 
the District GATE coordinator, since her GATE certification constitutes special training and 
experience necessary to act as the District GATE coordinator.   

The District demonstrated a need for its teachers to provide support to EL 
students, which includes a fluency in Spanish, in order to meet the students’ needs.  The 
District also demonstrated that Respondents Becerra, Sanabria and Strean are BCLAD 
holders and have special training to teach EL students that Respondents with more seniority 
do not possess.  Therefore, the District appropriately “skipped” Respondents Becerra, 
Sanabria and Strean, and they may be retained.        

The District demonstrated that its eighth graders will require teachers with the 

 
10. 

content knowledge to meet their needs, and that this would require teachers with a single 
subject credential.  The District also demonstrated that Respondent Paliza has special 
training and certification to teach single subject English to eighth graders that Respondents 
with more seniority do not possess.  Therefore, the District appropriately “skipped” 
Respondent Paliza, and she may be retained.        
 
 
The number of FTEs/employees to be reduced/terminated has decreased to 14.  
Caryn Banks, Felicity LaRue and Melanie Pumphrey were sent a Notice of Recommendation 
that Services Will be Terminated, but did not submit Requests for Hearing.  However, the 
evidence did not establish that they were among the retirements/resignations, and therefore, 
are counted among the 14 FTEs/employees subject to reduction/termination.  Consequently, 
except as set forth above, only the 14 most junior employees should be sent notice that their 
services will be reduced or terminated for the 2010-2011 school year because of the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular services.  The most senior employees, Respondents 
Rob Sinclair, Erin Gregorio, and Charlighne Lee should be retained  

 
 
11.  No certificated employee junior to any Respondent is being retained to 
perform any services which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.    
 
 
terminating or reducing Respondents’ employment for the 2010-2011 school year, as set 
forth in Factual Findings 1 through 27and Legal Conclusions 1 through 11.     

Cause exists within the meaning of Education Code section 44955 for 

12. 

8 

ORDERS 

1. 

2. 

The Accusations served on the following Respondents are dismissed:  

 
 
Respondents Ana Paliza, Gwendolyn Strean, Tara Goines, Ana Sanabria, Dimas Molina, 
Priscilla Becerra, Rob Sinclair, Erin Gregorio, and Charlighne Lee. 
 
 
Nostrant, Randi Cooper, Ventura Herrera, Lisa Martinez, Challen David, Camille Lynn, 
Matthew Brockway, Monetta Carter, Joyce Wallace, Priscilla Salgado, and Nicole 
Pieniaszek.  Notice may be given to Respondents that their services will be reduced or 
terminated for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of 
particular services as indicated.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.     
 

The Accusations served on the following Respondents are sustained: Deena 

Dated: April 12, 2010 

________________________________ 
JULIE CABOS-OWEN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

 
 
  
 
   

 

9 

