 

 
 

 

BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ACTON AGUA DULCE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
 

OAH No. L2010031160 

In The Matter Of The Accusations Against: 
 
Anali Ortiz, Rosemary Oppenheim, Bonnie 
Tate (Russon), Heidi Witeby, Shelley 
Kinsey, Marilyn Alford, Diane David-
Healy, and Karen Coker,  
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
Julie Cabos-Owen, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, heard this matter on April 30, 2010, at the Acton Agua Dulce Unified 
School District Offices in Acton, California. 
 
 
Agua Dulce Unified School District (District).  Shirley A. Lee of Schwartz, Steinsapir, 
Dohrmann & Sommers, LLP, represented all Respondents.   
 

Maggy M. Athanasious of Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP, represented the Acton 

Oral and documentary evidence was received.  The record was left open to allow 

counsel to submit simultaneous written closing briefs, which were timely filed.  The 
District’s Closing Brief was marked as District’s Exhibit 13 and lodged.  The Respondent’s 
Closing Brief was marked as Respondent’s Exhibit E and lodged.  The record was closed, 
and the matter was submitted for decision on May 4, 2010. 
 

 

 
1.     Complainant, Dr. Brent Woodard, Superintendent, filed the Accusation while 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

acting in his official capacity as the Interim Superintendent of the District.   
 

2.     Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

3.     On March 11, 2010, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted a 
resolution (Resolution 09.10.8) to reduce and discontinue the following particular kinds of 
services provided by the District no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year:   

 
Services 

 
Elementary School Teacher   

Number of Full-Time 
Equivalent (FTE) Positions

 

 9.0 FTE 

 

 

1 

Secondary School Teacher – Social Science 
Special Education Teacher – Special Day Class 
Special Education Teacher –  

 

  1.0 FTE 
  1.0 FTE  

  3.0 FTE 

     

     

Resource Specialist Program  
   

 

 

Total FTE Reduction: 

  

 

14.0  FTE 

 
4. 

 

The Board further determined that the reduction in services necessitated a 

decrease in the number of certificated employees at the close of the 2009-2010 school year 
by a corresponding number of FTE positions, and directed the Superintendent to notify the 
appropriate employees to implement the Board’s determination. 
 

5. 

Following the adoption of the Resolution 09.10.8, the District determined that 

the following terminated FTEs would be addressed by way of attrition (retirement, 
resignation, non-reelection):  3.0 FTE Elementary School Teachers,1 1.0 FTE Special 
Education Teacher – Resource Specialist Program, and 1.0 Secondary School Teacher – 
Social Science.  Since the retirement of the Social Science Teacher was known prior to 
issuance of preliminary layoff notices, no Social Science Teacher received a layoff notice.  
Additionally, only two Special Education Teachers – Resource Specialist Program received 
preliminary notices of layoff. 
 

On or before March 15, 2010, the District gave notice to each Respondent of 

the potential elimination of her position for the 2010-2011 school year.  On March 26, 2010, 
the District served the Accusation on each Respondent who requested a hearing.  

 
6. 

7. 

All Respondents served with the Accusation timely filed requests for hearing 

and Notices of Defense to determine if there was cause for not reemploying them for the 
2010-2011 school year.   

 

 

8. 

The services set forth in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services 

 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code  section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified particular kinds of 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  
 
 
solely to the needs and welfare of the District and its pupils.   
 
 
The Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements and 
requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees. 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services was related 

10. 

9. 

                                                 

1 Michelle Mokler was an elementary school teacher whose resignation was taken into 

account prior to the Board’s adoption of Resolution 9.10.8.  Therefore, her resignation was 
not counted as part of the Elementary School FTEs identified for reduction.    
 

2 

11. 

 
 
dates, current assignments, and credential and certificate information. 
 

The District maintains a Seniority List which contains employees’ seniority 

The District used the Seniority List with seniority dates to develop a proposed 

 
12. 

layoff list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being 
reduced.  The District also considered each teacher’s credentials and certifications.   

 
13.  On March 11, 2010, the Board adopted a resolution (Resolution 09.10.9) 

which established tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated 
employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  According to Resolution 9.10.9, 
the order of termination shall be based on the needs of the District and its students in 
accordance with the following system:  
 

A. 

Number of teaching and/or special service credentials.   

Rating:  +1 per credential 
Number of supplementary authorization.   

Rating:  +1 per supplementary authorization 

Earned degrees beyond the BA/BS level.   

B. 

C. 

Rating:  +1 per degree 

 
In the event that common day hires have equal qualifications based on 
application of the above criteria, the District will then break ties by 
utilizing a lottery.  

 
 
14. 

 
16. 

The District used information from the District’s Seniority List to apply the tie 

breaking criteria of Board Resolution 09.10.9.   

 
15.  On April 28, 2010, the District rescinded the layoff notices of the following 

employees:  Danielle Cancasci (#50 on the Seniority List, seniority date 4/1/06) (.5 FTE 
Elementary School Teacher), Charmony Murray (#55, seniority date 8/28/06) (.5 FTE 
Elementary School Teacher), Kelly Oliver (#58, seniority date 8/28/06) (1.0 FTE Elementary 
School Teacher), Danielle Johnson (#59, seniority date 8/28/06) (1.0 FTE Elementary School 
Teacher), Taiz Nadjarians (#61, seniority date 9/1/06) (1.0 FTE Elementary School Teacher), 
and Lisa Williams (#94, seniority date 8/31/09) (1.0 FTE Special Education Teacher – 
Special Day Class).   

The District determined that nobody less senior than Respondents was being 

retained to render services which Respondents are certificated and competent to render.  
 
 
17(a).  The District issued a preliminary layoff notice to Taiz Nadjarians as an 
Elementary School Teacher because she was mis-assigned and would need to be assigned to 
an elementary school teaching position.  Ms. Nadjarians teaches high school art (grades 9 
through 12).  At the time the preliminary layoff notices were issued, she had a multiple 

3 

subject credential with a supplemental art authorization which only allowed her to teach art 
to grades 9 and below.  However, on March 18, 2010, the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing issued Ms. Nadjarians a single subject art credential which allows her to teach 
that subject to grades 10 through 12.  This corrected her “mis-assignment.”  
 
 
school art.  Ms. Nadjarians is the only teacher in the District who is credentialed to teach 
high school art.   
 

17(b).  The District has a special need for a teacher with an art credential to teach high 

17(c).  Respondents Rosemary Oppenheim (#60, seniority date 9/1/06) and Anali 

Ortiz (#54, seniority date 8/28/06) are more senior than Ms. Nadjarians.  However, neither 
Respondent Oppenheim nor Respondent Ortiz have an art credential which would allow 
them to teach high school art.    
 

17(d).  The District appropriately “skipped” Ms. Nadjarians because she was 

rendering services which the more senior Respondents (Oppenheim and Ortiz) were not 
certificated and competent to render.     
 

18(b).  Respondent Coker is a probationary employee with a Preliminary Education 

18(a).  When it issued the preliminary notices of layoff to Respondent Karen Coker 
(#89, seniority date 10/22/09), it was for reduction of 1.0 FTE Special Education Teacher – 
Resource Specialist Program.  However, the District later determined that Respondent 
Coker’s assignment was actually as a Special Education Teacher – Special Day Class (SDC).  
The District had already issued a preliminary layoff notice for reduction of the 1.0 FTE of 
SDC to Lisa Williams (#94, seniority date 8/31/09).  Since Ms. Williams had been employed 
by the District longer, the District rescinded her notice of layoff, and counted Respondent 
Coker as the 1.0 FTE of SDC to be reduced. 
 
 
Specialist Instruction Credential.  Ms. Williams is a probationary employee with a 
Provisional Internship Permit, Education Specialist.  By virtue of her Provisional Internship 
Permit and her experience, Ms. Williams she is certificated and competent to render services 
as a Special Education Teacher – Special Day Class.  There was no evidence that Respondent 
Coker has special training and experience necessary to teach a SDC which Ms. Williams 
does not have.  Therefore, the District appropriately retained Ms. Williams as the more 
senior SDC teacher.   
 
 
Education Teacher – Resource Specialist Program.   
 

19(a).  Respondent Diane David-Healy (#88, seniority date 10/19/09) is a Special 

19(b).  After the preliminary notices of layoff were issued, Marna Peterson, who 

taught Special Education – Preschool, notified the District of her retirement.  Respondent 
David-Healy holds a credential which authorizes her to teach the preschool level Special 
Education which Ms. Peterson taught.   
 

4 

19(c).  Despite the vacancy and Respondent David-Healy’s certification, the District 
did not rescind her layoff notice.  Although the preschool level Special Education FTE was 
not listed in the Board’s resolution, the District now is considering eliminating that position 
for the 2010-2011 school year.  Consequently, the District does not intend to fill the vacant 
position at this time.   

 
19(d).  There was no evidence or authority presented which would require the District 

to retain probationary employee, Respondent David-Healy, to fill the vacant position.   
 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 

 
 
44949 and 44955 were met.   
 
Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees in the District due 
 
to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils 
within the meaning of Education Code sections 44955.   
 
  
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part:  

 
3.  

[T]he services of no permanent employee may be terminated . . . while 
any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, 
is retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certi-
ficated and competent to render.   

[¶] . . . [¶] 
 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on 
the same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termi-
nation solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students 
thereof. 

  

 

 
4(a).  Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), allows the District to devi-

ate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority, if the District demonstrates 
that there is a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, and 
that the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that 
course or course of study which others with more seniority do not possess.     

 
4(b).  The District demonstrated that there was a specific need to retain Ms. 
Nadjarians as a high school art teacher and that she has the special training and certification 
necessary to hold this position, which no Respondent with more seniority possessed.  
Therefore, the District appropriately “skipped” Ms. Nadjarians.         
 

5 

6. 

5. 

No certificated employee junior to any Respondent is being retained to 
 
perform any services which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.    
 
 
terminating or reducing Respondents’ employment for the 2010-2011 school year, as set 
forth in Factual Findings 1 through 19 and Legal Conclusions 1 through 5.     
 
 

Cause exists within the meaning of Education Code section 44955 for 

ORDERS 

1. 

The Accusations served on Respondents are sustained.  Notice may be given 

 
 
to Respondents that their services will be reduced or terminated for the 2010-2011 school 
year because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated.   
 

2. 

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.     

Dated: May 5, 2010 

________________________________ 
JULIE CABOS-OWEN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

 
 
  
 
   

 

6 

