BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF EDUCATION 
ADELANTO SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
Respondents listed in Appendix A. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
    OAH No. 2010030308 
 
 

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

Todd M. Robbins, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, Attorneys at Law, 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
of California, heard this matter in Adelanto, California on April 23, 2010. 
 
 
represented the Adelanto School District. 
 
 
respondents listed in Appendix A, except for respondent Maria Rivera. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondent Maria Rivera represented herself. 

The matter was submitted on April 23, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Carlos R. Perez, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, APLC, Attorney at Law, represented all 

1. 

 
Ross Swearingen, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources of the Adelanto 
 
School District, made and filed the accusation dated March 9, 2010, in his official capacity as 
the designee of Darin Brawley, District Superintendent. 
 
 
 

Respondents1 are certificated district employees. 

2. 

3. 

On March 9, 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955, the superintendent notified the Board of Education of the Adelanto School District in 
writing of his recommendation to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services for the 
upcoming school year.  The superintendent stated the reasons for the recommendation.  The 

                                                 
1  
outside the scope of this proceeding or were dismissed as respondents prior to the conclusion of the hearing. 

Other individuals were initially named as respondents, but either did not request a hearing and thus are 

 

1

recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment was not related to their 
competency as teachers. 
 

4. 

On March 9, 2010, the board adopted Resolution No. 09-10-24, determining 
that it would be necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of 
the current school year.  The board determined that the particular kinds of services that must 
be reduced for the 2010-2011 school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE) 
positions: 
 

Particular Kind of Service 

 

 

Full-Time Equivalent

Elementary K-6 Teaching Services   
Intervention Teaching Services  
 
Special Education Teaching Services 
 
Music Teaching Services 

 

 

 
 
 
 

31.5 
2 
2 
1.14 

The proposed reductions totaled 36.34 FTE positions. 

5. 

The board further determined in Resolution No. 09-10-24 that “competency,” 
as described in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for the purposes of bumping, 
“shall necessarily include: (1) possession of a valid credential in the relevant subject matter 
area; (2) ‘highly qualified’ status under the No Child Left Behind Act in the area to be 
assigned; and (3) an appropriate EL authorization (if required by the position).” 
 

6. 

The board directed the superintendent or his designee to determine which 

employees’ services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of the 
reduction of the foregoing particular kinds of services.  The board further directed the 
superintendent or his designee to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the 
district who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services. 
 

7. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district timely served on respondents a 
written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services would not be 
required for the upcoming school year, along with the related accusation.  The notice set 
forth the reasons for the recommendation.  The notice advised respondents of their right to a 
hearing, that each respondent had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person 
sending the notice by the date specified in the notice, a date which in each case was more 
than seven days after the notice was served, and that the failure to request a hearing would 
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 

The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment was not 

related to their competency as teachers. 
 
 
All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 

8. 

Respondents timely filed written requests for hearing and notices of defense.  

 

 

 

 

2

9. 

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of the 

12. 

10. 

11. 

The services the board addressed in Resolution No. 09-10-24 were “particular 

13.  Amanda Anderson is an elementary school teacher.  She was first employed 

district. 
 
 
kinds of services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education 
Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of 
services was not arbitrary or capricious and constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
welfare of the district and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as 
determined by the board. 
 
 
The board considered all positively assured attrition, including resignations, 
retirements and requests for transfer, in determining the actual number of necessary layoff 
notices to be delivered to its employees. 
 
 
by the district for or during the 2008-2009 school year.  She reported to school on August 13, 
2008, got her room key and spent the next three days preparing her classroom.  She was not 
paid for these three days, and the district did not require her to work.  The district also did 
not tell her not to work on these three days.  Even though no one told her to work on those 
three days, she believed she was expected to do so because the district calendar identified 
August 13 as the first official work day.  Her first date of paid service with the district was 
October 8, 2008.  The delay occurred because the district was waiting for the receipt of 
Anderson’s live scan clearance. 
 
 
Anderson’s seniority date to be October 8, 2008.2
 
 
periods) and choir (one period).  She is slated for layoff via: (i) a 0.14 FTE PKS reduction in 
the music teaching services; (ii) a 0.50 FTE bump by the more senior Cinnamon Olivarez, a 
part-time elementary teacher; and (iii) a 0.36 FTE bump by the more senior Maria Rivera, 
also an elementary school teacher.  Respondents contest the second component of Durgin’s 
proposed layoff (i.e., 0.50 of her full-time position) on the basis that a part-time employee 
(Olivarez) should not be permitted to bump a full-time employee.  As explained below 
(Legal Conclusion 5), the district’s position that Durgin was properly bumped by Olivarez is 
correct. 
 
 
services.  All of these employees are in categorically funded positions, and the funding for 

14.  Marnee Durgin teaches middle school English Language Development (six 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44845, the district properly determined 

The district currently employs eight individuals in intervention teaching 

15. 

                                                 
2  
Nonetheless, this Finding is offered as guidance to the parties, since the matter was sufficiently litigated at the 
hearing to permit a finding to be made. 

It appears that Anderson would be subject to layoff even if she were given the seniority date she requested.  

 

3

such positions is, at least for now, continuing.  The two least senior of these eight employees, 
Cathryn Wilson and Charmaine Ramirez, received layoff notices; the remaining six did not  
In fact, the six remaining individuals in this categorically funded position each have greater 
seniority than any identified by the district for layoff.  Further, the district does not intend to 
terminate the employment of these six remaining individuals under any process; instead, 
these individuals are to be retained as district employees.  Under these circumstances, and as 
explained below (Legal Conclusion 6), the district properly identified Wilson and Ramirez 
for layoff and properly declined to send layoff notices to any of the remaining six (more 
senior) employees in this assignment. 
 
 
services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

16.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 

3. 

Pursuant to section 44995, a senior teacher whose position is discontinued has 
the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to 
fill.  In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is 
filling that position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  
Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Santa 
Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified 
School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843; Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. 
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.) 
 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine 

whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic 
layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned 
to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra. at 136-137.) 
 
 
with any statistical computation.  It is within the governing authority’s discretion to 
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued 
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose 
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)  A school district has wide 

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in 

4. 

 

4

discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or 
so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of 
law.  (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 
318, 322.) 
 

5. 

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district 

and establishing requirements for employment.  This discretion encompasses determining the 
training and experience necessary for particular positions.  Similarly, school districts have 
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a 
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.  
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) 
 

Pursuant to Hildebrandt, a district may generally not be required to split a full-time 

position held by a junior employee in order to accommodate a part-time employee who 
wishes to bump into that junior employee’s position.  However, and contrary to respondents’ 
argument in this case, Hildebrandt does not prohibit a district from splitting a full-time 
position so as to permit a more senior, albeit part-time employee from bumping into the a 
more junior full-time employee’s position.  Instead, the broad discretion accorded to districts 
in connection with the implementation of PKS layoffs districts leads to the conclusion that in 
fact districts do retain the discretion to do just that. 
 

6. 

Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City School 

District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260 held that certificated teachers assigned to a 
categorically funded program may not be laid off as temporary employees without according 
them the procedural formalities due permanent and probationary employees unless the 
program has expired.  As such, Bakersfield serves to offer certain protections to employees 
whose employment a district wishes to terminate without according such employees the 
protections provided by the layoff statute. 
 

Here, the two least senior teachers in the categorically funded position were properly 

designated for layoff.  The district is not intending to layoff (i.e., outside the section 44955 
process) the remaining six teachers holding this position.  Accordingly, Bakersfield, which is 
intended to protect certain certificated employees from an attempt to lay them off without 
affording them the protections provided by the layoff statute, simply does not come into play 
in this case. 
 

7. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44845, certificated employees are deemed 

8. 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

“to have been employed on the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a 
probationary position.” 
 
 
accusation.  Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the district to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the welfare of the schools and 
the pupils thereof.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the district 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The district 

 

5

identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board 
be directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is recommended that the board give respondents 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services are no longer required by the district. 
 
 

ADVISORY DETERMINATION 

The following advisory determination is made: 

The accusations served on respondents are sustained.  Notice may be given to 

 
 
respondents before May 15, 2010, that their services will not be required because of the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated. 
 
 
 
DATED:  ________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
DONALD P. COLE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

6

Appendix A 

Jon Barnes 

Diana Garcia 

Asacia Lopez 

Barbara Marrs 

Laura Johnson 

Ashely Gudino 

Marnee Durgin  

Heather Biewend 

Amanda Anderson 

Christina Hoard-Guess 

 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
7. 
 
8. 
 
9. 
 
10. 
 
11.  Debbie Mockler 
 
12.  Holly Ostrom 
 
13.  Krystina Ponce De Leon 
 
14. 
 
15.  Maria Rivera (0.64)3
 
16.  Abigail Serena 
 
17. 
 
18. 
 
 
 
 
 

Charmaine Ramirez 

Jonathan Wilson 

Catherine Tury 

                                                 
3  

Respondent Rivera’s layoff is partial, i.e., 64% of her full-time position. 

 

7

