BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE 
NEEDLES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
    OAH No. 2010030959 
 
     

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Layoff/Accusation 
Against: 
 
 20 CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES, 
 
                                       Respondents. 
 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter came on regularly for hearing before Roy W. Hewitt, Administrative Law 

John W. Dietrich, Esq. of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo represented the 

 
 
Judge, at Needles, California on April 6, 2010.  
 
 
Needles Unified School District (the district). 
 
 
all 20 respondents. 
 
 
cause until April 9, 2010 so that the parties could submit closing briefs. The briefs were 
received and the matter was deemed submitted on April 9, 2010.  
 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the matter was continued for good 

Shirley A. Lee, Esq. of Schwartz, Steinsapir, Dohrmann & Sommers LLP represented 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

 
 
On March 10, 2010, the Board of Education of the district (the board) adopted 
Amended Resolution number 09-10-15(A), determining that it would be necessary to reduce 
or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) at the end of the current school year.  The 
board determined that the PKS that must be reduced for the 2010-2011 school year were the 
following full time equivalent (FTE) positions: 
 

 

1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

  1.0 

  8.0 

  1.0 

  1.0 

  2.0 

  1.0 

  1.0 

  1.0 

FTE 

     .5 

PKS 
 
High School Frosh Seminar/Life Skills 
 
High School Science  
 
High School English/Language Arts 
 
High/Middle/Elementary School Music 
 
Middle School Core Teacher 
 
Middle School Counselor 
 
Middle School Physical Education   
 
Elementary Classroom Teacher 
 
Elementary Special Education 
 
  
 
 
Total FTE positions to be reduced or eliminated 
 
 
meaning of Education Code section 44955. 
 
 
district recommended, with regard to the ensuing school year, that the board reduce or 
eliminate the specified PKS provided by the district for the 2010-2011 school year by 
notifying the certificated employees listed in Finding 6 that their services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
discontinue the services listed in Finding 1, above, were neither arbitrary nor capricious; 
rather, the recommendation and decision were based on the projected 1.4 million dollar 
budget deficit.  Thus, the board’s decision represents a proper exercise of its discretion.  
 
 
district and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees as determined by the board. 
 
 
The Superintendent designated the respondents, permanent or probationary 
teachers employed by the district, by creating a seniority list, first selecting teachers to be 
laid off in the inverse of the order in which they were employed, then assigning and 
reassigning employment in such a manner that all employees to be retained will be retained 
so as to render services which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. 

The services listed above are PKS, which may be reduced or discontinued within the 

On March 10, 2010, based on the board’s resolution, the Superintendent of the 

The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 

The district’s recommendation and the board’s decision to reduce or 

_________ 
 16.5  

5. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

2

Prior to March 15, 2010, the following 20 certificated employees affected by 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. 

6. 

3. 

4. 

2. 

10. 

12. 

Jeff Plank 

Jim Boring 

Amy Avila 

Laurie Scully 

Eric Christensen 

Kelli Cox-Hearn 

Actual layoff notices 

11.  Ashley Rubalcaba 

 
 
the layoffs received written notice/precautionary notice notifying them that, pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, their services “will not be required for the 
upcoming 2010-2011 school year:” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13.  Wendy Stophus-Stahl 

Precautionary layoff notices 

17.  Heather Woods 

15.  Michelle Totra 

16.  Karen Whitley 

David McMasters 

Robert McMahon 

Jennifer Edwards 

Shannon Roach 

Kenneth Parker 

Theresa Sutton 

Patricia Phelps 

Alan Newman 

Jean Lacey 

14. 

9. 

1. 

5. 

8. 

7. 

6. 

2. 

3. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

On March 10, 2010, the Superintendent of the district made and filed an 

accusation in his official capacity. 

Prior to March 15, 2010, all respondents, through their union representatives, 
were involved in developing the tie-breaking criteria to be used in layoff situations.  The tie-
breaking criteria were set forth in the Memorandum of Understanding and were adopted by 
the board as the tie-breaking criteria to be used in this reduction in force matter.  
Additionally, prior to March 15, 2010, all respondents were served with amended board 
resolution number 09-10-15(A), a Notice of Recommendation that Services Will Not Be 
Required, a Notice of Accusation, the Accusation, a Notice of Defense, a Request for 
Hearing, and copies of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, and Government Code 

7. 

 
8. 

 

3

sections 11506, 11507.5, 11507.6, 11507.7, and 11520.  Additionally, the Notice of 
Recommendation that Services Will be Terminated advised respondents as follows:  

 

 
10. 

“You are advised that you may request a hearing before the 

Board of Education of the District to determine if there is cause for not 
employing you for the 2010-2011 school year.  Your request for a 
hearing must be in writing and delivered on or before March 24, 2010, 
and in no event later than twelve (12) days from the date of this notice, 
to:  [Omitted] 
 
If you fail to request a hearing on or before this date, your 
failure to do so shall constitute a waiver of your right to a hearing.  For 
your convenience, a form entitled ‘Request for Hearing and Notice of 
Defense’ is enclosed.  (Exh. 4)” 
 
9. 

All respondents timely submitted their notices of defense requesting a hearing 

to determine if cause exists for not re-employing them for the ensuing year.   

Each respondent who requested a hearing and filed a Notice of Defense was 

properly noticed of the date, time and place of the instant hearing.  

 
11.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.  
 
12. 

 

 

a. 

b. 

13. 

The following concerns were raised during the hearing: 

Amy Avila, a teacher on special assignment (TOSA) is being 

Respondents are certificated permanent or probationary employees of the 

Michelle Totra (Totra) was not allowed to bump into a 9th grade 

 
district. 
 
 
 
 
English teaching position; 
 
 
improperly dismissed from her position as Academic Coach; and, 
 
 
(elementary school teacher, alternative education teacher, and a special education teacher) 
during the instant reduction in force proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
fact that she possessed a supplementary authorization to teach English prior to March 15, 
2010; however, pursuant to the board’s resolution, “competency” for purposes of bumping 
requires, in addition to possession of a valid credential in the relevant subject matter area, 
“’highly qualified’ status under the No Child Left Behind Act, and an appropriate EL 
authorization (if required by the position).”  (Exh. 3.)  In Totra’s case, there was no evidence 

In connection with these concerns, the evidence established the following: 

The district failed to consider three previously eliminated positions 

Totra provided appropriate documentation to the district evidencing the 

14. 

c. 

a. 

 

 

 

4

 

 

c. 

b. 

Avila began working as TOSA as Academic Coach based on a 

The district did not fail to consider the three previously eliminated 

that she has “highly qualified” status under the No Child Left Behind Act; therefore, 
inadequate evidence was presented to support the finding that Totra can bump into a 9th 
grade English teaching position. 
 
 
competitive examination/interview.  As a result of the competitive interview process, Avila 
was selected over teachers with more seniority to teach on special assignment as Academic 
Coach.  Consequently, it makes no sense to allow a more senior employee, who is less 
competent to work as Academic Coach, to bump Avila.  It is well established that a junior 
employee possessing special competence can be retained over a senior employee lacking such 
competence.  (Alexander v. Delano Joint Union High School District (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 
567). 
 
 
positions (elementary school teacher, alternative education teacher, and a special education 
teacher) during the instant reduction in force proceedings.  Based on resignations during the 
previous school year, three positions were eliminated rather than being filled (an elementary 
school teaching position, an alternative education position, and a middle school special 
education position).  It was well after these three positions were eliminated that the board 
adopted Amended Resolution number 09-10-15(A), determining that it would be necessary 
to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) at the end of the current school 
year.  Consequently, there is no jurisdiction in the present proceedings to “reach back” and 
address issues that resulted from pre-reduction in force actions, ostensibly in violation of the 
union’s Memorandum of Understanding with the district.  If respondents take issue with the 
district’s elimination of the three positions, they need to raise their objections in the 
appropriate forum.  The instant proceedings are limited to assuring that the district followed 
the correct procedural steps in implementing a force reduction, that the services it seeks to 
reduce are of the permissible type, and that the employees to be terminated have been 
correctly identified.   
 
 
probationary employee, or any permanent employee with less seniority, is being retained to 
render services which such permanent employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
particular kinds of services by 16.5 FTE positions, the district continued to evaluate its 
personnel needs.  After taking into consideration positively assured attrition, the district has 
elected to rescind the notice of termination as to respondent Laurie Scully (0.4 FTE) and to 
revise Kenneth Parker’s termination to reflect a reduction of 0.4 FTE. 
 
 
district agreed to modify the seniority list by advancing Alan Newman’s seniority date to 
October 10, 2000.  
 
 

In addition to rescinding the notice, as set forth in Finding 16, above, the 

The services of no permanent employees are being terminated while any 

Subsequent to the action the board took on March 10, 2010, to reduce 

15. 

16. 

17. 

 

5

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

3. 

1. 

The services listed in Factual Finding 1 are PKS that can be reduced or 

Jurisdiction for the instant proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code 

Based on the Factual Findings, considered in their entirety, cause exists to 

 
 
sections 44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been 
provided/met, as required. 
 
 
discontinued pursuant to Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper 
exercise of its discretion.  
 
 
reduce the number of certificated employees of the District by 15.5 FTE positions (the 
original 16.5 FTE positions minus the 1 FTE described in Finding 16), due to the budget 
crisis described in Factual Finding 3. 
 
 
District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
 
 
which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
needed during the 2010-2011 school year due to reduction or discontinuance of PKS. 
 
 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

Cause exists to notify 16 of the 20 respondents that their services will not be 

Cause to reduce or discontinue services relates solely to the welfare of the 

5. 

4. 

6. 

ADVISORY DETERMINATION 

WHEREFORE, THE FOLLOWING ADVISORY DETERMINATION is hereby 

made: 

 
1. 

 

1. 

Jim Boring 

The Accusation is sustained in part.  The district shall notify the following 151 

 
respondents that their services will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school year due to 
lack of funds and the resulting need to reduce or discontinue PKS: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11.  Wendy Stophus-Stahl 

10.  Ashley Rubalcaba 

Kelli Cox-Hearn 

Eric Christensen 

Patricia Phelps 

Jean Lacey 

Jeff Plank 

8. 

3. 

4. 

2. 

9. 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
1  
notices.  

The 16th respondent will be the next in order from those respondents who received precautionary layoff 

 

 

6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5. 

7. 

6. 

2. 

12. 

Alan Newman 

Theresa Sutton 

Kenneth Parker 

David McMasters 

14.  Karen Whitley 

13.  Michelle Totra 

15.  Heather Woods 

The Accusation is dismissed as to Laurie Scully (0.4 FTE), Kenneth Parker 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.6 FTE), Amy Avila and any of the following three respondents who were served with 
precautionary notices who are not affected by the adjustment in the layoff list due to the 
findings, conclusions and dismissals:  Jennifer Edwards; Robert McMahon; and, Shannon 
Roach.  
 
 
  
DATED:  April ___, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
ROY W. HEWITT 
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

  

 

7

