BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
LONG BEACH UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 

     OAH Case No. 2010020244 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES  
 
Employed By THE LONG BEACH UNIFIED 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
Respondents. 
 
 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Daniel Juárez, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of 

Reich, Adell & Cvitan and Marianne Reinhold, Carlos R. Perez, and Kent 

Atkinson, Anderson, Loya, Ruud & Romo and Anthony P. De Marco, Cathie 

 
 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 12, 15, May 3, 4, 24, 25, and 26, 
2010, in Long Beach, California. 
 
 
L. Fields, and Jabari A. Willis represented the Long Beach Unified School District 
(LBUSD). 
 
 
Morizawa represented the certificated employees of the Long Beach Unified School 
District (referred to herein as Respondents) listed in Appendix B.  Respondents’ 
counsel was assisted each day of hearing by Joe Boyd, Executive Director of the 
Teachers Association of Long Beach (TALB). 
 
 
themselves were:  Erin Boeglin (Respondent Boeglin), Hortensia Breton (Respondent 
Breton), Pensa Chambliss (Respondent Chambliss), Yong Jadus Chan (Respondent 
Chan), John Dunster (Respondent Dunster), Melissa Espinoza, Linda Gant 
(Respondent Gant) (represented by Jason Gant), Tracey Herrera (Respondent 
Herrera), Brenda Hoefs (Respondent Hoefs), Nancy Izumi (Respondent Izumi), 
Catherine Jones, Laurel A. Lass (Respondent Lass), Deborah Mahoney (Respondent 
Mahoney), Arlene Perez, Joseph Posard (Respondent Posard), Colleen Sasaki  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Other LBUSD employees who participated in the hearing and represented 

 

1

Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad and Lawrence B. Trygstad did not appear, but 

(Respondent Sasaki), and Sopani Sun (Respondent Sun).1  When referred to 
collectively herein, these self-represented individuals are referred to as “the Self-
Represented Respondents.” 
 
 
filed a Notice of Representation of Respondent Janet L. Jones. 
 
The Presiding Administrative Law Judge of the Office of Administrative 
 
Hearings granted a continuance from April 16 to May 3 and 4, 2010.  The ALJ 
hearing the matter granted a continuance from May 4 to May 24, 25, and 26, 2010, 
and from May 26 to June 21, 2010.  The ALJ held the record open until June 21, 
2010, to allow the parties to file written closing argument.  The parties, including 
Respondent Melissa Steere (Respondent Steere) (who filed a separate closing brief 
although she is represented by Ms. Reinhold), and four of the Self-Represented 
Respondents:  Respondents Gant, Hoefs, Izumi, and Posard, filed closing briefs 
timely.2  Each brief was marked for identification. 
 
 
 
 
extended the statutory deadlines for a period of time equal to the collective days 
continued. 
 

The matter was deemed submitted for decision on June 21, 2010. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (e), the continuances 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Ruth Perez Ashley (Ashley), LBUSD Assistant Superintendent of 

1  Where any Respondent’s name is used, followed by his or her surname in 

 
 
Human Resource Services Development, filed the Accusations in her official 
capacity. 
 
 
Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of 
LBUSD, unless otherwise noted in the Factual Findings.  All Respondents at issue in 
this proceeding are listed in Appendix A. 
                                                 
 
parentheses, the parentheses indicates that that Respondent is mentioned again 
thereafter; his or her first name is not mentioned again.  Where no parentheses 
follows his or her name:  that Respondent is only mentioned once herein, or that 
Respondent shares his or her surname with another Respondent, and in that 
circumstance, their full names are consistently used throughout to identify the proper 
Respondent. 
 
 
closing arguments at hearing in lieu of written argument.  Nevertheless, all closing 
and/or reply briefs, including those filed by Respondents Gant, Hoefs, Izumi, Posard, 
and Steere were marked for identification and considered in this matter. 

2  Respondents Gant and Hoefs filed closing briefs after having made oral 

 

2

6. 

4. 

5. 

3. 

On February 16, 2010, due to the State’s budget crisis and an 

In response to the written notice, Respondents requested a hearing to 

On March 2, 2010, the Governing Board further considered additional 

 
anticipated reduction in State funding, the LBUSD Governing Board (the Governing 
Board) determined to reduce or discontinue certain services within LBUSD and 
adopted Resolution 021610 to, among other things, direct the Superintendent to notice 
those certificated employees that would reduce the number of certificated positions, 
as set forth in Factual Finding 10, effective the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
information provided to LBUSD representatives, amended Resolution 021610 and 
adopted Resolution 021610-B. 
 
 
By March 15, 2010, pursuant to Resolution 021610-B, the 
Superintendent notified the Governing Board and Respondents, in writing, that it was 
the Superintendent’s recommendation that Respondents be notified that Respondents’ 
services would no longer be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The notice 
stated the reasons for such notice, and informed each Respondent of his or her right to 
request a hearing. 
 
 
determine if there is cause to not reemploy him or her for the 2010-2011 school year.  
All Respondents and Self-Represented Respondents were deemed to have requested a 
hearing timely. 
 
 
7. 
each Respondent. 
 
 
 
9. 
 
in Appendix C. 
 
 
the 2010-2011 school year: 
 
Elementary School Services  
 
Elementary Classroom Instruction (K-3)  
Elementary Classroom Instruction (4-5) 
Elementary Computer Instruction 
Elementary Itinerant Science Instruction 
Elementary Magnet Instruction (Carver Care) 
Elementary Reading Specialist/Literacy 
Elementary/K-8 Physical Ed Instruction 
 
Elementary School Services Subtotal 

Resolution 021610-B reduces or discontinues the following services for 

LBUSD served the Accusation and other required documents timely on 

LBUSD dismissed the Accusations against the 238 Respondents listed 

    2.00 
    5.00 
    1.00 
    1.00 
     9.00 

All jurisdictional requirements were met. 

   
   
   
   
 

461.00 

479.00 

FTE 

10. 

8. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Middle School Services 
 
Middle School English Instruction 
Middle School Foreign Language Instruction-Spanish 
Middle School Humanities Core Instruction 
Middle School Math Instruction 
Middle School Reading Specialist/Literacy 
Middle School Science Instruction 
Middle School Technology Core   
 
Middle School Services Subtotal 
 
High School Services 
 
High School Computer Instruction 
High School English Instruction   
High School Foreign Language Instruction 
-French 
-Spanish  
-J ap an es e  
-Khmer 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

FTE 

14.00 
  1.00 
  3.00 
11.00 
  0.475 
  8.00 
  1.00 

38.475 

FTE 

3.00 
9.00 

   
1.00 
 
4.00 
 
2.00 
   
1.00 
1.00 
 
         10.00 
6.00 
 
5.00 
 

        15.60 
          4.00 
          0.80 
          1.00 
          2.40 
          1.00 
        10.00 
        21.00 

           7.00 
           3.50 
           1.00 
           1.00 
           0.50 
         20.00 
          13.00 
        143.80 

 

FTE 

 
High School Graphic Arts Instruction 
High School Guidance Opportunity Class 
 
High School Health Instruction 
 
High School Junior ROTC  
High School Math Instruction 

 
 

 
 

-Algebra 
-Geometry 
-CAHSEE Prep 
-Interactive Math 
-Career Math 
High School Music Instruction 
High School Physical Education Instruction 
High School Regional Occupational Program 
High School Science Instruction 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
-Biology 
-Chemistry 
 
-Earth Science   
 
-Engineering 
-Oceanography  

 
 
 
 
 
High School Social Science Instruction   
 
High School Visual Arts Instruction 
 
 
High School Services Subtotal 
 
Districtwide Programs 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

4

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29.80 
11.00 
15.00 
25.00 
  2.00 
  1.00 
  7.00 
12.00 
  1.00 
  1.00 
  1.00 
  1.00 
  1.00 
  1.00 
  1.00 

 
 
Counseling Services 
 
Social Workers 
 
 
Elementary and K-8 Vice Principals 
 
Middle School Assistant Principals 
 
 
Math Intervention 
 
 
 
Intervention (AVID) 
 
 
TOSA Math Coach   
 
GEAR UP Program Facilitators 
 
Safe & Drug Free Schools Coach  
 
Safe & Drug Free Schools Program Facilitator   
 
Nutrition Coach 
 
 
Special Education Data Specialist  
 
OCIPD Program Specialist - ELL  
 
OCIPD Program Facilitator -ELL  
OCIPD Student Teacher Coordinator 
 
 
Districtwide Programs Subtotal 
 
Adult Education 
 
Adult Education - Computer Instruction 
Adult Education - Long Beach School for Adults 
Adult Education - Reading Specialist/Literacy 
Adult Education - Dean 
 
Adult Education Subtotal 
 
Total FTE Reduction  
 
 
tiebreak criteria to be applied when certificated permanent and probationary 
employees share the same first date of paid service.  The tiebreak criteria are: 
 

1.00 
5.00 
5.80 
1.00 

         783.075 

         109.80 

         12.00 

FTE 

11. 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Governing Board, through Resolution 021610-B, determined the 

Persons with preliminary or clear credentials authorizing service 

1. 
as a Speech Therapist. 
 
2. 
Persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  EL  Certification  with  an 
included  bilingual  component  (BCLAD  or  equivalent)  who  also  have 
preliminary  or  clear  credentials  authorizing  service  in  the  areas  of 
Special Education. 
 
Persons with non-bilingual preliminary or clear EL certification 
3. 
(CLAD/SE  395  or  equivalent)  who  also  have  preliminary  or  clear 
credentials authorizing service in the areas of Special Education. 

 

5

Persons with a preliminary or clear single subject credential. 

Persons with a preliminary or clear multiple subject credential. 

Persons with non-bilingual preliminary or clear EL certification 

Persons with preliminary or clear credentials authorizing service 

4. 
in the areas of Special Education. 
 
Persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  EL  Certification  with  an 
5. 
included bilingual component (BCLAD or equivalent) who also have a 
preliminary or clear single subject credential. 
 
Persons with non-bilingual preliminary or clear EL certification 
6. 
(CLAD/SB  395  or  equivalent)  who  also  have  a  preliminary  or  clear 
single subject credential. 
 
7. 
 
8. 
Persons with preliminary or clear EL Certification with an 
included bilingual component (BCLAD or equivalent) who also have a 
preliminary or clear multiple subject credential. 
 
9. 
(CLAD/SS 395 or equivalent) who also have a multiple subject 
credential. 
 
10. 
 
11. 
 
12. 
2010 school year. 
 
13. 
or Probationary 1. 
 
Persons with credentials or certificates authorizing services in 
14. 
classes for limited or non-English proficient students priority listed as 
follows: 
 
A. 
(BCLAD) 
 
B. 
or equivalent. 
 
15. 
credentials priority listed as follows: 
 
A. 

Bilingual Cross Cultural Language and Academic Development 

Cross Cultural Language and Academic Development (CLAD), 

Status in the following priority as a Permanent, Probationary 2, 

Persons with one or more of the following preliminary or clear 

Persons who have held a Board Authorization during the 2009-

Single Subject Credential and Special Education Credential; 

Persons with a Master's Degree. 

 

6

Persons with specialized training in reading instruction priority 

Reading Recovery Certificate 
Reading Specialist Certificate 

B.  Multiple Subject Credential and Special Education Credential; 
C. 
Single Subject Credential and Supplemental Credential; 
D.  Multiple Subject Credential and Supplemental Credential; 
Single Subject Credential and Multiple Subject Credential; 
E. 
 
16. 
listed as follows: 
 
A. 
B. 
 
17. 
 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
 
18.  Years of total service to the District. 

Advanced Placement 
National Board Certification 
Advancement Via Individual Determination 
International Baccalaureate Certificate 
Non-violent Crisis Intervention Certificate 

Persons with specialized training in the following areas: 

12. 

13. 

The services set forth in Factual Finding 10 are particular kinds of 

Respondent Lisa Ware (Respondent Ware) argued that she should be 

 
 
services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955. 
 
Tie-Breaker Arguments 
 
 
credited with a tie-breaker point for possessing a reading specialist certificate.  
Respondent Ware possesses a clear reading certificate, issued to her on May 5, 2010.  
There was, however, insufficient evidence for the ALJ to find that a clear reading 
certificate is equivalent to a reading specialist certificate.  If hereafter, it is established 
that these two certificates are equivalent, LBUSD shall credit Respondent Ware with 
a tie-breaker point for possessing a reading specialist certificate. 
 
Respondent Aikaterini Sotriopoulos (Respondent Sotriopoulos) argued 
 
that she should be credited with a tie-breaker point for completing GATE professional 
development training.  Respondent Sotriopoulos argued that GATE training should 
qualify for a tie-breaker point, like AVID, IB, and AP training.  (See Factual Findings 
16 and 17, for descriptions of the AVID, IB, and AP programs.)  This argument was 
unpersuasive.  She also argued that, in the alternative, LBUSD should skip her from 
layoff.  This argument was also unpersuasive. 
 

14. 

 

7

16. 

15. 

Respondent Jill Pait (Respondent Pait) argued that she should be 

 
credited with a particular tie-breaker point, but failed to present sufficient evidence to 
support her argument. 
 
IB, AVID, AP Program Certifications 
 
 
The Governing Board determined to exempt certain individuals from 
layoff, including those with particular certification and teaching experience in three 
programs.  LBUSD incorporates specialized teaching programs into certain courses 
throughout the school district:  the Advancement Via Individual Determination 
(AVID) program, the International Baccalaureate (IB) program, and Advanced 
Placement (AP) program.  AVID is a college-readiness program designed to increase 
the number of students who enroll in four-year colleges.  It focuses on the least served 
students in the academic middle.  It is a fourth through twelfth grade system with 
rigorous standards.  Typical students are those who may be first in their families to 
attend college and may come from low-income and/or minority families.  Teachers 
generally go through specialized AVID training or are otherwise capacitated to teach 
using the AVID program; there are three levels of training.  IB is an academically 
challenging program that fosters critical-thinking skills and international-mindedness.  
It consists of distinct subprograms, for the elementary, middle, and high schools.  
Teachers must go through specialized IB training.  AP is also an academically 
rigorous program.  The parties failed to offer evidence describing the AP program; 
however, as Respondents failed to contest the appropriateness of identifying the AP 
program for skipping, and there was no evidence establishing such a finding, 
LBUSD’s skipping criteria for the AP program is deemed proper. 
 
 
its students and the school district that require specialized training for its teachers.  
LBUSD has identified those teachers who have a particular level of training in any 
one of these programs and who were teaching in any one of these programs during the 
2009-2010 school year to be exempt from layoff (otherwise referred to herein as 
being “skipped”).  LBUSD determined and memorialized this skipping in Resolution 
021610-B. 
 
 
have completed all three levels of AVID training, or have at least one level of the 
three-level training and have taught an AVID course in the 2009-2010 school year.  
LBUSD determined to only skip IB teachers at the high school level.  Such a selection 
limited the skipping to only two IB-trained teachers (their names are included in 
Appendix C).  With regard to AP, LBUSD determined that to be eligible for skipping, 
AP-trained teachers must have taught at least one AP course in the 2009-2010 school 
year. 
 
 
should include those who possess the ability to teach AVID, even if they did not teach 

The AVID, IB, and AP programs are unique and valuable programs for 

LBUSD determined that to be eligible for skipping, Respondents must 

Respondents argued that the skipping of AVID trained individuals 

19. 

17. 

18. 

 

8

21. 

20. 

Respondent Sandra Gutierrez argued she should be skipped.  She taught 

The evidence sufficiently established that teachers incorporating the 

it during the 2009-2010 school year, as some Respondents had completed the AVID 
level I training, but were not teaching AVID during the 2009-2010 school year.  A 
subset of Respondents also argued that it was inappropriate to skip any AVID teacher 
because they asserted that any LBUSD teacher is able to participate in the AVID 
training and receive AVID certification, thus contending AVID certification is not 
“special training and experience” as required by Education Code section 44955, 
subdivision (d).3  Respondents further argued that LBUSD failed to establish that 
AVID training is necessary to teach the AVID elective course, or that LBUSD has a 
specific need for the AVID program in its schools.  Respondents lastly argued that if 
LBUSD intends to skip AVID teachers as described, it should do so for all 
Respondents with any level of AVID training. 
 
 
AVID and IB programs into their teaching are specially trained in the respective 
programs, and thus, utilize special training and experience to teach.  Therefore, 
Respondents’ arguments, including the individual AVID-related arguments that 
follow were unsuccessful, unless noted otherwise.  (See Legal Conclusions 4 and 5.) 
 
AVID 
 
 
an AVID class during the 2009-2010 school year, and completed AVID level I 
training in the summer of 2008.  She completed two days of the AVID level II 
training in October 2009, and would have completed that training, but for the 
training’s cancellation.  Given LBUSD’s skipping criterion regarding the AVID 
program, Respondent Sandra Gutierrez established cause to skip her layoff. 
 
 
Respondent Ellen Noble (Respondent Noble) attended the AVID 
Summer Institute training in 2007.  At the time of hearing, she was registered to 
attend the AVID II Summer Institute training in San Diego, California, from August 2 
to 6, 2010.  Respondent Noble provided further evidence to establish that, at the time 
of hearing, she was an AVID elective teacher.  Respondent Noble argued that, due to 
her current and upcoming training, she is able to displace individuals who have been 
retained because of their AVID training or experience.  Her AVID training and 
teaching experience is adequate to warrant her skipping from layoff, pursuant to 
LBUSD’s skipping criteria. 
 
 
Respondents’ counsel highlighted evidence in the record and proffered 
argument regarding Respondent Veronica Williams, that she should be skipped.  She 
did not testify, but the evidence established that Respondent Veronica Williams 
completed AVID level I training and taught an AVID course in the 2009-2010 school 
year, and therefore meets the skipping criteria.  Respondent Veronica Williams 
should be skipped from layoff. 
                                                 
 

3  Respondents made no similar argument regarding the IB or AP programs. 

23. 

22. 

 

9

24. 

25. 

26. 

Respondent Amy Brown argued she should be skipped.  She argued 

Respondent Anna Huynh argued that LBUSD should take into account 

Respondent Shannon Brizendine (Respondent Brizendine) argued that 
 
she should be skipped.  Respondent Brizendine completed the level I AVID training 
in 2008.  She does not, nor has she previously, taught an AVID course.  Respondent 
Brizendine’s argument was unpersuasive. 
 
 
that she assists the AVID certified teachers sufficiently to qualify for skipping.  She 
asserted that the use of AVID is a group effort that includes her own work with the 
AVID site team.  She argues that LBUSD should skip whole AVID teams, like the 
one with which she participates.  Respondent Amy Brown’s argument was 
unpersuasive. 
 
 
her previous certification.  She received AP training from the Los Angeles Unified 
School District (LAUSD) in July 2000, and May 29, 2003, and taught AP 
environmental science within the LAUSD, during the 2003-2004 school year.  She 
received certification for completing an AP biology laboratory and course 
development workshop through the Southern California Advanced Placement 
Institute.  Respondent Anna Huynh established her AP training, but there was no 
evidence that she taught an AP course in the 2009-2010 school year, therefore she 
cannot be skipped from layoff, pursuant to the skipping criteria. 
 
 
asserted that she completed the level I AVID training in 2008, although she did not 
present a certificate of completion or any other evidence, other than her testimony, to 
establish that assertion.  She uses what she learned in the AVID training in her class 
teachings.  LBUSD has not credited her with a tie breaker point for AVID.  There was 
inadequate evidence to establish that Respondent Liseeth Ramos completed AVID 
training; therefore, the absence of a tie-breaker point for AVID training is appropriate. 
 
 
that she should be credited with completing IB and AVID training, however, there 
was insufficient evidence to establish that she completed either training. 
 
 
Respondent Nicole Zeineddine (Respondent Zeineddine) argued that 
she teaches an AVID course, but that LBUSD failed to credit her with the AVID tie 
breaker criterion.  Respondent Zeineddine has not attended the AVID Summer 
Institute training, she has no AVID certification, and no other outside AVID training.  
She asserts that she has on-the-job AVID training through her current teaching 
assignment.  She attends meetings with AVID teachers and plans course work for 
AVID students.  She highlighted the experience of Respondent Jennifer Ho (see 
directly below), as a teacher who, like her, has no formal AVID training, yet notes 
that, unlike her own situation, LBUSD is dismissing Respondent Ho’s Accusation.  
Respondent Zeineddine seeks to have her Accusation dismissed like that of 
Respondent Ho.  Respondent Zeineddine’s argument was unpersuasive. 

Respondent Kimberly Stubblefield (Respondent Stubblefield) asserted 

Respondent Liseeth Ramos argued that she should be skipped.  She 

28. 

27. 

29. 

 

10

30. 

31. 

In their briefing, Respondents presented two lists of individuals who, 

Respondent Ho asserted that she has not completed any AVID training 
 
through LBUSD.  She does, however teach two AVID elective courses and previously 
received AVID training through the Los Angeles County Office of Education.  These 
facts distinguish her from Respondent Zeineddine. 
 
 
they argued, had completed some level of AVID training and were potentially eligible 
for skipping.  The evidence did not establish that any of those individuals were 
eligible for skipping, based on the AVID skipping criteria, with the exception of 
Respondents Sandra Gutierrez and Veronica Williams, discussed ante.  These two 
lists included Respondents Roberta Williams, Kara Johns (Respondent Johns), Ana 
Allen, Brizendine (discussed ante), Sonia McMichael (Respondent McMichael), 
Michael Vecchiolla, Mary Hoang (Respondent Hoang), Danielle Salisbury 
(Respondent Salisbury), Kimberlie Smith, Suzanne Dobbs, Elizabeth Duty, Roxana 
Taboada-Peña (Respondent Taboada-Peña), Alan Sheppard, Christina Patterson, 
Gwenelle Warren, Liseeth Ramos (discussed ante), Jessica Castellanos, John Wilson, 
David Thornburg, Hartley Rappaport (Respondent Rappaport), David Espinosa, 
Ramona Glaser (Respondent Glaser), Kay Whitman (Respondent Whitman), 
Adrienne Doung (Respondent Doung), Kristina Babcock, Victoria Casillas 
(Respondent Casillas), Brandi Janda (Respondent Janda), Pamela Showley 
(Respondent Showley), Daniela Manole, Shawn McFarland, Amy Brown (discussed 
ante) Ling Bensie, Bryan Mahan, Catherine Hawkins, and Doris Minh (Respondent 
Minh) (discussed ante). 
 
IB 
 
 
Regarding the IB program, Respondents argued that LBUSD should 
skip all IB-certified teachers because the IB program is a continuum consisting of 
three subprograms:  the elementary, middle, and high school subprograms.  
Respondents explained that if teachers implementing the IB program in the 
elementary and middle schools are laid off, the high school IB program will falter, as 
they asserted that each subprogram at the elementary and middle schools are 
necessary to the success of the entire IB program.  This argument, and the individual 
IB-related arguments that follow, were unsuccessful.  (See Legal Conclusions 4 and 
5.) 
 
 
IB training in the elementary school subprogram and should be skipped.  He asserts 
he is the only IB certified fourth grade teacher within LBUSD.  He provided 
additional evidence of the specialized nature of the IB program overall.  Respondent 
Campbell’s skipping argument was unpersuasive. 
 
 
Minh is IB certified for teaching in the middle school subprogram.  She participated 

Respondent Ryan Campbell (Respondent Campbell) argued that he has 

Respondent Minh argued that she should be skipped.  Respondent 

32. 

33. 

34. 

 

11

36. 

The parties stipulated that Respondent Debra Boyle (Respondent 

35.  Also in their briefing, Respondents presented a list of 25 individuals 

in IB training between January 22 and 25, 2010.  She argued that LBUSD should skip 
her and all IB certified teachers.  Respondent Minh’s argument was unpersuasive. 
 
 
with IB certification, to support the arguments of those Respondents who argued that 
LBUSD should skip all IB-certified teachers, not just the two in the high school 
subprogram.  As this argument was not credited, these 25 individuals were not 
skipped on this basis.  The 25 individuals are:  Respondents Paula Swiercz, Jennifer 
Mendoza, Jocelyn Carlson, Karen Hardy, Glaser, Mary Jane Alviar, Kristie Nash, 
Kelly Mahnken, Doung, Cindy Pitts, Giovanna Tripiano, Tia Buford, Jennifer 
Manwarring, Laura Hernandez, Alexis Dunning, Campbell, Katrina Martinez, Mia 
Mariano, Stubblefield, Michele Homiakof (Respondent Homiakof), Amanda Tritle 
(Respondent Tritle), Paul Mason, Catherine Hawkins, Veronica Williams, and Minh 
(discussed ante). 
 
AP 
 
 
Boyle) is teaching an AP course and has AP training.  Therefore, it is appropriate for 
LBUSD to skip Respondent Boyle from layoff, as she meets the LBUSD’s skipping 
criteria. 
 
Bumping Arguments 
 
37.  Numerous Respondents argued that, when taking into consideration 
 
each of their credentials and teaching experiences, they were capable of teaching in 
the position of another teacher (also referred to herein as “bumping”).  As each 
Respondent asserted that he or she each had greater seniority than those whom they 
argued they could replace, each Respondent asserted that it was appropriate to find 
and conclude that each should bump into another identified more junior teacher and 
not be laid off.  In each of these cases, each Respondent provided some evidence of 
their credentials and experience; but their arguments were unsuccessful for the 
following reasons.  In some cases, there was insufficient evidence establishing 
Respondents’ credentials and/or experience.  In other cases, there was inadequate 
evidence establishing the requirements of the teaching position(s) into which 
Respondents argued they could bump.  And still, in other cases, the evidence 
presented was generally unpersuasive. 
 
 
Osuna, Megan Kaplinsky, Jessica Castellanos, Kathleen Vokoun, Anna Huynh, 
Stacey Wills (Respondent Wills), Stacey Collins, Noble, Glaser, Beverly Weigand, 
Francesca Marchese, Roberta D. Williams, Anna Weber, Terrence Hegamin, Melissa 
Mann, Stubblefield, McMichael, Jill Hoover, Teri Pearlman, Janelle Deutschman, 
Mark Jonas (Respondent Jonas), Katiria Hernandez, Myriam Gurba, Erica Kelley, 

Therefore, the bumping arguments of Respondents Maya Oliver, Rosio 

38. 

 

12

39. 

40. 

Respondent Hugo Ehuan (Respondent Ehuan) also made bumping 

In its briefing, Respondents proffered bumping arguments for other 

Crystal James (Respondent James)4, Hoang, David Sheek (Respondent Sheek), 
Homiakof, and Iyaunna Towery (Respondent Towery) were unpersuasive. 
 
 
Respondents who did not testify, or who did testify, but, in their testimony, proffered 
arguments other than bumping arguments.  These respondents were:  Respondents 
Salisbury, Amanda Gerritsen, Nancy Dalton, Pait, Johns, Erin Vaughn, Wendy 
Cavanaugh, William Feliciano, Eddie Cruz, Olga Galaviz, Jonas, Paul Mason, Steven 
Hoffman (Respondent Hoffman), Justin Gaschen, Donna Dean, Valerie Munroe, 
Whitman, Doung, Alma Rios, Laura You, Brizendine, Janda, Casillas, Zeineddine, 
Michelle Early, Mireya Valenzuela, Ware, and Alexandria Moreland.  The bumping 
arguments of these Respondents were similarly unpersuasive. 
 
 
arguments, by brief.  He failed to submit a request for hearing timely in this 
proceeding.  Respondent Ehuan failed to do so, however, because he has been, and is, 
on active military duty.  He is on a military leave of absence from LBUSD.  He did 
not receive his notice of preliminary layoff until March 30, 2010, as a consequence of 
his deployment location.  As soon as his military duties permitted, he submitted his 
request for hearing.  Respondent Ehuan is deemed to have submitted his request for 
hearing adequately to qualify him as a Respondent in this matter.  Respondents’ 
counsel submitted a bumping argument on his behalf that is deemed a part of the 
record in this matter (contained in Reply Brief of Certain Respondents, marked as 
Exhibit 108 for identification; see Respondents’ Reply Brief at 6-8).  Respondent 
Ehuan’s bumping arguments, however, are unpersuasive, as there was insufficient 
evidence to support his arguments. 
 
Adult School Teachers 
 
 
own behalf, and on behalf of Respondents Linda Goonetilleke (Respondent 
Goonetilleke), Respondent Ryan De La Vega (Respondent De La Vega), and 
Respondent Robert Hofius (Respondent Hofius).  Respondents Goonetilleke, De La 
Vega, and Hofius, through and including Respondent Spooner asserted that, as adult 
school teachers hired by LBUSD, they have been hired as temporary employees 
without seniority dates.  They argued that their temporary classifications are incorrect 
and assert that they are permanent employees, since LBUSD failed to provide them 
with temporary contracts during at least one year of their employment.  They believe 
they should not be laid off because of what they assert is their permanent employee 
status and because of the particular and valuable services they provide to adult 
students within LBUSD.  They asserted support in Education Code section 44916 and 

Respondent Gregory Spooner (Respondent Spooner) testified on his 

41. 

                                                 
 
 

4  The parties stipulated that Respondent James is a permanent employee. 

 

13

43. 

42. 

Respondent Zariq Schoettler (Respondent Schoettler) argued that 

Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High School District et al. (2003) 29 
Cal.4th, 911. 
 
Respondents Spooner, Goonetilleke, De La Vega, and Hofius each 
 
received, signed, and agreed to temporary employment contracts in each year they 
have been employed with LBUSD, but provided evidence that LBUSD failed to 
provide a temporary contract in one year within a string of continuous temporary 
employment contracts (in Respondent Goonetilleke’s case, LBUSD failed to provide 
her two temporary contracts in two distinct years).  Respondent Spooner had 
temporary employment contracts from 2002 through 2010, with the exception of the 
2003-2004 school year.  Respondent Goonetilleke had temporary employment 
contracts from January 1999 through 2010, with the exception of the 2001-2002 and 
2005-2006 school years.  Respondent De La Vega had temporary employment 
contracts from 2000 through 2010, with the exception of the 2001-2002 school year.  
Respondent Hofius had temporary employment contracts from January 2001 through 
2010, with the exception of the 2001-2002 school year.  Their arguments were 
unpersuasive.  (See Legal Conclusions 7-10.) 
 
Miscellaneous Arguments 
 
 
LBUSD failed to credit her with possession of a mathematics supplemental 
authorization.  She provided documentary evidence to establish that authorization.  At 
hearing, LBUSD agreed Respondent Schoettler possesses a mathematics 
supplemental authorization, and has possessed the same since May 2003. 
 
 
was inconsistent when it considered assignments and reassignments of teachers:  
giving weight to some teachers’ authorizations that were expired or would expire at 
the end of the 2009-2010 school year (allowing such teachers to bump into positions), 
while disallowing other teachers’ current authorizations or ability to obtain 
authorizations in the upcoming school year to direct their assignments.  Respondents 
asserted LBUSD’s alleged inconsistency resulted in employee assignments that are 
arbitrary and capricious.  The evidence did not establish these allegations as to the 
specific assignments highlighted by Respondents; therefore, Respondents’ argument 
was unpersuasive.  (See Legal Conclusion 13.) 
 
 
LBUSD’s ranking of board authorizations and supplemental credentials is inequitable 
and flawed.  Board authorizations are authorizations issued by LBUSD, pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44256 and 44263.  These authorizations give the holder the 
same ability to teach in the designated subject area as a teaching credential for one 
school year.  The Commission on Teacher Credentialing issues supplemental 
credentials.  Neither party proffered evidence explaining supplemental credentials.  
Pursuant to its tie-breaking criteria, LBUSD gives board authorizations more weight 

Respondents argued LBUSD’s consideration of board authorizations 

Respondent Stacey Benuzzi (Respondent Benuzzi) argued that 

44. 

45. 

 

14

48. 

47. 

46. 

Respondent David Christensen argued that LBUSD should categorize 

Respondent Jennifer Mason argued that her credentials should protect 

than a supplemental credential.  Respondent Benuzzi argued that, among other things, 
board authorizations require less course work to obtain than supplemental credentials.  
LBUSD’s ranking of board authorizations, as more valuable than supplemental 
credentials, argued Respondent Benuzzi, is illogical, and does not serve the needs of 
LBUSD or its students.  Respondent Benuzzi’s argument was unpersuasive.  (See 
Legal Conclusion 2.) 
 
 
her from layoff.  She argued she could bump into several more junior teachers’ 
positions and presented evidence of her qualifications and outstanding service to 
LBUSD.  However, the evidence was insufficient to find or conclude that LBUSD 
should not lay her off. 
 
 
LBUSD intends to retain 0.6 FTE of Respondent Hoffman’s position.  
Respondent Hoffman argued that he should be retained in total to continue teaching 
math at Lakewood High School.  He contended that LBUSD’s retention of only 0.6 
FTE was illogical.  The evidence and law was sufficient to find that LBUSD could 
retain 0.6 FTE of Respondent Hoffman’s position and no authority was presented to 
the contrary; therefore, his argument was unpersuasive. 
 
 
him as a business teacher instead of a physical education teacher.  He currently 
teaches physical education and coaches varsity soccer.  His authorizations allow him 
to teach physical education and business classes.  Given his current assignment, the 
evidence did not support finding or concluding that LBUSD should re-categorize 
Respondent David Christensen or dismiss the Accusation against him. 
 
 
provisions of the federal law, known as “No Child Left Behind.”  Respondent 
Rappaport’s arguments were unpersuasive. 
 
Respondent Natalia Orndoff (Respondent Orndoff) argued that she 
 
should not be laid off, as she provides particular services to LBUSD students that 
should be preserved, namely her work with a cross cultural language and academic 
development credential.  Respondent Orndoff argued that such services should be 
viewed similarly to programs like AVID.  Her argument was unpersuasive. 
 
 
Respondents Kathy Jo McMillin (Respondent McMillin) and Rose 
Vadakan (Respondent Vadakan) argued that LBUSD should skip them because of 
their special training and experience working with high-risk students.  Respondents 
McMillin and Vadakan teach at a middle school through the Guidance Opportunity 
Program, teaching students with disruptive behaviors, drug and/or alcohol problems, 
and gang affiliations, among other problems.  They argued that LBUSD should skip 
them for providing services for this student population and that their special 
experience should be equivalent to that of AVID training.  Despite their valuable 

Respondent Rappaport argued that he should not be laid off, proffering 

51. 

49. 

50. 

 

15

53. 

54. 

52. 

Respondent Darin O’Connell (Respondent O’Connell) argued that, as 

services, Respondents McMillin’s and Vadakan’s arguments were unpersuasive.  
Respondent McMillin further asserted that she should have a seniority date in August 
2005, instead of her current date of September 6, 2005; however, the evidence was 
insufficient to establish a specific earlier date. 
 
 
Respondent Erin Clark (Respondent Clark) argued that another 
employee’s seniority date appeared to her to be inaccurate.  The evidence was 
inadequate to establish Respondent Clark’s argument. 
 
 
the sole male physical education teacher at Avalon High School/Middle School, 
Catalina Island, he is the only physical education teacher qualified to supervise the 
male locker room.  On this basis, LBUSD should not lay him off.  The evidence was 
insufficient to establish that Respondent O’Connell would be the only qualified 
person to supervise the male locker room at his school, as it was not established that 
such supervision required a teacher, nor was there conclusive evidence that no one 
else at Avalon High School/Middle School could supervise the male locker room. 
 
 
Respondent Gerard Miller (Respondent Miller) argued that he should 
be skipped.  Respondent Miller argued that he teaches a unique program (a guidance 
opportunity class) for children with extreme behaviors.  He possesses a non-violent 
crisis intervention certificate.  However, Respondent Miller’s skipping argument was 
unpersuasive. 
 
55.  At hearing, the parties agreed that Respondent Lori Weilandt’s 
 
September 1, 2004 seniority date should be October 21, 2003, and consequently, her 
seniority number was changed to 894W. 
 
Respondents’ Overall Arguments 
 
 
proceeding.  That is, LBUSD issued precautionary notices of potential layoff to 
LBUSD employees that it had no intention of serving with a final layoff notice.  
Furthermore, Respondents argued that LBUSD failed to rescind those precautionary 
notices timely and thus failed to consistently and properly identify those Respondents 
LBUSD was seeking to layoff.  In doing so, Respondents argued that LBUSD 
deprived them of their due process right to properly present their defenses.  This 
argument was unsuccessful.  (See Legal Conclusion 14.) 
 
 
employees with preliminary layoff notices whose seniority is junior to employees 
who were served with such notices.  Respondents proffered a list of 17 employees 
whom LBUSD failed to serve with preliminary notices of layoff (and are therefore 
not subject to layoff), or whose layoff notices LBUSD erroneously rescinded.  These 
individuals are listed in Appendix D.  Respondents argued that this predicament 

Respondents argued that LBUSD over-noticed its employees for this 

Respondents argued that LBUSD failed to serve a number of 

56. 

57. 

 

16

58. 

59. 

Respondents argued that LBUSD should allow employees holding a 

The parties made two stipulations related to this issue.  First, the parties 

requires the dismissal of the Accusations of all Respondents with more seniority than 
any mistakenly retained junior employee.  LBUSD conceded that it indeed failed to 
serve a number of employees, as Respondents asserted.  However, Respondents’ 
argument that, as a consequence, LBUSD must dismiss wholesale the Accusations of 
all Respondents with more seniority than any mistakenly retained junior employee 
was unsuccessful.  (See Legal Conclusion 16.) 
 
 
agreed that LBUSD will identify the most senior individual who is competent and 
qualified to bump into the assignment held by Respondent Matthew Michaelson 
(Respondent Michaelson)5, had he received a layoff notice, and will not issue a final 
layoff notice to that most senior respondent.  Second, the parties agreed that LBUSD 
will identify the most senior respondent who is competent and qualified to bump into 
the assignment held by any less senior employee who did not receive a layoff notice, 
and will not issue a final layoff notice to that most senior individual. 
 
 
multiple subject credential to bump into middle school positions that consist of a core 
assignment.  This argument was unsuccessful.  (See Legal Conclusion 15.) 
 
The Self-Represented Respondents 
 
 
Respondent Boeglin argued that her seniority date of August 28, 2002, 
should be changed to June 24, 2002, because she began teaching summer school for 
LBUSD on that earlier date.  Respondent Boeglin argued that LBUSD paid her to 
teach summer school, and that the first date of payment was her first date of paid 
service, for purposes of seniority calculation.  Respondent Boeglin’s argument was 
unpersuasive by virtue of Education Code section 44913.  (See Legal Conclusions 17 
and 27.)  She further asserted that she had participated in the New Teacher Institute 
training around the same time as when she began teaching summer school, but she 
provided insufficient evidence to establish that assertion.  (See Factual Findings 69 
and 70, for an explanation of the New Teacher Institute training.) 
 
 
argued that LBUSD failed to inform her that working part-time, as she has been 
doing, would limit the rate at which she would acquire service credit.  She argued that 
she had detrimentally relied on LBUSD’s information, and was not accurately 
informed that working part-time would impair her ability to acquire permanent status, 
a status she does not currently have (she remains a probationary employee, as she has 
not worked two consecutive school years).  She further argued that, based on 
                                                 
 
May 13, 2010.  Respondent Michaelson possesses the least seniority of those 
employees included on the two lists Respondents proffered, as noted in Factual 
Finding 57. 

5  LBUSD mistakenly rescinded Respondent Michaelson’s notice of layoff on 

Respondent Melissa Espinoza argued that she should be retained.  She 

60. 

61. 

 

17

62. 

Respondent Gant argued that she should be retained because she is a 

LBUSD’s communications with her, LBUSD has acted unfairly and in bad faith.  
Consequently, argues Respondent Melissa Espinoza, these actions have caused her to 
make uninformed decisions, namely choosing to work at a 50 percent position, 
instead of a full-time position, and thereby precluding her from attaining permanent 
employee status.  Respondent Melissa Espinoza’s argument was unpersuasive.  (See 
Legal Conclusion 18.)  She additionally argued that she should be skipped due to 
having completed AVID training.  She participated in AVID training from July 29 to 
August 2, 2002; however, there was no evidence that she ever taught an AVID 
course.  Therefore, she did not establish cause to be skipped.  Lastly, Respondent 
Melissa Espinoza argued that LBUSD should waive a portion of Education Code 
section 44908 to grant her permanent status.  She provided evidence that, in January 
2010, the California State Board of Education gave approval, with conditions, for 
such a waiver, to the Chino Valley Unified School District for 12 employees within 
that school district.  That argument was unavailing.  (Ibid.) 
 
 
well-qualified teacher who specializes in teaching English-language learners.  
Respondent Gant teaches in the City of Avalon, on Catalina Island.  Although 
LBUSD identifies her classroom as an English-only class, Respondent Gant’s 
classroom includes a large number of primarily Spanish-speaking, limited English-
speaking students.  She uses Spanish daily in class and believes her language skills 
and her ability to relate to these bicultural students is a necessity to teaching the 
students.  Respondent Gant established her qualifications to teach English Language 
Learners.  Further, Respondent Gant submitted numerous letters of recommendation 
from the families of students, describing her excellent teaching skills, her effective 
methods, and each asking that Respondent Gant be retained as an essential teacher in 
Avalon.  Respondent Gant additionally provided evidence that the student population 
in Avalon is properly described as consisting of a high percentage of Spanish-
speaking students of low income who require the kinds of teaching skills she 
possesses and the methodologies she employs.  Respondent Gant argues that her 
overall qualifications constitute special training and experience, as contained in 
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).  Respondent Gant’s arguments 
were unpersuasive.  (See Legal Conclusion 19.) 
 
 
Respondent Hoefs argued that she should be retained because she lost 
an earlier obtained seniority date due to her inability to work on the mainland.  Like 
Respondent Gant, Respondent Hoefs resides and teaches in Avalon, Catalina Island.  
After having taken a leave of absence related to childcare, on June 30, 2006, 
Respondent Hoefs tendered her resignation to LBUSD.  She had taught within the 
District since approximately September 1998.  Upon attempting to return to work, 
Respondent Hoefs had been displaced from her previous position.  LBUSD then 
offered her a position within the District in Long Beach.  As she lives on the Catalina 
Island with her husband and children, and there was no transportation that would 
allow her to commute to Long Beach during school hours, she could not accept a 
position there.  She understood that if she did not accept a position in Long Beach, 

63. 

 

18

64. 

65. 

Like Respondent Izumi, Respondents Breton, Lass, Mahoney, and 

LBUSD would terminate her.  Respondent Hoefs did not want to have an employment 
termination on her record; therefore she chose to resign.  Respondent Hoefs feels her 
resignation was forced due to these circumstances.  She made several attempts 
thereafter to address LBUSD, explain her situation, and find a way to continue to 
teach for LBUSD.  Respondent Hoefs is a dedicated teacher, whom LBUSD considers 
an outstanding employee.  LBUSD contracted with Respondent Hoefs to substitute 
teach for the 2006-2007, and 2007-2008 school years.  LBUSD rehired Respondent 
Hoefs on approximately November 25, 2008; her seniority date comports with this 
rehire date.  Despite Respondent Hoefs’s established commitment to LBUSD students 
on Catalina Island, her argument was unpersuasive, given the Legislature’s mandate 
in Education Code section 44848.  (See Legal Conclusion 20.) 
 
 
Respondent Izumi argued that she should be retained.  She first began 
working for LBUSD on August 27, 1984, as a counselor.  She worked as a counselor 
for LBUSD for 17 years and then worked as a social worker from 2000 to the present.  
She argued that, given her years with the District, and qualifications, LBUSD should 
not lay her off.  Respondent Izumi’s argument was unpersuasive. 
 
 
Arlene Perez are all social workers for LBUSD.  Each of them presented documentary 
evidence to support their positions.  Each argued that she should be retained because 
they provide unique, valuable, and necessary services to the LBUSD student body.  
Each of these Respondents described their varied and outstanding accomplishments as 
social workers and described their passion and desire to do social work for LBUSD 
students.  They established that they are individually qualified to do social work for 
LBUSD and provide a valuable service, however their arguments that they should not 
be laid off were unpersuasive. 
 
 
employment with LBUSD in approximately 2002.  In 2009, Respondent Posard was 
laid off.  He was hired thereafter as a temporary employee for the 2009-2010 school 
year.  Based, at least in part, upon communications between Respondent Posard and 
Ashley, Respondent Posard took the necessary steps to acquire a counseling 
credential.  In approximately April 2009, Ashley mistakenly told Respondent Posard 
that his counseling credential would entitle him to bump into a counseling position 
during the current layoff season.  Respondent Posard argued that he relied on 
Ashley’s comments, he signed a special contract, and such a contract is distinct from 
                                                 
 
requested to be heard in a private session, apart from the numerous respondents 
assembled during the instant proceeding.  LBUSD opposed the motion.  Respondent 
Posard’s request was denied, as Education Code section 44944.1 is not applicable to 
the instant proceeding and thus there was no authority to provide him a private 
session during his testimony and argument. 
 

6  At hearing, Respondent Posard, citing Education Code section 44944.1, 

Respondent Posard6 argued that he should be retained.  He began 

66. 

 

19

68. 

67. 

Respondent Catherine Jones argued that she should be skipped.  She 

Respondents Chambliss, Chan, Dunster, Herrera, Sasaki, and Sun did 

69.  At issue in this hearing, was the contention that LBUSD required 

a temporary contract (therefore, he is not a temporary employee), and he should retain 
August 26, 2002 (when he first began with LBUSD), as his seniority date, a date that 
would allow him to take the position of another social worker or counselor within the 
school district.  Respondent Posard’s arguments were unpersuasive.  The evidence 
established that he is a temporary employee, and his employment may be 
discontinued on that basis.  (See Legal Conclusion 22.) 
 
 
not testify or otherwise offer evidence on their behalves. 
 
 
participated in AP training from July 7 to July 11, 2008, and taught AP Art History in 
the 2009-2010 school year.  As such, Respondent Catherine Jones established cause 
to be exempt from layoff, pursuant to LBUSD’s skipping criteria. 
 
Seniority Date Amendments—Based on Mandatory Trainings 
 
 
Respondents to attend, and that it paid them to attend, a number of teacher trainings 
prior to the start of their first day in class.  Those trainings included the New Teacher 
Institute (NTI) training; the Open Court/Reading First (Open Court) training; a 
particular training in Dallas, Texas (hereafter referred to as “the Dallas training”); the 
Linda Mood Bell (LMB) training; the “Language !” training; the High Point training; 
and the PEACE Academy training.  Where Respondents were able to establish that 
LBUSD required them to attend these trainings and paid them for attendance, whether 
by stipend, regular pay rate, or otherwise, their seniority dates were herein found to be 
the first date they attended the particular training at issue.  (See Legal Conclusions 25 
and 26.) 
 
 
The parties stipulated that LBUSD would recognize attendance at NTI 
as the first date of paid service in a probationary position for purposes of calculating 
seniority.  LBUSD will review records to determine which employees attended NTI 
in various years and will accordingly adjust the seniority dates of all those employees 
it confirms attended that training. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70. 

 

20

73. 

72. 

71. 

74. 

Respondent Melissa Steere (Respondent Steere)7 argued that her 

Respondent Cheryl Huber (Respondent Huber) argued that her 

Respondent Alina Herrera-Gonzalez (Respondent Herrera-Gonzalez) 

Respondent Luz Ochoa (Respondent Ochoa) argued that her September 

 
September 3, 2002 seniority date should be August 2, 2002.  She attended the Dallas 
training between August 2 and 9, 2002.  LBUSD paid for her attendance and required 
her to attend.  She asserted that LBUSD also required her to participate in the NTI 
training in August 2002, but provided insufficient evidence to establish the dates of 
that training.  Respondent Steere’s first date of paid service, and consequently her 
seniority date, is properly August 2, 2002. 
 
 
argued that her September 3, 2002 seniority date should be August 2, 2002.  
Respondent Herrera-Gonzalez attended the Dallas training between August 2 and 9, 
2002.  LBUSD paid for her attendance and required her to attend.  Her first date of 
paid service, and consequently her seniority date, is properly August 2, 2002. 
 
 
September 30, 2002 seniority date should be August 9, 2002.  Respondent Huber 
attended the Dallas training between August 2 and 9, 2002.  LBUSD paid for her 
attendance and required her to attend.  Her first date of paid service, and consequently 
her seniority date, is properly August 2, 2002. 
 
 
3, 2002 seniority date should be August 3, 2002.  Respondent Ochoa attended the 
Dallas training between August 3 and 9, 2002.  LBUSD paid for her attendance and 
required her to attend.  Her first date of paid service, and consequently her seniority 
date, is properly August 3, 2002. 
 
 
Respondent Victoria Joo (Respondent Joo) argued that her September 
3, 2002 seniority date should be August 2, 2002.  Respondent Joo attended the Dallas 
training between August 2 and 9, 2002.  LBUSD paid for her attendance and required 
her to attend.  Her first date of paid service, and consequently her seniority date, is 
properly August 2, 2002. 
                                                 
 
were required to file closing briefs.  The brief was prepared by Martin E. Steere, Esq. 
identified as “Associated Counsel appearing on behalf of Melissa Steere.”  Mr. Steere 
did not appear on the record or file any document identifying himself as associated 
counsel, although LBUSD’s and Respondents’ counsel informed the ALJ that Mr. 
Steere made himself known to them during the hearing and informed them that he 
would be filing a brief on behalf of Respondent Steere.  The pleadings in this matter 
establish that Ms. Reinhold represents Respondent Steere.  There was no objection to 
Respondent Steere’s closing brief.  Respondent Steere’s brief was accepted and 
marked for identification.  The brief included one attachment that was not offered at 
hearing, namely a photocopy of OAH Proposed Decision in case number 
2010030980, another and unrelated matter.  That attachment was not admitted, and 
consequently, not considered in this matter. 

7  Respondent Steere submitted an “Opening Brief” at the time Respondents 

75. 

 

21

79. 

77. 

78. 

76. 

Respondent Lee Kolsky (Respondent Kolsky) argued that his 

Respondent Rattana Khiev (Respondent Khiev) argued her September 

Respondent Irma Ayapantecatl (Respondent Ayapantecatl) argued that 

Respondent Julianne Beebe (Respondent Beebe) argued her September 

 
her September 1, 2004 seniority should be August 23, 2004.  Respondent 
Ayapantecatl attended the NTI training between August 23 and 26, 2004.  LBUSD 
paid for her attendance and required her to attend.  Her first date of paid service, and 
consequently her seniority date, is properly August 23, 2004. 
 
 
September 2, 2003 seniority date should be August 18, 2003.  Respondent Kolsky 
attended the NTI training between August 18 and 22, 2003.  LBUSD paid for his 
attendance and required him to attend.  His first date of paid service, and 
consequently his seniority date, is properly August 18, 2003. 
 
 
1, 2004 seniority date should be August 23, 2004.  Respondent Khiev attended the 
NTI training between August 23 and 27, 2004.  LBUSD paid for her attendance and 
required her to attend.  Her first date of paid service, and consequently her seniority 
date, is properly August 23, 2004. 
 
 
5, 2006 seniority date should be August 21, 2006.  Respondent Beebe attended the 
NTI training between August 21 and 25, 2006.  LBUSD paid for her attendance and 
required her to attend.  Her first date of paid service, and consequently her seniority 
date, is properly August 21, 2006. 
 
Respondent Holly Camarillo (Respondent Camarillo) argued that her 
 
September 2, 2003 seniority date should be July 7, 2003, based on when she began 
preparing herself and classroom for the upcoming school year.  Respondent Camarillo 
attended the Open Court training between July 14 and 18, 2003, and the NTI training 
between August 18 and 22, 2003.  LBUSD paid for her attendance at both trainings 
and required her to attend both.  Her first date of paid service, and consequently her 
seniority date, is properly July 14, 2003. 
 
 
September 1, 2004 seniority date should be July 7, 2004.  Respondent Trutanich 
attended the Open Court training between July 7 and 13, 2004.  LBUSD paid for her 
attendance and required her to attend.  She further argued that she attended the NTI 
training, however, there was insufficient evidence to establish when she attended the 
NTI training.  Her first date of paid service, and consequently her seniority date, is 
properly July 7, 2004. 
 
 
seniority date should be August 9, 2004.  Respondent Varnell attended the Open 
Court training between August 9 and 13, 2004.  LBUSD paid for her attendance and 
required her to attend.  She also completed the NTI training on August 27, 2004.  Her 

Linda Varnell (Respondent Varnell) argued that her September 1, 2004 

Respondent Romi Trutanich (Respondent Trutanich) argued that her 

82. 

81. 

80. 

 

22

83. 

85. 

84. 

Respondent Nancy Avila (Respondent Avila) argued that her 

Respondent Deborah Brown argued that her September 1, 2004 

first date of paid service, and consequently her seniority date, is properly August 9, 
2004. 
 
 
seniority date should be August 16, 2004.  Respondent Brown attended the Open 
Court training between August 16 and 20, 2004.  LBUSD paid for her attendance and 
required her to attend.  She further argued that she attended the NTI training, 
however, there was insufficient evidence to establish when she attended the NTI 
training.  Her first date of paid service, and consequently her seniority date, is 
properly August 16, 2004. 
 
 
Respondent Sheek argued that his September 1, 2004 seniority date 
should be August 16, 2004.  Respondent Sheek attended the “Language!” training 
between August 16 and 20, 2004, and the NTI training between August 23 and 27, 
2004.  LBUSD paid for his attendance at both trainings and required him to attend 
both.  His first date of paid service, and consequently his seniority date, is properly 
August 16, 2004. 
 
 
September 2, 2003 seniority date should be August 4, 2003.  Respondent Avila 
attended the Dallas training between August 4 and 8, 2003, and August 11 through 
12, 2003.  LBUSD paid for her attendance and required her to attend.  Her first date 
of paid service, and consequently her seniority date, is properly August 4, 2003. 
 
Respondent Melanie Coleman (Respondent Coleman) argued that her 
 
September 2, 2003 seniority date should be August 13, 2003.  Respondent Coleman 
attended the NTI training for special education teachers between August 13 and 14, 
2003.  Respondent Coleman asserted LBUSD paid her to attend, however, she could 
not recall clearly.  Respondent Coleman’s testimony as to this training and payment 
was clear and similar to other similarly situated Respondents (without appearing to 
merely repeat the testimony of others).  Therefore, Respondent Coleman’s testimony 
in this case is sufficient to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that she 
attended the NTI training for special education teachers, that LBUSD paid for her 
attendance, and that the training was mandatory.  Her first date of paid service, and 
consequently her seniority date, is properly August 13, 2003. 
 
 
Respondent Diane Wenrick (Respondent Wenrick) argued that her 
September 2, 2003 seniority date should be August 1, 2003, based on training and 
work she undertook beginning August 1, 2003.  Respondent Wenrick attended the 
NTI training between August 18 and 22, 2003.  LBUSD paid for her attendance and 
required her to attend.  She also asserted that she substitute taught on August 1 and 4, 
2003, and was required to make up 23 days for retirement purposes, known as “make-
up days.”  (See Factual Finding 94, for an explanation of “make-up days.”)  Her work 
on August 1 and 4, 2003 are insufficient to qualify as her first dates of paid service, 

87. 

86. 

 

23

89. 

88. 

Respondent Marisa Torrez-Chavez (Respondent Torrez-Chavez) 

Respondent Jisun Gale (Respondent Gale) argued that her September 

based on Education Code section 44918, subdivision (a).  Her first date of paid 
service, and consequently her seniority date, is properly August 18, 2003. 
 
 
20, 2003 seniority date should be August 4, 2003.  Respondent Gale attended the 
Linda Mood Bell (LMB) training between August 4 and 8, 2003.  LBUSD paid for 
her attendance and required her to attend.  Her first date of paid service, and 
consequently her seniority date, is properly August 4, 2003. 
 
 
argued that her September 1, 2004 seniority date should be August 2, 2004.  
Respondent Torrez-Chavez attended the LMB training between August 2 and 6, 2004, 
although she left the training one day early (August 5, 2004).  She testified she was 
told her attendance on the last day was allowable, given the training schedule.  There 
was no evidence that her absence nullified her training.  She attended the High Point 
training between August 11 and 12, 2004.  She does not recall what she was paid for 
either training, but asserted that she was paid by LBUSD.  Respondent Torrez-
Chavez’s testimony as to these trainings was clear and similar to other similarly 
situated Respondents (without appearing to merely repeat the testimony of others).    
Therefore, Respondent Torrez-Chavez’s testimony in this case is sufficient to 
establish by a preponderance of the evidence that:  she attended the LMB and High 
Point trainings, that LBUSD paid for her attendance at both, and that the trainings 
were mandatory.  Her first date of paid service, and consequently her seniority date, is 
properly August 2, 2004. 
 
 
Respondent Emily Warner (Respondent Warner) argued that her 
September 4, 2007 seniority date should be June 21, 2007.  Respondent Warner 
attended the AP Institute between July 9 and 13, 2007.  Respondent Warner’s 
testimony was sufficient to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that LBUSD 
paid her to attend the AP Institute, despite the absence of documentary evidence.  She 
asserted she also attended the “PEACE Academy” training, but had insufficient 
evidence to establish that assertion.  Given her AP Institute attendance, her first date 
of paid service, and consequently her seniority date, is properly July 9, 2007. 
 
 
September 1, 2004 seniority date should be August 11, 2004.  Respondent Quamma 
attended the mandatory High Point Training between August 11 and 12, 2004.  
LBUSD paid for her attendance.  Therefore, Respondent Quamma’s first date of paid 
service, and consequently her seniority date, is properly August 11, 2004. 
 
 
should be August 13, 2003, because she began substitute teaching and engaged in 
other duties to ready herself for the coming school year.  She further explained that 
she engaged in make-up days (40 days) while school was not in session, and chose to 
do so beginning August 13, 2003.  Respondent Schoettler also asserted that she 

Respondent Schoettler argued that her September 2, 2003 seniority date 

Respondent Vanessa Quamma (Respondent Quamma) argued her 

91. 

90. 

92. 

 

24

94. 

93. 

Respondents Wills, Wenrick, and Nikki Dunnicliffe (Respondent 

participated in mandatory trainings starting August 25, 2003; however, the evidence 
was insufficient to establish her training participation.  Her substitute teaching did not 
qualify her for an earlier seniority date.  (See Legal Conclusion 29.)  Respondent 
Schoettler’s first date of paid service therefore remains September 2, 2003. 
 
 
Respondent Towery argued that her September 3, 2002 seniority date 
should be July 1, 2002, because she began substitute teaching and shadowing other 
teachers on that date.  She asserted the work she began on July 1, 2002, was required 
by LBUSD.  There was insufficient evidence to establish her assertions that she began 
paid work on July 1, 2002, or that any work she engaged in on July 1, 2002, was 
required by LBUSD.  The documentary evidence established that she attended the 
NTI training in August 2002, but there was insufficient evidence to establish a 
specific date.  Without such evidence, a seniority date in August 2002 could not be 
established.  The parties may meet hereafter and agree on the appropriate date in 
August 2002, if they can establish a specific date; however, with the evidence in the 
record, the ALJ could not make such a factual finding.  Therefore, Respondent 
Towery’s September 3, 2002 seniority date remains appropriate. 
 
Seniority Date Amendments—Based on Make-up Days 
 
 
Dunnicliffe) each made arguments that their seniority dates (September 2, 2003, for 
Respondents Wills and Wenrick; and July 23, 2004, for Respondent Dunnicliffe), 
should be earlier (July 21, 2003, for Respondent Wills; August 1, 2003, for 
Respondent Wenrick; and July 8, 2004, for Respondent Dunnicliffe).  They each 
based their individual arguments on their assertions that LBUSD informed each that 
they were required to work days before the start of the school year to maximize their 
retirement credits during their first year of employment.  The evidence established 
that these “make-up days” were optional; Respondents were able to complete these 
days at any point during the first year, including any days school was not in session.  
Therefore, it cannot be concluded that the make-up days were mandatory, or that 
LBUSD required Respondents Wills, Wenrick or Dunnicliffe to engage in “make-up 
days” prior to the start of the school year.  Furthermore, the testimony of Respondents 
Wills, Wenrick, and Dunnicliffe established that each mostly substitute taught during 
the “make-up days.”  Their testimony left it unclear as to when they specifically 
engaged in substitute teaching versus other tasks.  The evidence was also inconclusive 
as to the substance of the tasks other than substitute teaching.  Thus, based partially 
on Education Code section 44918, and otherwise on the lack of conclusive evidence 
as to the tasks engaged in by each Respondent and when each Respondent engaged in 
those tasks, Respondents Wills’s, Wenrick’s, and Dunnicliffe’s arguments to amend 
their seniority dates, based on “make-up days” were unpersuasive.  (See Legal 
Conclusion 29.) 
 
 
 

 

25

96. 

97. 

95. 

Respondent Lori Primrose (Respondent Primrose) argued that her 

Seniority Date Amendments—Miscellaneous 
 
 
Respondent Showley argued her September 7, 2004 seniority date 
should be a date in January 2004.  She argued that she began substitute teaching 
fourth and fifth grade classes in January 2004, before the school principal offered her 
a permanent position.  Respondent Showley was unable to provide evidence of a 
specific date in January 2004, when she began substitute teaching.  Without such 
evidence, and in consideration of Education Code section 44918, a change in seniority 
date is not warranted.  Respondent Showley’s first date of paid service therefore 
remains September 7, 2004. 
 
 
February 13, 2004 seniority date should be September 3, 2003.  Respondent Primrose 
filled a long-term substitute teaching position for a fifth grade classroom teacher who 
was out on medical leave.  She taught the class with no break in service through the 
school year, but LBUSD converted her into a probationary employee in February 
2004.  Therefore, her substitute teaching does not establish an earlier seniority date.  
(See Legal Conclusion 29.) 
 
 
Respondent Jennifer Kim-Clinton (Respondent Kim-Clinton) argued 
her September 3, 2002 seniority date should be August 27, 2002.  The evidence was 
insufficient to establish the earlier seniority date. 
 
 
Respondent Taobada-Peña argued her September 6, 2006 seniority date 
should be September 5, 2006.  Respondent Taobada-Peña argued that she, in fact, was 
required to begin teaching on September 5, 2006.  The evidence was insufficient to 
establish the earlier seniority date. 
 
 
be in the fall of 1997.  She asserted that she worked for LBUSD between 1997 and 
2001, but failed to provide sufficient evidence of that assertion.  There was 
insufficient evidence to establish an earlier seniority date.  Respondent Tritle further 
argued that she should be skipped for having IB certification.  She does not teach the 
IB high school subprogram course.  Her argument was unpersuasive, given LBUSD’s 
determination to only skip the high school IB certified teachers. 
 
 
September 6, 2005 seniority date should be August 31, 2005.  Respondent Cuevas 
attended a training described as a “buy back” training on August 31, 2005.  There was 
insufficient evidence to establish that the “buy back” training was mandatory or that 
LBUSD paid her to attend the training.  Therefore, Respondent Cuevas’s seniority 
date remains September 6, 2005. 
 
 
February 8, 2005 seniority date should be September 27, 2004.  Respondent Guntner 

100.  Respondent Kristina Cuevas (Respondent Cuevas) argued that her 

101.  Respondent Ingrid Guntner (Respondent Guntner) argued that her 

Respondent Tritle argued her September 5, 2006 seniority date should 

98. 

99. 

 

26

102.  Respondent Guntner testified a second time, arguing that another 

104.  Any other arguments proffered by Respondents or the Self-Represented 

argued that she first began working with students, substitute teaching for a teacher on 
an extended leave of absence on the earlier date.  There was insufficient evidence to 
establish Respondent Guntner’s argument.  Therefore, her seniority date remains 
February 8, 2005. 
 
 
employee’s seniority date appeared to her to be inaccurate.  The evidence was 
inadequate to establish Respondent Guntner’s argument. 
 
 
103.  Respondent Erin Triplett-Jackson (Respondent Triplett-Jackson) argued 
that her November 4, 2004 seniority date should be September 12, 2004.  Respondent 
Triplett-Jackson argued that she began teaching as a long-term substitute on the 
earlier date.  There was insufficient evidence to establish Respondent Triplett-
Jackson’s argument. 
 
 
Respondents that were not specifically mentioned in the Factual Findings were 
determined to be unpersuasive or insufficient to warrant an exemption from layoff, a 
dismissal of the Accusation, or a change in seniority date. 
 
Other Factual Findings 
 
 
kinds of services that the Governing Board directed to be reduced or discontinued. 
 
 
106.  The Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the particular 
kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 10 was due to the anticipated decline in 
State funding; the Governing Board’s decision was not arbitrary or capricious, but 
constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 
 
to the welfare of LBUSD and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees of LBUSD, as determined by the Governing Board. 
 
 
was not related to their competency as teachers. 
 

108.  The recommendation that Respondents be terminated from employment 

107.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related 

105.  LBUSD identified the certificated employees providing the particular 

109.  No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to 

render a service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

27

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

3. 

1. 

2. 

There was insufficient evidence to establish the assertions of those 

The parties met all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b) states in pertinent part, 

 
 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, including Respondent Ehuan.  (See 
Factual Finding 40.) 
 
Tie-Breaker Arguments 
 
 
“[a]s between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis 
of needs of the district and the students thereof.”  The evidence established LBUSD’s 
tie-breaker criteria are not arbitrary in nature and reasonably based on the needs of the 
school district and its students. 
 
 
Respondents who sought additional tie-breaker points.  As noted in Factual Finding 
13, as to Respondent Ware, if the parties agree a clear reading certificate is equivalent 
to a reading specialist certificate (a conclusion that could not be reached by the 
evidence presented by either party), then it would be appropriate for LBUSD to credit 
Respondent Ware with a tie-breaker point for possessing a reading specialist 
certificate. 
 
IB, AVID, AP Program Certifications 
 
 
“a school district may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of 
seniority [if] . . . [t]he district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 
specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee has special 
training and experience necessary to teach that course of study or to provide those 
services, which others with more seniority do not possess.” 
 
 
LBUSD acted appropriately and within its purview when it identified AVID, IB, and 
AP programs as programs that meet the requirements for exempting certain junior 
employees from layoff, who were trained and/or teaching AVID, IB, and AP 
programs, as determined.  Requiring employees to have taught AVID and AP courses 
in the most recent school year is a reasonable criterion and falls within the 
Legislature’s parameters of skipping those with “special training and experience.”  
(Educ. Code, § 44955, subd. (d), italics added.)  Respondents did not conclusively 
establish that AVID training was or is available to all teachers, as they argued; 
however, even if it were, not all teachers did or could become AVID trained, and not 
all teachers taught AVID during the most recent school year.  LBUSD’s criterion is 
appropriate.  Regarding the IB arguments, nothing in the law would require LBUSD 
to exempt from layoff all IB certified teachers simply because it determined to skip 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d) states in pertinent part, 

LBUSD exercised its discretion in developing its skipping criteria.  

4. 

5. 

 

28

6. 

those from the high school subprogram.  Thus, LBUSD’s skipping of only the two IB-
certified high school teachers is an appropriate action allowable by law.  (Ibid.) 
 
Bumping Arguments 
 
 
As found in this matter, there were several reasons why Respondents’ 
bumping arguments were unsuccessful:  there was insufficient evidence establishing 
Respondents’ credentials and/or experience; there was inadequate evidence 
establishing the requirements of the teaching position(s) into which Respondents 
argued they could bump; and the evidence presented was unpersuasive. 
 
Adult School Teachers 
 
 
Respondents Spooner, Goonetilleke, De La Vega, and Hofius rely on 
Education Code section 44916 and Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High 
School District, et al. (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911. 
 
 
 

Education Code section 44916 states in pertinent part: 

7. 

8. 

 
At the time of initial employment during each academic year, 
each new certificated employee of the school district shall receive a 
written statement indicating his employment status and the salary that 
he is to be paid.  If a school district hires a certificated person as a 
temporary employee, the written statement shall clearly indicate the 
temporary nature of the employment and the length of time for which 
the person is being employed.  If a written statement does not indicate 
the temporary nature of the employment, the certificated employee 
shall be deemed to be a probationary employee of the school district, 
unless employed with permanent status. 

9. 

 
 
In the case of Respondents Spooner, Goonetilleke, De La Vega, and 
Hofius, the year in which LBUSD failed to provide them a contract for temporary 
employment was one year within a string of otherwise continuous contracted 
temporary employment.  For each, several years of temporary employment continued 
well after the year without such a contract.  There was no evidence that any of the 
Respondents were surprised, confused, or uncertain about being employed as 
temporary employees the year of, or the year following, the year with no contract.  
There was no evidence that Respondents were led to believe they were being 
employed as probationary employees, or that there was any confusion on the part of 
Respondents, or assertions by LBUSD that it was offering Respondents anything 
other than temporary employment. 
 
10.  Given these facts, the case of Kavanaugh, supra, does not support 
 
Respondents’ argument.  In that case, the teacher at issue, a high school English 
teacher, argued she was told by the principal that the position she applied for and 

 

29

11. 

LBUSD’s ranking of its tie-breaker criteria, including its ranking of 

acquired was one that would lead to a permanent position.  The principal denied 
making such an assertion.  This factual dispute was central to the California Supreme 
Court’s analysis.  The Court stated, “A requirement that employing districts inform 
applicants for certificated positions of their proposed employment status (permanent, 
probationary, temporary, substitute) before they actually begin working avoids the 
kind of bait-and-switch scenario in which a teacher begins the school year believing 
his or her status is probationary (with the accompanying level of job protection) only 
to discover after the year has started—when it is too late to find another position—
that the position is only temporary.”  (Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union 
High School District, et al., supra, 29 Cal.4th at 921-922).  There was no such “bait-
and-switch” tactics in the instant matter.  The relevant statute and the manner in 
which the State’s High Court applied it to Kavanaugh makes clear that teachers 
should find protection in Education Code section 44916 when school districts make 
assertions or take actions that may reasonably lead employees to presume they are 
being employed as probationary employees.  In the instant matter, the continuous 
string of temporary employment contracts, before and after the one year without a 
contract, distinguish such a scenario.  Furthermore, Respondents’ argument in this 
case is stale, as argued by LBUSD. 
 
Miscellaneous Arguments 
 
 
board authorizations and supplemental credentials, was an appropriate exercise of its 
discretion, as set forth in Legal Conclusion 2. 
 
 
54, lacked factual support and/or legal merit, and therefore were not credited. 
 
Respondents’ Overall Arguments 
 
 
authorizations was inconsistent in its assignments and reassignments of employees is 
unavailing.  There was insufficient evidence to establish Respondent’s assertions.  In 
cases Respondents highlighted, there were adequate, lawful reasons why LBUSD 
assigned or reassigned those particular Respondents. 
 
 
Respondents’ argument that LBUSD overnoticed employees was 
unsuccessful.  All Respondents were given an opportunity to testify and present 
evidence on their own behalves.  There was no evidence that, based on the 
preliminary notices sent by LBUSD, and the manner in which the school district 
proceeded at hearing, any Respondent was unaware of the basis(es) for his or her 
potential layoff, or was somehow precluded from presenting a full defense.  
Consequently, there was no evidence that Respondents suffered a deprivation of their 
due process rights. 
 

Respondents’ argument that LBUSD’s consideration of board 

Respondents’ other arguments, set forth in Factual Findings 46 through 

12. 

14. 

13. 

 

30

15. 

16. 

Respondents’ argument that LBUSD must allow particular 

Respondents argued that LBUSD’s failure to serve some junior 

 
Respondents holding a multiple subject credential to bump into middle school 
positions that consist of a core assignment was unavailing.  LBUSD argued in this 
matter, a teacher must be able to bump into a junior teacher’s entire assignment, not 
only the core portion, as LBUSD is not engaging in what it refers to as “partial 
bumping.”  That argument is reasonable and Respondents provided no legal authority 
supporting its argument or authority to otherwise require LBUSD to perform such 
bumping. 
 
 
employees with preliminary layoff notices requires the dismissal of all Accusations 
against more senior employees.  This argument is referred to as “the domino theory.”  
This theory is unavailing.  The parties stipulated that LBUSD would dismiss a 
corresponding number of Accusations against Respondents, corresponding to the 
number of individuals it failed to serve with layoff notices.  (Factual Finding 58.)  
Such an act is an appropriate cure for the school district’s failure, and such a cure has 
been recognized by the courts, as LBUSD argued.  (See Alexander v. Board of 
Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 576-577.)  Furthermore, it stands to reason that 
this predicament should not lead to the dismissal of the Accusations against all 
employees with more seniority than any retained junior employee.  Such a result 
would unreasonably frustrate the legislatively constructed layoff process within the 
Education Code, while a reasonable cure exists that would protect Respondents’ 
rights and allow the school district to pursue its layoff.  Indeed, the parties have 
agreed to this more reasonable course of action, and such an action promotes the 
Legislature’s statutory purpose while curing the defects created by LBUSD. 
 
The Self-Represented Respondents 
 
 
unpersuasive, in light of the Legislature’s mandate in Education Code section 44913.  
(See Legal Conclusion 27, post.) 
 
 
legal obligation to inform her that her decision to reduce employment to half-time 
employment would curtail her ability to acquire service credit.  She similarly failed to 
establish evidence of actionable unfairness or bad faith on the part of LBUSD.  She is 
not eligible to be skipped on the basis of AVID training, as noted in Factual Finding 
61.  Lastly, as to the State Board of Education’s waiver, the evidence failed to 
establish the circumstances involved with the Chino Valley Unified School District, 
and its 12 employees.  With the evidence in the record, it could not be found or 
concluded that the circumstances in the Chino Valley matter, whatever those may be, 
were similar to the circumstances in the instant case, as it relates to Respondent 
Melissa Espinoza. 
 

Respondent Melissa Espinoza failed to establish that LBUSD had any 

Respondent Erin Boeglin’s argument for an earlier seniority date was 

17. 

18. 

 

31

20. 

19. 

Respondent Linda Gant established that she is a well-qualified teacher 

 
to teach her students:  largely English language learners from Spanish-speaking 
households in Avalon, Catalina Island.  Despite her qualifications, the generally 
disadvantaged nature of the student body she teaches, and the letters of support from 
her students’ families, Respondent Gant could not establish cause to exempt her from 
layoff or dismiss the Accusation against her.  LBUSD set forth its skipping criteria 
and did not add criteria similar to Respondent Gant’s qualifications to qualify her for 
exemption on the bases she advocates. 
 
 
Respondent Brenda Hoefs is a well-regarded teacher who established 
that she felt she had no other option but to resign from employment with the school 
district because there was no viable transportation for school teaching assignments 
between Avalon, Catalina Island and Long Beach.  While Respondent Hoefs’s 
circumstances are unfortunate, the law is nonetheless clear.  Education Code section 
44848 states in pertinent part, “[w]hen any certificated employee shall have  
resigned . . . and shall thereafter have been reemployed by the board, his date of 
employment shall be deemed to be the date on which he . . . rendered paid service 
after his reemployment.”  The Legislature made no provision for when certificated 
employees resign under what the employee feels is a forced decision.  The evidence 
did not establish that Respondent Hoefs’s decision to resign was subject to reversal or 
that LBUSD should reinstate her previous seniority date. 
 
 
presented evidence of their excellent work as social workers.  Their services are 
indeed valuable to LBUSD.  Nonetheless, they provided no evidence to warrant the 
dismissal of the Accusations against them, or their skipping, pursuant to LBUSD’s 
criteria. 
 
 
evidence to establish his assertion that the special contract he signed was distinct from 
a temporary contract.  His reliance on Ashley in obtaining a counseling credential 
does not shield him from layoff.  Temporary employees may be dismissed “at the 
pleasure of the [governing] board . . . so long as the temporary employee is notified 
before the end of the school year.”  (Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High 
School District, et al. (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911, 917-918 [citing Taylor v. Board of 
Trustees (1984) 36 Cal.3d 500, 505].)  Respondent Posard provided no persuasive 
evidence that he was unaware he was agreeing to temporary employment, or that 
LBUSD did anything to make him believe he was agreeing to anything other than 
temporary employment.  Thus, Respondent Posard can be laid off.  The remainder of 
Respondent Posard’s arguments lacked merit and/or were otherwise unpersuasive. 
 
 
Respondents Chambliss, Chan, Dunster, Herrera, Sasaki, and Sun did 
not testify and no other evidence was presented on their behalf to warrant retention. 
 

Respondent Posard is a temporary employee.  There was insufficient 

Respondents Izumi, Breton, Lass, Mahoney, and Arlene Perez 

23. 

21. 

22. 

 

32

24. 

26. 

25. 

27. 

The Legislature has disallowed summer school employment in 

Education Code section 44845 states in pertinent part, “[e]very 

Respondents correctly argued that if LBUSD required and paid 

Respondent Catherine Jones established that she should be skipped 

 
from layoff due to meeting the skipping criteria for AP training and teaching.  
(Factual Finding 68.) 
 
Seniority Dates 
 
 
probationary or permanent employee . . . shall be deemed to have been employed on 
the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.” 
 
 
Respondents to attend the various trainings (NTI, Open Court, etc.) before the start of 
the school year, the first day of training attended by each Respondent, where payment 
and attendance were established by competent evidence, would be the first date of 
paid service and his or her seniority date.  It is appropriate in those circumstances, as 
reflected in the Factual Findings, ante, to amend each Respondent’s seniority date 
accordingly. 
 
 
computing permanent employment status.  Education Code section 44913 states in 
pertinent part, “Nothing in Sections 44882 to 44887, inclusive, Sections 44890, 
44891, Sections 44893 to 44906, inclusive, and Sections 44908 to 44919, inclusive, 
shall be construed as permitting a certificated employee to acquire permanent 
classification with respect to employment in a summer school maintained by a school 
district, and service in connection with any such employment shall not be included in 
computing the service required as a prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to, 
classification as a permanent employee of the district.  The provisions of this section 
do not constitute a change in, but are declaratory of, the preexisting law.”  This 
mandate relating to credit for permanent status, supports LBUSD’s argument that 
summer school employment does not establish an earlier seniority date.  Therefore, 
where Respondents argued a change in their seniority date, based on summer school 
teaching, those arguments were not credited. 
 
 
Regarding “make-up days,” the evidence established that these days 
were days Respondents could choose when to work, and were altogether optional.  
LBUSD argues that this, in part, should disallow the counting of such days to 
determine seniority dates.  However, in determining when an employee first rendered 
paid service in a probationary position, the statute is unambiguous.  The first date of 
paid service in a probationary position qualifies, even if a “make-up day,” provided 
that the paid service does not run afoul of the Legislature’s other mandates, for 
example, and saliently, Education Code sections 44913 and 44918.  (See Legal 
Conclusions 27 and 29.)  While LBUSD did not require employees to begin “make-up 
days” before the start of the school year, LBUSD allowed many to do just that.  
LBUSD argues that allowing these days to count toward seniority, given the optional 
nature and unstructured choosing of days, by both teachers and the school district, 

28. 

 

33

29. 

Regarding substitute teaching, Education Code section 44918, 

would lead to unfair changes in seniority dates.  Be that as it may, there is no 
authority to support LBUSD’s argument.  Therefore, “make-up days” worked before 
the start of the school year can qualify as the dates upon which an employee first 
rendered paid service in a probationary position.  However, in this case, those 
Respondents asserting such arguments failed to provide conclusive evidence that they 
engaged in employment that would qualify as countable service for purposes of 
determining seniority. 
 
 
subdivision (a), states in pertinent part, “Any employee classified as a substitute . . . 
employee, who serves during one school year for at least 75 percent of the number of 
days the regular schools of the district were maintained in that school year and has 
performed the duties normally required of a certificated employee of the school 
district, shall be deemed to have served a complete school year as a probationary 
employee if employed as a probationary employee for the following school year.”  
LBUSD correctly argues that, given this provision, if an employee begins substitute 
teaching, but is then offered a probationary position before serving 75 percent of the 
school year he or she began substitute teaching, that employee may not use that 
substitute service to calculate seniority.  Accordingly, Respondents’ claims were 
assessed within this analysis, as reflected in the factual findings. 
 
Additional Legal Conclusions 
 
 
30.  With the exception of Respondents Debra Boyle, Sandra Gutierrez, 
Ellen Noble, Veronica Williams, Catherine Jones, and those Respondents listed in 
Appendix C, cause exists to sustain LBUSD’s action to reduce or discontinue the full-
time equivalent positions set forth in LBUSD’s Resolution 021610-B, and to permit 
LBUSD to give notice to all other Respondents that their services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, as set forth in Factual Findings 1-109, and Legal Conclusions 1-29, and 31-35. 
 
The services identified in the Governing Board’s resolution number 
 
021610-B are particular kinds of services that the Governing Board can reduce or 
discontinue under Education Code section 44955.  The Governing Board’s decision to 
reduce or discontinue the identified services was not arbitrary or capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of 
services relates solely to the welfare of LBUSD’s schools and pupils within the 
meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
 
 
particular kinds of services that the Governing Board directed to be reduced or 
discontinued. 
 
 
Code section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of 

33.  A school district may reduce services within the meaning of Education 

LBUSD properly identified the certificated employees providing the 

32. 

31. 

 

34

service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may 
‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent 
because fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) 
 

34. 

LBUSD established cause to not reemploy Respondents for the 2010-

2011 school year, except for Respondents Debra Boyle, Sandra Gutierrez, Ellen 
Noble, Veronica Williams, Catherine Jones, and those Respondents listed in 
Appendix C. 
 
 
services that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 

35.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 

ORDER 

1. 

 
 
Except as provided in Order 2(a) and 2(b) below, and except for 
Respondents Debra Boyle, Sandra Gutierrez, Ellen Noble, Veronica Williams, 
Catherine Jones, and those Respondents listed in Appendix C, the Accusations served 
on all other Respondents in this matter, providing the particular kinds of services that 
the Governing Board directed to be reduced or discontinued, are sustained. 
 
2(a).  Notwithstanding Order 1 above, the Long Beach Unified School 
 
District shall identify the most senior Respondent who is competent and qualified to 
bump into the assignment held by Respondent Matthew Michaelson and shall not 
issue that most senior Respondent a final layoff notice. 
 
 
2(b).  Notwithstanding Order 1 above, the Long Beach Unified School 
District shall identify the most senior Respondents who are competent and qualified 
to bump into the assignment held by any less senior employee who did not receive a 
layoff notice (those listed in Appendix D), and shall not issue a final layoff notice to a 
corresponding number of those most senior Respondents. 
 
 
Notice shall be given to all Respondents, other than those excluded by 
Orders 1, 2(a), and 2(b), that their services will be terminated at the close of the 2009-
2010 school year. 
 
 
Gutierrez, Ellen Noble, Veronica Williams, Catherine Jones, those Respondents listed 
in Appendix C, and those Respondents to be identified pursuant to Orders 2(a) and 
2(b), are dismissed. 
 
Dated:  July 6, 2010   
 
 
 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
DANIEL JUAREZ 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

The Accusations served on Respondents Debra Boyle, Sandra 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

4. 

3. 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

35

Appendix A 
 
Respondents In Case Number 2010020244 

 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 

 
 

 

Employee Name 
 
Abbott, Patricia D 
Acosta, Diana A 
Ahmadi, Kathryn E 
Alberto, Natasha  
Alcala, Jisela G 
Allen, Ana R 
Allen, Timothy S 
Alvarez, Davealyn H 
Alvarez, Maria P 
Alviar, Mary Jane D 
Anaya, Maria D 
Anderson, Audra L 
Anderson, La Vida M 
Anderson, Sedelia M 
Antonio, Kathyrine E 
Appell, Christine E 
Aranda, John F 
Araya, Andrea  
Arca-San, Jennifer J 
Arce, Gabriela G 
Arzate Jr, Manuel A 
Arzuman, Allison S 
Aslan, Rita A 
Avila, Nancy P 
Ayapantecatl, Irma  
Babcock, Kristina K 
Bahr, Victoria F 
Balbuena, Blanca  
Baltazar, Eleanor C 
Banda, Tiffany A 
Barba, Elizabeth  
Barrientos, Maria E 
Baskin, Tabatha L 
Bates, Julie A 
Baumback, Jeffrey D 
Beck, Paul B 

36

37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 
77 
78 

Becker-Bermudez, Alicia Y 
Beebe, Julianne  
Belayachi, Gabriella  
Beltran, Carrie C 
Bensie, Ling G 
Benuzzi, Stacey M 
Bergh, Rebecca A 
Bessolo, Lauren J 
Blackburn, Gloria F 
Boeglin, Erin L 
Boese, Lisa A 
Bolanos, Reyes  
Boone, Angela R 
Borchardt, Kelly B 
Bourne, Laurie E 
Boyd, Brie A 
Boyle, Debra L 
Bradfield, Christine S 
Branda, Timothy C 
Braun, Dolores  
Breceda, Amy C 
Breton, Hortensia T 
Brizendine, Shannon P 
Brown, Amy W 
Brown, Deborah R 
Brown, Robert P 
Brown, Toya M 
Bruton, Stephanie J 
Bucko, Elizabeth G 
Buffington, Jessica D 
Buford, Tia M 
Bulat, Christina C 
Burg, Gary G 
Burgess, Bruce M 
Callier, Joseph L 
Camarillo, Holly M 
Campbell, Ryan R 
Campion, Janette  
Cancino, Christina M 
Cantu-Pacheco, Elaine Y 
Capparelli, Eva G 
Carlson, Jocelyn C 

 

37

79 
80 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 

Carr, Laura C 
Carr, Tiffany J 
Carroll, Michael J 
Carungcong, Meghan M 
Casillas, Victoria  
Cassara, Janet  
Castellanos, Jessica K 
Cavanaugh, Wendy R 
Celestial, Julie L 
Centurion, Cynthia K 
Cernok, Laura C 
Chambliss, Pensa M 
Chan-Jadus, Yong Y 
Chao, Alex L 
Chavez, Monica M 
Christensen, Barbara C 
Christensen, David B 
Chu, Jennifer M 
Church, Michelle L 
Clare, Melinda A 
Clark, Erin L 
Cline, Laurie D 
Coleman, Melanie C 
Collins, Stacey L 
Conrrad, Jessica  
Cordero, Rickeenah K 
Cortes, Erica  
Costanza, Shelly A 
Coster, Trinette L 
Croft, Karen S 
Cross, Kristy L 
Cruz, Eddie  
Ctvrtlik, Joyce A 
Cuaxiloa De Shivers, Gloria E 
Cuevas, Kristina J 
Da Silva, Kelly A 
Daley, Kathleen A 
Dalton, Nancy M 
Dau, Erin M 
Davenport, Carrie M 
Davis, Jennifer E 
Davis, Monica G 

 

38

121 
122 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 
150 
151 
152 
153 
154 
155 
156 
157 
158 
159 
160 
161 
162 

Davis-Foster, Erin J 
Day, Jennifer L 
De Koekkoek, Patricia L 
De La Vega, Ryan A 
De Rosier, Hilda P 
Dean, Donna J 
Deutschman, Janelle Y 
Diaz, Elizabeth  
Diaz, Olga F 
Dines, Michelle A 
Dobbs, Suzanne M 
Dody, Vanessa A 
Domingo, Maria Elena S 
Dominguez, Brenda  
Donnelly, Mary E 
Doon-Samaniego, Heidi-Lynn  
Doung, Adrienne L 
Dulce, Arlene S 
Dunnicliffe, Nikki N 
Dunning, Alexis A 
Dunster, John B 
Duty, Elizabeth A 
Early, Michele L 
Ebo, Obiorah O 
Eckert, Christopher B 
Eisman, Kelli D 
Elia, Karla L 
Ellis, Robyn W 
Enriquez, Ramon P 
Eomurian, Mark A 
Erskine, Ann M 
Espinoza, David O 
Espinoza, Melissa M 
Estrada, Ann M 
Estrada, Arnold  
Fakes, Damien  
Faris, Robert L 
Farmer, Paul G 
Fawcett, Brendan A 
Federici, Ovidio  
Feliciano, William C 
Ferguson, Ashleigh S 

 

39

163 
164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 
170 
171 
172 
173 
174 
175 
176 
177 
178 
179 
180 
181 
182 
183 
184 
185 
186 
187 
188 
189 
190 
191 
192 
193 
194 
195 
196 
197 
198 
199 
200 
201 
202 
203 
204 

Ferrer, Michelle M 
Fidel, Jodee D 
Fideler, Tracy L 
Figueroa, Lucy A 
Flint, Summer L 
Flores, Guillermo J 
Fox, Brent L 
Fox, John T 
Franco, Michelle B 
Fredericksen, Timothy R 
Freeman, Josh M 
Freer, Nichole L 
Frost, Amanda D 
Frushour, Nora H 
Fukushima, Teri  
Gagnon, Diane L 
Galaviz, Olga L 
Gale, Jisun  
Galindo, Esperanza V 
Gallagher, Tracie L 
Gallo, Veronica L 
Gant, Linda J 
Garcia, Lupe  
Garcia, Maria D 
Garcia, Nicole M 
Garcia Vasquez, Erik G 
Gardea, Danielle M 
Garza, Mayra C 
Gaschen, Justin M 
Gastelum, Mayra A 
Gegenworth, Georgia S 
Geib, Joyce E 
Gentle, Diane D 
George, Kathy D 
Gerritsen, Amanda R 
Gerson, Victoria  
Ghareeb, Jessica E 
Ghavimi, Shawdee  
Gibbons, Megan E 
Gladinus, Elizabeth R 
Glaser, Ramona R 
Glasser, Scott R 

 

40

205 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 
213 
214 
215 
216 
217 
218 
219 
220 
221 
222 
223 
224 
225 
226 
227 
228 
229 
230 
231 
232 
233 
234 
235 
236 
237 
238 
239 
240 
241 
242 
243 
244 
245 
246 

Glidden, Jessica R 
Goettsch, Katie R 
Goldman, Jennifer L 
Gomes, Whitney  
Goncalves, Ammie M 
Gonser, Wendy R 
Gonzalez, Cindy A 
Gonzalez, Lori M 
Goonetilleke, Linda J 
Gordon, Alyssa J 
Granado, Deborah B 
Grant-Burton, Sharron D 
Grantham, Denise L 
Greciasmith, Josephine M 
Grunzweig, Joan A 
Guerrero, Mirna E 
Guillen, Mario  
Guntner, Ingrid H 
Gurba, Myriam K 
Gutierrez, Brandi N 
Gutierrez, Jill M 
Gutierrez, Sandra C 
Guy, Amy E 
Hackney, Lewis W 
Haggerty, Petra M 
Hall, Elisa J 
Hardy, Karen J 
Harrison, Karen  
Hartman, Erika E 
Hatch, Julie C 
Hawkins, Catherine V 
Hawkins, Michelle R 
Hazel, Jason L 
Hebert Jr, Patrick P 
Hegamin, Terrence  
Heilemann, Ralph P 
Hellerud, Jennifer A 
Hemminger, Andrew M 
Henry, Rasheka L 
Hernandez, Katiria  
Hernandez, Laura  
Herrera, Julie Ann  

 

41

247 
248 
249 
250 
251 
252 
253 
254 
255 
256 
257 
258 
259 
260 
261 
262 
263 
264 
265 
266 
267 
268 
269 
270 
271 
272 
273 
274 
275 
276 
277 
278 
279 
280 
281 
282 
283 
284 
285 
286 
287 
288 

Herrera, Tracey A 
Herrera-Gonzalez, Alina I 
Hess, Toby M 
Hickox, Catherine S 
Higginbotham, Jeannette M 
Higgins, Phillip E 
Higuera, Laura  
Hilgenberg, Richard W 
Hines, Angela N 
Ho, Jennifer C 
Hoang, Mary  
Hodge, Kellie P 
Hoefs, Brenda  
Hoffman, Steven A 
Hofius, Robert D 
Holt, Drew K 
Holt, Jeanne M 
Homiakof, Michele A 
Hoover, Jill I 
Horton, Elizabeth A 
Hryze, Gina L 
Hubbard, Anastasia J 
Huber, Cheryl P 
Huff, Libby C 
Huffman, Mark A 
Huizar, Alicia  
Humphries, Michael J 
Hutchinson, Shauna R 
Huynh, Anna S 
Huynh, Crystal  
Ibarra, Rosalinda B 
Ibarra, Veronica G 
Ing, Puthea  
Iose, Meaalofa  
Irwin, Sandra L 
Ishida, Rika  
Ito, Jennifer K 
Ivemeyer, Jennifer M 
Izumi, Nancy C 
Jackson, Diane C 
Jackson, Mary C 
James, Annitta L 

 

42

289 
290 
291 
292 
293 
294 
295 
296 
297 
298 
299 
300 
301 
302 
303 
304 
305 
306 
307 
308 
309 
310 
311 
312 
313 
314 
315 
316 
317 
318 
319 
320 
321 
322 
323 
324 
325 
326 
327 
328 
329 
330 

James, Crystal C 
Janda, Brandi E 
Jasprica, Mandy N 
Jeffers, Jennefer L 
Jeffery, Jake S 
Jernigan, Nicole M 
Johns, Kara D 
Johnson, Geri A 
Johnson-Lichfield, Janice E 
Jonas, Mark A 
Jones, Catherine E 
Jones, Janet L 
Jones, Rodney S 
Joo, Victoria I 
Jorda, Anna M 
Joseph, Victoria A 
Junier, Darren E 
Kane, Mary G 
Kang, Hannah L 
Kaplinsky, Megan D 
Kawai, Lisa Y 
Keester, Ronald W 
Kelly, Erica J 
Kep, Tevy  
Keys, Cheryl M 
Khiev, Rattana S 
Kim-Clinton, Jennifer I 
Kittleson, Kimberly D 
Knapp, Diane M 
Kobaissi, Fatima S 
Kogen, Barry A 
Kolb, Jennifer N 
Kolodny, Harper W 
Kolsky, Lee R 
Kompleski, Gerald  
Kong, Sophak P 
Konyalian, Lizbeth  
Krause, Veronica C 
Kroneberger, Yvonne M 
Kutsunai, Miki  
Landeros, Esmeralda M 
Larsen, Gwendolyn  

 

43

331 
332 
333 
334 
335 
336 
337 
338 
339 
340 
341 
342 
343 
344 
345 
346 
347 
348 
349 
350 
351 
352 
353 
354 
355 
356 
357 
358 
359 
360 
361 
362 
363 
364 
365 
366 
367 
368 
369 
370 
371 
372 

Larsen, Peder O 
Lass, Laurel A 
Lauriano, Lisa A 
Lausch, Yvonne K 
Lawrence, Dana L 
Ledesma, Meegan N 
Lee, Sheila M 
Lefkowith, Derek J 
Leonard, Katherine C 
Leonard, Marnelle M 
Leonardo, Tina M 
Leone, Anetta C 
Levy, Nancy L 
Lim, Anna L 
Lim, Theavy  
Lindstrom, Brett C 
Littleworth, Bradley J 
Livingston, Jody Sun  
Lockwood, Debra M 
Lofstrom, Linda J 
Lopez, Claudia  
Lopez Sheldon, Maria I 
Lopez-Hernandez, Nancy  
Lourenco, Karrie D 
Lourenco, Sonia R 
Lubner, Mary E 
Lucchese, Dawn D 
Lujan, Vicki L 
Lund, Elieth E 
Luu, Rebeka Q 
Lytle, Angela  
Maben, Anne F 
Macander, David A 
Mackey, Dawn M 
Maestas, Aline A 
Mahan, Bryan L 
Mahnken, Kelly G 
Makridis, Paula S 
Mamnoon, Farahnaz  
Maners, Courtney M 
Manion, Stephanie M 
Manipon, Monica O 

 

44

373 
374 
375 
376 
377 
378 
379 
380 
381 
382 
383 
384 
385 
386 
387 
388 
389 
390 
391 
392 
393 
394 
395 
396 
397 
398 
399 
400 
401 
402 
403 
404 
405 
406 
407 
408 
409 
410 
411 
412 
413 
414 

Mank, Linda J 
Mann, Melissa V 
Manole, Daniela  
Manwarring, Jennifer L 
Marasigan, Maria C 
Marchese, Francesca L 
Mariano, Marinelle J 
Mariano, Mia G 
Markovitz-Troncoso, Stacy L 
Martin, Chau T 
Martin, Jeffrey W 
Martin, Jennifer  
Martinez, Christina M 
Martinez, Katrina R 
Mason, Jennifer L 
Mason, Paul  
Mathews, Candice N 
Matto, Emily M 
Mc Carty, Sunday  
Mc Craw-Harrison, Ashley M 
Mc Farland, Shawn  
Mc Grath, Leland  
Mc Michael, Sonia X 
Mc Millin, Kathy Jo  
Medina, Claudia  
Meiers, Cindy D 
Melendez, Martha C 
Mena, Elizabeth  
Mendenhall, Joy M 
Mendez, Anicia M 
Mendoza, Jennifer A 
Miles, Nicole A 
Miller Jr, Gerard C 
Minh, Doris Y 
Mocsary, Tiffaney S 
Montemayor-Duncan, Marsha G 
Montoya, Carolyn E 
Morales, Hilda C 
Morales, Maribel  
Moreland, Alexandria M 
Morris, Julia L 
Mostert, Terri S 

 

45

415 
416 
417 
418 
419 
420 
421 
422 
423 
424 
425 
426 
427 
428 
429 
430 
431 
432 
433 
434 
435 
436 
437 
438 
439 
440 
441 
442 
443 
444 
445 
446 
447 
448 
449 
450 
451 
452 
453 
454 
455 
456 

Munro, Valerie M 
Mynar, Kimberly A 
Najera, Enrique R 
Nash, Kristie L 
Nathan, Devi K 
Navarro, Vilomar  
Nervo, Regina M 
Newell, Barbara S 
Newhard, Christina L 
Newman, Susan E 
Nielsen, James J 
Nixon, Cassandra E 
Noble, Ellen P 
Nuez, Matthew  
O'Connell, Darin J 
Obeji, Jeanne M 
Ochoa, Luz E 
Oduwole, Bola  
Olguin, Zuzuky M 
Oliver, Lisa M 
Oliver, Maya C 
Ono, Alisia L 
Orndoff, Natalia L 
Ortloff, Patricia L 
Osuna, Rosio  
Owens, Kenneth W 
Ozimok, Carolyn  
Paimany, Davy  
Pait, Jill E 
Paluska, Annette S 
Papale, Alicia K 
Patterson, Christina M 
Patterson, Eric J 
Patterson, Kimetha W 
Paus, Charles P 
Pearlman, Teri E 
Pech, Puch  
Perez, Arlene  
Perez, Leoner J 
Perez, Nathan T 
Pham, Tram Anh M 
Phillips, Andrea T 

 

46

457 
458 
459 
460 
461 
462 
463 
464 
465 
466 
467 
468 
469 
470 
471 
472 
473 
474 
475 
476 
477 
478 
479 
480 
481 
482 
483 
484 
485 
486 
487 
488 
489 
490 
491 
492 
493 
494 
495 
496 
497 
498 

Pineiro, Paula  
Pitts, Cindy L 
Pravednikov, Christy R 
Pravednikov, Victor  
Primrose, Lori A 
Primrose, Scott A 
Prom, Linaromy  
Puentes, Marilu  
Quamma, Vanessa V  
Quiaot, Gertrude M 
Quintanar, Wendy  
Rachal, Tiffany P 
Rafkin, Jennifer M 
Ramirez, Elizabeth  
Ramirez Jr, Antonio  
Ramirez Jr, Jose  
Ramos, Esmeralda  
Ramos, Liseeth  
Rangel, Elida  
Rappaport, Hartley A 
Rash, Kelly M 
Rasmusson, Florinda L 
Ratliff, Janique L 
Reagan, Caprice J 
Reese, Katherine M 
Reger, Mandi M 
Reyes Jr, Alfred L 
Rice, Kelley I 
Richardson, Patricia S 
Richardt, Steven T 
Riede, Cynthia D 
Rios, Alma L 
Ritt-Caban, Mary C 
Rivera, Terri  
Roberts, Wendy L 
Robinson, Patricia M 
Robles, Elizabeth S 
Rock, Charity D 
Rockwood, Alison E 
Rodriguez, Diana C 
Rodriguez, Griselda G 
Roe, Rebecca A 

 

47

499 
500 
501 
502 
503 
504 
505 
506 
507 
508 
509 
510 
511 
512 
513 
514 
515 
516 
517 
518 
519 
520 
521 
522 
523 
524 
525 
526 
527 
528 
529 
530 
531 
532 
533 
534 
535 
536 
537 
538 
539 
540 

Romanio, Gary L 
Rosenthal, Heather B 
Ruiz, Ashley E 
Saikley, Jessica L 
Salaya, Wendy J 
Salazar, Jennie Y 
Salisbury, Danielle C 
Salzman, Antonia M 
Sanchez, Maria T 
Sanders, Emily  
Sandocal, Francisco S 
Sands, Erica L 
Sarabakhsh, Nooshin  
Sarabia, Edith I 
Sarabia, Erica  
Sarantakis Jr, Stephen D 
Sarmiento, Christopher P 
Sasaki, Colleen M 
Schmidt, David A 
Schoettler, Zariq  
Schultz, Cory D 
Schwenzfeier, Dominique V 
Sedillo, Carla D 
Segovia, Jose Luis  
Seo, Tina M 
Serna, Margarita F 
Serrano, Karen L 
Sheek, David G 
Sheets, Michael S 
Sheppard, Alan T 
Shihady, Megan H 
Shipman, Renee M 
Shiraki, Nicole  
Showley, Pamela K 
Sicaeros Jr, Porfirio H 
Siddiqui, Hajra S 
Sigur, Latesha A 
Silva, Danielle A 
Sipowicz, Melissa M 
Smith, Kimberlie L 
Smith, Wendy  
Soldan, Jennifer M 

 

48

541 
542 
543 
544 
545 
546 
547 
548 
549 
550 
551 
552 
553 
554 
555 
556 
557 
558 
559 
560 
561 
562 
563 
564 
565 
566 
567 
568 
569 
570 
571 
572 
573 
574 
575 
576 
577 
578 
579 
580 
581 
582 

Sotiropoulos, Aikaterini A 
Soto, Erma  
Sparks, Julie A 
Spooner, Gregory K 
Steele, Jennifer A 
Steere, Melissa M 
Steider-Brady, Lorian  
Stevens, Tia L 
Stranahan, Lisa D 
Stringer, Laura  
Stubblefield, Kimberly D 
Suarez, Kathleen  
Sue, Stacy  
Sugimoto, Kristin K 
Sula, Kenireta F 
Summers, David R 
Sun, Sopani T 
Sutton, Sarabeth  
Swiercz, Paula P 
Tablada, Gabriel L 
Taboada-Pena, Roxana  
Tait, Howard L 
Thayer, Lance F 
Thibeau, Nicole D 
Thornburg, David  
Thue, James J 
Thuney, David E 
Thurmond, Kitalie N 
Tierney, Kirsten H 
Torrez-Chavez, Marisa R 
Towery, Iyaunna K 
Trecker, Cynthia E 
Tripiano, Giovanna F 
Triplett-Jackson, Erin R 
Tritle, Amanda R 
Trutanich, Romina S 
Tunnicliff, Wendy M 
Turner, Janet J 
Turner, Marcus J 
Un-Maciel, Dinna  
Underwood, Lee R 
Ung, Darith  

 

49

583 
584 
585 
586 
587 
588 
589 
590 
591 
592 
593 
594 
595 
596 
597 
598 
599 
600 
601 
602 
603 
604 
605 
606 
607 
608 
609 
610 
611 
612 
613 
614 
615 
616 
617 
618 
619 
620 
621 
622 
623 
624 

Urias, Cristina L 
Ussery, Erica M 
Uy, Vanessa A 
Vadakan, Rose G 
Valadez, Patricia  
Valenzuela, Mireya  
Valenzuela, Richard T 
Vandezande, Laura A 
Vansteenwyk, Michelle L 
Vargas, Alina D 
Varnell, Linda W 
Vaughn, Erin E 
Vecchiolla, Michael S 
Vega, Sara C 
Velasquez, Karen  
Velazquez, Beatriz  
Verduzco, Bianca  
Verduzco, Rene  
Viola, Anthony  
Vogel-Zuiderweg, Lynn C 
Vokoun, Kathleen M 
Volkoff, Cora M 
Wade, Edina N 
Ward, Lea H 
Ware, Lisa A 
Ware, Wendy D 
Warner, Emily A 
Warren, Gwenelle D 
Warshauer, Michelle P 
Waterman, Bradford H 
Waterman, Edward A 
Watson, Susan E 
Watts, Geoffrey C 
Webb, Kelly L 
Webb, Monica J 
Weber, Anna B 
Weeks, Shannan D 
Wells, Scott J 
Wells, Teresa P 
Wenrick, Diane M 
Westermeyer, Linda H 
Weston, Monica J 

 

50

Whelan, Kristin M 
White, Davion E 
Whitesell, Elizabeth A 
Whitman, Kay F 
Wiegand, Beverly F 
Wielandt, Lori J 
Wilcox, Laura M 
Wilder, Krista D 
Wilhelmi, Danielle C 
Williams, Katherine A 
Williams, Michelle  
Williams, Nadia V 
Williams, Roberta D 
Williams, Robyn M 
Williams, Veronica A 
Williams-Davis, Monica D 
Wills, Stacey R 
Wilson, John R 
Winston, Denise M 
Wohlgezogen, Lorena  
Yaeger, Daniel S 
Yell Ii, David M 
Yim, Eugene H 
You, Laura G 
Zavala, Damaris D 
Zeineddine, Nicole S 
Zelaya, Doris E 
Zeoli, Jeanine M 
Zuluaga, Kelly L 

625 
626 
627 
628 
629 
630 
631 
632 
633 
634 
635 
636 
637 
638 
639 
640 
641 
642 
643 
644 
645 
646 
647 
648 
649 
650 
651 
652 
653 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

51

Respondents Represented by Reich, Adell & Cvitan In Case Number 2010020244 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Abbot, Patricia 
1. 
Acosta, Diana  
2. 
Ahmadi Kathryn 
3. 
Alberto, Natasha 
4. 
Alcala, Jisela   
5. 
Allen, Ana 
 
6. 
Allen, Timothy 
7. 
Alvarez, Davealyn 
8. 
9. 
Alviar, Mary Jane 
10.  Anderson, Audra 
11.  Apell, Christine 
12.  Aranda, John   
13.  Araya, Andrea 
14.  Arca-San, Jennifer 
15.  Arce, Gabriela 
16.  Avila, Nancy   
17.  Ayapantecatl, Irma 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 

Banda, Tiffany 
Becker-Bermudez, Alicia 
 
Beebe, Julianne 
 
Bensie, Ling   
 
Benuzzi, Stacie 
 
Blackburn, Gloria 
 
Bolanos, Reyes 
 
 
Boyd, Brie 
Boyle, Debra   
 
Bradfield, Christine   
 
Braun, Dolores 
Brizendine, Shannon  
 
Brown, Amy   
 
Brown, Deborah 
 
Brown, Robert 
 
Bucko, Elizabeth 
 
Buffington, Jessica 
 
 
Bufford, Tia 
 
Callier, Joseph 
 
Camarillo, Holly 
 
Campbell, Ryan 
 
Capparelli, Eva G. 
 
Carlson, Jocelyn 
 
Carr, Laura 

 

 

 

Appendix B 

Carr, Tiffany 
42. 
Carungong, Meghan 
43. 
Casillas, Victoria 
44. 
Cassara, Janette 
45. 
Castellanos, Jessica 
46. 
Cavanaugh, Wendy 
47. 
Chao, Alex 
48. 
Chavez, Monica 
49. 
Christensen, David 
50. 
Church, Jennifer 
51. 
Clare, Melinda A. 
52. 
Clark, Erin 
53. 
Cline, Laurie 
54. 
Coleman, Melanie 
55. 
Collins, Stacy 
56. 
Cordero, Rickeenah 
57. 
Costanza, Shelly 
58. 
Coster, Trinette 
59. 
Cuaxiloa De Shivers, Gloria 
60. 
61. 
Cuevas, Kristina 
62.  Daley, Kathleen 
63.  Dalton, Nancy 
64.  Davenport, Carrie 
65.  Day, Jennifer 
66.  De La Vega, Ryan 
67.  Dean, Donna 
68.  Deutschman, Janelle 
69.  Diaz, Elizabeth 
70.  Diaz,Olga 
71.  Dody, Vanessa 
72.  Domingo, Elena 
73.  Donnelly, Mary E. 
74.  Doung, Adrienne 
75.  Dulce, Arlene 
76.  Dunnicliffe, Nikki 
77.  Dunning, Alexis 
78.  Duty, Elizabeth 
Early, Michele 
79. 
Ebo, Obiorah 
80. 
Eisman, Kellie 
81 
Ellis, Robyn 
82. 

52

83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
91. 
92. 
93. 
94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 
98. 
99.  Gagnon, Diane 
100.  Galaviz, Olga  
101.  Gale, Jisun 
 
102.  Gallagher, Tracie 
103.  Gallo, Veronica 
104.  Garcia, Lupe   
105.  Garcia, Maria  
106.  Garza, Mayra  
107.  Gaschen, Justin 
108.  Gastelum, Mayra 
109.  Gentle, Diane  
110.  Gerson, Victoria 
111.  Ghavmi, Shawdee 
112.  Glaser, Ramona 
113.  Glasser, Scott  
114.  Goldman, Jennifer 
115.  Gomes, Whitney 
116.  Granado, Deborah 
117.  Grunzweig, Joan 
118.  Guerrero, Mirna 
119.  Guillen, Mario 
120.  Guntner, Ingrid 
121.  Gurba, Myriam 
122.  Gutierrez, Brandi 
123.  Gutierrez, Sandra 
124.  Guy, Amy 
125.  Hackney, Lewis 
126.  Haggerty, Petra 
127.  Hardy, Karen  

 
Enriquez, Ramon 
 
Eomurian, Mark 
 
Espinoza, David 
 
Estrada, Ann Marie 
 
Estrada, Arnold 
 
Fakes, Damien 
 
Robert Faris 
 
 
Farmer, Paul   
 
Federici, Ovidio 
Feliciano, William 
 
Fredericksen, Timothy 
 
Freeman, Josh 
 
Freer, Nichole 
 
Frost, Amanda 
 
Frushour, Amanda 
 
Fukushima, Teri 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

128.  Harrison, Karen 
129.  Hartman, Erika 
130.  Hazel, Jason 
131.  Hegamin, Terrence 
132.  Heileman, Ralph 
133.  Hellerud, Jennifer 
134.  Hernandez, Laura 
135.  Herrera-Gonzalez, Alina 
136.  Hess, Toby 
137.  Hickox, Catherine 
138.  Higginbotham, Jeannette 
139.  Hoang, Mary E. 
140.  Hodge, Kellie 
141.  Hoffman, Steven 
142.  Holt, Drew 
143.  Homiakof, Michele 
144.  Hoover, Jill 
145.  Hryze, Gina 
146.  Hubbard, Anastasia 
147.  Huber, Cheryl 
148.  Huff, Libby 
149.  Huffman, Mark 
150.  Humphries, Michael 
151.  Hutchinson, Shauna 
152.  Huynh, Anna 
153.  Huynh, Crystal 
154. 
155. 
156. 
157. 
158. 
159. 
160. 
161. 
162. 
163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168.  Kaplinsky, Megan 
169.  Keester, Ronald 
170.  Kelly, Erica 
171.  Kep, Tevy 
172.  Khiev, Rattana 

Ibarra, Rosalinda 
Irwin, Sandra 
Ishida, Rika 
James, Crystal 
Janda, Brandi 
Jasprica, Mandy 
Jeffers, Jennefer 
Johns, Kara 
Johnson, Geri 
Johnson-Lichfield, Janice 
Jonas, Mark 
Jones, Rodney 
Joo, Victoria 
Junier, Darren 

 

53

 

173.  Kim-Clinton, Jennifer 
174.  Kittleson, Kimberly   
 
175.  Knapp, Diane  
 
176.  Kobaissi, Fatima 
177.  Kolsky, Lee 
 
178.  Konyaliam, Lizbeth   
179.  Kroneberger, Yvonne 
 
180.  Kutsunai, Miki 
 
181.  Larsen, Peder  
 
182.  Lauriano, Lisa 
 
183.  Lefkowith, Derek 
 
184.  Levy, Nancy   
185.  Lim, Anna 
 
 
186.  Livingston, Jody Sun  
 
187.  Lockwood, Debra 
188.  Lopez-Sheldon, Maria 
 
189.  Lourenco, Sonia 
 
190.  Lucchese, Dawn 
 
191.  Luu, Rebeka   
 
192.  Lytle, Angela  
 
193.  Maben, Anne  
 
194.  Macander, David 
 
195.  Mackey, Dawn 
 
196.  Maestas, Aline 
 
197.  Mahan, Bryan  
 
198.  Mahnken, Kelly 
199.  Makridis, Paula 
 
200.  Mamnoon, Farahnaz   
 
201.  Maners, Courtney 
 
202.  Manion, Stephanie 
 
203.  Manipon, Monica 
 
204.  Mann, Melissa 
 
205.  Manole, Daniela 
206.  Marasigan, Maria 
 
207.  Marchese, Francesca  
 
208.  Mariano, Marinelle 
 
209.  Mariano, Mia  
 
210.  Martin, Chau   
 
211.  Martinez, Katrina 
 
212.  Mason, Jennifer 
 
213.  Matthews, Candice 
 
214.  McCarty, Sunday 
 
215.  McCraw, Ashley 
 
216.  McGrath, Leland 
 
217.  McMichael, Sonia 

218.  Melendez, Martha 
219.  Mendenhall, Joy 
220.  Mendez, Anicia 
221.  Mendoza, Jennifer 
222.  Miles, Nicole 
223.  Miller, Gerard Jr. 
224.  Montoya, Carolyn 
225.  Moreland, Alexandria 
226.  Morris, Julia 
227.  Munro, Valerie 
228.  Mynar, Kimberly 
229.  Najera, Enrique 
230.  Nash, Kristie 
231.  Nathan, Devi 
232.  Newhard, Christina 
233.  Nixon, Cassandra 
234.  Noble, Ellen 
235.  Nuez, Matthew 
236.  Obeji, Jeanne 
237.  Ochoa, Luz 
238.  O’Connel, Darin 
239.  Oduwole, Bola 
240.  Olguin, Zuzuky 
241.  Oliver, Maya 
242.  Oliver, Lisa 
243.  Orndoff, Natalia 
244.  Ortloff, Patricia 
245.  Osuna, Rocio 
246.  Ozimok, Carolyn 
247.  Paimany, Davy 
248.  Papale, Aliciaq 
249.  Patterson, Christina 
250.  Patterson, Eric 
251.  Pearlman, Teri 
252.  Perez, Leoner 
253.  Pineiro, Paula 
254.  Pitts, Cindy 
255.  Primrose, Lori 
256.  Primrose, Scott 
257.  Puentes, Marilu 
258.  Quamma, Vanessa 
259.  Quiaot, Gertrude 
260.  Quintanar, Wendy 
261.  Rafkin, Jennifer 
262.  Ramirez, Antonio 

 

54

 
263.  Ramirez, Elizabeth 
 
264.  Ramos, Liseeth 
 
265.  Rash, Kelly M. 
 
266.  Reagan, Caprice 
 
267.  Reese, Katherine 
 
268.  Reger, Mandi  
269.  Reyes, Alfred  
 
270.  Richardson, Patricia   
 
271.  Richardt, Steven 
 
272.  Riede, Cynthia 
 
273.  Roberts, Wendy 
 
274.  Rockwood, Alison 
 
275.  Roe, Rebecca  
 
276.  Rosenthal, Heather 
 
277.  Salaya, Wendy 
 
278.  Salazar, Jennie 
 
279.  Sanders, Emily 
 
280.  Sarabia, Edith  
 
281.  Sarabia, Erica  
 
282.  Schmidt, David 
283.  Schoettler, Zariq 
 
284.  Schwenzfeir, Dominique 
285.  Sedillo, Carla  
286.  Seo, Tina 
 
287.  Sheek, David   
288.  Sheets, Michael 
290.  Shiraki, Nicole 
291.  Showley, Pamela 
292.  Sicaeros, Porfirio 
293.  Siddiqui, Hajra 
294.  Silva, Danielle 
295.  Smith, Kimberlie 
296.  Sotiropoulos, Aikaterini 
297.  Sparks, Julie   
298.  Spooner, Gregory 
299.  Steere, Melissa 
300.  Stevens, Tia 
 
301.  Stringer, Laura 
302.  Suarez, Kathleen 
303.  Sue, Stacy 
304.  Sugimoto, Kristina 
305.  Summers, David 
306.  Swiercz, Paula 
307.  Taboada-Pena, Roxana 
308.  Thibeau, Nicole 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

309.  Thue, James 
310.  Thuney, David 
311.  Torrez-Chavez, Marisa 
312.  Towery, Iyaunna 
313.  Tripiano, Giovanna 
314.  Triplett Jackson, Erin 
315.  Tritle, Amanda 
316.  Trutanich, Romina 
317.  Tunnicliff, Wendy 
318.  Turner, Janet 
319.  Un-Maciel, Dinna 
320.  Vadakan, Rose 
321.  Valadez, Patricia 
322.  Valenzuela, Mireya 
323.  Van Steenwyk, Michelle 
324.  Vandezande, Laura 
325.  Vargas, Alina 
326.  Varnell, Linda 
327.  Vaughn, Erin 
328.  Vecchiolla, Michael 
329.  Velazquez, Karen 
330.  Velazquez, Beatriz 
331.  Verduzco, Bianca 
332.  Verduzco, Rene 
333.  Vogel-Zuiderweg, Lynn C. 
334.  Vokoun, Kathleen 
335.  Ware, Lisa 
336.  Warner, Emily 
337.  Warshauer, Michelle 
338.  Watson, Susan 
339.  Watts, Geoffrey 
340.  Webb, Monica 
341.  Weber, Anna 
342.  Weeks, Shannan 
343.  Wells, Teresa P. 
344.  Wenrick, Diane 
345.  Weston, Monica 
346.  Whelan, Kristina 
347.  White, Davion 
348.  Whitesell, Elizabeth 
349.  Whitman, Kay 
350.  Wiegand, Beverly 
351.  Wielandt, Lori 
352.  Williams, Katherine 
353.  Williams, Nadia 

 

55

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

354.  Williams, Robyn 
355.  Williams, Veronica 
356.  Williams, Roberta 
357.  Wills, Stacey   
358.  Wilson, John   
359.  You, Laura 
 
360.  Zavala, Damaris 
361.  Zeineddine, Nicole 
362.  Zelaya, Doris  
363.  Zeoli, Jeanine  
364.  Zuluaga, Kelly 
365.  Navarro, Vilomar 
366.  Pait, Jill 
 
367.  Uy, Vanessa   
368.  Davis, Jennifer 
369.  Ferguson, Ashleigh 
370.  Ono, Alisa 
371.  Mocsary, Tiffany 
372.  Mannwarring, Jennifer 
373.  Gerritsen, Amanda 
374.  Derosier, Hilda 
375.  Gonzalez, Lori 
376.  Kolodny, Harper 
377. 
378.  Soto, Erma 
379.  Krause, Veronica 
380.  Cruz, Eddie 
 
381.  Perez, Nathan  
 
382.  Mason, Paul 
383.  Dobbs, Suzanne 
384.  Saikely, Parker J. 
385.  Saikely, Jessica 
386.  Stubblefield, Kimberly 
387.  Martin, Jennifer 
388.  Lund, Elieth 
 
389.  Romanio, Gary 
390.  Babcock, Kristina 
391.  Sands, Erica 
392  Ho, Jennifer 
393. 
394.  Phillips, Andrea 
395.  Hernandez, Katiria 
396.  Galindo, Esperanza 
397.  Bulat, Christina 
398.  Davis, Monica 

 
 
Jeffrey, Jake   

Iose, Meaalofa 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

399.  Carroll, Michael 
400.  Wilder, Krista 
401.  Shihady, Megan 
402.  Rappaport, Hartley 
403.  Goonetilleke, Linda 
404.  Thayer, Lance 
405.  Lopez-Hernandez, Nancy 
406.  Baumback, Jeff 
407.  Gonser, Wendy 
408.  Fox, Brent 
409.  Vega, Sara 
410  Breceda, Amy 
411.  Cernok, Laura 
412.  Morales, Maribel 
413.  McMillin, Kathy Jo 
414.  Hall, Elisa 
415.  Salisbury, Danielle 
416.  Huizar, Alicia 
417.  Sula, Kenireta 
418.  Rios, Alma 
419.  Flint, Summer 
420.  Arzate, Anthony M. 
421.  Wohlgezogen, Lorena 
422.  Thornburg, David 
423.  Nielsen, James 
424.  McFarland, Shawn 
425.  Sarmiento, Christopher 
426.  Nervo, Regina 
427.  Smith, Wendy 
428.  Geib, Joyce 
429. 
430.  Prom, Linaromy 
431.  Hemminger, Andrew 
432.  Tait, Howard 
433.  Warren Gwenelle 
434.  Barrientos, Maria 
435.  Sheppard, Alan 
436.  Dominguez, Brenda 
437. 
438.  Belayachi, Gabriela 
439.  Croft, Karen 
440.  Balbuena, Blanca 
441.  Underwood, Lee 
442.  Hofius, Robert 
443.  Garcia-Vasquez, Erik 

Ibarra, Veronica 

James, Annitta 

 

56

444.  Flores, Guillermo 
445.  Crowson, Daniel 
446.  Hawkins, Catherine 
447.  Minh, Doris 
448.  Beltran, Carrie 
449.  Larsen Gwendolyn 
450.  Martin, Jeffrey 
451.  Gamboa, Alissa 
452.  Rock, Charity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

57

Respondents Against Whom the Accusations Were Dismissed 
In Case Number 2010020244 

Appendix C 

Seniority Number 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Name   
 
1. Acarbonara, Diana  
 
2. Alcala, Jisela G 
 
3. Ali, Hend 
 
4. Allen, Timothy 
 
5. Alvarez, Maria P 
6. Anaya, Maria D 
 
 
7. Appell, Christine 
8. Arca-San, Jennifer J 
9. Arzuman, Allison S 
10. Ashbran, Meredith 
11. Aslaya, Wendy 
 
12. Bahr, Victoria F   
13. Baltazar, Eleanor  
14. Barba, Elizabeth   
 
15. Bates, Julie A 
16. Beck, Paul B 
 
17. Becker-Bermudez, Alicia Y 
18. Beebe, Julian 
 
19. Belayachi, Gabriella 
 
20. Bergh, Rebecca A 
 
 
21. Boese, Lisa A 
 
22. Boone, Angela R  
 
23. Bourne, Laurie E  
 
 
24. Bowker, Jacob 
 
 
25. Boyd, Brie 
 
26. Boyle, Debra 
 
 
27. Branda, Timothy C 
 
 
28. Braun, Dolores 
 
29. Brown, Jennifer   
 
30. Brown, Toya M   
 
31. Bruton, Stephanie J 
 
32. Bucko, Elizabeth  
 
33. Burg, Gary G 
 
 
34. Camarena, Santiago 
 
 
35. Cancino, Christina M 
36. Cantu-Pacheco, Elaine Y 
 
37. Carbone, Cinnamon 

 

352 
1589 
425 
609 
1484 
1411 
1211 
1361 
1617 
15 
503 
1708 
348 
1337 
1768 
1478 
1296 
351 
1261 
1623 
1696 
1583 
1608 
30 
602 
340 
1722 
1308 
357 
1461 
1577 
331 
1618 
329 
1616 
1437 
55 

58

1316 
 
 
38. Carr, Tiffany J 
1369 
 
39. Celestial, Julie L   
1265 
 
40. Cernok, Laura C   
278 
 
 
41. Chahal, Jenny 
1474 
42. Christensen, Barbara C   
1324 
 
43. Chu, Jennifer M   
1709 
 
44. Church, Michelle L 
1730 
 
45. Conrrad, Jessica   
1710 
 
46. Cortes, Erica 
 
1354 
 
47. Costanza, Shelly A 
1357 
 
48. Coster, Trinette L 
412 
49. Crowder-Jones, Michael  
632 
 
50. Crowson, Danielle 
1585 
 
51. Da Silva, Kelly A 
1267 
 
52. Daley, Kathleen A 
1441 
53. Dau, Erin M 
 
 
1412 
54. De Koekkoek, Patricia L  
913 
 
55. De Santiago, Javier 
174 
 
56. Diaz, Olga 
 
350 
 
57. Domingo, Maria   
58. Donnelly, Mary E 
1295 
 
59. Doon-Samaniego, Heidi-Lynn  1732 
 
1750 
60. Eckert, Christopher B 
 
1713 
61. Erskine, Ann M   
 
1714 
62. Fawcett, Brendan A 
 
524 
63. Federici, Ovidio   
 
427 
64. Ferguson, Ashleigh 
 
1487 
65. Ferrer, Michelle M 
 
1277 
 
66. Fidel, Jodee D 
 
1715 
67. Fideler, Tracy L   
 
1444 
68. Figueroa, Lucy A  
 
1274 
69. Flint, Summer L   
 
505 
 
70. Flores, Adriana 
 
1548 
71. Fox, John T 
 
 
1753 
72. Franco, Michelle B 
 
 
451 
73. Freeman, Josh 
 
1008 
74. Frost, Amanda 
 
 
440 
75. Gallagher, Tracie  
 
1620 
76. Garcia, Nicole M  
1646 
77. Gardea, Danielle M 
 
1392 
78. Gegenworth, Georgia S   
1578 
 
79. George, Kathy D  
1716 
 
80. Ghareeb, Jessica E 
1640 
 
81. Gladinus, Elizabeth R 
906 
 
82. Glasser, Scott 

 

 

59

 
83. Glidden, Jessica R 
 
84. Goettsch, Katie R  
 
85. Gomes, Whitney   
 
86. Gordon, Alyssa J  
87. Grant Burton, Sharron D  
88. Grantham, Denise L 
 
89. Greciasmith, Josephine M 
 
90. Gutierrez, Jill M   
 
 
91. Guy, Amy E 
 
92. Hall, Elisa  
 
 
93. Henry, Rasheka L 
 
94. Herrera, Julie Ann 
95. Hickox, Catherine 
 
96. Higginbotham, Jeanette   
 
97. Higgins, Phillip E 
 
98. Higuera, Laura 
 
 
99. Hines, Angela N   
 
 
100. Ho, Jennifer 
 
101. Holt, Jeanne M   
 
102. Huff, Libby 
 
 
103. Humphries, Mike 
 
104. Hutchinson, Shauna 
 
105. Huynh, Crystal   
 
106. Ibarra, Veronica G 
 
107. Ing, Puthea 
 
108. Ito, Jennifer K 
 
109. Ivemeyer, Jennifer M 
 
110. Jasprica, Mandy N 
 
 
111. Jeffery, Jake 
 
112. Jones, Janet L 
 
 
113. Jorda, Anna M   
 
114. Joseph, Victoria A 
 
 
115. Kawai, Lisa Y 
 
116. Kep, Tevy 
 
117. Keys, Cheryl M  
 
118. Kitttleson, Kimberly D  
 
119. Kogen, Barry A  
 
120. Kolb, Jennifer N 
 
121. Kong, Sophak P  
122. Kutsunai, Miki   
 
123. Landeros, Esmeralda M 
 
124. Lawrence, Dana L 
 
125. Ledesma, Meegan N 
 
126. Lee, Sheila M 
 
127. Leonard, Katherine C 

 
 

 

1576 
1755 
332 
1271 
1661 
1638 
1733 
1393 
1346 
392 
1447 
1734 
1190 
530 
1706 
1448 
1767 
698 
1398 
1022 
336 
259 
1345 
1270 
1668 
1662 
1430 
1352 
1174 
589 
1282 
1681 
1415 
1333 
1449 
1349 
1975 
1736 
1672 
1259 
1587 
1682 
1717 
1395 
1657 

 

60

 

 

 
 
128. Leonard, Marnelle M 
 
 
129. Leonardo, Tina M 
 
 
130. Lim, Theavy 
 
 
131. Lindstrom, Brett C 
 
132. Littleworth, Bradley J   
 
133. Lofstrom, Linda J 
 
 
134. Lopez-Sheldon, Maria   
 
 
135. Lourenco, Karrie D 
 
 
136. Lubner, Mary E  
 
 
137. Lucchese, Dawn 
 
 
138. Lujan, Vicki L   
 
 
139. Maben, Anne 
 
 
 
140. MacAnder, David 
 
 
141. Manion, Stephanie 
 
 
142. Mank, Linda J 
143. Mariano, Marinelle J 
 
 
144. Markovitz-Troncoso, Stacy L   
 
 
145. Martin, Chau T   
 
146. Martinez, Christina M   
 
 
147. Matto, Emily M  
 
 
148. McCormick, Chelsea 
 
 
149. Medina, Claudia 
 
 
150. Meiers, Cindy D 
151. Mendenhell, Joy 
 
 
152. Montemayor-Duncan, Marsha G 
 
153. Moorhouse, Jennifer 
 
154. Morales, Hilda C 
 
155. Morris, Julia 
 
 
156. Mocsary, Tiffaney 
 
157. Mostert, Terri S  
 
158. Neimeyer, Mary  
 
159. Newell, Barbara S 
 
160. Newman, Susan E 
 
161. Obeji, Jean 
 
 
162. Oliver, Lisa M   
 
 
163. Ono, Alisia L 
 
164. Owens, Kenneth W 
 
165. Padilla, Armando 
 
166. Paluska, Annette S 
167. Papale, Alicia K  
 
168. Patterson, Kimetha W   
 
169. Paus, Charles P   
 
 
170. Pech, Puch 
171. Pham, Tram Anh M 
 
172. Pravednikov, Christy R  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1621 
1450 
1685 
1999 
1666 
1721 
156 
1451 
1737 
763 
1718 
31 
1256T 
131 
1626 
1268 
1658 
1355 
1607 
1738 
166 
1394 
1452 
114 
1740 
38 
1365 
144 
628 
1705 
262 
1480 
1454 
497 
1290 
1159 
623 
499 
1741 
1347 
1724 
2523 
1391 
1457 
1742 

 

61

 

 
173. Pravednikov, Victor 
 
174. Quintanar, Wendy 
 
175. Ramirez Jr., Jose 
 
176. Ramos, Esmeralda 
 
177. Rangel, Elida 
 
 
178. Ratliff, Janique L 
 
179. Rice, Kelley I 
 
 
180. Ritt-Caban, Mary C 
 
181. Rivera, Terri 
 
182. Robinson, Patricia M 
 
183. Robles, Elizabeth S 
 
184. Rockwood, Allison 
185. Rodriguez, Diana C 
 
186. Rodriguez, Griselda G   
 
187. Rosenthal, Heather 
 
188. Rulo, Dithmar 
 
 
189. Saikley, Jessica L 
 
190. Salazar, Jennie Y 
 
191. Salzman, Antonia M 
 
192. Sanchez, Maria T 
 
193. Schmidt, David   
 
194. Schultz, Cory D  
 
195. Serna, Margarita F 
 
196. Serrano, Karen L 
 
197. Sheets, Michael S 
 
198. Shipman, Renee  
 
199. Silva, Danielle A 
 
200. Sipowicz, Melissa M 
 
201. Soldan, Jennifer M 
 
202. Sparks, Julie 
 
203. Stephenson, Jolena 
 
204. Stevens, Tia L 
 
205. Stranahan, Lisa D 
 
206. Suarez, Kathleen 
 
207. Summers, David 
 
208. Tablada, Gabriel L 
 
209. Thurman, Ashley 
 
210. Tierney, Kirsten H 
 
211. Trecker, Cynthia E 
 
212. Turner, Janet 
 
 
213. Underwood, Lee 
214. Urias, Christina L 
 
215. Valenzuela, Richard T   
 
216. Velasquez, Karen 
 
217. Viola, Anthony   

 

 

1743 
438 
1426 
1396 
1417 
1418 
1473 
1443 
1756 
1643 
1707 
5012 
1960 
1624 
300 
525 
1292 
1311 
1419 
1667 
334 
1745 
1486 
1746 
1287 
526 
1293 
1686 
1381 
952 
76 
1269 
1747 
1351 
631 
1399 
1095 
1580 
1459 
764 
259 
1625 
1680 
1366 
1421 

 

62

1545 
1410 
1659 
148 
1550 
1422 
1423 
1332 
973 
1748 
887 
1720 
1434 
333 
1703 
1424 
37 
1425 
1749 
335 
122 

 
218. Volkoff, Cora M 
 
219. Wade, Edina N   
 
220. Ward, Lea H 
 
 
221. Warner, Emily   
222. Waterman, Bradford H  
 
223. Waterman, Edward A 
 
224. Webb, Kelly L   
 
225. Webb, Monica J  
226. Wells, Teresa 
 
 
227. Westermeyer, Linda H   
 
228. Whitesell, Elizabeth 
 
229. Wilcox, Laura M 
 
230. Wilhelmi, Danielle C 
 
231. Williams, Katherine 
 
232. Williams, Michelle 
 
233. Winston, Denise M 
 
234. Wright, Donald   
 
235. Yaeger, Daniel S 
 
236. Yim, Eugene H   
 
237. Zarate, Manuel   
238. Zelaya, Delores  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

63

Appendix D 

LBUSD Employees whom LBUSD Did Not Serve with Layoff Notices but Should 
Have or Whose Notices were Erroneously Dismissed 
Case Number 20100202448 

Horatio Gomez 
Jeremy Bucko 
Gerlynn Montiel 
Monique Robertson 
Matthew Gold 
Lisa Marie Weyh 
Keira Malkus 
Cory Clarke 
Marsha Swinford 

 
 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10.  Angel Luna 
11.  Alison Bestelmeyer 
12.  Kristy Freund-McFeggan 
13.  Maria Andersen 
14. 
15.  Marie Richelle Bergman 
16.  David Costa 
17.  Maria Perossio 

Teresa Wells 

 

 

                                                 
 

8  These 17 individuals cannot be laid off, pursuant to this proceeding. 

64

