BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
GLENDALE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Employment Status of: 
 
Teachers of the Glendale Unified School 
District, 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

    
 
 OAH No. 2010030985 
     
    
     
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 

      

(District).   
 

Ralph B. Dash, Administrative Law Judge with the Office of Administrative 

Hearings, heard this matter on April 22 and 23, 2010, at Glendale, California.  
 

Howard A. Friedman, Attorney at Law, represented Glendale Unified School District 

Emma Leheny, Attorney at Law, represented the 89 Respondents named in Exhibit A 

attached hereto and made a part hereof. 

 
Thomas Allen represented Respondent Cristina Allen. 
 
There was no appearance by or on behalf of three of the 93 Respondents named on 

Exhibit B, attached hereto and made a part hereof, and the matter proceeded by way of 
default hearing as to them.  
  

 
Oral and documentary evidence having been received and the matter submitted, the 

Administrative Law Judge makes the following Finding of Facts. 
      

1. 

Michael Escalante, Ed. D., Superintendent of the District, acting in his official 

capacity, caused all pleadings, notices and other papers to be filed and served upon 
Respondents named in Exhibit B pursuant to the provisions of Education Code Sections 
44949 and 44955.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements have been met with respect to 
the District and the Respondents named in Exhibit B.  

 
2. 

On March 2, 2010, the District's Governing Board adopted a Resolution to 

reduce and discontinue the services of 112 full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated positions 
in Elementary K through 6th grade, excluding positions in the Foreign Language Academies 
of Glendale (FLAG), for the 2010/2011 school year 

 
3. 

 
7. 

These services are “particular kinds of services” that may be reduced or 

 
4. 

discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision to 
reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but 
constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of these particular kinds of services related to 
the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds 
of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District as 
determined by the Board.     
 
 
deaths and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices 
to be delivered to its employees as of March 15, 2010.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. 
Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627 at 636 (1983).1   
 

The Board properly considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements, 

 
5. 

6. 

The District created a seniority list (Exhibit 3) naming all probationary and 

permanent teachers in order of each one’s first date of paid service.  Respondents are 
certificated District employees.  The Board specifically excluded from layoff the teachers in 
the FLAG program; however, all 17 teachers in the FLAG program were given 
“precautionary” layoff notices.  The FLAG program is a researched-based, highly-regarded, 
dual-immersion program which requires that students in grades kindergarten through second 
grade receive instruction in the “target” language for 90 percent of the school day.  As 
students move to upper level grades in the FLAG program, the amount of instruction in the 
target language is reduced by 10 percent each year until it reaches 50 percent where it 
remains.  The goal of the program is to teach students to be completely proficient in English 
and the target language.  The exception to this FLAG model is the FLAG Armenian heritage 
class, taught in English only, but which include after-school instruction in the Armenian 
language and culture.  Currently, the FLAG program offers classes in Spanish, Italian, 
German and Korean, with plans to add Japanese. 

The design of the FLAG program necessitates that all teachers in the program 

be native speakers or near-native speakers.  Simply having a working knowledge of a 
language or BCLAD certification does not qualify a teacher to teach in the program.  The 
teacher must be able to read, write and speak the target language fluently enough to be able 
to translate the English language curriculum, answer student questions, and generally teach 
as though the entirety of the class was being conducted in the target language.  If a teacher is 
a non-native level speaker and has mistakes in his or her pronunciation or dialect, a student 
may adopt the mistakes and repeat them mistakes himself.  Further, as Andrea Reuter, a 
FLAG teacher and a witness called by the attorney for Respondents even noted, teachers in 
the FLAG program must be able to think on their feet and know answers immediately.   They 
cannot take the time to look up a particular word or phrase that they may not know.  

                                                
 
required positively assured attrition to be considered through May 15, 2010. 

1 All layoffs were for particular kinds of service, and not “average daily attendance” which might have 

 

2

 
8. 

 
9. 

Individuals who merely have a working knowledge of a language do not have this ability.  
Moreover, FLAG teachers are faced with the additional challenge of developing lesson plans 
and coursework in two languages, working beyond traditional hours, and arranging 
additional parent-teacher meetings beyond what is typically arranged by teachers in 
traditional classrooms. 

As a result of the challenges and difficulties associated with teaching in the 

FLAG program, the District has developed a distinct and very competitive selection process 
for teachers wishing to teach in the program. (See Exhibit 11, Interview Process for FLAG 
Programs and Accompanying Interview Paperwork.)  The first step in the interview process 
includes a paper screening where the District looks for, among a number of qualities, 
experience teaching in a dual-immersion program and evidence that the individual is a native 
or near-native speaker, reader and writer in the target language.  During the second step, the 
District conducts a telephone interview in English and the target language in an effort to 
verify the proficiency of the individual's language skills. (Ibid.)  The third step of the 
interview process includes an oral and written interview before a panel that includes a 
principal, a native speaker of the target language and, in some instances, parents of children 
already in the program. (Ibid.)  The fourth and final step requires prospective teachers to 
prepare a demonstration lesson in the target language to students currently in the program or 
to the panel if the program in the target language has not formally been established. (Ibid.)  
Only one Respondent (Jessica Zavala) testified that she qualified to teach in Spanish in the 
FLAG program.  However, she admitted that she does not speak the language perfectly, and 
her fluency comes from speaking with her parents.  She did not indicate that she could 
properly translate the English curriculum into Spanish. 

 
School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district 
and establishing requirements for employment. (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 
Cal.3d 294, 299-300.)  Similarly, school districts have the discretion to determine particular 
kinds of services that will be eliminated, “even though a service continues to be performed or 
provided in a different manner by the district.” (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 
Cal.App.4th 1571, 1582-1585; Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 
Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) 
 
 
10.  What amounts to a particular kind of service for lay-off purposes varies 
according to the circumstances, and must in each case be determined in the light of the 
particular facts.  A particular kind of service may be a certain subject, it may be the teaching 
of the subject for a particular purpose, or it may be a particular manner of teaching the 
subject. (Walsh v. Board of Trustees of Redlands High School Dist., (1934) 2 Cal. App. 2d 
180, Fuller v. Berkeley School Dist. of Alameda County, ( 1934) 2 Cal.2d 152; Gallup v. 
Board of Trustees, (1996) 41 Cal. App. 4th 1571.)  CTA vs. Goleta Union School District 
(1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32, holds that elementary teaching is a distinct particular kind of 
service.  In Gallup, the court specifically noted that the issue is not who will perform the 
services, but how the services will be performed. (Gallup, supra at 1588.)  It follows that 
teaching the elementary curriculum in a dual-language immersion program such as FLAG is 

 

3

11. 

Similarly, the evidence established the unique nature of the AdvancePath Lead 

a distinct service taught in a particular manner, and thus the District acted within its 
discretion in exempting from layoff the 17 FLAG program teachers. 
 
 
Teacher position and the Teacher Specialists whose junior incumbents were retained over 
teachers with more seniority.   AdvancePath is run jointly by the District and AdvancePath 
Academics, Inc., a private company that works in conjunction with school districts across the 
country to offer programs to at-risk students.  The program is designed to assist students who 
have dropped out of school to complete their education.  In addition to the skills of a 
traditional teacher, the lead AdvancePath teacher for a school district must have managerial 
skills, experience running an office, extensive experience working with at-risk students and a 
willingness to work evenings and weekends.  (See Exhibit 10, Announcement of Certificated 
Position – Lead Teacher AdvancePath Academy, and Overview of AdvancePath Training 
Phases.)  The lead AdvancePath teacher is also required to undergo a ten-day-long intensive 
training funded by AdvancePath, and is required to attend ongoing training throughout the 
school year.  (Ibid.)   The lead AdvancePath teacher must have the ability to develop strong 
relationships with at-risk students and must be able to communicate effectively with the 
parents of such students.  In an effort to ensure that the lead teacher possesses the necessary 
qualities, the District conducts a separate hiring process to fill the position, which includes an 
interview process conducted jointly by AdvancePath and the District.  The teacher currently 
employed in the position has extensive experience working with at-risk youth, has already 
undergone the necessary training, and possesses all the capabilities and qualities the 
AdvancePath company believes are necessary for the position. 
 
 
and beyond what is expected of a traditional classroom teacher.  The District has 
approximately 25-30 different individuals working as Teacher Specialists in a number of 
areas including the FLAG program, special education and English language learner 
programs.  The District does not move traditional classroom teachers in and out of these 
types of positions, but rather conducts a separate interview process to fill each such position.  
(See Exhibit 12, Sample Announcements for Certificated Position – Teacher Specialists.)  
Requirements vary depending on the specific placement, but in addition to a minimum of 
three to five years of classroom experience, teacher specialists must have strong 
interpersonal skills, the ability to directly support administrators, technical knowledge 
including advanced computer and data system skills and preferably a master’s degree. (Id.)  
Similar to the FLAG and AdvancePath programs, individuals seeking such positions must 
participate in separate and rigorous interview process before they may be given such a 
position.  Accordingly, all three types of positions, FLAG, AdvancePath and Teacher 
Specialist, constitute particular kinds of service separate from services provided by 
traditional multi-subject credentialed Respondents 
 
 
considered to be the same kinds of services rendered by other elementary school teachers, 
“skipping” allows deviation from strict seniority when the “district demonstrates a specific 
need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated 

Individuals employed as Teacher Specialists must also possess qualities above 

Even if the FLAG, AdvancePath and Teacher Specialists positions were 

13. 

12. 

 

4

14. 

employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of 
study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.”   (Ed. 
Code § 44955, subd. (d)(1).)  In other words, for purposes of a school district's reduction in 
force, skipping refers to a junior teacher being retained for specified reasons.  (Bledsoe v. 
Biggs Unified School (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 131, fn. 3, citing Alexander v. Delano 
Joint Union High Sch. Dist. (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567.)  
 
In order to justify skipping a junior employee in a reduction in force, a District 
 
must demonstrate a specific need for personnel with special training and experience to teach 
a specific course of study or to provide certain services.  (Ed. Code § 44955, subd. (d).)  The 
District demonstrated at hearing that this special need exists and further established that, 
based on these needs, it has determined that no senior employee possesses the qualifications 
which would entitle him or her to be assigned to the position of FLAG teacher, AdvancePath 
Lead Teacher or Teacher Specialist). 
 
 
15.  Appellate court decisions in the layoff context have held that where 
competency is not demonstrated by a senior employee, a junior employee having the ability 
to serve the needs of a program may be retained by the school district even though it may 
result in the senior employee's termination.  (Brough v. El Segundo Unified Sch. Dist. (1981) 
118 Cal.App.3d 702, citing Moreland Teachers Ass'n v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 
655.)  Courts have reasoned that the law requires “that someone make informed 
determinations whether a laid-off employee . . . is both 'certificated and competent,’” and 
that “these determinations necessarily involve ‘discretionary decisions’ by a school district's 
responsible officials because they ‘have a special competence’ to make them.”  (King v. 
Berkeley Unified Sch. Dist., (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1023; Duax v. Kern Community 
College Dist., (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565).  In making this determination, a school 
district must consider not only legal qualifications (i.e., whether a teacher is appropriately 
credentialed) but also actual competence, or “the correlation between the applicant's specific 
training and experience and the duties of the available position.”  (King, supra, 89 
Cal.App.3d at 1019.) 
 
 
English and social science teacher challenged the retention of two junior teachers teaching in 
a community day school, stating that the junior teachers were improperly skipped because 
the senior teacher was certificated and competent to render the services they were providing.  
The teacher argued that only formal, written program requirements are relevant in 
determining the District's needs and the teacher's competence to fill these needs.  (Id. at 138.)  
The court rejected the teacher's argument, finding instead that subdivision (d)(1) of section 
44955 “expressly allows a district to demonstrate its specific ‘needs’ and there is nothing in 
the statute that requires such needs to be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job 
descriptions, or program requirements.”  (Ibd.)  The court went on to specifically find that 
while the teacher may have the base qualifications necessary to be certificated and competent 
because she held the appropriate credential to teach in the community day school, 
“subdivision (d)(1) recognizes a district may have specific needs for personnel to teach a 
specific course of study that go beyond base qualifications.”  (Ibid.)   

In Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th at 131, a senior 

16. 

 

5

18. 

 
17. 

In Bledsoe, the superintendent testified that the community day school served 

Evidence was presented that the seniority date of some of the Respondents, as 

19.  Education Code § 44848 states that if an employee resigns and is thereafter 

 
 
a distinct and difficult student population, requiring teachers to posses a specialized 
background, training, and experience.  (170 Cal.App.4th at 138.)  The court found that this 
evidence sufficiently established a specific need by the district for such teachers.  (Ibidd.)  
Here, the District provided evidence that 21 individuals (17 FLAG, one AdvancePath and 
three Teacher Specialists) should be skipped and their lay-off notices rescinded.  The District 
has established both that the three programs are each a distinct kind of service and that the 21 
incumbents may properly be skipped in determining the order of layoff. 
 
 
reflected in Exhibit 3, should be revised.  The claim of each Respondent was thoroughly 
examined.  Except for the three teachers discussed below, it is found that Respondents 
presented insufficient evidence from which it may be concluded the District erred in its 
preparation of the seniority list.2   
 
 
reemployed, the “date of employment shall be deemed to be the date on which [she] first 
accepted reemployment . . . or rendered paid service . . . after [her] reemployment.” (See also 
San Jose Teachers Ass’n v. Allen, 144 Cal. App. 3d 627 (1983).  Kathy Wong, a permanent 
employee, took a leave of absence from the District effective at the end of the 2001-2002 
school year.  When Wong returned to the classroom in the fall of 2005, the District 
erroneously denied her permanent status and had her sign a temporary contract for the 2005-
06 school year.   
 
 
20.  Under Education Code § 44931, teachers who are permanent upon their 
resignation have the right of re-hire for 39 months and will be restored to all the rights and 
benefits of a permanent employee upon return. Wong returned to the classroom within this 
39-month time limit.  The District violated this section by instead categorizing Wong as 
“temporary” without justification for doing so.  Wong's seniority date should be corrected to 
remedy this District error.  
 
 
position in 2005.  The fact that her position was only a 50 percent share is irrelevant to her 
classification.  There is “nothing in the statute[] indicat[ing] the legislature intended that 
permanent status should be denied” in the situation of a job-share teacher working half-
weeks rather than half-days, where the teacher would have earned permanent status upon re-

 
21.  The District cannot prevail by arguing that Wong returned to less than a full-time 

 

                                                
2  In this regard, it should be noted the District’s contention that Respondents are barred under the doctrine of laches 
from asserting a different seniority date has no merit.  It is the District’s duty and responsibility to maintain adequate 
and accurate records for purposes of determining seniority.  Under Evidence Code section 664, the District is 
presumed to have regularly performed its official duties.  If it has failed to maintain records to support the seniority 
dates given (as it seems to be doing by stating that Respondents unduly delayed making seniority claims and the 
District no longer has the appropriate documentation or “institutional memory” to refute it), then it has not regularly 
performed its duty.  However, Respondents did not offer sufficient evidence to overcome the presumption, so the 
District was not “put to the test” of showing how any alleged delay affected their ability to rebut evidence. 

 

6

22.  Elementary teacher Unis Ko-Choi was given a seniority date of September 7, 

structuring the work schedule.  (Vittal v. Long Beach Unified School District (1970) 8 Cal. 
App. 3d 112, 119-120.)  Therefore, although Wong returned to a less than full-time position, 
she should rightly have been categorized as permanent upon her return to the classroom.  The 
seniority list should be amended to reflect her correct seniority date of October 3, 2005. 
 
 
2004.  However, at hearing she produced documentation, in the form of an “Administrative 
Summary Evaluation” dated April 26, 2002, in which her status was listed as “P-1,” first year 
probationary teacher.  She began teaching for the District at the start of the 2001-2002 school 
year (the specific date was not established by the evidence), and her seniority date must be 
corrected to reflect that starting date. 
 
 
23.  Elementary teacher Renee Rivera was given a seniority date of September 13, 
2005.  This date was assigned because the District did not receive Rivera’s credential until 
the late afternoon of September 12, 2005.  However, the evidence was clear that Rivera’s 
credential was valid when she began teaching at the start of that school year, September 1, 
2005, and her seniority date must be revised accordingly. 
 
 
24.  Testimony and offers of proof by and on behalf of many teachers established that 
each had attended a mandatory two-day training program prior to their respective start dates, 
and each wanted their seniority date adjusted to account for those two days.  However, the 
evidence was that the teachers were not paid, nor did they receive a stipend of any kind, for 
that training.  Under Education Code section 44845, seniority starts to accrue from the first 
date of paid service in a probationary capacity. 
 
 
25.  Testimony and offers of proof were made on behalf of several teachers that they 
had signed “serial temporary contracts to fill vacant positions” or had provided service for at 
least 75 percent of the preceding school year, and their seniority dates should be revised to 
reflect their first date of paid service to the first date of employment in a temporary capacity 
or substitute capacity.  There is no need to delve into the law on this subject.  The testimony 
and offers of proof were, in each case, unsubstantiated and insufficient to establish that the 
seniority dates should be changed. 
 

1. 

Jurisdiction for these proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code Sections 

Conclusions of Law 
 

44949 and 44955.   
      

2. 

The services set forth in Finding 2 are particular kinds of service which may 
be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and case law.  A district 
may reduce services, within the meaning of Education Code Section 44955, subdivision (b), 
“either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, thereafter, be 
performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered 
services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to deal with 
the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)   

 

7

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

Cause exists because of the reduction in particular kinds of services to reduce 

the District's teaching positions by 112 FTEs and to give notice to the affected teachers 
pursuant to Education Code section 44955. (Campbell v. Abbot (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796; 
Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689).      

The District’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither arbitrary 

nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.  

6. 

Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

 
which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts 
lack. (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa 
Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  As set forth  
in Findings 6 through 12, all 21 incumbents in the FLAG, AdvancePath and Teacher 
Specialist positions have such superior skills or capabilities.  Although precautionary layoff 
notices were given to them, the District need not send them final layoff notices. 
      

ORDER 

 
1.  As a result of the reductions of services, the District may give notice to all teachers 

listed on Exhibit B that their services will not be required for the 2010/2011 school year; 
provided, however, the District need not send such notice to incumbents in the FLAG, 
AdvancePath and Teacher Specialist programs.   

 
2.  The District shall amend its seniority list: as to Kathy Wong, by providing her with 

a seniority date of October 3, 2005; as to Unis Ko-Choi, by providing her with a seniority 
date as of the first day of the 2001-2002 school year; and, as to Renee Rivera, by providing 
her with a seniority date of September 1, 2005. 
 
 
Dated:____________________ 
                        
 
 
                         
                                    
                                    
 
 
 

___________________________ 
RALPH B. DASH  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

8

 

EXHIBIT A (page 1 of 3) 
 

BRAD MICHAEL 

HASMIK 

PATRICIA A 

JENNIFER DENELLE 

 
ROBERT 
AMSES 
ANDERSON PATRICIA ELISABETH 
ARNTSON 
AROYAN  CHRISTINE A 
BEDOE 
BELL  CHRISTINA M 
KYLE W 
BENDER 
APRIL 
BRIGHT 
CARBAJAL  LAURA 
CHAI  CAROLINE C 
CHO  EUN-JUNG CHRISTINE 
CHOBANYAN 
CHOI  JUNE 
CHOI  UNIS SU YOUNG 
CHUI  DEREK H 
DAINES 
ERIC N 
DALTON  MATTHEW DENNIS 
DE BRUIJN  RENS PAUL 
DE LA GARZA 
DE LUNA  VIOLET ANN MARIE 
DEMBEKJIAN  
DIMUNDO  DANIEL BRYAN 
STEFANI 
DOMBROSKI 
EGUIZARIAN 
AIDA 
ELEFTHERIADOU  MARY 
FLETCHER  EVE M 
GARAY 
GARCIA 
GARRUBBA JENNIFER P. 
GARZA 
GASPARIAN NOONEH 
GHARABIGHI 
GOLSTANYAN 
HAKOPIAN  NARINEH 
HAMEL 
CHERYL L 
HANSEN BRINGAS 
HERNANDEZ 
HUDSON 
HUGHES 
HWANG 
ISKANDARYAN  ARMINE 
ITO  SHANNON JO ANN TOMIKO 

SARA W 
KIMBERLY DAWN 
KYLIE SEOLHWA 

KELLY DENICE 
VIVIAN 

AYLIN 
RIMA 

NICOLE 

NANCY 

PEARL CARMEN 

KARLA JEAN 

 

9

 
EXHIBIT A (page 2 of 3) 
 

ARPINE 
LAURIE RENEE 
REBECCA LYNN 

LISABETH 
MELISSA BEE 

ADRINEH 

SHANNON W 

CHRISTINE LYNN 

 
KAPRIELIAN 
KESHISHIAN 
LAST NAME FIRST NAME 
KIM  DARAE JAYNA 
KIM  CINDY SHIN YOUNG 
KUGEL 
PATRICIA A 
KURCHIAN  HERMINE G 
LAING 
DOUGLAS A 
LANDEROS  CYNTHIA P 
LOHUARU  SUSAN DENICE 
LUNA MARIANA PATRICIA 
MACK 
MARKARIAN 
MARSTON  MEGAN C 
MATEVOSIAN 
MC FARLANE 
MCREYNOLDS 
MORELL 
OFARRILL  DIANEH 
PARDO 
PATTON 
PRADO 
QUINONEZ  YVONNE OPAL 
REUTER 
RIVERA 
ROBERTSON 
RODRIGUEZ 
SCHILLING  LESLIE ANNE 
SHIN  AH REUM 
SPARKS 
STOKES 
TAHK JEE HYE 
TAPIA 
TISCARENO ARACELI 
ALINA 
VEHUNI 
VERCRUSE  JETTREY JEROME 
WEST JENNIFER ELAINE 
WIDHOLM  CAROLYN GRACE 
WILLEMS  GARY R 
WILLIAMS  TERESA EB 
WINANS 

KRISTIN DAWN 
TARA LORYNN 
IRACEMA 

ASHLEY 
DIANE MATHIS 

ANDREA 
RENEE DIANE 

JENNIFER LYNN 

ZULEMA R 

LYNDE ANN 
SONYA ELIZABETH 

 

10

 
 
EXHIBIT A (page 3 of 3) 
 

WISINSKI  ROBYN WESSLER 

KATHY K. 

 
WONG 
WOOLDRIDGE 
WORSTER  WHITNEY C 
YOUNG 
YOUSEFI  ADRINEH 
ZAVALA 

JESSICA 

PEGGY 

BOBBI SUE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11

EXHIBIT B (page 1 of 3) 

June Choi 

Laura Carbajal 
Caroline C. Chai 
Eun-Jung Christine Cho 

Melissa Rubin Adams 
Cristina Lianne Allen 
Robert Amses 
Patricia Elisabeth Anderson 
Jennifer Denelle Arntson 
Christine A. Aroyan 
Patricia A. Bedoe 
Christina M. Bell 
Kyle W. Bender 

 
 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10.  April Bright 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14.  Hasmik Chobanyan 
15. 
16.  Unis Su Young Choi 
17.  Derek H. Chui 
18. 
Eric N. Daines 
19.  Matthew Dennis Dalton 
20.  Quyen Le Dau 
Rens Paul De Bruijn 
21. 
Brad Michael De La Garza 
22. 
23.  Violet Ann Marie De Luna 
24.  Nicole Dembekjian 
25.  Daniel Bryan DiMundo 
Stefani Dombroski 
26. 
27.  Aida Eguizarian 
28.  Mary Eleftheriadou 
29. 
30. 
31.  Kelly Denice Garay 
32.  Vivian Garcia 
33. 
34.  Nancy Garza 
35.  Nooneh Gasparian 
36.  Aylin Gharabighi 
37. 
Rima Golstanyan 
38.  Narineh Hakopian 
39. 
40.  Karla Jean Hansen Bringas 
41. 
42. 

Pearl Carmen Hernandez 
Sara W. Hudson 

Lena M. Fischer 
Eve M. Fletcher 

Jennifer P. Garrubba 

Cheryl L. Hamel 

 

12

EXHIBIT B (page 2 of 3) 

Laurie Renee McFarlane 
Rebecca Lynn McReynolds 
Christine Lynn Morell 

Shannon W. Mack 

Cindy Shin Young Kim 
Patricia A. Kugel 

 
 
43.  Kimberly Dawn Hughes 
44.  Kylie Seolhwa Hwang 
45.  Armine Iskandaryan 
Shannon Jo Ann Ito 
46. 
Lisabeth Kaprielian 
47. 
48.  Melissa Bee Keshishian 
49.  Darae Jayna Kim 
50. 
51. 
52.  Hermine G. Kurchian 
53.  Douglas A. Laing 
Cynthia P. Landeros 
54. 
55. 
Susan Denice Lohuaru 
56.  Mariana Patricia Luna 
57. 
58.  Adrieneh Markarian 
59.  Megan C. Marston 
60.  Arpine Matevosian 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64.  Dianeh OFarrill 
65.  Kristine Dawn Pardo 
Tara Lorynn Patton 
66. 
67. 
Iracema Prado 
68.  Yvonne Opal Quinonez 
69.  Andrea Reuter 
70. 
71. 
72. 
73. 
74.  Ah Reum Shin 
75.  Ashley Sparks 
76.  Diane Mathis Stokes 
Jee Hye Tahk 
77. 
Zulema R. Tapia 
78. 
79.  Araceli Tiscareno 
80.  Alina Vehuni 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84.  Gary R. Willems 

Jettrey Jerome Vercruse 
Jennifer Elaine West 
Carolyn Grace Widholm 

Renee Diane Rivera 
Lynde Ann Robertson 
Sonya Elizabeth Rodriguez 
Leslie Anne Schilling 

 

13

EXHIBIT B (page 3 of 3) 
 

Teresa EB Williams 
Jennifer Lynn Winans 
Robyn Wessler Wisinski 

 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88.  Kathy K. Wong 
89. 
90.  Whitney C. Worster 
91. 
Peggy Young 
92.  Adrineh Yousefi 
93. 

Bobbi Sue Wooldridge 

Jessica Zavala 

 

 

14

