BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
MOUNTAIN VIEW SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Michael A. Scarlett, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard 

  OAH Case No.  2010030729 
 
 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certificated  Employees  of  the  Mountain  View
School District, 
 
 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this matter on May 6, 2010, in El Monte, California. 
 
 
Superintendent of Personnel Services for the Mountain View School District (District). 
 
 
Emma Leheny and Charlotte Noss, Attorneys at Law, Rothner, Segall, Greenstone & 
Leheny, represented 98 certificated employees set forth in the attached Appendix A, who are 
collectively referred to as Respondents.  Kathy O’Neil and Michaela O’Neil, California Teachers 
Association, were also present at hearing on behalf of Respondents.  
 
 
allow the parties to submit written closing arguments on or before May 13, 2010.  On May 13, 
2010, the District and Respondents submitted timely written post-hearing briefs and this matter 
was submitted for decision.  The closing briefs were marked as Exhibits 13 and 14 respectively. 
 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing.  The record was left open to 

Margaret A. Chidester, Attorney at Law, represented Gloria Diaz, Assistant 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. 

Assistant Superintendent Gloria Diaz (Assistant Superintendent) filed the 

 
 
Accusation in her official capacity. 
 
 
 
 
the District’s Governing Board and Respondents that the District was recommending the 
reduction or discontinuation of certain particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 and that 

Respondents are certificated and probationary employees of the District. 

Before March 15, 2010, the Assistant Superintendent provided written notice to 

3. 

2. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

4. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Service 

               FTE1 Reduction

72.0 
  8.0 
  1.0 
  2.0 
  2.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 

Respondents’ services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
On March 10, 2010, the Governing Board of the District (Governing Board) 
adopted a Resolution entitled “RESOLUTION OF THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
MOUNTAIN VIEW SCHOOL DISTRICT REGARDING REDUCTION OR 
DISCONTINUANCE OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICE,” (hereinafter referred to as 
“Resolution”), reducing or discontinuing the following services at the close of the 2009-2010 
school year: 
 
 
 
 
K-8 Classroom Teaching Positions 
Literacy Coaches 
 
 
Teachers on Special Assignment (2 at 50%)   
 
 
Counselors 
 
Physical Education Teaching Positions 
 
Social Science Teaching Position 
 
 
Business/Computer Teaching Position 
Psychologist 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Between March 11 and 15, 2010, the District provided written notice by personal 
service or certified mail to 126 Respondents that the Assistant Superintendent had recommended 
that 88 FTE would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of 
particular kinds of services.  The District received 120 timely requests for hearing from the 
Respondents.  
 
 
required documents on 120 Respondents.  Thereafter, 112 Respondents filed timely notices of 
defense, seeking a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2010-
2011 school year. 
 
 
The services set forth in Factual Finding No. 4 are particular kinds of services 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  
Respondents challenge whether the PKS was properly implemented by the District which is 
dealt with in the Factual Findings below.2
 
The Governing Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth in 
 
Factual Finding No. 4 because of budget cuts as a result of reduced State and federal funding and 
                     

On March 22, 2010, the District filed and served the Accusation and other 

Total                                                                                            88.0 FTE 

5. 

7. 

8. 

6. 

1  FTE refers to “full-time equivalent” position. 
2  All further references are to the Education Code. 
 

 

2

9. 

10. 

The Governing Board also adopted criteria by which to “exempt” certain 

The reduction of services set forth in Factual Finding No. 4 is related to the 

the reduction in student enrollment.  The Assistant Superintendent testified that federal money 
that had been intended for use over a two year period had been expended during the 2009-2010 
school year.  In her opinion, the District would go “bankrupt” if the reductions in the Resolution 
were not implemented as recommended.  The Assistant Superintendent stated that the budget 
cuts, along with the decline in student enrollment over the last seven to eight years had severely 
reduced the District’s funding.  The decision to reduce the particular kinds of services is neither 
arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s discretion. 
 
 
welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of 
certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board. 
 
 
certificated employees from the order of layoff “by virtue of their credentials, competence, 
assignment, experience, or certification.”  Exhibit “A” of the Resolution specifies categories of 
certificated employees the Governing Board seeks to exempt from or “skip” during the layoff 
process.  These categories are (1) certificated employees who possess administrative 
credentials; (2) certificated employees who possess a credential authorizing service in special 
education; (3) certificated employees who possess a credential authorizing service as a 
Newcomer teacher; (4) certificated employees who possess a credential authorizing service in 
alternative education (Magnolia Learning Center); (5) certificated employees who possess a 
credential authorizing service as a Head Start Literacy Coach or First 5 Literacy Coach; and 
(6) certificated employees who possess a credential authorizing service as an English 
Language Development Teacher on Special Assignment (ELD/TOSA). 
 
 
seniority for employees with the same first date of paid service.  Exhibit “B” of the Resolution 
provides that the order of termination of employees with the same first date of paid service shall 
be determined by reference to certain tiebreaker criteria and to points assigned to each category 
of tiebreaker criteria.  The Resolution further established a lottery process to be implemented if 
the tiebreaking criteria did not break all ties between employees with the same first date of paid 
service.  The criteria were not all equally weighed, and points were awarded for each item.  The 
tiebreaking criteria are reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of certificated and 
probationary employees, and the District properly applied the criteria.  There were no specific 
challenges raised by Respondents based upon implementation of the tiebreaker criteria by the 
District. 
 
 
(first date of paid service with the District), current assignments and locations, whether an 
employee is “exempt” from the layoff, the employee’s status as permanent, probationary, 
temporary, etc., credentials and authorizations, advance degrees, and major areas of study.  In 
January 2010, the District sent all of the certificated employees the seniority list notifying the 
employees of the information contained in the seniority list and requesting that they verify the 

The Governing Board also adopted tiebreaker criteria for determining the relative 

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority dates 

12. 

11. 

 

3

13. 

14. 

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and “bumping” 

Subsequent to the adoption of the Resolution, the District identified vacancies in 

information.  On at least two subsequent occasions in March and April 2010, employees were 
given an opportunity by the District to correct or dispute information contained in the District’s 
seniority list. 
 
 
list of the least senior employees who were identified in the particular kinds of services sought to 
be reduced or discontinued by the Resolution.  Based on the information from the seniority lists, 
the District determined whether senior employees designated for layoff possessed credentials in 
other areas that would entitle them to “bump” junior employees holding positions that were not 
included in the particular kinds of services designated for reduction in the layoff.  The District 
also used the seniority list to apply the tiebreaking criteria in Exhibit “B” of the Resolution. 
 
 
the 2010-2011 school year due to Positively Assured Attrition (PAA) including retirements, 
deaths, and resignations.  In consideration of such attrition the District concluded that the 
number of certificated employees required to be terminated pursuant to this proceeding would be 
reduced by 16 FTE positions; specifically 13 FTEs for K-8 Classroom Teaching Positions and 
two (2) FTEs for Literacy Coach positions.3   
 
 
15.  On April 13, 2010, the District rescinded its notices of non-reemployment issued 
to, and the Accusation as it pertained to, Respondents: Steve Brownson, Rachel Chan, Ramona 
Chandler, Sandy Delgado, Andrea Enciso, Olga Gallegos, Aracely Hernandez, Jacqueline 
Hernandez, Vinh Huynh-Kieu, Erin Lewis-Morris, Jose Santiago, Haile Ucbagaber, Fernando 
Velazquez, Maria Villavicencio, and Michael Yurkas.  As a result of the rescinded layoff 
notices, 98 Respondents remained subject the Resolution and were represented at the layoff 
hearing. 
 
 
District discovered an error had been made in determining Ms. Enciso’s first date of service with 
the District.  Ms. Enciso’s first date of service in the seniority list was originally September 1, 
1999, and placed her as (#313) on the seniority list.  However, a review of her payroll records 
revealed her first day of service was in fact August 29, 2000, placing her as (#350) on the revised 
seniority list prepared by the District.  Consequently, Ms. Enciso, who has a multiple subject 
credential with a crosscultural language and academic development (CLAD) authorization, was 
retained over several senior certificated employees who are scheduled for layoff and who are 
certificated and competent to teach the fourth grade class Enciso was retained teach.  Thus, the 
District inappropriately “skipped” Ms. Enciso. 
 
                    

Subsequent to the decision to rescind its layoff notice to Andrea Enciso, the 

16. 

 

3  One other position was vacated through attrition/retirement: Anita Cole’s Special 

Education RSP position.  This position, however, was filled by Diana Rich, (#378), who was 
formerly a K-8 classroom teacher, but possessed a Clear Specialist Credential in Special 
Education which qualified her to be placed into Cole’s special education position.  No 
challenges were made by Respondents as to Ms. Rich’s placement into this position.  

 

4

17. 

18. 

The more senior certificated employees impacted by the District’s error in 

Respondents argue that the Governing Board’s designation of “K-8 Classroom 

 
calculating Respondent Enciso’s seniority date are: Respondents Bernadette Dincin (#341); 
Felicita Li (#342); Diana Decamp (#343); Nelly Ann Fernandez (#344); Patricia Gutierrez-
Bowers (#345); Lizette Loya (#346); Ryan Namihira (#346); and Marisa Torres (#348).  All of 
theses certificated employees possess a multiple subject credential with CLAD or BCLAD 
(bilingual) authorizations that would qualify them to teach the position held by Respondent 
Enciso.  By virtue of the District retaining Respondent Enciso, the District has retained a junior 
employee to teach a class that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to teach.  
Therefore, Respondent Bernadette Dincin, the most senior of the teachers subject to layoff that 
could have filled this position, will be retained for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Reduction of Particular Kinds of Service For K-8 Classroom Teachers 
 
 
Teachers” was a general definition of the PKS and therefore only seniority should be considered 
in implementing the reduction for this PKS.  Respondents essentially argue that the District 
failed to provide sufficient notice of its intent to exclude seventh and eighth grade teachers, nine 
in total, in departmentalize math, science, and English classes, and therefore failed to afford 
Respondents notice and reasons why these teachers were excluded.  Respondents argue that the 
nine most senior K-8 teachers subject to layoff should therefore be retained by the District.  
 
 
specificity to place teachers on notice is not persuasive.  This PKS placed all K-8 teachers on 
notice of the District’s intent to reduce teacher positions for these grades, including the teachers 
teaching departmentalized classes in the seventh and eight grades.  The District decided to 
implement the reduction by reducing K-6 teachers with multiple subject credentials teaching in 
self-contained classrooms, and seventh and eighth grade teachers teaching “core” classes in the 
middle schools.  The District has the discretion to achieve the K-8 reduction in this manner as 
long as they were not arbitrary and capricious in its implementation. 
 
 
Positions,” the District determined that it would retain seventh and eighth grade mathematics, 
science and English teachers who possessed either single subject credentials or supplemental 
authorizations in those subjects and who taught in departmentalized classes at the middle school 
level.  Although the Resolution did not specify an exemption or skipping criteria for seventh and 
eighth grade teachers in departmentalized classes for math, science, and English, the Assistant 
Superintendent testified that teachers with single subject and supplemental authorizations in 
math, science, and English were retained to teach the departmentalized classes they were 
assigned because there were not more senior employees who were certificated and competent to 
teach these classes at the middle school level.  The District’s seniority list confirmed that no 
more senior K-8 teacher subject to layoff was certificated and competent to teach these 
departmentalized courses math, science, and English.  Respondents also offered no evidence that 
any more senior certificated employee was certificated and competent to “bump” into any of the 

Respondents’ argument that “K-8 Classroom Teachers” does not provide enough 

In implementing the Resolution’s reduction for “72 K-8 Classroom Teaching 

20. 

19. 

 

5

departmentalize classroom position.  The District’s action was not arbitrary or capricious in 
implementing the K-8 Classroom Teacher reduction in the Resolution. 4    
 
21.  Additionally, although it did not articulate that departmentalized math, science 
 
and English teachers would be skipped in the Resolution, the District was justified in skipping 
these teachers.  The District is not required to provide justification for skipping a particular 
teacher or position in its Resolution.  The District need only show evidence that it has a specific 
need for personnel to teach a specific course of study, and the junior employee retained has the 
special training and experience necessary to teach that course.  Here, the Assistant 
Superintendent testified that seventh and eighth grade teachers with single subject credentials 
and supplemental authorizations were retained to teach specific departmentalized classes in 
math, science, and English in the middle schools.  These teachers were presently assigned to 
those departmentalized classes, except for three who bumped into the departmentalized classes 
due to being more senior than the teacher presently teaching the class, and the District intends to 
maintain them in those assignments for the 2010-2011 school year.  This constituted a sufficient 
basis for skipping these teachers because no more senior employee was certificated and 
competent to teach the classes and their retention related to the needs and welfare of the District 
and its students. 
 
 
Exemption or Skipping Related to the Newcomer Position 
 
                    

 

4  The seniority list revealed that nine seventh and eighth grade certificated employees 

with single subject and supplemental authorizations in math, science, and English were retained 
to teach departmentalized classes in the middle schools: Lourdes Fonseca (#358) to teach life 
science with a single subject credential in biological science; Abelina Blocker (#360) to teach 
science/math with a single subject credential in physical science and a supplemental 
authorization in math; Marcos Bowers (#362) to teach math with a multiple subject credential 
with CLAD and a supplemental authorization in math; Debra Ho-Bates (#365) to teach science 
with a multiple subject credential with CLAD and a supplemental authorization in science; 
Carrie Ann Coss (#367) to teach English with a multiple subject credential with CLAD and a 
supplemental authorization in English; Carol A. Chavarin (#375) to teach math/science with a 
multiple subject credential with BCLAD and a supplemental authorization in math; Neelam 
Tandon (#383) to teach science with a single subject credential with CLAD in biological science, 
chemistry, and English; Jerado L. Puente (#387) to teach math with a single subject credential 
with CLAD in business and a supplemental authorization in math; and Kathy M. Kurtz (#396) to 
teach science with a single subject credential with CLAD in life science.  Respondents argued 
that three other middle school teachers were inappropriately retained by the District: Danny 
Hamm (#398), Jacqueline Chavez (#459), and Melissa Dawn (#460).  However, these three 
teachers were bumped by more senior teachers who possessed single subject credentials or 
supplemental authorizations to teach the departmentalized classes they where assigned to 
teach. Ms. Chavarin (#398) bumped Mr. Hamm, Ms. Blocker (#360) bumped Ms. Chavez, 
and Ms. Coss (#367) bumped Ms. Dawn. 

 

6

23. 

22. 

The District seeks to exempt or “skip” Respondent Irma Laura Parisi, its only 

Required qualifications for the Newcomer teacher include in relevant part: the 

 
Newcomer teacher, from layoff based upon her special training and experience to perform this 
position.  Although Respondent Parisi is located at one school location, fourth through sixth 
grade students are enrolled in the Newcomer program in her class from all ten of the District’s 
elementary schools.  The Newcomer program essentially is an English immersion program 
specifically designed for students who have been in the United States for one year or less and 
speak little or no English.  Approximately 70 percent of the District’s student population is 
Spanish speaking.  Students enrolled in the Newcomer program have unique and special needs 
associated with their inability to speak English, their recent introduction into the American 
community and culture, the sometime traumatic circumstances surrounding their immigration to 
the United States, including separation from parents and family, and the inability of the their 
parents to communicate in English if the parent is present in their home.  The Newcomer teacher 
must work with other teachers and parents in assessing the student’s needs and determining the 
appropriate classroom placement of the Newcomer student. 
 
 
ability to work cooperatively and effectively with others, particularly at grade level assignment; 
ability to work with a spirit of enthusiasm and cooperation on a school team; knowledge of 
discipline techniques; knowledge of effective practices in English Language Development 
(ELD); multiple subject credential with a Bilingual Certificate of Competence (BCC), the 
predecessor to the BCLAD, or BCLAD; successful experience working with non-English 
speaking students; training in Project GLAD (Guided Language Acquisition Design) or 
willingness to participate in such training; and being bilingual and biliterate. 
 
 
seniority list.  She has been the Newcomer teacher with the District for nine years and had been 
employed with the District as a bilingual teacher for almost 15 years prior to entering the 
Newcomer position.  Ms. Parisi has a Masters Degree in Science and Reading and holds a BCC. 
 She is bilingual and biliterate in the Spanish language.  The BCC allows Ms. Parisi to teach K-
12 grades, pre-school, adult education, and to teach English as a second language.  She possesses 
the systematic ELD and Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English (SDAIE) 
certificates and also is a District trainer for the ELD certificate.  Ms. Parisi is trained in early 
literacy strategies, the Kate Kinsella Acquisition Vocabulary, Project GLAD, Systematic 
Instructional Observation Protocol (SIOP), the Avenues Program (State adopted ELD program), 
Thinks MAPS (cognitive training), and has been the Title One Coordinator and a bilingual 
coordinator for the District in past years.  Finally, Ms. Parisi expressed a sincere and deep 
passion for working with non-English speaking students, manifested out of her personal 
experiences as a “Newcomer” immigrating to this country.  Her testimony evidenced a vast 
amount of experience in working with non-English speaking students both in the context a 
Newcomer teacher, and her prior experience as a bilingual teacher for the District. 
 
 
they were certificated and competent to teach the Newcomer position.  Although both possessed 

Respondents Ofelia Heredia (#356) and Felicita Li (#342) offered evidence that 

Respondent Parisi has a seniority date of August 29, 2001, and is (#368) on the 

24. 

25. 

 

7

26. 

Respondent Parisi, however, has significantly more training and experience 

the minimum qualifications required to teach the Newcomer position, Respondent Parisi 
possessed significantly more training and experience as a Newcomer teacher.  Respondent 
Heredia had particularly impressive qualifications to fill the Newcomer teacher position.  She 
possessed a multiple subject credential with BCLAD authorization, and has a supplemental 
authorization to teach Spanish and a Bachelors Degree in Liberal Arts.  Ms. Heredia is bilingual 
and biliterate and has training in SDAIE, GLAD, SIOP, systematic ELD, ELL, Thinking MAPS, 
and is a site trainer in ELD.  Ms. Felicita had no experience teaching Newcomer students or 
additional training in the area of teaching non-English language students.  She has never served 
worked in an alternative education program, as a literacy coach, or as a support provider or 
mentor in the District, positions that may have afforded her training and experience in dealing 
with students enrolled in the Newcomer program. 
 
 
working with the students in the Newcomer program by virtue of her employment in that 
position for the last nine years.  Although Ms. Heredia asserts she has ten years experience 
teaching ELL students, this experience is not in a position specifically designed to address the 
needs of non-English speaking students.  The Newcomer students have special and unique needs 
as discussed above in Factual Finding 23, and Ms. Parisi has a higher level of experience and 
competence to meet those needs.   
 
Exemption or Skipping Related to the Magnolia Learning Center Program 
 
 
The District also seeks to exempt or “skip” Respondents Sharon Faye Durall 
(#384) and Antonio Balbuena (#441), its two alternative education teachers in the Magnolia 
Learning Center (MLC) program, from layoff based upon their special training and experience to 
perform this position.  Ms. Durall teaches a combination seventh and eighth grade class, and Mr. 
Balbuena teaches a combination fifth and sixth grade class.  The classes taught in the MLC 
program provide the same multiple course instruction provided in mainstream classrooms, 
except the classes are smaller because of the behavioral challenges presented by the students.  
The MLC program is an academic program managed under guidelines for community day 
schools.  The classroom setting provides for a smaller, self-contained learning environment for 
students who have academic and severe behavioral challenges that prevent them from being 
assigned in the mainstream classroom environment. 
 
 
ELL authorization, No Child Left Behind (NCLB) compliant, and three years teaching 
experience.  Desired qualifications include knowledge and experience working in an alternative 
education setting and/or with “at risk” students, demonstrated ability to work with and motivate 
students with academic and behavioral challenges; and be bilingual in English and Spanish.  The 
Assistant Superintendent testified that the students in the MLC program have severe behavioral 
issues that required a tremendous amount of support and attention from the teachers assigned to 
that program.  MLC teachers received a significant amount of specific training designed to 
prepare them for teaching and motivating students with severe and aggressive behavioral issues. 

The qualifications required for the MLC position are a multiple subject credential, 

27. 

28. 

 

8

31. 

29. 

Respondent Balbuena has a seniority date of August 29, 2006, and has a multiple 

 
 
Respondent Durall has a seniority date of August 28, 2002, and has a multiple 
subject credential with CLAD authorization, a Bachelor of Arts degree in Child Development, 
and Masters Degrees in Educational Administration and Multicultural Education.  She is NCLB 
compliant and has ELL training.  She has taught in the MLC program four years.  Prior to 
teaching in the MLC program, Ms. Durall taught as a Literacy Coach with the District and has 
also taught reading intervention classes, assisted in developing the District’s writing plan, was 
the coordinator for the high school tutor program for middle school students, and worked as a 
mentor and as a support provider in the District. 
 
30.  Ms. Durall testified that the students in the MLC program have severe behavioral 
 
problems, including drug and gang related issues, that sometimes result in violent behavior that 
requires specific and targeted interventions to neutralize the student’s aggressions and protect the 
teacher, the student, and other students in the classroom.  She has received training through 
workshops on non-violence crisis prevention and intervention, trainings dealing autistic and bi-
polar behaviors in the classroom, and training in programs such as “Boys Town” (Georgetown) 
and “Ripple Effects” dealing with how to handle a crisis in the classroom.  Through her 
assignment in the MLC program, Respondent Durall has received significant training 
specifically targeted at dealing with students in the alternative education program. 
 
 
subject credential with a supplemental authorization in social science, and a Masters Degree in 
Crosscultural Teaching.  Mr. Balbuena has taught in the MLC program for four years, and was a 
long term substitute teacher in alternative education for two years prior to his MLC assignment.  
He has received much of the same training Respondent Durall received as a result of his 
assignment in the MLC program.  He reaffirmed Ms. Durall’s testimony that students in the 
MLC program had significant and severe behavioral problems associated with, among other 
factors, gangs and drugs, and required specialized training to address these behavioral problems 
in an effective manner.  Mr. Balbuena has received training through workshops on non-violence 
crisis prevention and intervention, trainings dealing autistic and bi-polar behaviors in the 
classroom, and training in programs such as “Boys Town” (Georgetown) and “Ripple Effects.”  
 
 
Respondents Nellie Fernandez (#344), Patricia Gutierrez-Bowers (#345), Julie 
Swenson (#351), Kenneth Bowman (#352), and Lei Chen Barnitt (#376) offered evidence that 
they were certificated and competent to teach in the MLC program that the less senior 
Respondents Durall and Balbuena were retained to teach.  Respondents Fernandez, Gutierrez-
Bowers, Swenson, Bowman, and Barnitt all have multiple subject credentials with either CLAD 
or BCLAD authorizations that would satisfy the certifications required to perform the MLC 
teaching position. 
 
 
employee in favor of a junior employee necessarily focuses on the “special training and 
experience” it has determined is necessary to qualify a teacher to teach in the MLC program.  

33.  However, the inquiry into whether the District properly skipped a more senior 

32. 

 

9

35. 

34. 

Respondent Lei Chan Barnitt, who has a multiple subject credential with a 

Respondent Barnitt believed that the academic requirements and standards in the 

Students in the MLC program have been removed from the mainstream classrooms due to their 
severe academic and behavioral problems.  The students were described as extremely high risk 
students and required teachers trained in methods and interventions that assisted the teachers in 
working with this type of student.  Respondents Fernandez, Gutierrez-Bowers, Swenson, and 
Bowman presented no evidence that they have ever worked with students in an alternative 
education or community day school program or that they had acquired the necessary training and 
experience to qualify them for placement in the MLC program. 
 
 
BCLAD (not in Spanish) and a Masters Degree in TESOL (Teaching English to Speakers of 
Other Languages) testified that she had prior experience teaching as a Literacy Coach in the 
“Twin Cities Educational Center,” an alternative education program in the District from 2001 to 
2004.  The Twin Cities program later became the MLC program.  Ms. Barnitt worked with 
students in the Twin Cities program that had behavioral issues and received training in the 
“Georgetown Boy’s” (Boys Town) program to deal with students with severe behavior issues, 
teaching strategies, and ways of de-escalating aggressive or violent incidents that occurred in the 
classroom.  She received other relevant trainings including the GLAD Project training.   
 
 
Twin Cities program were the same as those in the MLC program.  However, the evidence 
showed that in 2001-2004, Ms. Barnitt taught a single subject, reading as a Literacy Coach, and 
not the multiple subjects currently required to be taught in the MLC program.  Ms. Barnitt also 
admitted that the level of training currently provided in the MLC program was not available in 
the Twin Cities program.  More importantly, however, Ms. Barnitt has not taught in an 
alternative education program since 2004, over six years ago.  She admittedly has not kept up to 
date with the MLC program or the training required for the program.  Respondents Durall and 
Balbuena have more recent training and experience in the MLC program by virtue of their 
assignment in the MLC program since 2006.  Ms. Durall and Mr. Balbuena have a greater 
degree of the special training and experience necessary to perform the MLC teaching position. 
 
Exemption or Skipping Related to the ELD/TOSA Position 
 
 
ELD/TOSA teacher, from layoff based upon her special training and experience to perform this 
position.  The ELD/TOSA position, under the general supervision of the Director English 
Learner & Parent Programs, “provides direct support services to staff [teachers] to help them 
identify English Learner gaps and assist with teaching strategies to improve the academic gaps 
specifically in the areas of English Language Development.”  The ELD/TOSA teacher works 
collaboratively with teachers, parents, and administrators to facilitate student learning, and helps 
the administration implement the District’s ELD program.  The position requires the employee 
to have a clear credential with ELL authorization, experience working with English Learners, 
computer literacy skills, expertise in reading/language arts programs, demonstrated ability to 
present staff development sessions and/or workshops, previous experience in school and 

Finally, the District seeks to exempt or “skip” Respondent Hanna Estes (#349), its 

36. 

 

10

38. 

37. 

Respondent Estes has a clear multiple subject credential with a BCLAD 

community leadership roles, knowledge of current research in literacy for English Language 
Learners, willingness to learn new model literacy programs.  Essentially, the ELD/TOSA teacher 
provides direct support to teachers in the area of ELL students, specifically assisting in staff 
development, using training in ELD and SDAIE, and collecting and maintaining data on ELL 
students and their achievement levels. 
 
 
authorization (Spanish), she is NCLB compliant, has an ELL certification, and a Bachelor of 
Arts Degree in Religious Science.  She has taught for over 18 years and has been with the 
District for ten years, one year as the ELD/TOSA teacher and nine years as a Newcomer teacher. 
 Ms. Estes identified several areas of training she has received, including but not limited to, 
Systematic ELD, SDAIE, Constructing Meaning, Project GLAD, Explicit Direct Instruction 
(EDI), Lexia Phonics, Title III Accountability Institute, California English Learner with 
Disabilities, LETRS Module 10 Syllabication and Advance Decoding, the California English 
Langauge Development Test (CELDT), the Online Assessment Reporting System (OARS), and 
SST Training.  Over the past year, Ms. Estes has become particularly astute in gathering and 
analyzing data relating to ELL students to assist staff and teachers in developing curricula and 
programs to improve ELL students’ academic performance.  She has worked collaboratively 
with teachers to improve the systematic ELD program within the District. 
 
 
Respondent Diana Decamp (#343) offered evidence that she was certificated and 
competent to serve as the ELD/TOSA teacher.  Ms. Decamp’s seniority date is August 29, 2000, 
the same first date of rendered service as Respondent Estes.  As a result of the tiebreaker criteria 
employed by the District, Respondent Decamp was the more senior of the two on the District’s 
seniority list.  Neither Respondent has challenged the appropriateness of the District’s criteria for 
tiebreaking or the manner in which the tiebreaking criteria was implemented.  Therefore, 
Respondent Decamp’s challenge to Respondent Este is viewed solely in terms of Ms. Decamp’s 
claim that the District retained a junior employee to perform a service that the more senior 
Decamp is certificated and competent to perform.  
 
 
authorization (Spanish), a specialist instruction certificate in bilingual crosscultural education, 
she is NCLB compliant, has a ELL certification, and a Masters Degree in Education.  Ms. 
Decamp has worked for the District for ten years and has taught for 24 years.  She is currently a 
biliteracy teacher for the first grade with the District.  Ms. Decamp has worked with ELL 
students and the systematic ELD programs employed by the District.  She also has many of the 
same or similar trainings as those completed by Respondent Estes, including training in 
Systematic ELD, SDAIE, Constructing Meaning, Project GLAD, EDI, Lexia Phonics, OARS, 
California Early Literacy Learning (CELL), Thinking MAPS, 5-year AB 466 Houghton Mifflin 
training, and peace-builders training. 
 
 
qualifications in many respects.  However, Respondent Estes has one year experience in the 

Respondent Estes and Respondent Decamp essentially possess very similar 

Respondent Decamp has a clear multiple subject credential with a BCLAD 

40. 

39. 

 

11

ELD/TOSA teacher position which tilts the scale in Ms. Estes’ favor.  Although, Respondent 
Decamp has had some experience in presenting staff development sessions and workshops, this 
experience was not specifically related to the ELD/TOSA position in the District.  On these 
facts, it is concluded Respondent Estes has the special training and experience necessary to teach 
the ELD/TOSA position that Respondent Decamp, a more senior teacher does not possess.  
Therefore, the District may exempt or “skip” Respondent Estes.  
 
The District did not retain any junior certificated employee to render a service 
 
which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render, except as provided in 
Factual Finding No. 16 and 17 as to Ms. Enciso.5   
 
 

41. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 7. 
 
PKS vs. ADA Layoff 
 
 
attendance (ADA) layoff instead of a PKS layoff because the Assistant Superintendent testified 
that declining enrollment over the past seven or eight years was partially responsible for the 
District’s budget shortfall, and the District implement the process for layoffs required when 
the reduction is based on average daily attendance as provided in Education Code section 
44955, subdivision (b).   
 

Respondents contend that the District was required to initiate an average daily 

2. 

3. 

In San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the 
reduction of particular kinds of services on the basis of financial considerations is authorized 
under Education Code section 44955, and, “in fact, when adverse financial circumstances 
dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section 44955 is the only statutory authority available 
to school districts to effectuate that reduction.”  Such a decision may be overruled if proven 
to be arbitrary or capricious, but a motivation to maintain flexibility in light of financial 
                     

5  One other Respondent, Kimberly S. Corrales-Gloria (#414) challenged the District’s 

calculation of her seniority date at hearing.  Ms. Corrales-Gloria essentially argued that her 
seniority date should have been August 1996 and not August 28, 2003, the date listed in the 
District’s seniority list.  She asserts a “break-in-service” argument based upon the District 
asking her to leave service after the 2001-2002 school because she was not NCLB compliant. 
 The District, however, presented evidence that showed Ms. Corrales-Gloria was not retained 
after the 2001-2002 school year because she had an emergency permit and the District was 
unable to justify using emergency permits after the 2001-2002 school year.  Ms. Corrales-
Gloria was rehired by the District after she obtained her multiple subject credential on June 
14, 2003.  Respondent Corrales-Gloria’ challenge to her seniority date can not be sustained 
because the District properly calculated her first date of paid service as August 28, 2003. 

 

12

 

4. 

Respondents contend that the District failed to follow the Resolution when it 

Here, the District established that the reduction of particular kinds of services 

uncertainty is neither.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers Association, Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 
Cal.App.3d 796, 808.)   
 
 
pursuant to Education Code section 44955 was a result of substantial budget cuts and reduced 
State and Federal funding, as well as declining student enrollment, by reason of Factual 
Findings 1-9.  The District’s layoff decision resulted from overall budget cuts, and not just a 
reduction in ADA.  Thus, the reason for the layoff, i.e. the reduction or elimination of 
particular kinds of services, was correctly stated in the pertinent notices.  Education Code 
section 44955, subdivision (b) does mandate that when declining student enrollment is one 
factor, among others, that the District must initiate an ADA layoff as oppose to a PKS.  The 
Legislature’s use of the term “may” in section 44995, subdivision (b), following the 
enumeration of the different types of reductions (PKS or ADA) indicate that the Governing 
Board has discretion to proceed under either process.   
 
Reduction of PKS for K-8 Classroom Teachers 
 
 
sought to reduce the 72 FTE of “K-8 Classroom Teaching Positions.”  Respondent argues that 
“K-8 Classroom Teaching Positions” must apply to all K-8 teaching positions and that the 
District’s decision to exclude teachers teaching math, science, and English in departmentalized 
classes in the middle school is an inappropriate deviation from the Resolution.  Respondents do 
not assert that the District improperly “skipped” more senior teachers or that any senior 
teacher had bumping rights as to the seventh and eighth grade math, science and English 
teachers retained by the District.   
 
 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services, which is not open to second-guessing in 
this proceeding.  Such policy-making decisions are not subject to arguments as to the wisdom 
of their enactment, their necessity, or the motivations for the decisions.  (California 
Teachers; Assn. v. Huff (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.)  Such decisions and action must 
be reasonable under the circumstances, with the understanding that “such a standard may 
permit a difference of opinion.”  (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board 
(1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831 (Santa Clara).)  Numerous cases stand for the proposition that 
the process of implementing layoffs is a very flexible one and that school districts retain great 
flexibility in carrying out the process.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott 
(1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796).  Further, the courts have held that a PKS may be defined in 
general terms such as “kindergarten through sixth grade classes,” or K-6 classroom teachers.  
(California Teachers Ass’n v. Goleta Union Sch. Dist., (1982) 132 Cal.App. 3d 32.)  
 
 
Here, the “K-8 Classroom Teachers” placed Respondents on sufficient notice 
that teachers in these grades would be subject to layoff.  The District notified K-6, as well as 
seventh and eight grade teachers that taught the departmentalized classes, that their services 

Boards of Education hold significant discretion in determining the need to 

6. 

5. 

 

13

7. 

may not have been required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The District in implementing its 
layoff for the 72 FTE K-8 classroom teachers determined that it would exclude seventh and 
eighth grade teachers that possessed single subject credentials or supplemental authorizations 
for departmentalized classes in math, science, and English.  Neither the Governing Board nor 
the District clearly expressed the intention to exclude these teachers from the Resolution.  At 
hearing, however, the Assistant Superintendent testified that the decision was made to retain 
teachers with single subject credential and supplemental authorizations in math, science, and 
English because there were no teachers with more seniority who were designated for layoff 
were certificated and competent to teach the departmentalized courses. 
 
The District acted within its discretion in implementing the Resolution in 
 
determining that seventh and eighth grade math, science, and English teachers rendering 
services in departmentalized middle school classroom courses would be excluded from the 
K-8 classroom teachers reduced.  A review of the District’s seniority list revealed that math, 
science, and English teachers at the middle school level who had single subject credentials or 
supplemental authorizations were excluded from the layoff by the District.  The teachers 
assigned to the departmentalized classes in math, science and English were retained to teach 
those classes for the 2010-2011 school year.  Thus, it cannot be concluded that the District 
acted arbitrarily or capricious in excluding these teachers.  There are no more senior teachers 
certificated and competent to render the services that the more junior teachers were retained 
to provide.  (See Educ. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)  The District also demonstrated a specific 
need for the departmentalized math, science, and English teachers in the middle schools, and 
the junior teachers retained possessed the training and experienced required render that 
service.  (Educ. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).  
 
 
the reduction in K-8 classroom teaching positions.  Respondents’ argument that the District 
inappropriately applied the Resolution is not sustained, by reason of Factual Findings 18-21 and 
Legal Conclusions 4-7.  
 
The Domino Theory 
 
 
non-reemployment was withdrawn by the District, and more senior employees commencing 
with (#349) through (#341) who are certificated and competent to teach Ms. Enciso’s class 
are subject to lay-off, that all such senior employees must be retained by the District.  
Respondents rely on Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b) that provides “Except as 
otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee may be terminated 
under the provisions of this section while . . . any other employee with less seniority, is 
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 
render.”  (Educ. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) 
 

Respondents contend that because Ms. Andrea L. Enciso’s (#350) notice of 

The District complied with the Governing Board’s Resolution in implementing 

8. 

 

9. 

Respondents’ argument is frequently made in these kinds of proceedings and is 

 

14

known as “the domino theory.”  However, the “domino theory” has been disfavored by the 
courts.  (See Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567.)  Although here, the 
District withdrew the layoff notice because of an error in calculating Ms. Enciso’s seniority 
date, the District’s error is analogous to failing to provide notice in the first instance as a 
result of inadvertence.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), specifically 
provides:  “Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or governing 
board of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the charges unless the 
errors are prejudicial errors.”  Therefore, the service of notice error is not a basis for 
invalidating the entire layoff or imposing a “domino effect.”   

 
10. 

Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567 adopted a 

“corresponding number” approach in not applying the over-inclusive remedy of forcing the 
school district to retain all senior employees to junior employees who were not noticed.  The 
remedy was tailored to correct the mistake to identify only those employees who were 
directly prejudiced by the error.  The Court held:  

12. 

 
Because at least some of the persons skipped should have received the notices, 
a corresponding number of the most senior of the employees who were not 
reemployed must have been improperly given notices.  The trial court must 
determine which of the Teachers suffered prejudicial error in this case.  (Id. at 
p. 576.)  
 
11.  Accordingly, an appropriate remedy in this case would be to retain the most 
senior employee prejudiced by the District’s error, Respondent Bernardette Dincin (#341).  
This conclusion is based upon Factual Findings 16-17 and Legal Conclusion 8-12.  
 
SkippingIssues  
 
 
junior teachers to render services as the Newcomer teacher, Respondent Irma Laura Parisi 
(#368), the MLC teachers, Respondents Sharon Faye Durall (#384) and Antonio Balbuena 
(#441), and the ELD/TOSA teacher, Respondent Hanna Estes (#349).   
 
 
subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order 
of seniority for either of the following reasons: (1) The district demonstrates a specific need for 
personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a 
services credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school 
nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach 
that course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not 
possess. . . .”  Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b) provides, in part:  “Except as 
otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee may be terminated 
under the provisions of this section while . . . any other employee with less seniority, is 

Respondents argue that the District inappropriately exempted or “skipped” four 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1) provides: “Notwithstanding 

13. 

 

15

14. 

Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1) provides an exception to subdivision (b) 

retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 
render.” 
 
 
where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study 
and that a junior certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach 
that course that the senior certificated employee does not possess.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified 
School Dist. (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.)  In Bledsoe, a district was able to skip two 
junior employees because of the district’s demonstrated need for teachers with experience in 
instruction in a community day school.  The junior teachers possessed special training and 
experience that enabled them to meet the district’s specialized needs for alternative education.  
This need was demonstrated by showing the teachers had taken courses in subjects that covered 
areas of instruction, had training in areas related to working with students with behavioral issues, 
and had actual experience in dealing with the day school students. 
 
Newcomer Teacher 
 
15.  Here, the District sought to skip Respondent Parisi in the Resolution and retain 
 
her as the Newcomer teacher.  The District demonstrated a specific need for personnel to teach 
the Newcomer course and Respondent Parisi possessed the special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course.  She has extensive training in areas related to teaching non-
English language students, she is a biliterate and bilingual teacher, and she has nine years 
experience as a Newcomer teacher in the District.  Although Respondents assert that two more 
senior certificated employees, Respondents Ofelia Heredia (#356) and Felicita Li (#342) were 
certificated and competent to teach the Newcomer class, the evidence showed that Respondent 
Parisi’s training and experience was superior to either of these employees.  The District properly 
skipped Respondent Parisi by reason of Factual Findings 22-26 and Legal Conclusions 12-15. 
 
MLC Teachers 
 
 
Antonio Balbuena (#441) and to retain them as MLC teachers.  As discussed in Factual Findings 
27 through 35, the District demonstrated a specific need for MLC teachers to provide alternative 
education services.  Respondents Durall and Balbuena possessed the special training and 
experience necessary to teach the MLC class.   
 
 
meet the special needs of the alternative education students in its MLC program.  The evidence 
showed that MLC students had severe and serious behavioral issues related to gangs and drug 
activity.  Both Respondents Durall and Balbuena have received training in dealing with the 
emotional and behavioral needs of District students.  Both have demonstrated adaptability in 
meeting the needs of students with special needs.   
 

17.  As in Bledsoe, here the District demonstrated a specific need for personnel to 

The District also sought to skip Respondents Sharon Faye Durall (#384) and 

16. 

 

16

18. 

19. 

20. 

Consequently, the District properly skipped Respondents Durall and Balbuena by 

Respondents Nellie Fernandez (#344), Patricia Gutierrez-Bowers (#345), Julie 
 
Swenson (#351), Kenneth Bowman (#352), and Lei Chen Barnitt (#376) offered evidence that 
they were certificated and competent to render services as the MLC teachers.  However, only 
Respondent Barnitt had any significant experience and training in working with students in an 
alternative education environment.  Ms. Barnitt’s, however, had not worked with alternative 
education students since 2004, and had not kept up with the training that is necessary to be 
effective in teaching these students.   
 
 
reason of Factual Findings 27-35 and Legal Conclusions 12-14 and 16-19. 
 
ELD/TOSA Teacher 
 
 
Finally, the District sought to skip Respondent Hanna Estes (#349) and retain 
her as the ELD/TOSA teacher.  The District demonstrated a specific need for an ELD/TOSA 
teacher and Respondent Estes Parisi possessed the special training and experience necessary to 
teach that course.  Although Respondent Diana Decamp (#343) had very similar credentials and 
training, Respondent Estes’ one year experience in the ELD/TOSA position in the District gives 
Ms. Estes the experience over Respondent Decamp.  Thus, the District properly skipped 
Respondent Estes, by reason of Factual Findings 36-41 and Legal Conclusions 12-14, and 20. 
 
The services identified in the Governing Board’s Resolution listed in Factual 
 
Finding No. 4 are determined to be particular kinds of services within the meaning of section 
44955, by reason of Factual Finding Nos. 4 and 7.   
 
 
Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction of the particular 
kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding No. 4, which cause relates solely to the welfare of 
the District’s schools and pupils, by reason of Factual Finding Nos. 1 through 9.   
 
 
by reason of Factual Findings 16-17 and Legal Conclusions 8-12.   
 
 
the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District identified the 
certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board directed be 
reduced or discontinued.  
 

Cause does not exist to terminate the services of Respondent Bernadette Dincin, 

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to 

21. 

23. 

22. 

24. 

25.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to perform, except as to Ms. Andrea 
L. Enciso, by reason for Factual Findings 16-17 and Legal Conclusions 8-12. 
 
 

 

17

ORDER 

1. 

2. 

The District may give notice to the following Respondents that their 

The Accusations issued against Respondents Antonio Balbuena, Kristine 

 
 
Barbero, Steve Brownson, Marcos Bowers, Tammy Capilla, Rachel Chan, Ramona Chandler, 
Carol Chavarin, Carrie Ann Coss, Jose Davila, Sandy Delgado, Bernadette Dincin, Sharon Faye 
Durall, Andrea Enciso, Anita Esparza, Hannah Estes, Maria Estevez, Olga Gallegos, Lourdes 
Fonseca, Maricela Gonzalez, Laura Gorgonio, Chad Greene, Aracely Hernandez, Jacueline 
Hernandez, Vin Huynh-Kieu, Belinda Hyde, Michele Ivey, Kathy Kurtz, Andria Leahy, Cecilia 
Leonin, Erin Lewis-Morris, Tasanda Limon-Escarcega, Daniel Montejano, Juana Morales, Juan 
Orellana, Irma Laura Parisi, Jerado Puente, Diana Rich, Jose Santiago, Jennifer Siebel, Neelam 
Tandon, Haile Ucbagaber, Ricky Villacorte, Fernando Velazquez, Maria Villavicencio, and 
Michael Yurkas are DISMISSED.  
 
 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year:  Felicita Li, Diana Decamp, Nelly 
Ann Fernandez, Patricia Gutierrez-Bowers, Lizette Loya, Ryan Namihira, Marisa Torres, Julie 
Ann Swenson, Kenneth Bowman, Linh Chau-Phan, Ruby Barajas, Tizoc Tirado, Ofelia Heredia, 
Amalia Macias, Marcos Garcia, Danielle Surowiec, Miguel Hernandez, Melida Haye, Anna Lau, 
Elaine Chun, Ronald Reyes, Adriana Murray, Heidi Zampach, Lei Chen Barnitt, Luis Acevedo, 
Esther Stone, Christina Gomez, Maria Arana, Gabriel Orosco, Christine Broussard-Simone, 
Yesenia Holquin, Ricardo Ortega, Danny Hamm, Sean Jacobs, Michael Jimenez, Amanda 
Castaneda, Debra Pak, Leticia Hernandez, Mayra Saenz-Ulloa, Nancy Lindsay, Krista Hand, 
Maricela Borrayo, Cynthia Davis, Sandra Saldana, Jeffrey Gutierrez, Kimberly Corrales-Gloria, 
Maria Robles-Rocha, Claudia Abascal, Carol Notti, Heather Whitaker, Monica McCullough, 
Matthew Leyva, Ailene Flores, Jeffrey Koenig, Karen Knudsen, Martha Banuelos-Sotelo, David 
Morris, Gabriela Duarte-Santos, Sabrina Diaz, Martha Larsson Cesar Chacon, Vicki Kawasaki, 
Bageshree Bhakta, Melissa Garrido, Analilia Montes, Emma Bolivar, Okalani Ulloa, Aileen 
Ermino, Maria Palmieri, Jacqueline Chavez, Melissa Restovich, and Edith Sandoval.  
 
 
 
DATED:  May 28, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
MICHAEL A. SCARLETT 
Presiding Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

18

 “APPENDIX A” 
Mountain View School District 
List of Respondents 
May 6, 2010 Hearing 
OAH Number 2010030729 

 

 

 

1.   Abascal, Claudia 
2.   Acevedo, Luis 
3.   Arana, Maria 
4.   Balbuena, Antonio 
5.   Banuelos-Sotelo, Martha 
6.   Barajas, Ruby 
7.   Barbero, Kristine 
8.   Barnitt, Lei 
9.   Bolivar, Emma 
10.  Borrayo, Maricela 
11.  Bowers, Marcos 
12.  Bowman, Kenneth 
13.  Broussard-Simon, Christine 
14.  Capilla, Tammy 
15.  Castaneda, Amanda 
16.  Chacon, Cesar 
17.  Chavarin, Carol 
18.  Chau-Phan, Lyhn 
19.  Chavez, Jacqueline 
20.  Chun, Elaine 
21.  Corrales-Gloria, Kimberly 
22.  Coss, Carrie 
23.  Davila, Jose 
24.  Davis, Cynthia 
25.  Diaz, Sabrina 
26.  Duarte-Santos, Gabriela 
27.  Durall, Sharon 
28.  Ennino, Aileen Tudayan 
29.  Esparza, Anita 
30.  Estes, Hannah 
31.  Estevez, Maria 
32.  Fernandez, NellyAnn 
33.  Flores, Ailene  
34.  Fonseca, Lourdes  
35.  Garcia, Marcos 
36.   Garrido, Melissa 
37.   Gomez, Christina 

38.   Gonzalez, Maricela  
39.   Gorgonio, Laura 
40.   Greene, Chad  
41.   Gutierrez, Jeffrey  
42.   Gutierrez Bowers, Patricia  
43.   Hamm, Danny 
44.   Hand, Krista  
45.   Haye, Melida  
46.   Heredia, Ofelia  
47.   Hernandez, Miguel 
48.   Holguin, Yesenia 
49.   Huerta Hernandez, Leticia 
50.   Hyde, Belinda  
51.   Ivey, Michele 
52.   Jacobs, Sean  
53.   Jimenez, Michael  
54.   Kawasaki, Vicki  
55.   Knudsen, Karen  
56.   Koenig, Jeffrey  
57.   Kurtz, Kathy  
58.   Larsson, Martha  
59.   Lau, Anna  
60.   Leahy, Andria  
61.   Leonin, Cecilia  
62.   Leyva, Matthew  
63.   Li, Felicita  
64.   Limon-Escarcega, Tashanda  
65.   Lindsay, Nancy  
66.   Loya, Lizette  
67.   Macias, Amalia  
68.   McCullough, Monica  
69.   Montejano, Daniel  
70.   Montes, Analilia  
71.   Morales, Juana  
72.   Morris, Dave  
73.   Murray, Adriana  
74.   Namihira, Ryan  

19

“APPENDIX A” 
Mountain View School District 
List of Respondents 
May 6, 2010 Hearing 
OAH Number 2010030729

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

75.   Orellana, Juan  
76.   Orosco, Gabriel  
77.   Ortega, Ricardo  
78.   Pak, Debra  
79.   Palmieri, Maria  
80.   Parisi, Irma  
81.   Puente, Jerardo  
82.   Restovich, Melissa  
83.   Reyes, Ronald 
84.   Rich, Diana 
85.   Robles, Maria 
86.   Saenz-Ulloa, Mayra 
87.   Saldana, Sandra 
88.   Sandoval, Edith 
89.   Siebel, Jennifer 
90.   Stone, Esther Joy  
91.   Surowiec, Danielle 
92.   Swenson, Julie 
93.   Tandon, Neelam  
94.   Tirado, Tizoc 
95.   Torres, Marisa  
96.   Ulloa, Okalani 
97.   Villacorte, Ricky 
98.   Zarnpach, Heidi  

 

