BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
PIONEER UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:  
 
 
ERIKA A. MARURI, 
 
 
                                                 Respondent. 

 
 
 
OAH No. 2010030042 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Rebecca M. Westmore, Administrative Law Judge, Office 

Allen R. Vinson, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of the Pioneer Union School 

 
 
of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 21, 2010, in Somerset, California. 
 
 
District. 
 
 
Maruri, who was present throughout the hearing. 
 
 
decision on April 21, 2010. 
 
 

Peter M. McEntee, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of respondent, Erika A. 

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for 

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1.     Richard L. Williams is the Superintendent of Pioneer Union School District 

(District).  His actions and the actions of the District’s Governing Board (Board) were taken in 
their official capacities. 
 

2.     Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. 

3.     On March 10, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 470, entitled “Resolution 

of Intention to Dismiss Certificated Employees.”  Pursuant to Resolution No. 470, the Board 
determined that it was necessary and in the best interest of the District to reduce or eliminate 
particular kinds of services (PKS) and to decrease a corresponding number of certificated 
District employees not later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year.  In order to limit 
the number of reductions, the District considered all positively-assured attrition, including 

1

deaths, retirements, and other permanent vacancies.  The Board directed Superintendent 
Williams to send appropriate notices to all employees whose services will be terminated by 
virtue of the PKS reductions and eliminations.  The PKS reductions and eliminations are based 
solely upon economic reasons, and are not related to the skills, abilities or work performance 
of the affected teachers. 
 

4.     Pursuant to Resolution No. 470, the Board resolved to reduce 2.00 full-time 

equivalent (FTE) K - 8th grade classroom teaching positions. 
 

5.     On March 11, 2010, in accordance with Resolution No. 470, and pursuant to 

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the District personally served notice on respondent 
advising that her services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Respondent 
timely filed a Request for Hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying her for the 
ensuing school year. 
 

6.     On March 24, 2010, Superintendent Williams made and filed the Accusation 
against respondent.  On March 26, 2010, respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense to the 
Accusation. 
 

7.     On April 8, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 472, entitled 

“Determination of District Needs for 2010-2011,” which set forth the following tie-breaking 
criteria to be used in determining the order of termination of certificated employees who first 
rendered paid service to the District on the same date: 
 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Individuals who hold regular valid California teaching 
credentials (not emergency credentials, intern credentials, or 
waivers) will be given preference.  If this factor is identical, 
then; 

Individuals with the greatest number of valid California 
teaching credentials authorizing service in the greatest number 
of K-8 teaching positions.  If this is identical, then; 

Individuals with valid California teaching credentials 
authorizing service in the area of English, mathematics, science, 
will be given preference.  If this factor is identical, then; 

Individuals with recent experience in K-8 multiple grade 
instruction. 

 
District’s Layoff Procedures 
 

8.     The District maintains a Certificated Employee – Date of Hire List (Seniority 

List) which contains data obtained from the District’s records and its employees, including, but 
not limited to, employees’ names, locations, service dates, credentials and tenure status.  Erika 

2

 

 

 

 

A. Maruri and Kathy Kaher first rendered service to the District on the same day in August 
2006, and are affected by the reduction in particular kinds of services.  Both certificated 
employees received preliminary layoff notices. 
 

9.     At hearing, Superintendent Williams asserted that the “tie-breaking” criteria 

were developed based on the needs of the district and the students.  When the District 
employed the “tie-breaking” criteria to determine the order in which Ms. Maruri and Ms. 
Kaher would be rehired, the District determined that Ms. Kaher was entitled to seniority over 
Ms. Maruri.  According to Superintendent Williams, Ms. Maruri and Ms. Kaher were “tied” at 
levels 1 and 2.  However, Ms. Kaher was determined to be more senior to respondent at level 
3, based on her credentials and supplemental authorization.  Superintendent Williams asserted 
that because Ms. Kaher has a supplemental authorization to teach English, and Ms. Maruri has 
a supplemental authorization to teach Music, Ms. Kaher would be accorded preference under 
Resolution No. 472, because English is one of the subject areas listed at Level 3 of the criteria, 
while Music is not. 
 
Jurisdictional Issue 
 

10.     As a consequence of the reduction in force, both Erika Maruri and Kathy Kaher 
received preliminary notices of layoff as both are the least senior multiple subject credentialed 
teachers.  The District recently offered a retirement incentive package to two specific 
certificated teachers.  One of the teachers, Janese Favret, has submitted her retirement 
paperwork to the District, which will be considered by the Board on May 5, 2010.  If Ms. 
Favret retires on or before May 5, 2010, it will become necessary for the District to determine 
the relative seniority of Ms. Maruri and Ms. Kaher prior to May 7, 2010, because one 
certificated employee will be retained to fill the vacant position created by the retirement of 
Ms. Favret. 
 

11.     The District argued that as the Board has not yet acted on Ms. Favret’s 

retirement paperwork, there has been no final attrition, and consequently there is no 
jurisdiction to apply the “tie-breaking” criteria in this matter.  While it is true that the Board is 
only required to consider positively-assured attrition, and as of the date of this hearing there 
was no positively-assured attrition, it is appropriate to determine the proper application of the 
“tie-breaking” criteria in this matter in the event that retention of one certificated employee is 
necessary. 
 
Discussion 
 
 
Subject Credential, Supplemental Authorization in Music, and Cross-cultural, Language and 
Academic Development (CLAD) Certificate.  She is currently assigned to teach 6th grade and 
two elective classes: Physical Education and 6th through 8th grade Skills for Adolescents at 
Mountain Creek Middle School.  Ms. Maruri also provides Spanish translation services 
between the District and the parents of students in the District. 
 

Erika Maruri has a seniority date of August 2006.  She holds a Clear Multiple 

12. 

 

3

13.  Kathy Kaher has a seniority date of August 2006.  She holds a Clear Multiple 

15. 

Level 3 of the District’s “tie-breaking” criteria set forth in Resolution No. 472 

14.  At hearing, Ms. Maruri argued that the District developed the “tie-breaking” 

Subject Credential and Supplemental Authorization in English.  She is currently assigned to 
teach 3rd through 5th grade at Walt Tyler Elementary School.   
 
 
criteria with full knowledge of the results, and therefore did not consider the needs of the 
district and students.  Ms. Maruri also argued that the District applied the “tie-breaking” 
criteria inappropriately, and that she should be credited for levels 1 through 4 of the “tie-
breaking” criteria based on her credentials and teaching assignments.  Ms. Maruri believes that 
her Clear Multiple Subject Credential authorizes her to teach English, mathematics, science, 
social studies and physical education, and that her Supplemental Authorization in Music 
authorizes her to teach Music to K – 8th grade.  Finally, Ms. Maruri argued that because she 
should be credited for levels 1 through 4 of the “tie-breaking” criteria, there continues to be a 
tie between Ms. Kaher and Ms. Maruri, and therefore it would be reasonable for the District to 
apply the criteria set forth in the District’s 2009 Resolution No. 450, in which the District 
purportedly considered “accumulative classroom instructional experience” as “tie-breaking” 
criteria. 
 
 
(Factual Finding 7) provides that “[i]ndividuals with valid California teaching credentials 
authorizing service in the area of English, mathematics, science, will be given preference.”  
While Ms. Maruri’s Clear Multiple Subject Credential allows her to teach multiple subjects in 
a self-contained classroom, neither her Multiple Subject Credential, nor her Supplemental 
Authorization in Music allow her to teach English, mathematics or science in a 
departmentalized class.  Ms. Kaher’s Supplemental Authorization in English, however, allows 
her to teach English in a departmentalized class.  Therefore, Level 3 of the District’s “tie-
breaking” criteria entitles Ms. Kaher to seniority over Ms. Maruri in the event the District has 
an opportunity to rehire a certificated teacher prior to the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
It is within the discretion of the Board to establish its “tie-breaking” criteria.  
Respondent did not establish that the Board violated its discretion, or engaged in arbitrary or 
capricious action when it established the “tie-breaking” criteria.  Application of the “tie-
breaking” criteria resulted in determining the order of termination solely on the basis of the 
needs of the district and the students thereof.  Respondent’s assertion that the District should 
apply the 2009 “tie-breaking” criteria that is superseded by the 2010 “tie-breaking” criteria is 
found to be without merit and is rejected. 
 
 

16. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The District employees who received notices that their services would not be 

 
 
required in the 2010-2011 school year are not being laid off for reasons related to their ablility 
or performance. 
 
 

 

4

2. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
proposed reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and the preliminary notice of 
layoff served on respondents are factually and legally appropriate.  The District has met its 
burden.  The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next school year is an 
appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955.  As stated in San Jose 
Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of particular 
kinds of services on the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that section, and, 
“in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section 
44955 is the only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.”  
The District must be solvent to provide educational services and cost savings are necessary to 
resolve its financial crisis.  The Board’s decision to reduce particular kinds of services was a 
proper exercise of its discretion.  In addition, all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth 
in Education Code sections 44944 and 44945 were met.  The notice sent to respondent indicates 
the statutory basis for the reduction of services and adequately describe the particular kinds of 
services to be reduced, and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due process.  
(Ibid., at p. 627; see also, Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831; Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838; and Degener v. 
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 

3. 

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular  

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another manner. (Gallup 
v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California Teachers Association v. Board of 
Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)  A school board may reduce 
services within the meaning of the statute either by determining that a certain type of service 
shall not be performed at all or by reducing the number of district employees who perform 
such services.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 
64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  As set forth in Factual Finding 4, the services identified in Resolution 
No. 470 are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education 
Code sections 44949 and 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  
Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
 
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides in pertinent part:  

4. 

Whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school 
year, …or whenever the amendment of state law requires the 
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the 
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by 
reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of 
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may 
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding 
percentage of the certificated employees of the district, permanent 

 

5

as well as probationary, at the close of the school year.  Except as 
otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent 
employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section 
while any probationary employee, or any other employee with 
less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.  
As between employees who first rendered paid service to the 
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine 
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the 
district and the students thereof.  Upon the request of any 
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the 
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days 
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance 
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in 
determining the order of termination and the application of the 
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other 
employees in the group.  This requirement that the governing 
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for 
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to 
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would 
not exist without such a requirement. 

5. 

 
Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), cause exists to give 
 
notice to respondent Erika A. Maruri that her services will not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.  No 
certificated employees with seniority dates junior to Ms. Maruri are being retained to teach 
classes for which she is certificated and competent to teach. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

Final notice may be given to respondent Erika A. Maruri that her services will 

not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

2. 

In the event that the District has an opportunity to rehire one certificated 

employee for the 2010-2011 school year, Kathy Kaher is entitled to seniority over Erika A. 
Maruri. 
 
 
DATED:   May 5, 2010 
 

_____________________________ 
REBECCA M. WESTMORE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

6

 

 

