BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE  
FONTANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of 
Certain Employees of the Fontana Unified 
School District Identified in Appendix A. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

    OAH No. 2010030123 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 19, 2010, in Fontana, California. 
 

Melanie Petersen, Fagen, Friedman, & Fulfrost, LLP, represented Fontana Unified 

No appearance was made by or on behalf of respondents Elizabeth Esquivias, Colleen 

Cristina Reyes, Tina Rivera and Richard Roth appeared and represented themselves.  

Marianne Reinhold, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented many of the respondents 

School District.  
 
 
identified in Appendix A.   
 
 
 
 
Gerke, Ken Hoong, Anne Johnson, Alphonso Jones, Eriberto Leon, James Logan, Reid 
Luszeck, Cheri Mabrie, Carla Martin, Christopher Persky, Amanda Pierce, and Emily 
Votruba who filed notices of defense1 and requested a hearing. 
 
Before the hearing the accusations served on Jessica Cifelli, Andrea Connolly, Keya 
 
Criswell-Fisher, Jacob Deem, Tracy Espinosa, Christopher Leach, George Mendoza, Irene 
Sanchez, Melissa Vazquez, and Angela Viencek were withdrawn and their layoff notices 
rescinded.  
  
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 19, 2010. 

                                                
1  
a notice of defense. 

The parties stipulated that all respondents were entitled to a hearing regardless of whether or not they filed 

 

 

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1. 

Yolanda Mendoza made and filed the accusation in her official capacity as 

Associate Superintendent, Human Resources of the Fontana Unified School District. 
 

2. 

Respondents are identified in Appendix A, attached hereto and by this 

reference are incorporated herein.  Each respondent is a certificated employee of the district. 
 

3. 

On March 3, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 10-18 

4. 

5. 

The district established tie-breaking criteria to determine the order of 

On and before March 5, 2010, Associate Superintendent Mendoza gave 

reducing particular kinds of services and directing the superintendent to give appropriate 
notices to certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the action.  The 
resolution identified 257 FTEs to be reduced.   
 
 
termination for those employees who shared the same seniority dates.  
 
 
written notice to certificated employees of the recommendation that their services would not 
be required for the 2010-11 school year.  The reasons for the recommendation were set forth 
in these preliminary layoff notices. 
 
 
requirements were met. 
 
 
positively assured attrition.  The district must issue final layoff notices before May 15, and 
when it does so the district will take into account any additional attrition that has occurred.  
After that, further attrition will allow the district to rehire laid off employees.   

Before issuing the preliminary layoff notices, the district took into account all 

An accusation was served on each respondent.  All prehearing jurisdictional 

6. 

7. 

The layoffs will not reduce any of the district’s offerings in code mandated 

courses below the level required by law.   

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is matter 

reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this proceeding.  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 
167.)  A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not be 
fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal. 
App. 3d 627, 637.) 
 
Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c), set forth a general rule 
 
requiring school districts to retain senior employees over more junior employees and to retain 
permanent employees over temporary employees.  Any exception to this general rule must be 
based on statute.  Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d) provides: 
 

10. 

“(d)  Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a 
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons: 

 
8. 

 
9. 

 

 

2

 

(1) 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential with 
a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that 
the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that 
course or course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority 
do not possess. 
 

(2) 

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with constitutional 

requirements related to equal protection of the laws.” 

 

 

 

11. 

The district implemented a bump analysis to determine which employees 

could bump into a position being held by a junior employee.  A senior teacher whose 
position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is 
certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” 
a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District 
(1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.) 

 
12.  Under subdivision (d)(1), the District may skip a junior teacher being retained for 
 
specified reasons.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 131.)  
Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers only if the junior 
teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)  A junior employee possessing 
special competence can be retained over a senior employee lacking such competence.  
(Alexander v. Delano Joint Union High School District (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567.)   

 
13. 

 
14. 

The district skipped two employees, a counselor at the adult school and a 

female physical education teacher, pursuant to Education Code section 44955(d)(1).2  The 
district was required to implement the governing board’s resolution in a manner that was 
consistent with the board’s policies and the district’s efforts to offer certain services to its 
students.  There is no legal requirement mandating that skipping criteria be contained in a 
governing board’s resolution.   

Several respondents who were counselors testified that they possessed the 

requisite Pupil Personnel Services (PPS) Credential which allowed them to provide 
counseling services to adults. They argued that they were able to perform the same services 
as the junior employee who had been skipped.  In fact, one senior employee had performed 
the skipped employee’s job during two previous school years before the skipped employee 
was hired by the district.  The district maintained that it had skipped the junior employee, 
with a November 16, 2009, seniority date, because he possessed superior skills which 
included the fact that the junior employee had interviewed and been selected for the position, 
that he traveled to college campuses, that he was a military liaison, and that he counseled 

                                                
2  
because he had been skipped.   

The counselor was not listed on the seniority list introduced at hearing and the district alleged this was 

3

adults, all tasks which the senior employees with PPS credentials were competent to perform.  
As such, the district’s decision to skip that employee appeared arbitrary and capricious and it 
is recommended that the most senior counselor with a PPS credential be permitted to “bump” 
the junior counselor who was skipped.   

 
15.  Although the evidence was unclear, apparently the district skipped the female 

physical education (PE) teacher because female PE teachers were needed “district wide” to 
assist with locker room monitoring of the girl’s locker rooms.  However, several witnesses 
testified that many schools have a greater male to female PE teacher ratio and that they are able 
to arrange their respective schedules so as to provide appropriate female locker room 
monitoring.  Moreover, Alejandro Alvarez, Director, Certificated Human Resources, 
acknowledged that the skipped female PE teacher had not yet been assigned, calling into 
question the district’s decision to skip her.  The evidence did not establish that the female PE 
teacher had been properly skipped and the decision to skip that employee appeared arbitrary 
and capricious.  It is recommended that the most senior PE teacher be permitted to “bump” the 
junior PE teacher who was skipped.   

 
16. 

Respondent Carol Sams, with an October 19, 1978, seniority date and a 
Designated Subjects Vocational Education Teaching Credential, testified that she was 
competent to “bump” a junior employee with a similar credential.  However, the district 
demonstrated that the employees Sams believed she could “bump” were actually teaching 
under another credential, one which Sams did not possess.  As such, she could not “bump” 
those employees.  The evidence established that Sams was employed in a service which the 
district reduced.  The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is matter 
reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this proceeding.  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 
167.)  However, respondent Sams testified that she noted several positions she believed she 
could “bump” but was not able to recall them at the hearing.  In order to ensure an accurate 
determination that Sams cannot “bump” another employee, it is recommended that the 
district review the seniority list with Sams to verify that there are no positions she can bump.  
 
 
as long term substitute teachers before they were retained as probationary I teachers.  They 
alleged that their seniority dates should be changed to reflect their time as substitutes.  The 
district argued that these respondents could not contest their seniority dates in this 
proceeding as they had agreed to those dates in the past, but the teachers credibly testified 
that they were unaware until this hearing that they could contest those dates.  The evidence 
established that these teachers were working prior to the dates they signed their contracts and 
that the district delayed in executing their contracts.  It is without question that it would be 
patently unfair to place these teachers in a worse position than long term substitutes who sign 
contracts at the start of the school year merely because the district delayed until after the 
school year began to have them sign their contracts.  Although Education Code section 
44918, subdivision (d), provides that time incurred as a day to day substitute teacher in the 
district may not be used when determining seniority, if these teachers worked more than 75 
percent of the number of days in the year prior to being offered a probationary position, their 
temporary or substitute year is deemed to be a probationary year per Education Code section 

Respondents, Julie Cox, Ajaa Jones, Jennifer Allen, and Michele Ness, worked 

17. 

 

4

44918.  It is recommended the district review the files of these respondents to determine if 
any of them served for at least 75 percent of the number of days, and if they did, to correct 
their seniority dates accordingly.  Thereafter, it is recommended the district determine 
whether any of these teachers, based upon these new seniority dates, have the seniority and 
qualifications necessary to rescind the preliminary notices issued to them.   

 
18. 

Respondent Jose Diaz testified that his August 3, 2006, seniority date was 

inaccurate because his principal required him to attend a mandatory orientation program in 
July 2006.  Diaz admitted he did not receive additional compensation for attending the 
training as he was told it was included as part of his contractual pay from the district.  The 
district argued that the orientation was offered throughout the year and that Diaz could have 
taken it later.  However, that argument was insufficient to rebut Diaz’ testimony that his 
principal required him to attend the July 2006 program.  The preponderance of the evidence 
established that Diaz was required to attend the orientation in July 2006.  Diaz reasonably 
relied on the statements made by his principal and attended the orientation under the 
reasonable belief that his attendance was required.  He forwent his summer vacation in order 
to attend this orientation.   

 
A valid claim of equitable estoppel consists of the following elements:  (a) A 
 
representation or concealment of material facts; (b) made with knowledge, actual or virtual, 
of the facts; (c) to a party ignorant, actually and permissibly, of the truth; (d) with the 
intention, actual or virtual, that the ignorant party act on it; and (e) that party was induced to 
act on it.  (See California Milling Corp. v. White (1964) 229 Cal.App.2d 469; 479; Long 
Beach v. Mansell (1970) 3 Cal.3d 462, 489.) 
 

In Long Beach v. Mansell (1970) 3 Cal.3d 462, 496, the California Supreme Court 

observed that the doctrine of estoppel may be applied against the government “where justice 
and right require it;” but it will not be applied where this would nullify a strong rule of policy 
adopted for the benefit of the public; and “[t]he tension between these twin principles makes 
up the doctrinal context in which concrete cases are decided.”  (3 Cal.3d 493.)  
 

“The government may be bound by an equitable estoppel in the same manner as a 

private party when the elements requisite to such an estoppel against a private party are 
present and, in the considered view of a court of equity, the injustice which would result 
from a failure to uphold an estoppel is of sufficient dimension to justify any effect upon 
public interest or policy which would result from the raising of an estoppel.”  (3 Cal.3d 496.)  

 
Accordingly, given the principal’s statements to Diaz and his reasonable reliance on 

them, the district is estopped from asserting that he has a different seniority date than the first 
day of attendance at this orientation for which he was paid.  It is recommended that the 
district review Diaz’ personnel file, and in light of this new seniority date, determine if Diaz 
has sufficient seniority to permit him to retain his employment. 

 

 

5

19. 

Richard Roth, an administrator with the district for over 20 years testified 

 
about the impropriety and unfairness of Education Code section 44956.5.3  He testified that 
several years ago during a fiscal crisis he was required to teach classes, and thereafter, he 
was listed on two separate district documents as having 20 years’ seniority.  The district 
conceded that past documents had incorrectly listed Roth’s seniority, but argued that this 
error did not give Roth more seniority rights than those to which he was entitled under the 
Education Code.  Roth admitted he was hired into the district as an administrator and did not 
refute the district’s contention that administrators may be required to teach.  While Roth’s 
situation, as with all of the long-serving administrators being released in this proceeding, was 
profoundly troubling, the evidence did not establish a basis for him to circumvent the plain 
language of Section 44956.5.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, 

2. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)   

 
3. 

Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant 
 
to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.  The 
district has identified the certificated employees who are providing the particular kinds of 
services that the Governing Board directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is recommended 
that the Governing Board give respondents notice before May 15, 2009, that their services 
will not be required by the District for the school year 2010-11. 
 
 
accusation subject to the recommendations listed in the factual findings.   This determination 
is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 
 
 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

4. 

                                                

3  

Education Code section 44956.5 provides that for certificated employees initially employed in an 

administrative position after July 1, 1983, who transfer to a teaching position, the period of employment as an 
administrator shall not be included in determining seniority for purposes of section 44955, except for school site 
administrators who shall earn up to a maximum of three years seniority while serving as site administrators.   
 

6

 

 

RECOMMENDATION 
 
It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the respondents whose 

names are set forth below except for those respondents identified above in the Findings of 
Fact Nos. 14, 15, 17, and 18, that their employment will be terminated at the close of the 
current school year and that their services will not be needed for the 2010-2011 school year. 

 

 
 
DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 
 
                               
                               
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings  

 

7

 

 

 

Appendix A 

Last Name 

First Name 

ABREGO 
AGUILAR 
ALLEN 
ALTAMIRANO 
ANDERSEN 
AVINA   
BARTELS 
BASULTO 
BELMONTEZ 
BELMORE 
BENNETT 
BENO 
BRADSHAW 
BREWER 
BRISENO 
BROWN 
BUTORAC 
CALLANTA 
CARDOSI 
CHIEK 
 
 
CONRAD 
CORDERO 
COX 
CRANE 
 
DANGANAN 
DAVIS 
DAVIS-FOX 
DAWSON 
DOLVAN 
DEL CASTILLO 
DENNIS 
DIAZ 
DIN 
DOMINGUEZ 
DOUGAN 
DUNN 
DZAMA 
EDWARDS 
 
ESQUIVEL 

ANA 
CRIS 
JENNIFER 
MARTHA 
ADAM 
CARLOS 
KEVIN 
MINNIE 
MARY 
DAVI 
AMY 
CAROLINE 
JESSICA 
KARLA 
RICHARD 
CAROLYN 
CHRISTOPHER 
ANNA 
WILLIAM 
TESSA 
 
 
TRISHA 
ALICE FAYE 
JULIE 
JONATHAN 
 
MICHELLE 
ERIC 
BRITTNEY 
MARAJHA 
TIFFANY 
ANEL 
KELLY 
JOSE 
EDUARDO 
MARICELA 
BRENDA 
SHAVON 
DAVID 
JESSICA 
 
JENNIFER 

8

Last Name 

First Name 

ELIZABETH 
LANA 
CYNTHIA 
JENNIFER 
ARMANDO 
REUBEN 
COLLEEN 
CHRISTINA 
ROSA 
KERI 
REBECCA 
CHRISTINE 
DESEREA 
PRISCILLA 
BEATRIZ 
DIANE 
TAMARA 
KEN 
TEVA 
JENNY 
ANNE 
AJAA 
ALPHONSO 
ALEXANDER 
AMY 
AMY 
DAVID 
LINDSEY 
AUDREY 
HEIDI 
 
ERIBERTO 
CHARLES 
JAMES 
SHENEE' 
NICK 
REID 
CHERI 
CRISTY 

ESQUIVIAS 
FELTON 
FIGUEIREDO 
FLORES 
FRESQUEZ JR. 
GAXIOLA 
GERKE 
GONZALES 
GONZALEZ 
GUGGISBERG 
HASENAUER-LOPEZ 
HASTON 
HERNANDEZ 
HERNANDEZ 
HERNANDEZ 
HERNANDEZ 
HERNANDEZ 
HOONG 
HOWRY 
HUTCHINGS 
JOHNSON 
JONES 
JONES 
JUBACK 
KANANEN 
KEELING 
KIM 
KNAPP 
KONKEL 
LANCE 
 
LEON 
LOBO JR. 
LOGAN 
LOGIUDICE 
LOPEZ 
LUSZECK 
MABRIE 
MACMILLAN 
MARCHAN-GREINER  VALENTINE 
MARTIN 
MATTHEWS 
MORA 
MORIN 
MURILLO 

CARLA 
VERNON 
ARMANDO 
ELIZABETH 
ALBERT 

 

9

Last Name 

NAVA 
NESS 
NORTHROP 
OWENS 
PARKER 
PASCUAL 
PEREZ ZAMORA 
PERSKY 
PIERCE 
PORRITT 
PRECIADO 
PRIETO 
PRITCHARD 
PROCTOR 
PUCHALSKI 
PUFF 
REASER 
REYES 
RIVERA 
RIVERA 
ROTH 
RUSSO 
SALAZAR 
SALCIDO 
SAMS 
SANCHEZ 
 
SARREAL-DAM 
SCATES 
SCHOENHERR 
SCHUCK 
SERVELLO 
SHARP 
SIMNJANOVSKI 
SIMPSON 
SJOL 
SORIANO 
SOTO 
STUHRMANN 
SULLIVAN 
TAKEMOTO 
TATUM JR. 
TEMPLE 
TIBBETTS 
URIBE 

First Name 

OLGA 
MICHELE 
CHRISTOPHER 
NIKIA 
ANNETTE 
EDWARD 
NADINE 
CHRISTOPHER 
AMANDA 
SULEIKA 
NANCY 
MARLENE 
LOIS 
ROBIN 
SARAH 
JACQUELYNE 
JACQUELINE 
CRISTINA 
JUDITH 
TINA 
RICHARD 
ROSE 
ROSALIE 
VICTORIA 
CAROL 
ARGELIA 
 
RACHEL 
JULIE 
DIANA 
DARRIN 
KIMBERLY 
LAURA 
RISTE 
SAMANTHA 
DIANA 
ROBERT 
LOUISE 
SHARON 
PAMELA 
CONNIE 
MICHAEL 
NANCY 
AMY 
SANDRA 

 

10

Last Name 

First Name 

URIBE 
VALDEZ 
 
 
VOTRUBA 
WATSON-RODGERS 
WILLARD 
WILLIAMS 
WILSON 
YAMARONE 

PAMELA 
DURAN 
 
 
EMILY 
LEAH 
DONNA 
YVETTE 
LORI 
MELINA 

11

 

 

