BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE 
STONY CREEK JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 
OAH No. 2010011055 
 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of 
Certificated Employees: 
 
JANINE BEARD, ALISA JOHNSEN and 
KATHLEEN PORTO-JONES, 
 
                                                   Respondents. 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Jonathan Lew, State of 
California, Office of Administrative Hearings on March 25, 2010, in Elk Creek, California.   
 
 
of the Stony Creek Joint Unified School District. 
 

Kim Kingsley Bogard and Elizabeth A. Tanner, Attorneys at Law, appeared on behalf 

Leslie V. Freeman, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of respondents Janine Beard, 

Submission of the case was deferred pending filing of legal argument.  Briefs from 

Alisa Johnsen and Kathleen Porto-Jones, who were all present.        
 
 
the District and respondent were received by April 13, 2010, and marked respectively as 
Exhibits 18 and P for identification.  The case was submitted for decision on April 13, 2010.     
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

2. 

1. 

Respondents Janine Beard, Alisa Johnsen and Kathleen Porto-Jones are 

John T. McIntosh is the Superintendent of the Stony Creek Joint Unified 

 
 
School District (District).  He made and filed the Accusation in his official capacity.   
 
 
permanent certificated employee of the District.  On February 12, 2010, the District served 
on respondents a written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to them 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The written notice set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation and noted that the District’s Board of Trustees had passed a Resolution (No. 
09-10-6) reducing the certificated staff by 4.5 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.  

 

1

Respondents timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying them for the ensuing school year. 
 

 

 

 

3. 

5. 

4. 

Services 

Grade Level 

On February 11, 2010, at a regular meeting, the District’s Board of Trustees 

On February 11, 2010, the District’s Board of Trustees determined that it was 

The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against respondents.  The 
Accusations with required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense were 
timely served on respondents on February 24, 2010.  On February 24, 2010, respondents 
timely filed Notices of Defense to the Accusation.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional 
requirements were satisfied. 
  
 
was given notice of the Superintendent’s recommendation that certificated employees 
holding 4.5 FTE positions be given notice that their services would be reduced or not 
required for the next school year, and stating the reasons for that recommendation.   
 
 
necessary to decrease programs and services and thus it was necessary to reduce teaching and 
other certificated services affecting employment of 4.5 FTE positions.  The District’s Board 
of Trustees adopted Resolution No. 09-10-6 providing for the reduction or elimination of the 
following particular kinds of services (PKS):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In determining the extent by which to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
 
services, the District’s Board of Trustees considered all positively assured attrition up to and 
including the date of the resolution.  The total number of positions to be reduced or 
discontinued under this resolution is 4.5 FTE certificated positions.  The Board has 
determined that the services of a corresponding number of certificated employees shall be 
terminated at the close of the current 2009-2010 school year. 
 
Application of Tie-Break Criteria 
 
 
resolution (No. 09-10-5) which established criteria to break seniority date ties.  It specified 
that the criteria were determined “on the basis of needs of the district and the students 
thereof.”  In determining relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid 
probationary service on the same day, the following criteria were to apply, in the order listed:   

a. 
b.   
c.   
d.    Agriculture 
e.   
Counseling 
 

Elementary Reading   
 
Elementary CDS 
 
Secondary CDS 
 
 

On February 11, 2010, The District’s Board of Trustees passed a second 

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reduction 

K-6 
K-6 
7-12 
7-12 
K-12 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
0.5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FTE 

4.5 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

6. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

2

 
 

 

a. 
b. 

c. 
d. 
e. 
f.  

Length of Service in the District, Excluding Substitute Service 
Length of Certificated Service Outside District, Excluding Substitute 
Service 
Clear Credentials 
CLAD Certification or Equivalent 
Breadth of Credentials 
Amount of Post-Graduate Study 

7. 

The District maintains a Certificated Seniority List which contains employees’ 

 
 
seniority dates (first date of paid service), credentials/certificates, authorizations and 
assignments.  The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the least 
senior employees assigned in the various services being reduced.       
 

8. 

Holly McLaughlin is a principal and half-time teacher with the District.  She 
testified as to application of the tie-break criteria.  Four District certificated employees have 
a seniority date of August 15, 2007.  These include Victoria Cutler, Erin Powell, and 
respondents Janine Beard and Kathleen Porto-Jones.  After application of the tie-break 
criteria, Victoria Cutler and Erin Powell were determined to be most senior, followed by 
Jeanine Beard and Kathleen Porto-Jones.  Ms. Cutler and Ms. Powell were served with 
precautionary layoff notices.  All four employees have the same length of service within the 
District.  Ms. Cutler had four years of certificated service outside the District, followed by 
Erin Powell with three years of certificated service outside the District.  Ms. McLaughlin 
determined that respondents Beard and Porto-Jones had no certificated experience outside 
the District.  Neither holds a clear credential.  Ms. Beard has a CLAD certification credential 
so she was determined to be senior to Ms. Porto-Jones.   
 

Ms. Porto-Jones contends that she has a CLAD, and is No Child Left Behind (NCLB) 

The District did not abuse its discretion in the creation or application of the tie-break 

compliant in science as a result of her 2007 science degree from California State University 
at Chico.  The District noted that even if Ms. Porto-Jones possesses a CLAD, respondent 
Beard would still be more senior to her under the tie-break resolution.  This is because Ms. 
Beard holds a multiple subject credential and this has greater breadth than Ms. Porto-Jones’ 
Designated Subjects Career Technical Education Teaching Credential.           
 
 
criteria.  The District’s application of the tie-break criteria in this case was reasonable and 
proper.  There was no indication that such application was arbitrary or capricious.   
 
Assignment and Reassignment of Certificated Employees 
 
 
employed as a full time reading specialist at the elementary school, one of the services being 
reduced by PKS Resolution No. 09-10-6.  Ms. Reed holds a Standard Elementary credential, 
with a Supplemental Authorization in Social Science.  The District determined to reassign 
her to an elementary classroom.   

Sherry Reed has a District seniority date of September 1, 1976.  She is 

9. 

 

3

 

 

Respondents contend that the District should have instead assigned Sherry Reed to 
Jeffrey Flynn’s Social Science position for the 2010-2011 school year because she holds a 
Supplemental Authorization in Social Science.  By so doing, Jeffrey Flynn and not 
respondent Beard would be subject to layoff.  Jeffrey Flynn is a probationary teacher.  His 
District seniority date is September 13, 2008.  He received a precautionary layoff notice.  Mr. 
Flynn holds a Single Subject Credential in Social Science, and he is scheduled to teach three 
Social Science courses not designated by grade level next year.  Respondents also note that 
Ms. Reed is certificated and competent to provide the half-time continuation teaching service 
provided by Ms. McLaughlin, also a probationary employee.  Ms. McLaughlin’s District 
seniority date is November 10, 2008. 
 

The District explained that Ms. Reed has been an elementary school teacher in the 

District for over 30 years.  Over that period she has never taught self-contained social science 
at the secondary level.  The District correctly noted that it has broad discretion to assign and 
reassign employees as it deems appropriate.  It has discretion as to whether additional 
assignments and reassignments should be made to save other junior teachers named as 
respondents.  And while the District has an affirmative obligation to reassign senior teachers 
who are losing their positions, it does not have the same obligation to reassign senior 
teachers who are not losing their position in an effort to save junior teachers.  “Inverse 
bumping rights” are not contemplated in the process by which Districts exercise discretion as 
to which assignments and reassignments are made.  (Duax v. Kern Community College 
District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 568.) 
 

10. 

The District did not abuse its discretion when it determined not to reassign Ms. 

Reed to teach Jeffrey Flynn’s Social Science position, or to teach Ms. McLaughlin’s 
position, for the 2010-2011, notwithstanding the fact that both are probationary employees, 
junior to respondent Beard. 
 
Alisa Johnsen 
 

11.  Ms. Johnsen has a District seniority date of August 26, 1996.  She holds a 

multiple subject credential, with single subject credentials in Pupil Personnel Services and 
Agriculture.  She is employed by the District in a counselor position (.5 FTE), grades K-12, 
the position eliminated in the District’s PKS resolution.  Although respondents contend that 
half-time counseling has not been reduced or eliminated, and that some counseling services 
will continue to be provided to the students of the District, this is not evidence that the 
service is not being reduced or eliminated, or that it will be provided by existing District 
employees who are not credentialed or competent to provide them.  The District is not 
required to identify by name the person or persons who will render the counseling service.  It 
is enough at this time that the District has included a .5 FTE counselor position among the 
particular kinds of services it intends to reduce or eliminate.    

 
Ms. Johnsen contends that she is certificated and competent to bump into a half-time 
teaching services position for grades 7-12 at a continuation school where Holly McLaughlin 

4

taught this year.  Respondents note that a valid teaching credential issued by the State Board 
or the Commission on Teacher Credentialing is deemed qualifying for assignment as a 
teacher in a continuation school, provided that the teacher consents to the assignment, that 
continuation classes provide suitable instruction for the various individuals for whose benefit 
they are established, and that continuation classes are designed to meet the educational needs 
of each pupil including, but not limited to, independent study, regional occupation programs, 
work study, career counseling, and job placement services, as a supplement to classroom 
instruction.  (See Ed. Code, §§ 48430, 48435.)  Ms. Johnsen believes her counseling and 
teaching experience, and her agricultural training and experience establish her competence to 
provide the varied and individualized attention that the students attending the continuation 
school require.   
 
 
The District notes that Ms. McLaughlin is assigned to a blended 
Administrative/Social Science assignment.  Ms. McLaughlin holds single subject credentials 
for both Social Science and English, with a supplemental authorization in Administrative 
Services.  She splits her time equally between teaching and principal duties.  The District 
contends that it is not required to split Ms. McLaughlin’s position to accommodate Ms. 
Johnsen.   
 

12. 

The District has never employed Ms. Johnsen for greater than .5 FTE.  No employee 

Respondents believe this case can be distinguished from Hildebrandt because the 

less senior to Ms. Johnsen is being retained to render service in a position for which she is 
credentialed and competent that is .5 FTE or less.  The District notes that a school district is 
not required to split an assignment when “bumping” pursuant to Education Code section 
44955.  Citing Hildebrandt v. St Helena (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, the District points to 
the limitations on the bumping and reemployment rights of half-time teachers.  In 
Hildebrandt, the First Appellate District ruled that a school district is not required to split a 
full-time position to allow half-time employee reinstatement rights.     
 
 
District would be allowing a half-time counselor to bump into an existing half-time teaching 
position.  This case is somewhat complicated by Ms. McLaughlin being tentatively assigned 
to less than half-time teaching responsibilities next year.  The District’s tentative high school 
master schedule for next year has Ms. McLaughlin teaching only two periods (Junior High 
History and Yearbook 9-11) and serving as principal/administrator for five periods.  
Respondents believe Ms. McLaughlin increased her own administrative responsibilities from 
half-time to .7 FTE, and assigned herself one period teaching junior high history and one 
period overseeing high school yearbook.  Respondents suggest that this, as well as other 
elements of the tentative schedule, “defies logic and can only be seen as obfuscation.”  
Respondents further suggest that the fact that Ms. McLaughlin was not subject to layoff was 
due to her intimate involvement as the principal in making the choices and recommendations 
to the Board for approval.  Respondents believe Ms. McLaughlin’s involvement 
demonstrates that the layoff decisions were arbitrary and capricious.   
 
 
McLaughlin’s existing position had it so chosen.  However, it was not an abuse of discretion 

The above matters have been considered.  The District could have split Ms. 

13. 

 

5

14.  Ms. Beard possesses a multiple subject teaching credential.  This credential 

for the District to characterize Ms. McLaughlin’s position as a full time blended 
Administrative/Social Science assignment, and then chose not to decouple the principal (.5 
FTE) from the teaching (.5 FTE) duties.  In King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 
89 Cal.App.3d 1016, the court found that a district is not compelled to offer separate half-
time positions in order to accommodate those previously laid off.  The school district had 
created a new position that involved 50 percent teaching and 50 percent counseling.  The 
court found no abuse of discretion in the district’s decision to retain a less senior employee 
who had credentials for 100 percent of the duties.  Here, the District has determined to retain 
Ms. McLaughlin, a less senior employee, to perform 100 percent of the duties.  Respondents 
believe there is evidence in this case suggesting bad faith and self-serving motives for 
redefining of positions.  In King, the court noted that “[v]irtually no evidence was presented 
to show that respondent showed bad faith in so defining the available position.”  Regardless, 
the record and evidence presented in this case did not demonstrate that Ms. McLaughlin or 
the District engaged in bad faith in the manner in which Ms. McLaughlin’s position was 
defined or redefined. 
 
Janine Beard 
 
 
authorizes her to teach grades K-12 in a self contained classroom.  Only two employees less 
senior to Ms. Beard are being retained for the 2010-2011 school year.  Mr. Flynn is teaching 
Social Science.  Ms. McLaughlin is assigned to a blended Administrative/Social Science 
assignment.  Ms. Beard possesses neither a Single Subject Social Science nor an 
Administrative credential.  She is not authorized to perform the assignments of either Mr. 
Flynn or Ms. McLaughlin. 
 
Kathleen Porto-Jones 
 
 
teach Agriculture and Natural Resources in grades 12 and below, and classes organized 
primarily for adults in career technical instruction.  She taught Agriculture and Natural 
Resources in grades 7-12 at the Elk Creek Junior and Senior High Schools.  During the three 
years she taught, Ms. Porto-Jones held a certificate of clearance and a preliminary designated 
subjects career technical education teaching credential.  The District believes Ms. Porto-
Jones is in the same position as Ms. Beard, with regard to whether she is credentialed and 
competent to perform the assignments of either Mr. Flynn or Ms. McLaughlin.  The District 
is correct.  Ms. Porto-Jones possesses neither a Single Subject Social Science nor 
Administrative credential.         
 
 
District’s Tentative High School Master Schedule.  It is a .70 FTE agriculture position that 
she believes she is certificated and competent to teach.   
 
 
The District noted that the Agriculture vacant position includes an Agriculture 
Animal Science and/or Agriculture Biology class, and an Animal and Plant Physiology class.  

16.  Ms. Porto-Jones wishes to be assigned into a vacant agriculture position on the 

15.  Ms. Porto-Jones possesses a designated subjects credential authorizing her to 

 

6

17.  Ms. Porto-Jones testified that she is NCLB compliant in Science as a result of 

Students must complete at least one biological science class in order to graduate.  Ms. 
McLaughlin testified that the agriculture biological science classes are the only biological 
science classes offered, and thus the only way for students to meet the science graduation 
requirement.  Because the agriculture biological science classes are not an “alternative” 
means of meeting science graduation requirements, they are a “core” science class as defined 
by NCLB.1  Accordingly, career technical education teachers such as Ms. Porto-Jones are 
required to meet NCLB teacher requirements if they are teaching core academic courses.  A 
teacher is not “highly qualified” or competent to teach a core subject area at the secondary 
level unless she has demonstrated competence in the subject area.  There are two ways of 
demonstrating subject matter competence in a core subject area:  1) possession of a credential 
in the subject area; or 2) successful completion of a required amount of course work in the 
subject area.  (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 6111.)  Ms. Porto-Jones does not possess a single 
subject science credential so she must have completed the required course work in order to 
be competent. 
 
 
her 2007 Bachelor of Science Degree from California Sate University at Chico.  She noted 
that her college transcripts demonstrate that she had completed 54 units of coursework which 
counted toward NCLB compliance in Science.   
 
 
A teacher must have completed coursework equivalent to an undergraduate major in 
the core subject area (32 non-remedial units earned with a grade of C or higher) to be NCLB 
compliant.  (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 6111.)  The District believes that Ms. Porto-Jones 
confused classes which counted toward her Agriculture Bachelor’s Degree with courses 
which count toward NCLB compliance.  The CTC Subject Matter Authorization Guidebook 
provides that coursework from a department other than that of the subject matter 
authorization being sought is not counted toward NCLB compliance unless a letter is 
provided from the chair of the subject area department stating that the course is equivalent to 
one offered by the department.  The District reviewed Ms. Porto-Jones’ transcripts.  Only 14 
units were from classes taken through the science departments.  Of those 14 units, Ms. Porto-
Jones received a grade of C or better in 10 units.  The District noted that even if Ms. Porto-
Jones is credited with all the “science” units she claims, she only completed 29 units with a 
grade of C or better.  Ms. Porto-Jones provided no documentation/letters that the classes she 
took in her major were equivalent to courses offered by the science departments.  
 
 
she is NCLB compliant to teach the core subject area (Science) to which she wishes to be 
assigned.   
 
 
biological science classes during the 2009-2010 school year.  However, past mis-assignments 

The above matters having been considered, Ms. Porto-Jones did not demonstrate that 

The District concedes that Ms. Porto-Jones was mis-assigned to agriculture 

18. 

                                                 
1 “Core subjects” are defined as: “English, reading or language arts, mathematics, science, foreign languages, civics 
and government, economics, art, history and geography.”  (United States Code, title XX, section 7801(11).) 

 

7

19. 

Respondents contend that the Agriculture curriculum provided in 2009-2010 

do not entitle her to continued mis-assignment, as such would entitle an unqualified teacher 
to be mis-assigned in perpetuity. 
 
Other Matters 
 
 
by Ms. Porto-Jones is not really being eliminated, noting that the Tentative High School 
Master Schedule lists a vacant .7 FTE position teaching four Agriculture courses.  Ms. Porto-
Jones noted that she can also teach two science courses in a different vacant 1.0 FTE position 
with an agriculture slant.  The District has used her over the past three years to offer the sole 
science curriculum in the District.  The matters set forth in Findings 16 through 18 govern, 
and provide the District’s rationale for not assigning Ms. Porto-Jones to these positions.  The 
District’s explanation was not unreasonable. 
 
 
complaint against her explains why the Agriculture program taught by her was targeted for 
elimination in the PKS resolution.  Along with suggestions that Ms. McLaughlin’s 
involvement and decisions were self serving, respondents believe that the decisions made by 
the District were “arbitrary, capricious and preposterous.”  No such finding is made in this 
case. 
 

Finally, Ms. Porto-Jones strongly hinted that a school board member’s personal 

20.  No other permanent or probationary certificated employee with less seniority 
is being retained to render a service which respondents and other noticed teachers, or any of 
them, are certificated and competent to render.  As between employees who first rendered 
paid service to the District on the same date, the order of termination was based solely on the 
needs of the District and the students thereof.  The District was required to apply tie-break 
criteria as part of the layoff process.  Such application was reasonable and proper.         
 

The reduction or discontinuation of the particular kinds of services set forth in 

Resolution No. 09-10-6 are related to the welfare of the schools and the students thereof 
within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  The decision to reduce or 
discontinue these services is neither arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of 
discretion of the District. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
 
required next year have rendered valuable services to the District. 
 

The District employees receiving notices that their services would not be 

2. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955 were met.  The notices sent to respondents indicated the statutory basis for 
the reduction of services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due 
process.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  The description of 

 

8

services to be reduced, both in the Board Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe 
particular kinds of services.  (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.  See, also, 
Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)      
 

3. 

The services identified in Board Resolution No. 09-10-6 are particular kinds of 

services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The 
District Board of Trustee’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. 
 

4. 

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the Stony 

Creek Joint Unified School District due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular 
kinds of services.  Cause for reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the 
welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 
44949. 
 

5. 

The District has discretion in making assignments and reassignments, and was 

not required to make the reassignment of Sherry Reed into other positions as proposed by 
respondents.  (See Factual Findings 9 and 10.) 
 
 
As set forth in the Factual Findings, the District applied seniority rules with some 
consistency, and allowed bumping based upon the more senior employee holding a credential 
or authorization to teach the assignment of the less senior teacher.  The District properly 
disallowed respondents from bumping into positions they were not otherwise certificated and 
competent to perform.  The District otherwise articulated the rationale for its bumping, 
assignments and reassignments, along with tie-break criteria, when the process so required. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

 
 
Notice shall be given to respondents occupying up to 4.5 FTE that their services will 
not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services.    
 
 
 
DATED:  April 19, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

___________________________  
JONATHAN LEW 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

9

