 
BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE   
SAN BENITO HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
OAH No.  2010030116 

 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of 
Certificated Employees: 
 
LINDA BIGNAN, SUSAN CARROLL, 
SANDRA PATRI, AND RENEE REED, 
 
 
 
 
 

   Respondents. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Lawrence M. Schoenke, Attorney at Law, Dannis Woliver Kelly, represented the San 

Administrative Law Judge Mary-Margaret Anderson, State of California, Office of 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Hollister, California, on April 13, 2010. 
 
 
Benito High School District. 
 
 
Respondents. 
 
 
 

The record closed on April 13, 2010. 

Michelle A. Welsh, Attorney at Law, Stoner, Welsh & Schmidt, represented all of the 

SUMMARY 
 

The Board of Trustees of the San Benito High School District decided to discontinue 
 
particular kinds of services provided by teachers in the 2010-2011 school year for budgetary 
reasons.  The decision was not related to the competency and dedication of those whose 
services were proposed to be eliminated.  The process complied with Education Code 
requirements. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Stan Rose filed the Accusation in his official capacity as Superintendent of the 

1. 

 
 
San Benito High School District (District). 
 
 
certificated employees of the District. 
 

2. 

Linda Bignan, Susan Carroll, Sandra Patri, and Renee Reed (Respondents) are 

3. 

On March 8, 2010, the Board of Trustees of the San Benito High School 

 
District adopted Resolution No. 02-30, in which the Board resolved to reduce or eliminate 
particular kinds of services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year, as 
follows: 
 
 
PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICE 

 
NUMBER OF FULL TIME EQUIVALENT 
(FTE) POSITIONS (including preparation 
and travel periods where applicable) 
 
2.0 FTE 
1.0 FTE 
0.6 FTE 
1.0 FTE 
1.0 FTE  
0.2 FTE   
0.6 FTE – Teaching Services 
0.2 FTE 
0.2 FTE  
0.2 FTE 
1.0 FTE 
1.0 FTE  - Teaching Services  
0.4 FTE 
0.2 FTE – Teaching Services  
1.8 FTE 
0.4 FTE 
0.2 FTE 
1 Stipend Position 
1 Stipend Position 
3 Stipend Position(s) 
12.0 FTE Total 

1.  School Counseling 
2.  Special Education (RSP Program) 
3.  Library Media Specialist Position 
4.  English 
5.  AVID 
6.  Physical Education  
7.  Physical Education 
8.  Science, Chemistry 
9.  Science, Anatomy/Physiology 
10. Science, Earth Science 
11. Mathematics 
12. Mathematics 
13. Foreign Language: Spanish 
14. Foreign Language: French 
15. Long Term Independent Study 
16. Social Science 
17. Graduation Coordinator 
18. AVID Coordinator  
19. Technology Mentor                                      
20. Assistant Music Director 
 
 

 

 

4. 

 
The District’s Seniority List is updated annually and was used to determine 
 
who would receive notices.  On March 9, 2010, written notice of the recommendation that 
their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year was served personally on all 
of the Respondents.  Each notice contained the reasons for it.   
 
 
filed and served.  Each Respondent filed a timely notice of defense and this hearing 
followed.  
 
 
that due to an anticipated shortage of funds, the District was required to look at areas to 

Each Respondent filed a timely request for hearing.  Accordingly, an Accusation was 

Shawn Tennenbaum, the District’s Director of Human Resources, explained 

5. 

 

2

8. 

6. 

7. 

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 

Respondent Linda Bignan teaches French and is subject to layoff because of 

The District’s other French teacher, M.L.1, has more seniority than Bignan.  

reduce.  The District consists of one high school site serving approximately 2,787 students in 
grades nine through twelve.  It is facing an expected loss of $1.8 million. 
 
 
made solely on the basis of the needs of the District and its pupils. 
   
Linda Bignan   
 
 
the proposed reduction of .2 FTE French teaching services.  Her French position will be 
reduced from .6 to .4 FTE.  Because of her seniority, Bignan was offered a .6 FTE position 
as a long-term independent study teacher, but she does not feel qualified for that assignment, 
which requires knowledge of many subjects she has never taught. 
 
 
She was previously also credentialed in Spanish, and taught one-half time in each language.  
Sometime in the last year, M.L. applied to the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing to revoke her Spanish credential.  After a period of months, the application was 
granted.  The District first learned of this action sometime after it happened and was not 
involved in any way.  After receiving the information about M.L.’s credential, Tennenbaum 
met with her twice.  He reported that M.L. chooses to teach French full-time and the District 
has no authority to order her to do otherwise.  There is no evidence in the record concerning 
the reason that M.L. caused her Spanish credential to be revoked; the result, however, was to 
leave the District with fewer options. 
 
 
they have worked together to prejudice Bignan’s reputation and employability.  According to 
Bignan, M.L.’s credential action was directed against her and is the latest in a continuing 
pattern of harassment.  She filed a formal complaint against M.L. in 2008, and does not feel 
District staff did enough to address the situation.  On March 29, 2010, Bignan wrote to 
Tennenbaum asserting “wrongful lay-off from my employment due to retaliation after 
complaint of harassment by fellow employee, [M.L.].”  At hearing, Bignan argued that the 
District is prevented from laying her off because it failed to act on her complaints and that to 
lay her off would constitute illegal retaliation for her complaints against M.L.  No legal 
authority was presented in support of these theories.  The situation is truly unfortunate; 
however, no grounds exist to exempt Bignan from layoff. 
 
Susan Carroll 
 
 
position.  She is the least senior teacher in that position and is subject to layoff because of the 
proposed reduction of 1.8 FTE long-term independent study positions.    
 
                                                 
 

Bignan believes that M.L. has been “acting behind the scenes” over the years 

Respondent Susan Carroll teaches long-term independent study in a .6 FTE 

1    Initials are used at the District’s request to protect this teacher’s privacy. 

10. 

9. 

 

3

13. 

11. 

12. 

The District has advertised a position as a Family and Consumer Science 

Sandra Patri 
 
 
Respondent Sandra Patri teaches long-term independent study in a .6 FTE 
position.  She is subject to layoff because of the proposed reduction of 1.8 FTE long-term 
independent study positions.  She holds a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, a 
CLAD, a supplementary authorization in art, and has a bachelor’s degree in interior design.   
 
 
Teacher for the 2010-2011 school year and Patri has applied.  She acknowledges that she is 
not yet qualified for two reasons.  She needs to take and pass the CSET test in Home 
Economics (she holds a ticket to take it on May 8, 2010) and she needs to complete a  
one-semester course in methodology.  Patri testified that she would have to find out where 
she could take such a course, whether at San Jose State, Cal State Monterey Bay or online. 
 
 
notice date, but even if she passes the test, she will still need to complete coursework.  In 
some instances districts will employ such teachers under a short-term staff permit while they 
earn the required credential, but districts are not required to do so.  Districts are only required 
to place teachers facing layoff in positions they are qualified for.  As Patri is not currently 
qualified for this new position, the District is not obliged to offer it to her.  No grounds exist 
to exempt Patri from layoff.       
  
Renee Reed 
 
 
The District has decided that she will be retained for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
to render a service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.   
 

15.  No permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained 

Patri notes that she will have taken the CSET prior to the May 15th final 

Respondent Renee Reed has received notice that her layoff notice is rescinded.  

14. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
1. 

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955 have been provided as required.  The District established jurisdiction for this 
proceeding as to each Respondent.  
 
 
reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction and 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services.   
 

Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to 

2. 

3. 

All contentions made by Respondents not specifically addressed herein are 

found to be without merit and are rejected. 

 

 
 
 

4

ORDER 

2. 

1. 

Notice may be given to Respondents Linda Bignan, Susan Carroll, and Sandra 

The Accusation against Renee Reed is dismissed. 

 
 
Patri that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
 
 
DATED: ________________________ 
 
 
                                     
             
                                                           
            
 
 
            
 

______________________________ 
MARY-MARGARET ANDERSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

5

