 
 

BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD 
SHANDON JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SAN LUIS OBISPO 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  L2010031176 
 
 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Alan Sciocchetti and Jill Smith,  
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
this matter on April 30, 2008, in San Luis Obispo, California. 
 
 
of the Shandon Joint Unified School District (District). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year. 
Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not 
reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
submitted for decision. 
 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing  and  the  matter  was 

Peter Carton, Attorney at Law, represented Rodney Wallace (Wallace), Superintendent 

John F. Sachs, Attorney at Law, represented Jill Smith (Respondent Smith).  

Alan Sciocchetti (Respondent Sciocchetti) represented himself. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.  

Superintendent Wallace filed the Accusation in his official capacity. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
On  March  9,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
adopted  Resolution  number  2009-10-12,  reducing  one  full-time-equivalent  position  in 
Kindergarten  through  Eighth  Grade  self-contained  classroom  education  for  the  2010-2011 
school year. 

3. 

5. 

7. 

4. 

6. 

9. 

8. 

10. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is 

Respondents made timely requests for hearings to determine if there is cause for 

On April 7, 2010, Superintendent Wallace issued the Accusation and served it on 

Superintendent  Wallace  thereafter  notified  the  Governing  Board  that  he 
 
recommended that notice be provided to Respondents that their services will not be required for 
the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
On  March  10,  2010,  the  District  provided  notice  to  Respondents  that  their 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular 
kinds of services.  
 
 
not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
Respondents.  Respondents thereafter filed timely Notices of Defense. 
 
 
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.1
 
 
neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion. 
                
 
The reduction of services set forth in factual finding number 3 is related to the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board. 
 
 
The  District  actually  wishes  to  retain  Respondent  Sciocchetti,  who  is  junior  to 
Respondent  Smith,  to  teach  his  current  assignment,  but  gave  notices  to  both  pending  the 
outcome  of  the  hearing.    Respondent  Sciocchetti  teaches  at  the  Shandon  Community  Day 
School, the only school of its kind in the District. The school provides instruction to students in 
grades Seven through Twelve who require education services outside regular school because of 
behavior or academic reasons. The number of students receiving instruction at any given time 
ranges from five to nineteen. Instruction is provided in a self-contained classroom, in the core 
curriculum  required  for  graduation,  namely,  Math,  Science,  English,  Social  Science,  Physical 
Education, and Health.  
 
 
Respondent Sciocchetti has a seniority date of August 15, 2005. He holds a clear 
multiple  subject  credential  and  a  single  subject  (Social  Science)  credential.    He  has  been 
teaching  at  the  community  day  school  for  six  years,  including  one  year  as  a  long-term 
substitute.  He  has  a  Master’s  Degree  in  Education.  Since  commencing  his  assignment, 
                    

12. 

11. 

13. 

 

1 All further references are to the Education Code. 

 

 
 
 

2

14. 

Respondent Sciocchetti has received training to meet the special needs of students in alternative 
education, such as the “Discipline with Dignity” workshop. Discipline with Dignity workshop. 
In  addition  to  dealing  with  behavior  issues,  he  has  training  and  experience  in  providing 
instruction in the multiple subjects in the higher grades.  
 
 
Respondent  Smith  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  22,  2003,  and  holds  a 
multiple subject credential. She has provided instruction at the elementary school level during 
her  entire  tenure.  Like  Respondent  Sciocchetti,  she  has  shown  adaptability  in  dealing  with 
multiple  subjects,  grades,  and  behavior  issues,  albeit  with  younger  students.  She  has  also 
attended  training  to  deal  with  disciplinary  issues,  such  as  the  “What’s  With  this  Kid”  and 
“Dealing with Difficult Behavior” workshops.  
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

3. 

2. 

4. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 8. 
 
The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
 
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 
and 9.   
 
Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  by 
 
one full-time-equivalent position due to the reduction of the services described in factual finding 
number 3, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 11. 
   
 
Cause  for  the  reduction  of  the  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3 
relates to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949, 
by reason of actual finding numbers 1 through 14, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 3. 
 
 
Districts  are  permitted  to  disregard  seniority,  or  “skip”  junior  employees,  in 
accordance  with  section  44955,  subdivision  (d):  “Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school 
district may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of 
the  following  reasons:  (1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential 
with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the 
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course of study 
or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess. . . .”   
 
In  Bledsoe  v.  Biggs  Unified  School  District  (2009)  170  Cal.App.4tth  127  (Bledsoe),  a 
 
district was able to skip two junior employees because of the district’s demonstrated need for 
teachers  with  experience  in  instruction  in  a  community  day  school.  The  junior  teachers 
possessed  special  training  and  experience  that  enabled  them  to  meet  the  district’s  specialized 

5. 

 

 
 
 

3

needs for alternative education. They had taken courses in many subjects that covered areas of 
instruction,  had  training  in  areas  related  to  working  with  difficult  students,  and  had  actual 
experience in dealing with the community day school students.  
 
 
In  this  case,  the  District  has  established,  and  Respondent  Smith  does  not  appear  to 
contest, the District’s specific need for a qualified community day teacher. As in Bledsoe, the 
District has a specific need for personnel to  meet the special needs of community day school 
students.  With  respect  to  the  personnel  to  meet  those  needs,  both  respondents  have  received 
training  in  dealing  with  the  emotional  and  behavioral  needs  of  District  students.  Both  have 
demonstrated  adaptability  in  meeting  the  needs  of  students  with  special  needs.  However, 
Respondent Sciocchetti has done so in the higher grades served by the community day school. 
He also has credentials and coursework that allow him to teach the broad spectrum of higher 
grade  courses.  But  more  importantly,  Respondent  Sciocchetti    has  extensive  experience  in 
providing services to the students served at the community day school. Accordingly, the District 
has  established  that  Respondent  Sciocchetti  has  the  requisite  special  training  and  experience 
necessary to meet the needs of the students at the community day school.  
 
 
 
 
of factual finding numbers 1 through 14, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 5.  
 

Cause, therefore, exists to terminate the services of Respondent Smith, by reason 

The District properly skipped Respondent Sciocchetti for layoff. 

6. 

ORDER 

1. 

2. 

The Accusation is dismissed with respect to Respondent Sciocchetti. 

 
The  Accusation  is  sustained  in  part,  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondent 
 
Smith  that  her  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2010-2011  school  year  due  to  the 
reduction of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
 
 
DATED:____________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 

 
Administrative Law Judge 
 

                                 
         
 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

SAMUEL D. REYES 

 
 

 

 
 
 

4

