BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF EDUCATION 
SADDLEBACK VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 
In the Matter of  the Accusation 
Against:   
 
 
DEBBY ACQUAZZINO and Other 
Certificated Employees of the Saddleback 
Valley Unified School District,  
 
 
                                    Respondents. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
OAH Case No. 2010020070 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Respondents named in Exhibit 1 as amended, and each of them, were represented by 

 
 
This matter was heard by Vincent Nafarrete, Administrative Law Judge, on April 14, 
2010, at Mission Viejo.  Complainant Margarett Lewis, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel 
Services, of the Saddleback Valley Unified School District was represented by David C. 
Larsen, Attorney at Law.      
 
 
Marianne Reinhold, Attorney at Law. 
 
 
Documentary, oral, and stipulated evidence having been received and oral arguments 
having been made, the Administrative Law Judge submitted this matter for decision on April 
14, 2010, and finds as follows: 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.   

 
 
The Administrative Law Judge takes official notice that, on March 22, 2010, 
the Accusation was made and filed by Margarett Lewis in her official capacity as Assistant 
Superintendent of Personnel Services of the Saddleback Valley Unified School District, State 
of California (District).   
 

2.   

Respondents, and each of them, are employed by the District as permanent or 

probationary certificated employees.   
 
 
intermediate, and high schools in Orange County and serves and educates approximately 
32,000 pupils.  Due to the ongoing state budget crisis and the concomitant loss of revenue 

The District is a unified school district comprised of a number of elementary, 

3. 

 

4. 

(B) On March 9, 2010, in Resolution No.  37:09-10, pursuant to Education 

(A) On March 9, 2010, the Superintendent gave written notice to the Board of 

from the state as well as lower enrollment, the District, which historically has had a low 
reserve, has been experiencing budgetary problems.  Last year, the District received federal 
stimulus monies to help temporarily offset its budget woes.  However, the Assistant 
Superintendent of Business Services prepared a preliminary budget for the District for the 
2010-2011 fiscal or school year based upon the Governor’s proposed budget for the State of 
California and determined that the District will receive approximately $36 million less in 
revenue than last year and its expenditures will exceed revenues by approximately $33 
million.   The Assistant Superintendent has recommended that the District make budget cuts 
of $33 to $34 million for the next fiscal year by, in part, reducing or discontinuing programs 
and services and laying off certificated personnel in order to help ensure a balanced budget 
and to maintain the required reserve.   
 
 
Education of his recommendation that programs and services and related certificated 
positions be reduced for the 2010-2011 school year in order to maintain a balanced budget 
and provide essential services.   The Superintendent provided the Board of Education with a 
list of services or programs that he recommended be eliminated or reduced for next fiscal 
year and a resolution that he recommended be adopted to give notice to certificated 
employees who may be reassigned or laid off due to the elimination or reduction of programs 
and services.   
 
 
Code sections 44949 and 44955 and based upon recommendation of the Superintendent, the 
Board of Education of the District determined and resolved that the State budget for 2009-
2010 will have substantial negative impacts on the District and the District is expected to 
have a shortfall of $19.9 billion dollars for the 2010-2011 fiscal year; that the Governor’s 
proposed budget cuts to K-12 public schools for the 2010-2011 fiscal year will require the 
District to make substantial cuts; that the District must eliminate programs and services for 
the 2010-2011 fiscal year to maintain a balanced budge and provide for essential services; 
and that it is necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services now being 
rendered by certificated personnel for the 2010-2011 fiscal year.   
 
 
services may result in the reassignments and layoffs of certificated employees and that it was 
necessary to give notice to employees who may be laid off as a result of the reduction in 
services.  The Board of Education thereupon directed the Superintendent to give written 
notices upon certificated employees in accordance with and in the manner prescribed by 
Education Code sections 44955 and 44949 in order to reduce certificated positions by a 
number corresponding to the services reduced or discontinued and positions affected thereby.  
The Board of Education further resolved that the actual layoff of any employee would be 
subject to its final review and determination after appropriate hearings and deliberations.   
 
 
also adopted a “Tiebreaker Criteria and Point System to be Applied when Certificated 
Probationary and Permanent Employees Share the Same First Date of Paid Service in a 

(D) On March 9, 2010, in Resolution No. 37:09-10, the Board of Education 

(C) The Board of Education recognized that the reduction or elimination of 

 

 

 

2

5. 

On or about March 11, 2010, pursuant to Resolution No. 37:09-10 of the 

Probationary Position.”  The Board of Education determined that, as between certificated 
employees who first rendered paid service in a probationary position to the District on the 
same date, the order of termination shall be determined by reference to 13 tiebreaking criteria 
and a point system.   The Board of Education further found that its tiebreaking criteria will 
best serve the needs of the District and its students and will be applied effective 2010-2011.    
 
 
Board of Education and the provisions of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the 
District’s Assistant Superintendent of Personnel Services as designee of the Superintendent 
gave written notices by personal service to respondents that the Superintendent had 
recommended and the Board of Education had resolved that their services will not be 
required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year and the reasons for this action (preliminary 
notice).  Respondents were notified that their positions will be eliminated or filled by 
“regular” employees with more seniority pursuant to Education Code section 44955.  The 
preliminary notices included Resolution No. 37:09-10 to reduce and/or discontinue particular 
of services or programs performed by certificated employees in the District, the list of 
particular certificated services or programs to be eliminated or reduced, the tie-breaking 
criteria, pertinent sections of the California Education Code, and a blank Request for 
Hearing.  Pursuant to instructions of the District, respondents signed certifications that they 
had received preliminary notices of layoff.   Respondents timely requested a hearing to 
determine if there is cause for not re-employing them for the 2010-2011 school year.   
 
 
sufficient in providing notice to respondents under Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955.  Respondents were not prejudiced by errors in the notices, if any, with respect to the 
spelling of their names, description of their employment status, addresses, or any other 
matters.   No claims were raised in the hearing that the notices or contents thereof or the 
timing of the notices were deficient in any respect. 
 
 
On or about March 22, 2010, the District properly served respondents, , and 
each of them, with an Accusation, Statement to Respondent, copies of Government Code 
sections 11507.5-11507.7, a blank Notice of Defense form, and Notice of Hearing.   
Respondents, and each of them, certified that they had received the Accusation and 
accompanying documents and filed timely notices of defenses, requesting a hearing to 
determine if there is cause not to employ them for the ensuing school year and denying any 
and all charges contained in the Accusation.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have 
been met.    
 
 
 
 
 
// 
// 
// 

The District’s preliminary notice of layoff dated March 11, 2010, was 

6.  

7. 

 

3

8. 

On March 9, 2010, the Superintendent recommended to the Board of 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
     
 
 
 
 
 

Special Education and Pupil Services 
 
RSP 
Special Day Class Non-Severe 
Psychologist    

 
Full-Time 
    Equivalent Positions 
     2.00 
 
     3.00 
 
     2.00 
 
     4.00 
 
     1.00 
   

 
 
 
 
Administration 
 
Elementary Principal  
Elementary Assistant Principal  
Intermediate Assistant Principal 
High School Assistant Principal 
Adult Education Dean 

Education of the District that it take action to reduce or discontinue certain services or 
programs offered by the District for the 2010-2011 school year in the following full-time 
equivalent (FTE) positions:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Course Offerings/Instructional--Elementary
Elementary  K-6, inc. restructuring   
 
Class Size Reduction Program 
Elementary Music 
 
Secondary Instruction
 
 
Art 
 
Math 
 
 
English 
 
Music   
 
Science (Biology) 
 
Social Science 
 
Spanish 
 
 
Physical Education 
Computer Concepts   
 
Agriculture 

     1.20 
     2.80 
     2.40 
       .20 
     3.00 
       .60 
     3.20 
     4.00 
     2.00 
       .20 

     1.00 
     1.00 
     1.60 

   77.00 

   12.00 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

K-12 Instruction 
BTSA/Induction Program 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On or about March 9, 2010, the Board of Education determined not to reduce or discontinue, 
the services or programs of assistant principals (9.00 FTE), and elementary music instruction 
(12.00 FTE).   As a result of retaining these services or programs totaling 21.00 FTE, the 

Adult Education
Community-Based English Tutoring Program 
Vocational Visions 

     1.00 
     3.00 

     1.00 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

9. 

10. 

The services or programs set forth in Finding 8 above are particular kinds of 

Board of Education determined to reduce or discontinue the remaining services set forth 
hereinabove which constitute a total of approximately 108.20 FTE positions under 
Resolution No. 37:09-19.  No claims were made that the resolution of the Board of 
Education to reduce or discontinue services was deficient or arbitrary and capricious in any 
respect.   
 
 
services performed by certificated employees of the District which may be reduced or 
discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The determination of the 
Board of Education to reduce or discontinue these services is within its sound discretion and 
is not arbitrary or capricious.   The District demonstrated that the reduction or discontinuance 
of these particular kinds of services is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils and 
is necessary in order for the District to maintain a balanced budget and sufficient reserve.   
 
Further, the District has obviated the need to reduce or discontinue all of the 
 
particular kinds of services or programs described in Finding 8 above and to terminate the 
employment of all respondents given preliminary notice and accusations by taking into 
account the personnel changes and attrition due to reassignments, retirements, and/or 
resignations of individual certificated employees within the District, including those 
certificated employees who resigned or retired the day before the hearing in this matter.  As 
set forth in the list of “2010-2011 Retirements and Resignations” (Ex. 9), there are 65 
certificated employees as of April 13, 2010, who have or will resign or retire from their 
employment with the District before the 2010-2011 school year.1  As such, the District has 
reasonably determined and accounted for what will be positively assured attrition among its 
certificated staff for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year and reduced by corresponding 
number the number of certificated employees whose employment must be terminated due to 
the present reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.   For example, the 
District has determined that it does not need to lay off any certificated employees in 
secondary instruction of English and computer concepts but must lay off certificated 
employees in other services or programs pursuant to the resolution of the Board of Education 
to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services for next school year.  
 
 
(A) The District has prepared and maintains a Seniority List (Exh. 21) which 
sets forth the names of certificated employees and their seniority dates or dates of first paid 
service, credentials and/or authorizations, and current assignments and site locations.  The 
District also complied and reviewed Job Descriptions (Exh. 6) of the services or positions 
that it was required to reduce or discontinue pursuant to the resolution of the Board of 
Trustees and applied the tiebreaking criteria to certificated employees who are affected by 
this layoff and first rendered paid service in a probationary position on the same dates and 
ranked them in an order of termination.    
 

11. 

                                                 

1 During the hearing, the footnote on page 2 of the list of 2010-2011 Retirements and 

Resignations, as marked by an asterisk, was deleted from this list or exhibit.    

 

5

 

 

12. 

(C) No claims were raised concerning the District’s Seniority List, staff 

(B) The District developed staff reduction flow charts of the least senior 

 
certificated employees currently assigned in the particular kinds of services that it is seeking 
to reduce in this layoff proceeding (Exhs. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, and 19).  The District then 
determined how many of these certificated employees are retiring or resigning; whether the 
least senior certificated employees in these particular kinds of services hold other credentials, 
can perform in other service areas, and are entitled to bump other more junior certificated 
employees; whether certain certificated employees should be skipped and retained; how 
many certificated employees are bumping into each service area; and how many certificated 
employees in each service area must be reassigned or laid off.   On the Seniority List and 
staff reduction flow charts, the District designated certificated employees to be reassigned to 
another service area as “R1” and in the color yellow and certificated employees to be laid off 
as “R2” and in the color pink.  The District also prepared a list of certificated employees who 
are to be laid off from their employment pursuant to this reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services (Exh. 1).  
 
 
reduction flow charts, or determinations of how many certificated employees and which 
particular certificated employee must be laid off or reassigned in each service area affected 
by the present reduction of particular kinds of services, except in the area of secondary art 
instruction.    
 
 
to facilitate the reduction or discontinuance of 77.00 FTE in elementary instruction by 
increasing class size in grades one through three and reducing the number of other 
elementary classrooms or grades that will likewise result in larger class sizes.  The District 
will also eliminate the 1.00 FTE position of BTSA coordinator but continue to provide 
support to any new teachers through site administrators and District staff.    
 
(B) The District has also received notice that 31 certificated employees in 
 
elementary instruction will be resigning or retiring and determined that three certificated 
employees are entitled to bump into elementary teaching positions.  As a result, during the 
hearing, the District withdrew or dismissed the Accusation against respondent Thomas 
Hammer and gave notice that it will not be necessary to reassign certificated employees Jill 
Bennet, Tracy Feller, Kimberly A. Fix, Michelle Gryzanoski, Lisa Johnson, Valerie Lau, 
Lisa Paisley, Kathleen Roberts, Kristin Thomsen, and Stephanie Crilly to different programs.   
 
 
(C) The District will terminate the employment of 40 elementary school 
teachers pursuant to the reduction or discontinuance of the particular kind of service of 
elementary instruction.  Finally, there are 28 certificated employees in elementary instruction 
who share the same seniority date of September 7, 1999, and are all subject to layoff.  The 
District applied the tie-breaking criteria to these teachers and ranked them in order of their 
tie-breaking points.  In the event that it needs additional elementary teachers for next school 
year, the District will recall or rehire these 28 teachers in order of this ranking list.    
 

(A) In the service or program area of elementary instruction, the District plans 

 

 

 

6

 

 

13. 

(D) The District has determined not to reduce or discontinue services 

(A) In the area of secondary instruction, the District will facilitate the 

 
performed by certificated employees in the Two-Way Language Immersion Program, a 
charter school in Spanish language immersion for elementary students within the District.  
Certificated employees assigned to the immersion program must be bilingual and possess 
either a BCLAD or BCC credential.  Certificated employees in the immersion program will 
be skipped; one immersion teacher, however, respondent Brittany Solapelzel, who has a 
seniority date of September 4, 2007, is to be bumped out of the program by an elementary 
grade teacher who holds a BCC credential.  Solapelzel is subject to layoff.   
 
 
reduction or discontinuance of this particular kind of service by reducing both the number of 
course offerings and sections of classes.  The District plans to offer less specialized courses 
and will eliminate classes with small enrollments.   
 
(B) Pursuant to the resolution of the Board of Education, the District plans to 
 
reduce or discontinue services in the Adult Education by a total of 5.00 FTE, including the 
services of the Adult Education Dean (1.00 FTE), Community-Based English Tutoring 
Program (1.00 FTE), and the Vocational Visions program (3.00).  The Adult Education Dean 
holds a credential to teach English and will be bumping into and reassigned to an English 
classroom position.  Two certificated employees in the Vocational Visions program will be 
bumping into and reassigned to positions in elementary instruction and one certificated 
employee, respondent Jacqueline Huckleberry, remains on the layoff list.  The Vocational 
Visions program, a program for developmentally disabled adults, will be discontinued.  
Students within the Vocational Visions program will be placed in the special education 
programs of the District while adults over the age of 22 will have to access other generic 
resources in the community.   
 
 
reduce or discontinue services in secondary math by 2.80 FTE.  The District has received and 
accounted for two resignations or retirements and four certificated employees will be 
bumping into secondary math.  Consequently, Suzanne Dean will not be reassigned and 
respondent Viji Janardan will not be laid off.  The District withdrew the Accusation against 
respondent Janardan.  Two certificated employees in secondary math, respondents Andrew 
Hammond and Christine Egge, remain on the layoff list.   
 
 
reduce or discontinue services in Spanish by 3.20 FTE and will reducing offerings in Spanish 
by 16 sections.  One certificated employee has a credential to teach business and will be 
bumping into a position in computer concepts.  The three most junior Spanish teachers will 
be laid off:  respondent Joel Rubio, Jr., who is being bumped out by an elementary teacher, 
and respondents Sandra Hanneman and Julia Hastings-Vele.  Respondent Hastings-Vele is 
employed in a 0.80 FTE and teaches one section of German in addition to teaching Spanish.  
Because she has an authorization to teach German, Hastings-Vele may be recalled to teach 
German next year if the District needs a teacher to teach an additional section or sections of 
German.   

(C) Pursuant to the resolution of the Board of Education, the District plans to 

(D) Pursuant to the resolution of the Board of Education, the District must 

 

 

 

7

 

14. 

(A) In the secondary instructional program of art, the District plans to reduce 

(E) Pursuant to the resolution of the Board of Education, the District plans to 
 
reduce or discontinue services in secondary instruction in biological science by 3.00 FTE.  
The District has received notices of resignation or retirement from two certificated 
employees in biological science and one certificated employee is bumping into biological 
science.  Respondents Samantha Le and Kenneth Tse, who are the most junior of biology 
teachers, are subject to layoff in this proceeding.   In addition, the District determined that 
respondent Gazelle Ghafoori should be accorded an additional point under application of the 
tie-breaking criteria because she has a subject matter authorization.  With the additional tie-
breaking point, respondents Ghafoori and Deborah Carlson, who share the same seniority 
date of September 4, 2007, were still tied with five points a piece.  The District conducted a 
lottery under the tie-breaking criteria, resulting in Ghafoori having a higher standing than 
Carlson.  The District thereupon dismissed the Accusation against respondent Ghafoori and 
plans to reassign Carlson to another service or program.   
 
 
or discontinue services by 1.20 FTE pursuant to the resolution of the Board of Education.  
The District has determined that there are no certificated employees who are resigning or 
retiring and one certificated employee who is entitled to bump into art instruction.  Following 
its analysis, the District has determined to retain Judy Baca in the art program and not 
reassign her to another program.  Further, during the hearing, the District withdrew or 
dismissed the Accusation against respondent Marco Magallanes and proposed the layoff of 
respondent Maria Nadal, who is being bumped by a more senior elementary teacher, and 
reduction of the full-time position of respondent Taylor O’Neill by 0.20 FTE.   No objections 
were raised with respect to these proposed actions of the District.  Finally, because it will be 
offering photography in the secondary art program, the District has one remaining position in 
art.  An issue remains whether the District should skip respondent Lydia Neuman as a 
secondary art teacher and retain her in this position or allow respondent Jon Hartl to bump 
into this position.  No evidence was presented regarding respondent Nadal and whether she 
can bump into this art position.   
 
 
at the District’s Trabuco Hills High School.   Her date of first paid service is September 8, 
2009.  She has a single subject credential in art.   Neuman teaches five periods of art, three of 
which meet the visual art requirement for admission to the University of California.  One of 
the courses that she teaches is entitled, “Photography as Art,” which covers both digital and 
black and white film photography as well as the history and critical studies of photography.  
She also teaches two periods of elective courses as follows:   Photography I, a one semester, 
introductory course in digital and film photography and techniques for digital Photoshop and 
darkroom film development; and Advanced Photography II, an advanced course.   Neuman 
maintains or oversees seven computer monitors and seven film enlargers as well as 
chemicals for the film darkroom.   She is also the advisor for the high school’s photography 
club.  Neuman attained her bachelor of art in architecture from Washington University in St. 
Louis and fulfilled the requirements for her credential at California State University 
Fullerton.  She is taking an advanced photography class at Saddleback College to maintain or 

(B) Respondent Lydia Neuman is a senior technology education or art teacher 

 

 

8

 

(C) Respondent Jon Hartl is a senior art teacher at El Toro High School within 

improve her knowledge and/or skills.  Prior to joining the District, Neuman was a student 
teacher in digital photography in the Irvine Unified School District.   
 
 
the District.  He holds a single subject credential in art.  His date of first paid service is 
September 2, 2008, and, as such, has more seniority with the District than respondent 
Neuman.  Hartl teaches six periods of art, each of which are year-long or two semester 
courses and meet the visual art requirement for admission to the University of California.  He 
teaches Foundations of Art, Drawing and Painting, Advanced Art, and Advanced Placement 
Art.   In Foundations of Art, he teaches students about the use of different mediums, 
including acrylic and water color, design principles, and art history. In his drawing and 
painting class, Hartl instructs students how to draw from observation, paint in different 
mediums, and illustrate and design poster art.  In Advanced Art, he teaches students how to 
create portfolios for admission to art colleges.   Hartl obtained a bachelor of art in art 
education from California State University Fullerton and fulfilled requirements for his 
credential at National University.  He has studied with artists and participated in workshops.  
Hartl contends that he can teach photography for the District.  From 1998 until 2001, he 
apprenticed with a master photographer who took wedding and family portraits.  
Subsequently, he has worked as an office manager for a photography studio, designed 
photography or portrait albums, and worked as a photographer for a Rancho Santa Margarita 
studio.  He has taken classes in beginning photography and history of photography and 
participated in workshops.  He has worked primarily in digital photography and admits that 
he needs further study in film development and/or darkroom techniques.   
 
(D) Based on Findings 14 (A) – (C), both respondent Neuman and respondent 
 
Hartl are credentialed to teach photography for the District based on their both holding single 
subject credentials in art.  However, the preponderance of the evidence demonstrated that 
respondent Neuman is more qualified than respondent Hartl to teach photography at the 
secondary level for the District.   Unlike Hartl, she has taught courses in both digital and film 
photography and the history and critical studies of photography.  She has experience and 
knowledge in both digital and film photography as well as in Photoshop and darkroom 
techniques.  In addition, Neuman has been the advisor for her high school’s photography 
club.  As such, respondent Neuman should be retained by the District to teach photography 
and respondent Hartl must be laid off pursuant to the reduction or discontinuance of art by 
1.20 FTE.   
 
 
Accusation against the following respondents:  Corrine Avila, Gazelle Ghafoori, Thomas 
Hammer, Viji Janardan, Marco Magallanes, and Rana Najd.    
 
 
who was duly served with a preliminary notice of layoff but then did not request a hearing, 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44944 and 44955.   
 

15.  During the hearing in this matter, the District withdrew or dismissed the 

(A) The District may take action against any certificated employee, if any, 

16. 

 

 

9

 

(B) The District may likewise take action against any certificated employee or 

 
respondent, if any, who was duly served with a preliminary notice of layoff and an 
accusation but then did not file a notice of defense or make an appearance at the hearing after 
filing a notice of defense, pursuant to Government Code section 11520, subdivision (a), and 
Education Code sections 44944 and 44955.   
 
 
than those respondents or certificated employees who are being retained by the District to 
provide services that respondents or other certificated employees are certificated and 
competent to render.   
 
 

It was not established there are any certificated employees with less seniority 

17. 

*  *  *  *  *  *  * 

Pursuant to the foregoing findings of fact, the Administrative Law Judge makes the 

 
 
following determination of issues: 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.   

Jurisdiction exists for the subject proceedings pursuant to Education Code 

2.   

Cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to reduce 

sections 44949 and 44955, based on Findings 1 – 17 above.  All preliminary notices, 
accusations, and other related papers and reports required by these Education Code sections 
have been provided in timely manner and, as such, the parties have complied with the 
statutory requirements.   
 
 
the concomitant number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services, as set forth in Finding 8 above.   With respect 
to those respondents whose employment have been found to be terminable by the District 
and any other certificated employees who received notices but did not request a hearing, if 
any, the causes set forth in the Accusation relate solely to the welfare of the District's schools 
and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.   
 
 
terminate the employment of respondents Corrine Avila, Gazelle Ghafoori, Thomas 
Hammer, Viji Janardan, Marco Magallanes, and Rana Najd inasmuch as the Accusation 
against them was dismissed, based on Findings 12, 13(C), 13(E), 14(A), and 15 above.    
 
 
terminate the employment of respondent Lydia Neuman due to the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services, based on Finding 14 above.   
 
 
Based on Findings 1 – 17 above, there is no certificated probationary or 
permanent employee with less seniority than any one of respondents or the certificated 

Cause does not exist pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to 

Cause does not exist pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to 

3. 

4. 

5. 

 

 

10

employees who is being retained by the District for the 2010-2011 school year to render 
services which any one of respondents or certificated employees is certificated and 
competent to render.  
 
 

*  *  *  *  *  *  * 

WHEREFORE, the Administrative Law Judge makes the following Order:  

ORDER 

3 

1. 

2. 

The Accusations issued against the remaining respondents, as named in 

 
 
The Accusations issued against respondents Corrine Avila, Gazelle Ghafoori, 
Thomas Hammer, Viji Janardan, Marco Magallanes, Rana Najd, and Lydia Neuman must be 
dismissed, based on Conclusion of Law 3 – 4 above, respectively.  These respondents will 
not be given notice that their services are not required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 as amended, are sustained, based on Conclusions of Law 1 – 2 and 5 above.   The 
District may give notice to these respondents, and each of them, in the inverse order of 
seniority that their services will not be required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year 
because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955.   
 
The District may give notice to those certificated employees, if any, who were 
 
served with notices and/or accusations that their services will not be needed next year but did 
not file requests for hearing or did not appear at the hearing, that their services will not be 
required for the ensuing 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.   
 
 
did not request a hearing, if any, the District shall further determine and take into account 
any additional positively assured attrition among certificated employees in deciding how 
many and when certificated employees should be terminated before the ensuing 2010-2011 
school year.   
 
 
Dated:  May 3, 2010 
 
 
 
 
  

Vincent Nafarrete 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings   

Before giving notice to respondents and the other certificated employees who 

4. 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

11

