 

 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
TEMPLETON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SAN LUIS OBISPO 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  L2010031646 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Layoff Of: 
 
Robin Aaron and Other  
  Certificated Employees of the  
  Templeton Unified School District, 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this matter on April 14, 2010, in Templeton, California. 
 
 
Superintendent, Templeton Unified School District (District). 
 
 
Alexis  Ridenour,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented Robin Aaron-England (Aaron-English), 
Julie  Badalamenti  (Badalamenti),  Deborah  Garcia  (Garcia),  Shelly  Keller  (Keller),  Neal 
Mandich  (Mandich),  Elisabeth  Neary  (Neary),  Susan  Pickett  (Pickett),  Susan  Rounsevell 
(Rounsevell),  Meredith  Salio  (Salio),  and  Teresa  Terry  (Terry),  collectively  referred  to  as 
Respondents.  
 
 
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year. 
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying 
them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing. The record was left open for 
the submission of written briefs. District submitted a Post Hearing Brief on April 19, 2010, and a 
corrected  Post  hearing  Brief  on  April  22,  2010,  which  documents  have  been  marked  for 
identification  as  Exhibit  15.  Respondents  had  filed  a  Hearing  Brief  and  did  not  file  a  post-
hearing brief by the April 21, 2010 deadline. The matter was submitted for decision on April 22, 
2010. 
 

Roberta  Rowe,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Deborah  Bowers,  Ed.D.  (Bowers), 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

2. 

3. 

1. 

Service 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

               FTE1 Reduction

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

Superintendent Bowers filed the Accusation in her official capacity. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On February 25, 2010, the Board of Trustees of the District (Governing Board) 
adopted  Resolution  number  R10-12  reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the 
2010-2011 school year: 
 
 
 
  2.00 
Teacher on Special Assignment (Math/Reading Int.) 
  3.00 
 
K-6 Teacher (Multiple subjects) 
 
Middle School Science (6th Grade) 
  1.00 
 
 
Middle School Math (6th Grade) 
  1.00 
 
 
Middle School Physical Education (6th Grade) 
    .50 
 
  1.00 
 
 
Middle School Art/Intervention 
  1.00 
 
 
Middle School Electives 
  1.00 
 
 
High School English    
    .43 
 
 
High School American Sign Language 
    .14 
 
 
 
 
High School French 
    .14 
 
 
 
High School Yearbook 
    .14 
 
 
High School Math 
 
 
    .14 
 
 
High School Advanced Drama 
Computers/Business   
  1.00 
 
 
 
Home School, Grades K-8                                                                     .53 
Independent Studies, Grades 9-12                                                       1.04 
 
 
 
On  March  11,  2010,  Superintendent  Bowers  notified  the  Governing  Board  that 
 
she  recommended  that  notice  be  provided  to  Respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
Between  March  11  and  March  15,  2009,  the  District  provided  notice  to 
Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  due  to  the 
reduction of particular kinds of services. Respondents filed timely requests for hearing.  
 
 

Total                                                                                         14.06 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

4. 

5. 

 
 
 

 
 

                     

1 Full-time equivalent position. 

 

 
 
 

2

 

a. 

9. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

b. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

On March 29, 2010, the District filed and thereafter served the Accusation 
 
on Respondents. Respondents Aaron-England, Badalamenti, Garcia, Keller, Neary, and Pickett 
filed  timely  notices  of  defense,  seeking  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not 
reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
Respondents  Mandich,  Rounsevell,  Salio,  and  Terry  did  not  file  timely 
notices of defense. At the hearing, Respondents Salio and Mandich testified about their intent to 
contest their layoffs, as expressed in the filing of a request for hearing, and about their excusable 
error in not submitting an additional document, the notice of defense.  
 
 
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.2
 
 
The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
finding  number  3  primarily  because  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  future  State  funding.  The 
decision to reduce the particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather 
a proper exercise of the District's discretion. 
 
 
The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board. 
 
The District issued layoff notices to 18 individuals, accounting for 15.3 FTE, or 
 
1.24 FTE more than authorized by the Governing Board. Superintendent Bowers explained that 
the “over-noticing” was done as a precaution. Respondents Badalamenti and Keller, both with 
seniority  dates  of  August  24,  1998,  are  the  two  most  senior  teachers  holding  multiple  subject 
credentials  and  Superintendent  Bowers  testified  they  were  the  ones  receiving  precautionary 
notices.  
 
On February 25, 2010, the Governing Board adopted criteria for breaking 
 
seniority ties for employees with the same first date of paid service. The following six criteria 
were chosen, based on the District’s needs for the 2010-2011 school year: credentials to teach or 
serve in a particular program or provide a particular service of need by the District; credentials to 
teach  a  special  categorical  program  (e.g.,  reading,  special  education);  years  of  experience 
previous to current employment as a full-time, credentialed teacher in a probationary/permanent 
K-12 teaching situation in a public school; number of supplementary authorizations (e.g. Math, 
English,  Health  Science);  possession  of  certificates  or  authorizations  to  teach  students  with 
limited English language proficiency; earned degrees beyond the BA/BS level. The criteria were 

11. 

12. 

10. 

a. 

                    

 

2 All further references are to the Education Code. 

 

 
 
 

3

 

b. 

equally weighed, and points were awarded for each item. The tie-breaking criteria are reasonable 
as they relate to the skills and qualifications of certificated employees.  
 
The District applied the criteria only as necessary to implement the layoff. 
 
Thus, for the five employees with a seniority date of August 24, 1998, the District applied the 
criteria  to  the  two  employees  with  multiple  subject  credentials,  Respondents  Badalamenti  and 
Keller, and not to the other three with single subject credentials, because the service at issue was 
elementary school education.  Similarly, of those with a seniority date of August 22, 1997, the 
District  broke  ties  among  employees  with  multiple  subject  credentials.  The  certificated 
employees  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  22, 1997, were not actually given notice of layoff.  
The District properly applied the criteria, as necessary to determine the order of termination.  
 
 
13.  As set forth in Resolution number R10-16, the Governing Board has concluded 
that  it  has  specific  needs  for  certificated  employees  who  possess  Bilingual  Crosscultural, 
Language, and Academic Development (BCLAD) certificates and for those who teach Special 
Education. Consistent with these needs, the District did not reduce or eliminate services in these 
areas, and has retained individuals who are junior to some Respondents to teach in these areas. 
The  District  has  established  its  specific  needs  in  these  areas  and  that  the  retained  individuals 
possess the requisite credentials to teach in these areas. No Respondent contends that he or she 
was laid off despite possessing a BCLAD certificate or a Special Education credential. 
 
The  District  has  established  a  competency  rule.  In  pertinent  part,  Board  Policy 
 
4117.3 states: “To be considered competent, an employee must have academic training, a valid 
and appropriate credential, and one year of full-time, successful contractual District experience 
within the last five (5) years in the assignment (i.e., K-6 classroom). [¶] In specialized classes 
such as music, physical education, or a single subject teaching assignment, an employee must 
have academic training, a valid and appropriate California credential, and one year of full-time, 
successful contractual District experience within the last five (5) years in that specialized area. 
…”  (Exhibit 1, at p.2.) This policy was incorporated into Resolution R10-16, adopted March 8, 
2010, entitled “Resolution regarding the Determination of District needs in Selected Certificated 
Positions:  Competency/Skipping  Standards,”  which  states  the  competency  rule  as:  “Teachers 
with one year of full-time, contractual District experience within the past five (5) years within 
the  subject  area  of  the  credential  or  supplemental  authorization.”  (Exhibit  5,  at  p.1.) 
Superintendent Bowers testified that the competency rule was intended to serve both as skipping 
criteria and as a competency statement. 
 
 
15.  Application  of  the  competency  rule  impacted  Respondent  Garcia,  who  has  a 
seniority date of August 25, 1999. She holds a clear multiple subject credential and a clear single 
subject  (English)  credential.  She  teaches  second  grade,  and  the  curriculum  includes  English 
instruction. Two junior teachers have been retained to teach high school English and two have 
been retained to teach middle school Language Arts, classes Respondent Garcia is credentialed 
to teach. However, she has not taught a departmentalized English class, or any other class for 

14. 

 

 
 
 

4

 

 

a. 

a. 

c. 

b. 

17. 

16. 

which her single subject credential provided the requisite qualification, in the past five years, in 
order to satisfy the District’s competency criteria and bump these retained junior employees.    
 
Respondent Aaron-England has a seniority date of August 25, 1999. She 
 
holds a clear multiple subject credential and a supplemental authorization in Health. She teaches 
fourth  grade,  but  has  not  taught  a  Health  class,  or  a  class  for  which  the  Health  authorization 
provided the requisite credential qualification, in the past five years.   
 
 
Danny Loney (Loney) has a seniority date of August 21, 2009. He holds a 
preliminary  single  subject  (Health  Science)  credential,  and  a  supplemental  authorization  in 
Introductory  Social  Science.  He  is  a  part-time  employee,  or  .43  FTE,  and  teaches  Health, 
Driver’s Education, and Physical Education. 
 
 
Respondent Aaron-England is not credentialed or competent to teach the 
classes  Loney  was  retained  to  teach.  Her  credentials  do  not  allow  her  to  teach  grades  above 
Ninth,  and  some  of  the  classes  taught  by  Loney  are  in  grades  Ten  or  higher.  Moreover, 
Respondent Aaron-England, who teaches fourth grade, has never taught health classes.  
 
 
Respondent  Keller  has  a  seniority date of August 24, 1998. She holds a 
clear multiple subject credential and a supplemental authorization in Social Science. During the 
past  year  she  has  been  working  as  a  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment,  teaching  Music  with  a 
world  history  emphasis  in  elementary  school,  a  position  that  was  eliminated.  Although 
Respondent Keller has taught social studies to her elementary school students, she has done so in 
the context of a self-contained classroom as authorized by her credential.  
 
 
Respondent  Keller  asserts  that  she  can  teach  the  History  class  that  Amy 
Wagner,  who  has  a  lower  seniority  date,  August  24,  2000,  was  retained  to  teach  in  middle 
school. However, this is a departmentalized class, and Respondent Keller is not credentialed to 
teach in such a setting. Moreover, during the past five years, she has not taught Social Science or 
any other subject within her credential in middle or high school.  
 
Respondent  Neary  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  22,  2001.  She  holds  a 
 
clear  multiple  subject  credential  and  a  supplemental  authorization  in  Computer  Concepts  and 
Applications. She has taught the Computer Lab classes at the middle school for eight years, and 
has been instrumental in upgrading and standardizing the curriculum.  
 
 
Respondent Neary is being laid off as a result of the District’s reduction of 
Computers/Business services in the high school. The teacher displaced by that reduction, Leila 
Harrington (Harrington), is certificated to teach at the middle school with a clear single subject 
(Business) credential, and is more senior (August 24, 2000).  Harrington has also taught in the 
subject matter, as her Multimedia class involves the use of computers and computer applications. 
Harrington also teaches ROP Accounting, but it was unclear if this was a computer-related class.  

18. 

b. 

b. 

a. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

5

 

 

a. 

c. 

d. 

19. 

 
 
Kari  Haworth  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  22,  2008,  and  holds 
preliminary single subject (Biological Science, Chemistry, Geosciences, and Physics) credentials 
and  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential.  She  teaches  high  school  classes,  including 
advanced  ones,  in  Computer  Science,  Physics,  Mechatronics,  and  Engineering.  Respondent 
Neary is not credentialed to teach computer science in high school. 
 
Tom Russell (Russell) has a seniority date of August 21, 2009, and holds a 
 
clear designated vocational education (Computer Systems Operation) credential. He teaches one 
period  of  Computer  Repair,  and  works  as  the  District’s  network  administrator.  Respondent 
Neary does not have the credential to teach this vocational class, which is taught to students in 
grades Ten and above. 
 
 
Megan  Cordes  (Cordes)  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  21,  2006.  She 
holds  clear  single  subject  (Biology  and  Chemistry)  credentials  and  a  clear  multiple  subject 
credential. She teaches Earth Science and a one period “ASB” at the high school.  In the ASB 
position, Cordes is the faculty advisor to the student body government, a position that is chosen 
by  the  high  school  principal  based  on  criteria  not  articulated  at  the  hearing.  Superintendent 
Bowers testified that the ASB assignment is not an independent assignment, and that is usually 
bundled with other teaching assignments. 
 
that  Respondents  Aaron-England,  Badalamenti, 
 
Garcia,  Keller,  Pickett,  and  Rounsevell  are  more  senior  than  Cordes  and  are  credentialed  to 
perform  the  duties  of  the  ASB  assignment.  Of  these  respondents,  only  Respondent  Garcia 
possesses a credential that would allow her to teach in departmentalized classrooms at the high 
school, the site of the ASB assignment. However, unlike Cordes, Respondent Garcia does not 
have a teaching load to which the single period of ASB can be attached. 
 
 
service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.   

20.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

Respondents  argue 

b. 

 

 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 7. 
 
 
 
The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
 
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 
and 8.   
 

2. 

 

 
 
 

6

5. 

3. 

4. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause 
relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils in the context of uncertain State 
funding, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 20.  
 
 
The four Respondents set forth in factual finding number 6.b. did not present any 
evidence  regarding  their  particular  circumstances, and they did not make any specific offer of 
proof regarding what, if any, evidence they would have presented if deemed to have filed timely 
notices of defense. Nevertheless, Respondents’ counsel was not limited in her cross-examination 
of District witnesses, and could have asked relevant questions that would impact retention of any 
Respondent, including these four. On the other hand, the District did not claim surprise or other 
prejudice  if  these  four  Respondents,  who  filed  request  for  hearings,  are  deemed  to  have 
requested a determination of whether cause exists for their layoff. Moreover, sections 44949 and 
44955  impose  certain  affirmative  obligations  and  requirements  on  school  districts,  and  these 
must  be  discharged  regardless  of  the  number  of  individuals  who  actually  request  a  hearing  or 
present evidence to be considered. Therefore, the Administrative Law Judge has considered the 
issue of whether cause exists for not reemploying Respondents Mandich, Rounsevell, Salio, or 
Terry for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
The number of certificated employees to be given final layoff notice depends on 
the service reductions. As Section 44955, subdivision (b) states, “Whenever a particular kind of 
service is to be reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year 
. . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall become necessary to 
decrease the number of permanent employees of the district, the governing board may terminate 
the services of not more than a  corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the 
district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  …”  (Emphasis 
added.)      In  this  case,  the  Governing  Board  has  reduced  or  discontinued  particular  kinds  of 
services  that  account  for  14.06  FTE,  and  final  notices  in  excess  of  this  number  may  not  be 
issued.    
 
 
Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he services of no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service 
which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.”    (Emphasis  added.)  
“Certificated” is defined by the provisions of the Education Code pertaining to credentials, but 
“competent” is not specifically defined.  In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994) 160 Cal.App.3d 
13, 19, the court defined the term in a reemployment proceeding under section 44956, in terms 
of the teachers’ skills and qualifications, specifically, as “relating to special qualifications for a 
vacant  position,  rather  than  relating  to  the  on-the-job  performance  of  the  laid-off  permanent 
employee.”  In doing so, the court noted that courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. 
Governing Board (1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and  Moreland Teachers Association v. 
Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, had interpreted the term in a similar manner. 

6. 

 

 
 
 

7

 
 
Courts in analogous layoff and reemployment contexts, construing provisions similar to 
section 44955, have recognized that school districts have discretion to establish rules to define 
teacher competency.  Thus, after reviewing earlier cases, the Court in Duax v. Kern Community 
College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565 (Duax), wrote: “Hence, from these authorities 
we conclude that a board’s definition of competency is reasonable when it considers the skills 
and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.” (See: also: Martin v. Kentfield School 
District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299-300; Forker v. Board of Trustees, supra.)  
 
 
In Duax, the governing board had established a standard of competency that required one 
year  of  full-time  teaching  in  the  subject  area  within  the  last  ten  years.    The  Court  found  such 
standard  “clearly  related  to  skills  and  qualifications  to  teach”  and  therefore  a  reasonable  one. 
(Duax, supra, 196 Cal. App.3d 555, at p. 567.)  The Court also concluded that the standard did 
not define competency too narrowly.   
 
 
The District’s competency rule, as set forth in Resolution R10-16 and quoted in factual 
finding  number  14,  relates  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  its  certificated  employees,  as 
required  by  the  foregoing  authorities,  and  may  be  used  by  the  District  in  implementing  the 
layoffs. In fact, it is very similar to the rule in Duax, with the only difference being the period in 
which  the  teaching  must  have  occurred.    Contrary  to  Respondents’  argument,  the  period 
established in the competency rule is not unduly restrictive. 
 
 
The  competency  rule  was  contained  in  a  resolution  that  also  addressed  skipping,  and 
Superintendent  Bowers  testified  that  the  resolution  was  also  intended  to  be  used  as  skipping 
criteria in light of the District needs. While the genesis of skipping and competency rules may lie 
in  the  same  District  needs,  skipping  decisions  must  meet  additional  statutory  requirements. 
Under  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  the  statutory 
mandate  to  lay  off  employees  in  order  of  seniority,  or  “skip”  junior  employees,  if  it 
“[d]emonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study . . . 
and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that 
course or course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not 
possess.”    In  this  case,  except  as  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  13,  the  District  did  not 
designate any particular area or areas in which it had specific needs that required skipping more 
junior employees. Thus, despite the “competency/skipping” designation in the resolution and the 
potential  confusion  it  may  cause,  the  District  requirement  of  one  year  of  experience  in  the 
subject matter during the past five years has only been allowed in this case in connection with 
one  of  its  intended  purposes,  namely,  defining  “competent”  pursuant  to  section  44955, 
subdivision (b).  
Although  mentioned  in  connection  with  several  respondents,  application  of  the 
 
competency  rule  only  impacts  Respondent  Garcia.  Respondents  Aaron-England,  Keller,  and 
Neary lacked the credential, as well as the experience, to teach the subjects they claimed junior 
teachers  were  retained  to  teach.  Respondent  Garcia  does  have  a  credential  that  allows  her  to 

 

 
 
 

8

7. 

teach English or Language Arts classes as a single subject in middle or high school, but has not 
taught this subject or another for which her credential would qualify her in this departmentalized 
setting.  Accordingly,  she  is  not  competent  to  render  a  service,  English  or  Language  Arts 
instruction, that a more junior certificated employee was retained to render.  
 
 
Respondents  argue  that  the  District  must  make  available  part-time  services  for 
which they qualify. As they point out, section 44955, subdivision (c), requires: “[T]he governing 
board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  manner  that  employees  shall  be 
retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. . . .” 
(emphasis added.) Respondents argue that “any” service should include part-time services, and 
correctly  point  out  that  section  44955  does  not expressly exclude part-time positions from the 
affirmatively-required assignments and reassignments.   
 
 
However,  as  the  court  recently  concluded  in  Hildebrandt  v.  St.  Helena  Unified  School 
District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, districts have discretion to define positions and the manner 
in  which  they  will  be  taught  as  long  as  it  is  done  in  good  faith.  In  this  case,  the  District  has 
decided  to  make  the  ASB  assignment  a  part  of  a  full-time  teacher’s  assignment,  and  such 
decision is within the District’s discretion.  Therefore, Respondent Garcia may not bump Cordes 
from the ASB portion of her assignment.3  
 
 
Subject  to  legal  conclusion  number  5,  cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of 
Respondents Aaron-English, Badalamenti, Garcia, Keller, Mandich, Neary, Pickett, Rounsevell, 
Salio,  and  Terry,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  20,  and  legal  conclusion 
numbers 1 through 7.  
 
// 
// 
// 
// 
// 
// 
// 

8. 

ORDER 

 
The  Accusation  is  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondents  Aaron-English, 
 
Badalamenti, Garcia, Keller, Mandich, Neary, Pickett, Rounsevell, Salio, and Terry, subject to 

                     

3  Since  Respondents  Keller  and  Neary  are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  teach 
portions of Loney’s or Russell’s assignments, it is unnecessary to decide whether the retained 
employees’ workloads constitute integrated positions that a district is not required to split, or 
whether  the  assignments  contain  part-time  portions  that  may  be  performed  by  more  senior 
employees. 

 

 
 
 

9

legal conclusion number 5, that their services will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school 
year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
DATED:____________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 

 
Administrative Law Judge 
 

                                 
         
 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

SAMUEL D. REYES 

 
 

 

 
 
 

10

