BEFORE THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
WINTERS JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 

In the Matter of the Accusation (Reduction 
in Force) Against: 
 
  GEORGE GRIFFIN, 
 
                                                   Respondent. 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
OAH No. 2010030181 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
Administrative Law Judge JoAnn Irwin Eshelman, Office of Administrative 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Winters, California, on April 22, 2010. 
 
 
represented the Winters Joint Unified School District (District). 
 

Terry Filliman, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

Respondent George Griffin (respondent) appeared on his own behalf. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, the record was closed and the matter 

was submitted for decision on April 22, 2010. 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
Release from Administrative Position 
 

1. 

On March 4, 2010, while meeting in closed session, the District’s Board of 
Trustees (Board) passed and adopted Resolution No. 836-10 (Resolution 836), pursuant to 
Education Code section 44951, releasing respondent from his position as Principal for 
Winters High School (1.0 FTE1) for the 2010-2011 school year.  The Board directed that 
respondent be reassigned as a regular certificated employee to a position for which he is 
“credentialed and qualified to serve” and that the Superintendent notify him of his specific 
assignment for the 2010-2011 school year prior to June 30, 2010.     
 

                                                 

1  FTE is an abbreviation for the term “full-time equivalent.”  This is the basic unit of employment 

measurement and staff calculation.  The designation 1.0 FTE means that respondent was employed full-time as a 
principal at Winters High School.      

When the Board returned to public session, it reported the action it had taken to 
release respondent, but did not report the actual roll call vote.   The Board’s failure to report 
the vote was non-substantive and had no relevance to the procedural steps required under 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  Respondent first received a copy of Resolution 
836 on the day of hearing. 
 
 
District (Superintendent), personally hand-delivered to respondent a Notice of Release from 
Administrative Position (Notice of Release), dated March 5, 2010.  The Notice of Release 
advised him that,  
 

On March 8, 2010, Rebecca D. Gillespie, Ed.D., Superintendent of the 

2. 

Pursuant to the authority contained in Education Code 
section 45591, you are hereby notified that at its meeting 
on March 4, 2010 the Board of Trustees of the Winters 
Joint Unified School District took action to release you 
from your administrative position for the 2010-2011 
school year.  You will be reassigned to a non-
administrative certificated teaching position for which 
you are properly credentialed.  You will be notified of 
your specific assignment for 2010-2011 prior to June 30, 
2010. 

 

 

3. 

The Notice of Release incorrectly listed the authority for respondent’s release 

as Education Code section 45591, rather than section 44951.  The Superintendent testified 
that this was a typographical error and that the correct section number was 44951.  Under 
Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), “Nonsubstantive procedural errors 
committed by the school district or governing board of the school district shall not constitute 
cause for dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.”  A typographical 
error incorrectly noting the code section under which respondent was released did not 
prejudice his substantive rights or affect the Board’s actions.  Therefore, this error was of no 
consequence. 
 
Reduction in Force Actions 
 

4. 

On March 4, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 834-10 (Resolution 

834) upon recommendation of the Superintendent that it was necessary to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school 
year.  The Board determined that it was necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds 
of services and a corresponding number of FTE positions, as follows: 
 

Services 

 

 

 

 

Number of FTE Position 

 
I.  Classroom Teaching Services: 

A.  Grade K-3 Elementary Teachers 
B.  Middle School Science Teacher (vacancy) 

 

 
 

3.00   FTE 
.857   FTE 

 

 
 

2

C.  High School RSP Special Education Teacher (vacancy)  
D.  High School English Teacher (librarian vacancy) 
E.  K-12 Independent Study Teacher 

.50   FTE 
          1.00   FTE 
 .33  FTE 
 

 

 

Classroom Support Services: 
A.  Counselor  (vacancy if retirements) 
 

III.  Administrative Services: 
A.  Elementary Principal 
 
B.  Middle School Assistant Principal 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
II. 

  

 

   

 .75   FTE 

   
 .50  FTE 
           1.00  FTE 

 
 
 
TOTAL:        7.937 FTE Positions  

5. 

The services identified in Resolution 834 are the particular kinds of services 
that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.   
The Board  considered all positively assured attrition, including deaths, resignations, 
retirements and other permanent vacancies for 2010-2011, which had occurred by March 4, 
2010, in determining the services to be reduced or eliminated.  The Board’s decision to 
reduce or discontinue services was a proper exercise of its discretion and was related to the 
welfare of the schools and the pupils of the District. 
 

6. 

In Resolution 834, the Board also set forth “competency criteria” designed to 
assist the District in determining whether affected employees could displace or bump junior 
employees.  The Resolution stated that, 
 

“competency”  for the purposes of Education Code 
sections 44955, 44956 and 44957 shall be met based 
upon: (1) current possession of a preliminary or clear 
credential and “highly qualified” status under the No 
Child Left Behind Act for each subject matter in 
secondary teaching assignments and/or grade level in a 
self-contained class to which the employee will be 
assigned at the beginning of the 2010-11 school year; 
and (2) the employee must have taught at least one 
subject within the department of the proposed secondary 
assignment, or taught in a self-contained classroom for a 
proposed elementary assignment, or taught the specific 
course of AVID, Student Government, Leadership or 
Intervention classes for assignment to one of those 
courses, for at least one full year within the District in 
the past five (5) school years (e.g., 2005-2006 or later) 
while classified as a probationary or permanent 
employee.  If the proposed assignment is in alternative 
education, the employee must be highly qualified under 
NCLB in each academic subject currently assigned to the 

 

3

position and have taught in alternative education within 
the District for at least one full year within the past five 
(5) school years (e.g., 2005-2006 or later) while 
classified as a probationary or permanent employee. 

7. 

Laura M. Smith is the Administrative Assistant to the Superintendent.  She 

 
 
works closely with the Superintendent to provide human resources information to the Board 
because there is no human resources officer in the District.  Ms. Smith testified that she was 
“heavily involved” in the planning for layoffs this school year.  In determining the 
competency criteria, key factors for the Board were: 1) to maintain a strong academic 
program at the secondary and elementary levels; 2) to have staff who have taught at the 
secondary or elementary level to which they are assigned; 3) to have staff assigned to 
courses that they want to teach; and 4) to assign staff to courses in which they have had 
recent teaching experience. 
 

8. 

Ms. Smith testified about the reasons for the Board’s decision to include 
specific courses in the competency criteria.  The “AVID [Advancement Via Individual 
Determination], Student Government, Leadership or Intervention courses” were included 
because the Board wished to retain teachers who had a “strong interest” in these courses.  
The Board required prior teaching experience in alternative education because the students 
in such settings have not been successful at a “regular” high school.  They often have 
different needs and require “different teaching strategies.”  
 

9. 

By letter dated March 11, 2010, the Superintendent recommended to the 

Board that three certificated employees be given written notice of layoff for the 2010-2011 
school year, pursuant to Resolution 834.  Respondent was not listed as one of those 
employees.  In addition, respondent’s administrative position as high school principal was 
not listed among the particular kinds of services to be reduced or discontinued.2   
 

10.  On March 11, 2010, the Superintendent gave respondent a written 

“Certificated Layoff Notice” along with a copy of Resolution 834 and copies of Education 
Code sections 44949 and 44955.  She explained that the District had determined that 
respondent had “no bumping rights as part of the layoff process,” and, for this reason, he 
was being given a layoff notice as a teacher. 
 
 

                                                 

2  Although it appears that the Superintendent erred in failing to notify the Board of respondent’s proposed 

layoff, as required under Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a), in fact, respondent was not entitled to a 
section 44949 notice.  The Board’s action in releasing respondent from his administrative position did not require 
subsequent action to lay him off under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  The steps that the District took 
to include respondent in the layoff process were apparently precautionary, affording him the opportunity to assert 
his bumping rights, if any.  Neverthelesss, any error in notice to the Board under section 44949, subdivision (a), 
was non-substantive and did not deprive respondent of a fair hearing.   

     

 

4

11.  On March 18, 2010, respondent submitted a timely written request for a 
layoff hearing to determine if there was cause for not reemploying him for the 2010-11 
school year.  On March 22, 2010, the Superintendent made and filed the Accusation in her 
official capacity.  Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense on March 27, 2010. 
 

12.  All of the pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

 
Respondent’s Status and Seniority in the District 
 

13. 

Respondent has been an employee of the District for 14 years.  He has served 
as an administrator that entire time and has never been a classroom teacher in the District.   
 

14.  After two years working as an administrator, respondent gained permanent 

status as a teacher or certificated employee, even though he had never taught in the District.  
Under Education Code section 44956.5,3 as a site administrator, the maximum seniority 
respondent can claim for bumping purposes is three years.  In accordance with this statute, 
the District set respondent’s seniority date as July 1, 2007.  Respondent did not contest this 
date. 
 

15. 

Respondent holds a clear multiple subject credential, a Bilingual, 

Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development (BCLAD) Certificate, a clear single 
subject Spanish credential, and a clear administrative services credential. 
 

16. 

Respondent has general bumping rights to displace a less senior teacher 
currently assigned to a teaching position for which respondent is both credentialed and 
“competent” under the District’s criteria in Resolution 834.  There was no evidence that 
respondent’s services as a permanent employee were being terminated while any 
probationary or other employee with less seniority was retained to render a service which 
respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
 
The District’s Position 
  
 
process due to a combination of lack of seniority and lack of Board-established 
“competence” to teach specific areas.  Respondent could not bump into either a self-
contained elementary assignment or a secondary Spanish assignment because there were no 
teachers in these assignments who were less senior than he.  In the case of the elementary 

The District determined that respondent had no bumping rights in the layoff 

17. 

                                                 

3  Education Code section 44956.5 provides, “ For a certificated employee initially employed in an 

administrative position on or after July 1, 1983, who transfers to a teaching position, the period of employment in 
the administrative position shall not be included in determining seniority for purposes of Sections 44955 and 
44956, except for school site administrators who shall earn up to a maximum of three years seniority while serving 
as site administrators.” 
 

 

5

19. 

18. 

Respondent’s primary defense was that his release from the administrative 

The District argued that there is no jurisdiction in a teacher layoff proceeding for 

Dual Immersion program, even though three teachers being skipped4 were less senior than 
respondent, the District determined that he still could not bump due to the Board’s 
competency criteria.  Respondent was also not “competent” to bump into an assignment to 
teach either alternative education or the specific courses listed in Resolution 834. 
 
Respondent’s Defenses  
 
 
position was not handled correctly under the procedural requirements of the public meeting 
law, known as the Ralph M. Brown Act (Brown Act), contained in Government Code 
sections 54950-54963.  Respondent contended that the failure of the Board to report its roll 
call vote while in closed session on March 4, 2010, was a violation of Government Code 
section 54957.1, subdivision (a)(5).  Respondent argued that, because the March 4 meeting 
resulted in his administrative release, it led to his eventual layoff, and was, therefore, 
relevant. 
 
 
consideration of possible Brown Act violations. 
 
 
In Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 846, the court found a violation of the 
Brown Act, but held that, “the validity of the action taken by the Board is not affected by 
the violation of the Brown Act. [citation omitted.]  Moreover, the fact that the Board's 
decision was made during a meeting which violated the Brown Act did not in and of itself 
deny respondent[s] a fair hearing.”  In this case, the possible Brown Act violation was a 
minor procedural defect.  It had no effect on the Board’s substantive decision or on 
respondent’s subsequent hearing rights.  Therefore, respondent’s Brown Act defense is not 
availing. 
 
 
Respondent also challenged the competency criteria adopted by the Board, 
stating that the development of the “exclusion criteria” [competency] was not done “in the 
spirit of the Ed. Code.”  He believes the criteria were adopted to specifically exclude an 
administrator from having rights to a teaching position, and considers the logic that an 
administrator cannot teach to be “suspect.”  Respondent also believes that the criteria were 
directed specifically at him and claimed that Board members had so informed him.  He 
pointed out that his BCLAD certificate would qualify him to teach in the Dual Immersion 
program, but for the competency requirement, and believes that this is evidence that the 
Board’s criteria were directed at him.  Respondent contended in closing argument that his 
14 years of experience as an administrator is relevant and should qualify as one year of 
classroom teaching in order to satisfy the competency requirement in Resolution 834. 

20. 

                                                 

4  In Resolution 834, the Board authorized the Superintendent to deviate from terminating in order of 

seniority (“skipping”) for teachers currently assigned to the elementary Dual Immersion program “based upon their 
unique training, qualifications and skills related to the required responsibilities for the course/job.”  Respondent did 
not challenge this skipping provision in the resolution.      

 

6

21. 

The District argued that the competency criteria were reasonable in focusing 
 
on the need for teachers with recent teaching experience, i.e. one year teaching a particular 
subject within the past five years.  The District also pointed out that there was no evidence 
that the criteria were specifically directed at respondent, and that respondent’s testimony to 
the contrary was mere “speculation.”   The District contended that respondent’s experience 
as an administrator is not the same as classroom experience no matter what the classroom 
subject. 
 

22. 

The evidence indicates that the competency criteria adopted by the Board in 

Resolution 834 were designed to strengthen the District’s academic program by retaining 
teachers with more recent classroom experience in the subject they would be assigned to 
teach.  Teaching standards and curriculum change regularly.  Teachers must constantly keep 
abreast of new developments and must attend continuing education programs.  It was 
reasonable and appropriate for the Board to adopt competency criteria that addressed these 
matters. 
 
 
There was no evidence that the criteria were adopted in order to specifically exclude 
respondent or other administrators.  Administrative experience, no matter how extensive, is 
not the same as classroom teaching experience.  The two are not interchangeable.  The 
evidence indicates that the Superintendent and Board acted in a manner consistent with the 
welfare of the schools and pupils in the District in adopting the competency criteria in 
Resolution 834. 
 

23.  Any defenses or issues not specifically raised in this proceeding are deemed 

waived.  Any other assertions put forth by respondent at the hearing and not addressed 
above are found to be without merit and are rejected.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.  There is jurisdiction to proceed in this matter under Education Code sections 44949 

2. 

The notices sent to respondent indicated the statutory basis for the reduction of 

and 44955.  All notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as 
required.  Any defects were non-substantive and not prejudicial, as set forth in Factual 
Findings 1, 3, and 9 (footnote). 
 
 
services and were sufficiently detailed to provide him due process.  (San Jose Teachers 
Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. 
Governing Board, supra, 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  The description of services to be reduced, 
both in Resolution 834 and in the notices, adequately describe particular kinds of services.  
(Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.  See, also, Degener v. Governing 
Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)  
 
 
could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The 

The services identified in Resolution 834 are particular kinds of services that 

3. 

 

 

7

Superintendent’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious and was a proper exercise of discretion.  Cause exists to reduce the 
number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates 
solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44949. 
 

4. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

5. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, “Except as 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
 
otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee may be terminated 
under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or any other 
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent employee 
is certificated and competent to render.”  
 
 
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides in pertinent part,  
“… and services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse order in which they 
were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with the provisions of Sections 
44844 and 44845.”  
 

6. 

7. 

Because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services 

8. 

pursuant to Education Code section 44955, cause exists to give notice to respondent that his 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year, as set forth in Factual Findings 
13 through 23.  No certificated employees with seniority dates junior to respondent are 
being retained to render a service which respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
As set forth in Factual Findings 6 through 8, and 20 through 22, the 
 
competency criteria adopted by the Board were reasonable and were the result of a 
reasonable exercise of discretion by the Board upon recommendation of the Superintendent. 
 
 
based on an alleged Brown Act violation was unavailing.  Any possible violation was a 
minor procedural defect, and had no impact on the Board’s substantive decision or on 
respondent’s subsequent hearing rights.  
 
 

As set forth in Factual Findings 1, and 18 through 19, respondent’s defense 

9. 

 
 
 
 

8

 

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice may be given to respondent George Griffin that his services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services in the District. 
 
 
 
Dated: April 27, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

____________________________ 
JOANN I. ESHELMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

9

