BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
LUTHER BURBANK SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
OAH No. 2010031826 

 

 
 
In the Matter of the Layoff of: 
 
CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE 
LUTHER BURBANK SCHOOL 
DISTRICT,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

James R. Lynch, Attorney at Law, GCR, LLP, represented the Luther Burbank School 

 
Administrative Law Judge David L. Benjamin, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in San Jose, California, on April 22 and May 7, 
2010. 
 
 
District. 
 
 
Perlita Balangue, Natalia Torres Diehl, Fadi Saba, Raquel Bridgen, and Diana Benavides. 
 
 
 
 
Muir. 
 

Respondent Eli Segura represented himself, and was assisted by his wife, Nadine 

Christopher Schumb, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Donna Palmese, 

Marilyn Aden represented respondent Lorena Mancia. 

The record closed and the matter was submitted on May 7, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

2. 

1. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the district. 

Becki Cohn-Vargas, Ed.D., issued the accusation in her official capacity as 

 
 
Superintendent of the Luther Burbank School District (district). 
 
 
 
 
# 02-09-10-03, authorizing the reduction of particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 
school year and directing the superintendent of the district to give appropriate notices to 
certificated employees whose positions will be affected by the actions.  The resolution states 
that the particular kinds of services to be reduced or eliminated are as follows: 

On February 9, 2010, the district’s governing board adopted Resolution  

3. 

 

 

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 Kind of Service
 
 
 
 
K-8 classroom Teacher 
 
Counselor 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 Number of Full-Time
 Equivalent Positions 
 (“FTEs”) 
 
 

7.0 
1.0 

 
 

 Total FTEs

 

 

 

 

 8.0 

 
 
 
 
 

 

4. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district gave written notice to respondents of 

5. 

Respondents filed timely requests for hearing to determine if there is cause for 

the recommendation that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  
The reasons for the recommendation were set forth in these preliminary layoff notices. 
 
 
terminating their services for the 2010-2011 school year.  An accusation was served on 
respondents, all of whom filed or are deemed to have filed timely notices of defense.  All 
prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 
 
Respondents’ contention regarding mandated services 
 
 
certificated employees.  The board took action to reduce or eliminate services because it is 
faced with a growing deficit. 
 

The district has one K-8 school (Luther Burbank), 574 students, and 24 

6. 

7. 

The district has not finalized its plans on how it will deliver instructional 

services in the 2010-2011 school year.  The district currently projects that its enrollment will 
fall by three students.  But even if its enrollment falls, it is likely that the district will need to 
combine classrooms.  At the present time, the district is looking at a combined K/1 classroom 
(with two other kindergarten and two other first grade classrooms), a combined 6/7 
classroom (with one other sixth grade and one other seventh grade classroom), and a 
combined 7/8 classroom (with one other seventh and one other eighth grade classroom).  The 
district has experience with combined classrooms; it has a combined first and second grade 
classroom this year.  Until now, Cohn-Vargas has been examining the number of students 
that might be assigned to each class, in an effort to keep class sizes down; she has not yet 
looked at the issue of delivering the necessary number of instructional minutes to each grade 
level in a combined class. 

 
Superintendent Cohn-Vargas acknowledges that the district’s enrollment projections 

may prove to be incorrect.  If enrollment increases and the district needs more teachers, 
Cohn-Vargas states that the district will “absolutely” rehire the teachers it has laid off. 

 
  8. 

 Respondents assert that the district cannot combine classrooms, as it currently 
intends to do, and still provide each grade level in the combined 6/7 and 7/8 classrooms with 
the number of instructional minutes the district must offer under state law.  (The district 

2

currently receives financial incentives from the state for offering a higher level of 
instructional minutes, incentives the district hopes to receive in 2010-2011.)  The layoff is 
invalid, respondents contend, because the district is reducing educational services below a 
legally-mandated level. 

 
9. 

 
Even if respondents are correct and the district’s current plan is not workable, 
that does not make the proposed layoff invalid.  Respondents cite no authority, and none has 
been found, for the proposition that the district is required to have a final instructional plan in 
place to effect an economic layoff.  On the contrary, the courts have recognized that a school 
district must make decisions on economic layoffs between March and May of each year, 
despite uncertainties regarding its finances and its enrollment for the next year.  (Campbell 
Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 807-808.)  A 
governing board may take action to reduce services even if it has not yet decided how it will 
provide mandated services or who will provide them.  (See Zalac v. Governing Bd. of 
Ferndale Unified School Dist. (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 853-854, and Campbell 
Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at pp. 810-812.)  
Respondents’ argument that the district will not meet legally-mandated levels of service is 
premature and it is rejected. 
 
Skipping issues 
 

10.  Under Education Codes section 44955, subdivision (c), probationary and 

permanent employees must be laid off in the inverse order of their seniority.  Subdivision 
(d)(1) of that section provides, however, that a school district may deviate from terminating 
an employee in order of seniority and “skip” that employee if  
 

[t]he district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach 
a specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated 
employee has special training and experience necessary to teach 
that course or course of study or to provide those services, 
which others with more seniority do not possess. 

11. 

 
 
In Resolution # 02-09-10-03, the board adopted two skipping criteria, only one 
of which – the bilingual skip – is pertinent here.  The resolution provides, in relevant part, as 
follows: 
 

The District shall retain certificated employees . . . regardless of 
their seniority, to the extent one or more of their assignments 
meet any of the following criteria: 

1.  Who is fluent in Spanish (demonstrated by possession of 
a Bilingual, Crosscultural, Language and Academic 
Development Certificate (Spanish), passage of the 
CSET:LOTE Subtest III (Spanish), passage of the 
BCLAD Examination No. 6 (Spanish), or equivalent 

3

 

 

certification), has at least two years’ experience of 
assisting monolingual students and parents in 
acclimating to the District’s English-only course of study 
during the period September 6, 2005, to March 15, 2010, 
and who is expected to continue providing such 
assistance for the District in the 2010-2011 school year. 

13. 

12. 

Based upon the bilingual skip criterion, the district proposes to skip 

Superintendent Cohn-Vargas testified to the basis for the bilingual skip.  The 

 
  
respondents Mancia and Segura.  There are certificated employees senior to Mancia and 
Segura who have received preliminary notices and who do not meet the bilingual skip 
criterion. 
 
 
population the district serves is 91 percent Spanish-speaking and the district has many 
monolingual Spanish students.  Cohn-Vargas herself speaks Spanish and uses it often in her 
work.  Cohn-Vargas states that it is very important for teachers to be able to assist students 
and communicate with their families in Spanish, and to assist with translation on other 
occasions, such as parent-teacher conferences.  In recognition of these abilities, the district 
pays a stipend to teachers with a BCLAD in Spanish. 
 
 
bilingual classes or a bilingual immersion program.  Teachers are not required to speak 
Spanish to be hired by the district. 
 
 
proficiency is necessary to teach a specific course of study.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. 
(d)(1); Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567.)  In this case, it is clear 
from the testimony of Cohn-Vargas and the teachers – including those who do not meet the 
terms of the skip criterion – that it is highly desirable for the district’s teachers to speak 
Spanish.  The uncontradicted evidence establishes, however, that the district does not offer 
any courses requiring bilingual ability.  The bilingual skip criterion is not valid.  Respondents 
Mancia and Segura may not be skipped.1
 
Seniority date issues 
 

14.  A district may skip a junior teacher based on bilingual ability only if bilingual 

All classroom instruction, however, is given in English.  The district does not offer 

15. 

It was stipulated at hearing that the correct seniority date for respondents 

Natalia Torres Diehl, Fadi Saba, and Raquel Bridgen is August 27, 2007. 

It was stipulated at hearing that the correct seniority date for respondent Donna 

 
16. 

 

Palmese is August 27, 2008. 

                                                 

1  In light of this finding, it is not necessary to address the issue of whether the district properly 

relied on an “equivalent certification” when it concluded that respondent Mancia meets the skip criterion. 

 

4

17. 

The district’s seniority list states that respondent Lorena Mancia’s seniority 
date is September 2, 2008.  The district and Mancia stipulated at hearing that her seniority 
date should be changed to August 27, 2008, without prejudice to Mancia’s claim that she is 
entitled to an earlier seniority date. 

 
Mancia asserts that her seniority date should be July 21, 2008, the first day of a 40-

hour training for English-language learners that the district required her to take.  The district 
paid Mancia a stipend of $1,000 to attend the training. 

 
Seniority is measured from the first date on which an employee renders paid service 
in a probationary position.  (Ed. Code, § 44845.)  Even if attendance at the July training was 
mandatory, as Mancia states, the evidence did not establish that the training was part of her  
service in a probationary position.  Mancia’s contract for the 2008-2009 school year was not 
offered into evidence.  It appears that the training was not part of her probationary service, as 
she was paid a stipend for her participation, rather than her salary as a probationary 
employee.  Mancia’s correct seniority date is August 27, 2008. 

 
18. 

Respondent Eli Segura is a permanent employee.  The district’s seniority list 

states that Segura’s seniority date is September 2, 2008.  At hearing the district stated that 
Segura’s seniority date should be changed to August 27, 2008.  Segura does not object to 
being assigned an earlier date, but he contends that his seniority date should be earlier still. 

 
Segura was first employed by the district in August 2001.  He continued to work for 

the district until the 2007-2008 school year, when he resigned to teach high school in another 
district.  Segura returned to the Luther Burbank School District on August 27, 2008.  When 
he returned, Richard Rodriguez, the superintendent at that time, assured Segura that he would 
keep his tenure and his original seniority date. 

 
When a permanent employee resigns from a district and is reemployed within 39 

months, he is entitled to retain his classification but his seniority date becomes the date he is 
reemployed.  (Ed. Code, § 44848; San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 
627, 641.)  Under this principle, Segura was entitled to retain his classification as a 
permanent teacher, which he did, but his new seniority date would be August 27, 2008, not 
the date he was first employed by the district. 

 
Segura argues, in essence, that the district should be estopped from asserting a 2008 
seniority date because of the contrary assurance he was given by the former superintendent.  
The evidence fails to establish, however, that Rodriguez knew his statement was false when 
he told Segura that he would keep his original seniority date, or that Segura relied on such a 
false statement to his detriment.  These are essential elements of an estoppel claim. 

 
Segura’s correct seniority date is August 27, 2008. 

 

 

5

Other matters 
 

19. 

The cause for the reduction in particular kinds of services relates to the welfare 

of the school and the pupils thereof. 

 
20.  No permanent employee is being terminated while any probationary employee, 

or any other employee with less seniority, is being retained to render a service which the 
permanent employee is certificated and competent to render. 

 
21. 

 Any contentions raised by respondents and not discussed above have been 

found to be without merit and are hereby rejected. 

  
 
22.  Hearing in this matter was continued from April 22, 2010, to May 7, 2010, at 
which time the matter was submitted.  The effect of the continuance is to extend the date by 
which copies of the proposed decision must be submitted to the board and to respondents and 
the date by which final layoff notices must be served.  Ordinarily, copies of the proposed 
decision are required to be submitted to the board and to respondents by May 7 (Ed. Code,  
§ 44949, subd. (c)(3)), and final layoff notices must be “given before” May 15 (Ed. Code,  
§ 44955, subd. (c)).  If the hearing has been continued, these dates are extended for a period 
of time equal to the continuance (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (e)).  May 7 is 15 days after April 
22, so the proposed decision is due 15 days after May 7 (May 22, a Saturday) and final layoff 
notices are due 15 days after May 15 (May 30, a Sunday). 
 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
 
By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 15 through 18, cause exists to 
require the district to update its records to reflect the correct seniority dates for respondents 
Diehl, Saba, Bridgen, Palmese, Mancia, and Segura. 
 

2. 

Cause exists because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of 

services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents in 8.0 FTE 
positions (7.0 K-8 classroom teachers and 1.0 counselor) that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the school 
and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 

 

ORDER 
 

The district shall update its records to reflect the correct seniority dates for 

1. 

 
respondents Diehl, Saba, Bridgen, Palmese, Mancia, and Segura. 
 
 

 

 

6

2. 

Notice may be given to respondents in 8.0 FTE positions that their services 

will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or elimination of 
particular kinds of services. 
 
 
DATED: _________________________ 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
DAVID L. BENJAMIN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

7

