BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
OAKLAND UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF ALAMEDA, CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES, 
 
                                                 Respondents. 
 

 
OAH No. 2010040155 
 

 
 
PROPOSED DECISION 
 

This matter was heard before Diane Schneider, Administrative Law Judge, State of 
California, Office of Administrative Hearings, in Oakland, California, on April 28, 2010. 
 

Marion McWilliams, Deputy General Counsel, Office of General Counsel, Oakland 

David Weintraub and Dusty L. Collier, Attorneys at Law, Beeson Tayer & Bodine, 

Unified School District, represented the Oakland Unified School District. 
 
 
represented respondents, all of whom are identified in Attachment A. 
 
 
simultaneous closing briefs, which were timely filed on April 29, 2010.  The Oakland 
Unified School District’s brief was marked as Exhibit 13, and respondents’ brief was marked 
as Exhibit I.   
 

The record was held open at the request of the parties to permit them to file 

The record closed and the matter was submitted on April 29, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

 
 
Superintendent of the Oakland Unified School District (district). 
 

Anthony Smith made and filed the Accusation in his official capacity as 

2. 

On March 10, 2010, the district’s governing board adopted Resolution No. 

0910-0159, which sets forth the board’s determination that it will be necessary for the district 
to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2010-2011 school year, 
for a total of 121 full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated positions.  (Resolution No. 0910-
0159 is set forth in Attachment B.) 
 

 

 

1

3 

All notices were timely and properly served.  All notices and other 

jurisdictional requirements contained in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 have 
been provided or satisfied.   
 

4. 

The respondents in this matter are identified in Attachment A.  At the hearing, 
the parties stipulated that Evelyn Chan and Rodney Jones have resigned.  The parties further 
stipulated that the following teachers identified in Attachment A are not parties to the layoff 
proceedings because they were not served with layoff notices or because they are temporary 
employees: Christine Illochi, Sharon Jeffery, Dana Lee Mcintyre, Jessica Sawczuk, Ruby 
Simmons, Yolanda Young and Wesley Jacques.  The Accusation will be dismissed as to 
these employees. 
 

Additionally, at the hearing, the district fully rescinded layoff notices issued to 

Sylvester Saunders, Joan Adams, Catherine Borquez, Terri Barr, Susanna Mori, Deborah 
Gordon, Diana MacDonald and Anne Hamilton.  The Accusation will be dismissed as to 
these employees.  In light of these rescissions, any issues raised by these respondents in 
connection with their layoffs are moot.  The district partially rescinded the layoff notice 
issued to Armando Florez, who will be retained for 0.6 FTE and laid off for 0.4 FTE.  The 
Accusation filed against Florez will be dismissed for 0.6 FTE. 

Pursuant to Resolution No. 0910-0159, the board took action to reduce or 

eliminate the following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year. 

            Counselor 

FTE 

Position 

                        
                                2.0 
2.0 
14.0 
1.0 
5.0 
16.0 

Adult Ed, OACE Central Instruction Support    
Adult Ed, English as a Second Language 
Adult Ed, Parenting Education 
Adult Ed, Career Technical Education 
Adult Ed, Adults with Disabilities/50+ 
K-8 Multi-Subject Classroom Teachers 
  (CORE and Self-contained classrooms) 
 
Total FTE:  121.0   

                   
       
    
 
    
                           
.   

     

81.0   
121.0 

Board Resolution No. 0910-0159 also resolved to retain, regardless of 

seniority (i.e., “skip” in the layoff process), certificated employees who possess a CLAD1 or 
BCLAD2 certificate: 

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that pursuant to Education 
Code § 44955(d)(1) it will be necessary to retain the services of 

                                                

1  Cross-Cultural, Language and Academic Development. 

2  Bilingual, Cross-Cultural, Language and Academic Development. 

 

 

2

 
5. 

 

 
6. 

 

K-12 teachers in the 2010-2011 school year regardless of 
seniority, who possess certification and credentials needed for 
the following programs: CLAD or Bilingual Education/BCLAD 
in the K-12 program.  The CLAD/BCLAD skipping criteria 
does not apply to Adult Education or Counselors. 

 
Superintendent Smith recommended that the board adopt this resolution to “enable the 
District to meet its state and federal requirements for serving English learners by not laying 
off employees who are in the program area to be reduced (K-8) if they have CLAD or 
BCLAD certification.” 
 
 Skipping Issues 
 

7. 

Respondents do not contest the validity of the board’s skipping criteria per se.3  

They contend, however, that the district applied the criteria in an arbitrary and capricious 
manner.   

 
8. 

 
9. 

Failure to Skip Emergency CLAD and BCLAD:  The district did not skip 

teachers who possess an emergency CLAD or BCLAD certificate because there is no 
guarantee that such teachers will be able to renew their emergency certificate or that they 
will complete the necessary requirements to obtain clear CLAD or BCLAD certification.  
Respondents who hold an emergency CLAD or BCLAD certificate contend that the district 
should have skipped them too because, like holders of a CLAD or BCLAD certificate, they 
are authorized to teach in bilingual programs with the emergency credential.  This contention 
lacks merit.  It is within the district’s discretion to determine that it would only skip bilingual 
teachers who have received CLAD or BCLAD certification.   

Expansion of Skipping Criteria to Encompass Credentials not Expressly Listed 

in Resolution:  The district interpreted the board’s “CLAD/BCLAD skipping criteria” to 
include authorization to skip any employee who possessed an English learner (EL) 
certification.  The district, therefore, skipped employees who possessed any certification to 
teach EL, including Bilingual Certificate of Competence (BCC), Language Development 
Specialist Certificate (LDS) and the Certificate of Completion of Staff Development 
(CCSD).  The skipped employees were not issued preliminary layoff notices and are not 
respondents.  Respondents contend that the district’s inclusion of these EL certifications in 
its skipping criteria impermissibly broadens the board’s resolution.  They are correct.  The 
plain language of Resolution 0910-0159 only authorizes the district to skip holders of 
BCLAD and CLAD certifications.  The prefatory language in the resolution that affirms the 
board’s intent to retain employees who are qualified to serve the needs of English learners is 

                                                

3  Respondents acknowledge that Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), allows a 
school district to deviate from seniority order in terminating a certificated employee when “the district 
demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that the 
certificated employee has special training or experience necessary to teach that course or course of study 
 . . . which others with more seniority do not possess.” 

 

3

not part of the skipping criteria adopted by the board and, therefore, does not authorize the 
district to skip employees who hold EL certifications other than CLAD or BCLAD.  The 
district’s inclusion of other EL certifications into its skipping criteria exceeds the board’s 
mandate and, therefore, constitutes an abuse of discretion. 

 
The employees who were improperly skipped should have received layoff notices.  

The appropriate remedy, which will be ordered, is to direct the district to identify the 
teachers who were improperly skipped and a corresponding number of the most senior 
employees who were prejudiced by such skips.  Those employees who were prejudiced by 
the district’s invalid skips may not be laid off.  (See Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 
139 Cal.App.3d 567, 576.)   

Equitable Estoppel 
 

10. 

Six respondents who were recruited by the district to move here from Spain in 

order to teach in the district assert that the district is estopped from laying them off in this 
proceeding.4  While their individual circumstances are somewhat different, the gist of their 
collective claim is that district personnel knowingly misrepresented that their jobs would be 
secure with emergency credentials as long as they pursued their CLAD or BCLAD and 
obtained it within a specified time.5  This assertion lacks merit.  There is no basis, either in 
fact6 or law,7 to justify application of the doctrine of equitable estoppel.   

 

 

                                                

4  The teachers asserting this claim are Alberto Alonso De La Cruz, Jorge Urdaniz, Maria Moreno 

De La Furento, Marta Poyatos Martin, Maria Cristina Turienzo, and Mireya Artabe-Torviso. 

 
5  Most of the respondents claim they were told that they had three years to obtain CLAD or 

BCLAD certification.  One respondent, Rocio Aranda-Alcaide, was not given a specified time period in 
which to obtain CLAD or BCLAD certification.  She claims, however, that she was assured by a district 
representative that her job would be secure as long as she possessed an emergency BCLAD and continued 
to pursue a CLAD or BCLAD. 
 

6  The elements of estoppel are (1) a representation or concealment of material facts (2) made 

with knowledge of the facts (3) to a party ignorant of the truth (4) with intention that the latter act upon it 
and (5) the party must have been induced to act upon it.  (See 7 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (1974 ed.), 
Equity § 132, p. 5352, and cases cited therein.)  “Where one of these elements is missing there can be no 
estoppel.”  (California School Employees Assn. v. Jefferson Elementary School District (1975) 45 Cal.App.3d 
668, 692.)  Here, the evidence failed to establish that district personnel made intentional misrepresentations to 
respondents.   

 
7Shoban v. Board of Trustees of the Desert Center Unified School District (1969) 276 Cal.App.2d 

534, 544 [estoppel should not be invoked against the government where to do so would be harmful to a 
specific public policy or public interest]; Fleice v. Chualar Union Elementary School District (1988) 206 
Cal.App.3d 886, 893 [estoppel cannot be invoked to contravene statutory provisions that define an 
agency’s powers].  Application of equitable estoppel in the instant case would defeat the Board’s statutory 
authority to define skipping criteria and would provide respondents with greater rights than other 
employees.   

 

4

Other Matters 
 

district and of its pupils. 

11. 

The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 

 
12.  With the exception of the teachers who have been prejudiced by the district’s 
improper skipping, as described in Factual Findings 6, 7, and 9, no permanent employee is 
being terminated while any junior employee is being retained to render a service which the 
permanent employee is certificated and competent to perform. 

 
13.  Any contentions raised by respondents and not discussed above have been 

found to be without merit and are hereby rejected. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
 
The  services  identified  in  Attachment  B  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that 
may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision 
to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  complies  with  the  guidelines  set  forth  in 
Education  Code  section  44955.    The  board’s  decision  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious, 
and was a proper exercise of its discretion.   
 
 
issue final layoff notices to Evelyn Chan, Rodney Jones, Christine Illochi, Sharon Jeffery, 
Dana Lee Mcintyre, Jessica Sawczuk, Ruby Simmons, Yolanda Young, Wesley Jacques, 
Sylvester Saunders, Joan Adams, Catherine Borquez, Terri Barr, Susanna Mori, Deborah 
Gordon, Diana MacDonald, Anne Hamilton, and Armando Florez (for 0.6 FTE).8  
 

Based upon the matters set forth in Factual Finding 4, cause does not exist to 

2. 

3. 

Based upon the matters set forth in Factual Findings 6, 7 and 9, it was 

established that the district impermissibly broadened the scope of the skipping criteria 
contained in Resolution No. 0910-0159 when it skipped employees who possessed English 
learner authorizations other than CLAD or BCLAD certifications.  Cause, therefore, exists to 
require the district to identify the most senior employees who have been prejudiced by the 
district’s invalid skips.  Cause does not exist to issue final layoff notices to these employees. 
 
 
services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to the remaining 
respondents identified in Attachment A, that their services will not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year.  The cause relates to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof 
within the meaning of section 44949. 

Cause exists because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of 

4. 

                                                

8  Florez may be issued a final layoff notice for 0.4 FTE. 

 

5

 

  

 

 

ORDER 

1. 

The Accusation is dismissed as to Evelyn Chan, Rodney Jones, Christine 
Illochi, Sharon Jeffery, Dana Lee Mcintyre, Jessica Sawczuk, Ruby Simmons, Yolanda 
Young, Wesley Jacques, Sylvester Saunders, Joan Adams, Catherine Borquez, Terri Barr, 
Susanna Mori, Deborah Gordon, Diana MacDonald, Anne Hamilton, and Armando Florez 
(for 0.6 FTE) 
 

2. 

The district shall identify the most senior employees who were prejudiced by 

the district’s invalid skips, as set forth in Legal Conclusion 3.   The district may not issue 
final layoff notices as to these employees.  The Accusation as to these employees is 
dismissed.  
 

3. 

Notice may be given to the remaining respondents identified in Attachment A, 

that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the 
reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.   
 
 
  
 Dated:  
 
 

May 6, 2010 

________________________________ 
DIANE SCHNEIDER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

6

