 
BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF  
SARATOGA UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT  
COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA, CALIFORNIA 

 
 
OAH No. 2010020462 

 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against 
Certificated Employees: 
 
SHEILA CHAKO et al., 
 
 
 
 
 

       Respondents. 

 

 

John R. Yeh, Attorney at Law, Dannis Wolliver Kelley, represented complainant 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 
 
Administrative Law Judge Melissa G. Crowell, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Saratoga, California, on April 26 and May 3, 
2010. 
 
 
Lane Weiss, Superintendent of the Saratoga Union School District. 
 
 
are listed on Attachment A.  
 
 
  

Christopher E. Schumb, Attorney at Law, represented all respondents whose names 

The matter was submitted for decision on May 3, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Lane Weiss made the accusation in his official capacity of Superintendent of 

 
 
the Saratoga Union School District.  
 
 
Respondents listed on Attachment A are certificated employees of the district.  
The district rescinded the March 15 notice it issued to Linda Rosiak.  The accusation against 
her will be dismissed.   
 
 
On March 9, 2010, the Governing Board of the Saratoga Union School District 
adopted Resolution No. 09/10-15.  The Board resolved to reduce or discontinue the particular 
kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year, and directed Superintendent Weiss to give 
notice to the certificated employees whose positions would be affected. 

3. 

-1-  

 

 

4. 

5. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

      Number of Full-Time Equivalencies 

In its resolution, the board resolved to reduce or discontinue the following 

On or about March 11, 2010, the superintendent gave written notice to 
respondents that, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, it was being 
recommended that their services would be reduced or eliminated for the 2010-2011 school 
year.  Respondents filed timely requests for hearing.  The district served an accusation on 
each respondent who requested a hearing.  Each respondent filed a notice of defense.  The 
parties stipulated that the district has complied with the requirements of Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
 
particular kinds of services:  
 
Particular Kinds of Services  
 
 
First Grade 
 
 
 
Second Grade  
 
 
Fourth Grade   
 
 
 
Fifth Grade 
 
 
School Counselor 
 
 
Computer Teacher/Tech Support  
 
 
 
Math Coach 
 
 
 
 
Dean 
 
 
 
 
 
Speech Arts 
 
 
 
Study Hall 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tutorial Prep   
 
Instructional Media Specialist (Categorical) 
 
 
 
Librarian (Categorical) 
 
 
 
Music  (Categorical)   
Science (Categorical)  
 
 
 
Silicon Valley New Teacher Project Mentor (Categorical) 
 
 
 
 
It was stipulated that the board’s PKS resolution contains an error regarding the 
amount of the reduction of Study Hall and Speech Arts services.  Each of these services is a 
one semester class taught by one teacher; they therefore jointly constitute only a .17 FTE 
position.  The district will effectuate the board’s PKS resolution by reducing these services 
jointly at the level of a .17 FTE position.  The net effect is that 14.34 FTE positions are being 
reduced or eliminated by the board’s PKS resolution. 
 
 
services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  No service is being reduced below a mandated level.   

1.0 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
0.50 
0.17 
0.17 
0.17 
1.0 
1.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.50 

The services set forth in the board’s PKS resolution are particular kinds of 

          14.51 FTE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Total:   

 
 
 
 
 

6. 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-2-  

7. 

The reductions were based on the district’s financial situation.  The district is a 

 
Basic Aid district, meaning that its funding comes primarily through property tax revenues, 
although the district also receives some of its funding through the federal government, the 
state government and the Saratoga Education Foundation.  The district has been operating in 
a budget deficit for a number of years.  It expects to receive less funding for next year but 
the amount of the reduction is uncertain at this time.  It also expects that its expenses will 
increase.  Considering all of this, the reductions are in the interest of the schools and their 
pupils.   
 

8. 

The board established by separate resolution criteria for determining the order 
of termination among certificated employees who have the same seniority date.  The criteria 
were applied to certificated employees who share the same seniority date in 2006, 2007 and 
2008.  No issues were identified with respect to application of the tie-breaking criteria to 
respondents.  
 
9. 
 
10. 

The district will take into account all positively assured attrition prior to 

The district has released all temporary employees.  

 

 
issuing the final notices.  
 

11. 

The district has a number of probationary employees who have greater 

seniority than some of its permanent employees.  In order to effectuate the PKS resolution 
reductions, services of probationary employees must be reduced or eliminated before 
services of permanent employees may be reduced or eliminated.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, 
subd. (b).)    
 

Challenges to 2006 Seniority Dates  
 

12.  A certificated employee’s seniority begins with the date he or she “first 

rendered paid service in a probationary position.”  (Ed. Code, § 44845.)    

Respondent Eric Witter has a seniority date of August 24, 2006, which 

corresponds with the first day of school for the 2006-2007 school year.  The district has 
given Witter two seniority dates.  He has a seniority date of August 24, 2006, for his .5 FTE 
teaching position, and a seniority date of August 7, 2006, for his .5 FTE administrative 
position, which is being eliminated by the PKS resolution.  The parties agree that his .5 FTE 
Dean position is a school site administrator position.   

 
The district has properly assigned respondent Witter a seniority date of August 24, 

2006, for his teaching position.  Pursuant to Education Code section 44956.5 the most credit 
towards seniority respondent Witter is entitled to for his administrative service is three years, 
which is less than the seniority he has as a teacher.   

 
13. 

 

-3-  

14. 

Respondent Lori Chaykin is an elementary teacher with a seniority date of 
August 24, 2006.  She attended a New Teacher Orientation on August 18, 2006.  She was 
told by someone that attendance at the orientation was mandatory for new teachers to the 
district, and she changed her vacation plans in order to attend.  She does not remember how 
she was compensated for her attendance, either by way of stipend or by credit on the salary 
schedule for professional development.   

 
Respondent Chaykin has not established that she is entitled to an earlier seniority date 
by reason of attending the New Teacher Orientation before the start of the 2006-2007 school 
year.  It was not established that attendance at the New Teacher Orientation was mandatory 
in the sense of there being negative consequences for failing to attend.  The district did not 
consider participation to be mandatory, and that was reflected in the letter the district sent to 
new employees inviting them to attend the orientation.  The district has correctly assigned 
respondent Chaykin a seniority date of August 24, 2006, as that is the date on which she first 
rendered paid service to the district in a probationary position. 
 

15. 

Respondents Sheila Chako, Sheridan Kurtz-Fenster, and Suzanne Ross are 
elementary teachers with seniority dates of August 24, 2006.  Each of these teachers had a 
preliminary teaching credential when first hired into the district.  As a part of their employment 
contract with the district, they were required to participate in the Silicon Valley New Teacher 
Project, also known as Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment (BTSA) program for two 
years.   
 
An orientation meeting for the program was held on August 17, 2006.  Respondents 

Chako, Kurtz-Fenster, and Ross argue that their seniority date should be advanced to 
August 17, 2006, because of their attendance at this meeting.  Each of these teachers was 
under the impression that attendance at the orientation meeting was mandatory.  Each was 
compensated for her attendance, either by way of stipend or by way of credit on the salary 
schedule for professional development.   

 
 
Respondents Chako, Kurtz-Fenster, and Ross have not established that they are 
entitled to an earlier seniority date by reason of their attendance at this orientation meeting.  
There is no question that these teachers were led to believe that their attendance at this 
meeting was important.  But, it was not established that attendance was mandatory in the 
sense of there being negative consequences for failing to attend.  But even if this were a 
mandatory meeting, it does not alter that they first rendered paid service to the district in a 
probationary position on August 24, 2006. 

Challenges to 2007 Seniority Dates  

Eveonne Lockhart, Shannon McQuaide and Sandra McConnell share the same 

seniority date of August 20, 2007, which corresponds with the first day of school for the 
2007-2008 school year.   

 
16. 

 

 

-4-  

17. 

Respondent McConnell was required to participate in the BTSA program upon 

her employment with the district for the 2007-2008 school year.  She attended the BTSA 
orientation meeting on August 16, 2007, which she argues, entitles her to have her seniority 
date advanced.  
 
Respondent McConnell received a stipend for her attendance at the meeting.  She also 

understood that her attendance at this meeting was mandatory.  She was never told that she 
had the option to reschedule the orientation meeting.    

 
Respondent McConnell has not established that she is entitled to advance her 

 
seniority date.  There is no question that she was led to believe that her attendance at this 
meeting was important.  But, it was not established that attendance was mandatory in the 
sense of there being negative consequences for failing to attend.  But even if this were a 
mandatory meeting, it does not alter that she first rendered paid service to the district in a 
probationary position on August 20, 2007.  

 
18. 

Respondent Lockhart was a new teacher to the district for the 2007-2008 
school year.  She attended the New Teacher Orientation on August 17, 2007, which, she 
argues, entitles her to have her seniority date advanced. 

 
Respondent Lockhart understood from district personnel that her attendance at this 

meeting was mandatory.  She received either a stipend or professional development credit on 
the salary schedule.   

 
Respondent Lockhart has not established that she is entitled to advance her seniority 
 
date.  There is no question that she was led to believe that her attendance at this meeting was 
important.  But, it was not established that attendance was mandatory in the sense of there 
being negative consequences for failing to attend.  But even if this were a mandatory 
meeting, it does not alter that she first rendered paid service to the district in a probationary 
position on August 20, 2007.  
 
Challenges to Bumping 

 
19.  Mardi Kambish is a senior teacher in the district with a seniority date of 
August 30, 1990.  She has a clear standard elementary credential and a supplementary 
authorization in Math.  Kambish holds a 1.0 FTE position with the district.  By virtue of her 
credentials, Kambish may teach Math or any position which requires a multiple subject 
credential. 

 
For the 2009-2010 school year, Kambish was assigned to be the Math Coach position, 
a position which is being eliminated by the PKS resolution.  The district retained Kambish’s 
Math position for this year, and “back-filled” it by using a temporary teacher.  The district 
has released the temporary teacher, and so that position is vacant.  

 

-5-  

The district has not decided where it will assign Kambish for 2010-2011 school year, 
and it will not make that decision until May.  The district thus proposes that it may lay off an 
elementary teacher junior to Kambish in order to have an elementary teaching position in 
which it can assign Kambish should it decide to do that.  The evidence establishes that the 
district does not have any other permanent or probationary teacher in mind to fill its vacant 
Math position.  Superintendent Weiss wants to keep all options open for filling the vacant 
Math position.  The district was very satisfied with their temporary math teachers this year.   

 
The district had not established a legal basis which would allow it to keep two 
positions open for one teacher whose position has been eliminated by a PKS resolution.  The 
net effect of the district’s decision not to make an assignment of Kambish is to reduce one 
elementary teacher position more than that which is authorized by, or necessary to effectuate, 
the PKS resolution.  The district is not permitted to do this.  The district may not issue a final 
notice to an elementary teacher junior to Kambish in order to effectuate the reduction in 
Math Coach services.  

 
20.  Other senior teachers were impacted by the PKS resolution.  The district 

proposes to place senior teachers into elementary teaching positions, thus bumping junior 
teachers who are currently occupying those positions.  Some of these more senior teachers do 
not have a CLAD, BCLAD, or other similar certificate.  Respondents argue that these senior 
teachers cannot bump into their positions because they have English Language Learners1 in 
their classrooms and a CLAD certificate is required in order to teach in those positions.2  In 
other words, respondents argue that these senior teachers are not credentialed and competent 
to teach in their positions.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)  The contention is without merit.  

 
It is not a requirement of the district for each of its elementary teachers to have a CLAD 

or similar certificate.  As established through the testimony of Assistant Superintendent of 
Education Services Elizabeth Polito, the district does have English Language Learners in all 
of its schools, but the percentage of students is not large in any school.  Each of the three 
elementary schools has some English Language Learners, but not each class in each school has 
them.  The greatest number of classes with English Language Learners are in Kindergarten, 
First and Second Grades.  The children tend to test out after second grade, although there are 
students who do not, and there are older students who enter the district that are English 
Language Learners.   

 
In short, not all of the classes offered by the district require teachers with a CLAD 

certificate.  The district has determined that it has a sufficient number of teachers with a 

                                                 
1  An English Language Learner is defined in Education Code section 306, subdivision (a), as: 
 
“’English Learner’ means a child who does not speak English or whose native language is not English 
and who is not currently able to perform ordinary classroom work in English, also known as a Limited 
English Proficiency or LEP child.”   
 
 
CLAD certificate, or its equivalent.   

2  It is not disputed that English Language Learners must be taught by a teacher possessing a 

-6-  

 
21. 

 

 
22. 

 
25. 

 
26. 

CLAD certificate that it can provide instruction to its English Language Learners next school 
year.  As such, the district is correctly following the requirements of Education Code section 
44955 in retaining its senior teachers without CLAD certificates, and noticing its more junior 
teachers for layoff.  

The PKS resolution requires a 2.0 FTE reduction in Music.  One music teacher 

will be resigning at the end of the school year.  The district’s evidence shows that it can 
satisfy the 2.0 FTE reduction and still retain a vacant .17 FTE music position.  The most 
senior teacher who is credentialed and competent to teach Music is respondent Witter.  He is 
entitled to bump into this .17 FTE Music position.  

Reduction of Science  

The PKS resolution requires the elimination of 1.0 FTE Science.  The district 

provided conflicting evidence regarding which position would be reduced.  There was 
testimony that the position held by respondent McQuaide, 7th Grade Science, would be 
eliminated.  There was testimony that .5 FTE of the position held by respondent Lockhart, 
6th Grade Science, would be eliminated.  The PKS resolution authorizes the district to layoff 
the equivalent of only 1 FTE Science position.  The district must make its determination of 
how to effectuate the 1.0 FTE Science reduction before it issues the final notices.  There is 
no evidence that the district will do otherwise.  

 
Other Matters 
 
Respondents argue that the district has not complied with the requirements for 
 
an ADA layoff.  It was not established by competent evidence that the district has conducted 
anything other than a PKS layoff.  
 

23. 

24.  All contentions made by respondents not specifically addressed above are 

found to be without merit and are rejected.   

Except as stated above, no permanent employee is being terminated while a 

permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service 
which the permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.  

The cause for the reduction in particular kinds of services relates to the welfare 

of the schools and the pupils thereof. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

 
 
44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been 
provided as required. 
 

-7-  

3. 

2. 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 2, there is no cause pursuant to 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 19, there is no cause pursuant to 

 
Education Code section 44955 to give final notice to respondent Rosiak.   
 
 
Education Code section 44955 to lay off a certificated employee holding a 1.0 FTE elementary 
teaching position in order to effectuate the PKS resolution reduction of 1.0 FTE Math Coach.   
 
 
section 44955 to give notice to certificated employees occupying 14.34 FTE positions that 
their services will be reduced or eliminated for the 2010-2011 school year.  This cause relates 
solely to welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44949.  
 

Cause exists because of the reduction of services pursuant to Education Code 

4. 

2. 

1. 

ORDER  
 
The accusation against respondent Linda Rosiak is dismissed.  

Except as set forth above, notice may be given to certificated employees 

 
 
 
occupying 14.34 full-time equivalent positions that their services will be reduced or 
eliminated for the 2010-2011 school year.   
 
 
DATED:  May 11, 2010 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
MELISSA G. CROWELL 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 

-8-  

 

 
 

 
EXHIBIT A 

Sheila Chako         
Lori Chaykin    

List of Respondents: 
 
1. 
2. 
3.  Harrison Dill         
4.  Margaret Ebner   
Sheridan Kurtz-Fenster   
5. 
6. 
Susan Jacobs       
7.  Kristi Kirwan        
8. 
9. 
10.  Shannon McQuaide      
11.  Christie Nielsen            
12.  Suzanne Ross 
13.  Amy Kathleen Schelhorse 
14.  Dustin Wells 
15.  Debra Willheim 
16.  Eric Witter 
17.  Judy Wolthausen 
 

Eveonne Lockhart      
Sandra McConnell     

  

