BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
CENTRALIA SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 
 
      
 
OAH Case No. 2010020639 
 
 

In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
Carrie Barron and Other Certificated 
Employees of the Centralia School District, 
 

                                                Respondents. 
 

 
 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge, Sophie C. Agopian, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
heard this matter on April 22, 2010, in Buena Park, California. 
 
 
Sharon J. Ormond, Attorney at Law, represented Dr. Douglas Staine (Staine), the 
Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, of the Centralia School District (District). 
 
 
Kent Morizawa, Esq. represented 13 certificated employees of the District, all of 
whom were present at the hearing.  One certificated employee, Carrie Barron, did not appear 
at the hearing and was not represented by counsel.  The hearing proceeded in her absence.  
The 14 certificated employees are respondents in this matter (Respondents).1
 
Prior to the hearing, the District dismissed the Accusation against certificated 
 
employee Linda Matlock, who concurrently withdrew her request for a hearing.  Dr. Matlock 
was, therefore, not present at the hearing, and is not a respondent in this case. 
 
 

Evidence was received and the matter was submitted for decision on April 22, 2010. 

 
 
 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
1. 

2. 

Assistant Superintendent Staine filed the Accusations in his official capacity. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

                                                

1 Carrie Barron, Kelly Calvert, Shelly Coveney, Elizabeth Cruz, Amy Edmundson, 

Desiree Howden, Leigh Logan, Patricia McClure, Karina Montes, Shannon Nelson, Theresa 
Ogawa, Robin St. Hilaire, Olivia Swinth and Judy Chhouk are Respondents. 

3. 

On February 23, 2010, the Governing Board of the District (Board) adopted 

Resolution No. 1362 (Resolution) and determined to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
certificated services (PKS) 2 for the 2010-2011 school year, as follows: 
 

Certificated Services 

 
Reduce K-6 Classroom Teaching Services 
Reduce K-6 SDC – Mild/Moderate Teaching  
Services 
Reduce Nursing Services 
Reduce Deaf and Hard of Hearing Teaching 
Services 
Reduce Resource Specialist Teaching Services 
Reduce Speech and Language Pathology 
Services 
Reduce Counseling Services 
Reduce Social Worker Services 
Reduce Principal Services 
Discontinue EL/Categorical Program 
Coordinator Services 
Discontinue Assistant Superintendent Student 
Services 
 
Total Certificated Positions 
 

 

 

FTEs

12.0 FTEs 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

3.0 FTE 
3.0 FTE 
2.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

 
27.0 FTEs 

4. 

The Board further determined that the reduction of such services made it 

 
necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District by a 
corresponding number of full-time equivalent (FTE) positions prior to the ensuing school 
year.  By the Resolution, the Board authorized the District Superintendent or designee to 
implement reduction in force proceedings.  The Resolution also set forth criteria to determine 
seniority among certificated employees with the same first date of paid service, i.e. “tie-
breaking criteria.”   
 
 
notified the Board and Respondents of the recommendation that Respondents’ services will 
not be required for the 2010-2011 school year, and stating the reasons therefor.  The notices 
recommending their lay-off are hereinafter referred to as “lay-off” notices, and were served  
 
 
 
                                                

The District Superintendent, Dr. Diane Scheerhorn, timely and properly 

5. 

2 Although Assistant Superintendent Staine testified that declining enrollment was a 

factor in the Board’s consideration for implementing a lay-off, the Board’s decision to 
implement a lay-off was primarily based upon a reduction and/or discontinuance of PKS. 

 

2

9. 

8. 

7. 

6. 

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 

Respondents timely requested a hearing and filed a notice of defense in 

The Board’s decision to reduce and discontinue the services set forth in 

The Board’s decision to reduce and discontinue such services was related to 

upon individual Respondents on March 8, 2010.  The lay-off notices included all necessary 
jurisdictional documents, including the Accusation and tie-breaking criteria adopted by the 
Board.3  
  
 
response to the Accusation.4
 
 
 
 
Factual Finding 3 was not arbitrary or capricious and constitutes a proper exercise of the 
Board’s discretion.  The certificated services identified in Factual Finding 3 are “particular 
kinds of services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education 
Code section 44955.5
 
 
the needs and welfare of the District and its pupils.  The District consists of nine K-6 
elementary schools and serves approximately 4,550 students.  The District expects its 
revenue to decrease substantially from the present school year to the next school year.  The 
District also has declining enrollment which contributes to its revenue reduction.  The 
District established that its reduction of the PKS identified in Factual Finding 3, including 
the reduction in special education services will not result in services being reduced below 
state mandates.  
 
To determine the order of termination or lay-off, the District properly created a 
 
seniority list by determining the first date of paid service as a probationary employee of each 
certificated employee and applying the Board-adopted “tie-breaking” criteria when 
necessary. 
 
 
 
 
                                                

10. 

3 One of the 14 Respondents, Judy Chhouk, received a “precautionary lay-off notice” 
although her position on the seniority list indicated that she was not subject to lay-off.  The 
District issued the precautionary notice to permit Ms. Chhouk’s participation in the hearing 
in the event that a challenge to the District’s implementation of the lay-off resulted in a 
change in the order of termination.  The District ultimately dismissed the Accusation against 
Ms. Chhouk for the reason set forth in Factual Finding 12. 

 
4 Factual Findings 1 through 6 are established by reason of the parties’ stipulation to 

paragraphs 1 through 7 in the Accusation. 

 
5 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 
 

 

3

11. 

If more than one employee shared a “first date of paid service,” the District applied 

Certificated employees’ “first date of paid service” was based upon information 
 
obtained from the employees, on file with the county office of education, contained in 
personnel files, and verified with the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing.  
None of Respondents disputed their “first date of paid service” as determined by the District. 
 
 
the tie-breaking criteria adopted by the Board.  The tie-breaking criteria included the type of 
credential held by the employee, any English language development certifications or 
authorizations, advanced degrees held and years of service with the District.  All 
Respondents were notified of the tie-breaking criteria at the time they were issued the lay-off 
notices on March 8, 2010.  The tie-breaking criteria were based on the needs of the District 
and its students, and were correctly applied to determine the order of lay-off.  Respondents 
did not dispute the District’s application of the tie-breaking criteria. 
 
 The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to Respondents to 
 
render a service which Respondents are certificated and competent to render.  In determining 
the order of lay-off, the District permitted senior employees, whose positions are subject to 
lay-off, to “bump” into positions held by junior employees, as long as the senior employee 
was certificated and competent to render such service.  The District properly considered the 
“credential and competency” information available to it prior to March 15, 2010, in 
determining which senior teachers were entitled to bump junior teachers.   
 
 
Respondent Olivia Swinth notified the District in early April 2010, that in addition to 
her Education Specialist – Mild/Moderate credential, she possessed an “autism certification,” 
which she requested that the District consider in determining whether she is entitled to bump 
a more junior special education teacher.  The District properly declined to consider the 
additional information because it was not provided to the District in a timely manner.  The 
lay-off statute prescribes strict timelines by which school districts must abide to ensure that 
affected teachers are notified of their prospective employment status, and are afforded due 
process well before the ensuing school year.  (Ed. Code § 44949.)  The March 15 deadline to 
notify affected teachers is jurisdictional and, therefore, school districts must strictly adhere to 
it in order to effectively enforce a lay-off.  Courts have recognized early on that school 
districts would be prejudiced if they were required to consider credentials or authorizations 
obtained after lay-off notices are issued.  (Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App. 
3d 689, 698.)  The reasoning is that after the March 15 deadline passes, it is too late for the 
school district to notify other employees of their potential nonreemployment.  Ongoing 
consideration of credentialing information would unreasonably restrict a school district’s 
ability to implement an economic lay-off. 
 
 
In this case, even if the District was required to consider Respondent Swinth’s autism 
certification after the March 15 deadline, it was not established that the certification entitles 
her to bump a more junior employee. 
 
 
 

 

4

12. 

In determining the number of lay-off notices to issue, the District considered 
 
all assured and/or known attrition at the time it issued the notices, including attrition related 
to resignations and retirements.  Based upon attrition known as of April 20, 2010, the District 
agreed to immediately dismiss the Accusations against three Respondents, Desiree Howden, 
Shannon Nelson, and Judy Chhouk.6  
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

 
1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction for this matter was established pursuant to sections 44949 and 

 
44955, by reason of Finding Findings 1 through 7. 
 
 
A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App. 3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 
 
under sections 44949 and 44955 because the services identified in the Board’s Resolution are 
particular kinds of services that can be reduced or eliminated within the meaning of section 
44955, and because the District established that the reduction of such services is related to 
the welfare of its schools and students pursuant to section 44949, subdivision (c)(3).  (Factual 
Findings 8 and 9.) 
 
 
 

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 

Section 44955, subdivision (b), further provides that: 

4. 

3. 

[T]he services of no permanent employee may be terminated… while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained 
to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and 
competent to render. 
 
[¶]…[¶] 
 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 
same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely 
on the basis of needs of the district and the students thereof. 
 
 

 

 
                                                

6 The Accusation against Leanna Mathias, who was not a Respondent in this matter, 

was also dismissed due to attrition as of April 20, 2010.  Ms. Mathias received 
“precautionary notice” regarding her lay-off, but did not request a hearing. 

 

5

5. 

The District properly developed and applied tie-breaking criteria to determine the 

Cause exists to sustain the Accusations against 11 Respondents because the 
 
District complied with the requirements of section 44955, subdivision (b), with respect to 
such Respondents, as set forth in Factual Findings 10 through 12, in that: 
 
 
correct order of termination among employees with the same seniority date; and  
 
 
service which a more senior Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
Calvert, Shelly Coveney, Elizabeth Cruz, Amy Edmundson, Leigh Logan, Patricia McClure, 
Karina Montes, Theresa Ogawa, Robin St. Hilaire, and Olivia Swinth. 
 
 

The District ensured that no junior certificated employee will be retained to render a 

Cause, therefore, exists to terminate the services of Carrie Barron, Kelly 

6. 

Notice may be given to the 11 Respondents identified in Legal Conclusion 6 that their 

The Accusations against Respondents Desiree Howden, Shannon Nelson, and Judy 

ORDER 
 

 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Chhouk are dismissed.  
 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

April 28, 2010 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

__________________________________ 
 
 
 

SOPHIE C. AGOPIAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

6

