BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
WILLOWS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF GLENN 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 
 
DIANNA ABOLD, LAUREN ALBERT, 
CATHRYN FLEMING, and MELANIE  
PERRIN, 
 
                                                        Respondents.
 
 

 

 
 
 
    OAH No. 2010031120 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Dian M. Vorters, Office of 

 
 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 30, 2010, in Willows, California. 
 

Matt Juhl-Darlington, Attorney at Law,1 represented complainant, Steve Olmos, 

Ted Lindstrom, Attorney at Law,2 represented respondents who are identified in 

Ed.D., Superintendent, Willows Unified School District. 
 
 
Appendix A, attached. 
 

The matter was submitted on April 30, 2010. 

 
 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
General Findings Concerning Statutory Requirements 
 
 
 

Respondents are certificated district employees. 

1. 

                                                

Chico, California  95928. 

Sacramento, California  95833-9773. 

 

1 Matt Juhl-Darlington, Attorney at Law, Matt Juhl-Darlington & Associates, 555 Main Street, Suite 120, 

 
2 Ted Lindstrom, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp Curtis & Price, LLP, 1331 Garden Highway, Suite 300, 

1

2. 

On March 4, 2010, the governing board of the district resolved to reduce or 

discontinue particular kinds of services.  To that end, the board adopted Resolution 2009-10-
14 (Layoff Resolution).  Within the meaning of Code section 44955, the services are 
“particular kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce or 
discontinue these services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of 
discretion. 
 

3. 

Not later than March 15, 2009, the superintendent of the district caused the 

5. 

4. 

A Notice of Non-reemployment was delivered to each respondent, by personal 

governing board of the district and respondents to be notified in writing of his 
recommendation that preliminary notice be given respondents, pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, that the district would not require their services for the 2010-2011 
school year.  The notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.  In recommending 
reductions in certificated staff, the superintendent considered the district’s declining student 
enrollment and the qualified condition of the district’s budget.  The recommendation was not 
related to respondents’ performance as certificated employees. 
 
 
delivery and by depositing the notice in the United States mail, registered, postage prepaid, 
and addressed to respondents’ last known address. 
 
 
The notice advised each respondent of the following:  She/he had a right to a 
hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, she/he had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing 
to the person sending the notice.  The request had to be delivered by a specified date, which 
was a date that was not less than seven days after the notice of termination was served.3  And 
the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 
 
Respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to determine whether 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  An accusation was timely 
served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice that, if they were going to request a 
hearing, they were required to file a Notice of Defense within five days after being served 
with the accusation.4  Respondents filed timely notices of defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
Positively Assured Attrition 
 
 
resignations and retirements which occur during the “computation period.”  (Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School Dist. (1981) 116 
                                                

The board must allow for positively assured attrition such as voluntary 

6. 

7. 

3 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

4 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a Notice 
of Defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
reduction in force cases, the Notice of Defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

 

2

8. 

The governing board considered all positively assured attrition which has 

Cal.App.3d 831, 847.)   The district must “consider evidence of positively assured attrition, 
involuntary retirements for the [upcoming] school year which were known to the board when 
it made its preliminary determination on 15 March … and when it made its final 
determination on 15 May.”  (Lewin v. Bd. of Trustees of Pasadena Unified School Dist. 
(1976) 62 Cal.App.3d 977, 983.) 
 
 
occurred to date, that is, all deaths, resignations, retirements, and additional attrition which 
may occur before the start of the 2010/2011 school year in reducing these services and but 
for the attrition already assured and the attrition anticipated would have found it necessary to 
reduce additional kinds of service.  
 
 
(reducing her assignment from 1.0 FTE to 0.66 FTE), had been rescinded and her 1.0 FTE 
position would be fully reinstated at Willows Intermediate School 
 
 
10.  On April 23, 2010, the district notified Melanie Perrin that her notice of layoff 
for her Elementary Teaching position (1.0 FTE), had been partially rescinded and she would 
be reassigned to Willows Community High School at 0.66 FTE. 
 
Services the District Intends to Reduce or Discontinue 
 

On April 23, 2010, the district notified Cathryn Fleming that her notice 

9. 

11. 

The governing board of the district determined, in the Layoff Resolution, that  

because particular kinds of services were to be reduced or eliminated, it was necessary to 
decrease the number of permanent employees in the district by 7.60 full-time equivalents 
(FTE).  The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to reduce 
or discontinue are: 
 

Counseling Positions
Counseling at Willows Elementary, Willows Intermediate, 
Willows High School, Willows Community High School 

Teaching Positions 
Kindergarten at Murdock Elementary 
Multiple Subject at Murdock Elementary 
Physical Education (PE) at Murdock Elementary 
Willows Community Day School, K-6 Grades 
Willows Intermediate School 
Willows Community Day, 7-12 Grades, 
Willows Continuation High School  
 

         

Total Certificated Reductions 

 

 

 

2.6  FTE 

1.0  FTE 
  1.0  FTE 
  1.0  FTE 

               1.0  FTE 

          1.0 FTE 
 
 
          7.6 FTE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

3

13. 

12. 

Skipping describes the process by which the district may deviate from the 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), the governing 

Use of Tie-Breaking Criteria Based on the Current Needs of the District and Students 
 
 
board of the district established, in Resolution 2009-10-13 (Tie-Breaking Resolution), 
criteria for determining the order of termination as among employees who first rendered paid 
service on the same day.  The board authorized that in the event of a tie in seniority dates, the 
“order of employment will be based solely on the needs of the District and the students 
thereof.” 
 
Skipping/Bumping/Seniority 
 
 
order of seniority when there is an identified need for a particular type of service, there is a 
junior employee who is uniquely qualified to provide that service or teach a subject, and 
there is no senior employee who is certificated and competent to provide the service.  (Ed. 
Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).)  The district employed skipping to achieve a proper list of 
employees to receive layoff notices. 
 
 
The district determined it was necessary to retain the services of certificated 
employees who possess a BCLAD (Bilingual, Cross-cultural, Language, And Academic 
Development) authorization or a Mathematics Credential and/or Certification and/or 
Supplement.  The board initially included possession of a CLAD (Cross-cultural, Language, 
and Academic Development) authorization as a skipping criteria.  Dr. Olmos testified that 
the board subsequently amended the Layoff Resolution by deleting CLAD authorization as a 
skipping criteria.  He believes a BCLAD authorization is important to give non-English 
speaking students every opportunity to learn English and facilitate communication with 
parents.  He believes this cannot be done without bi-lingual teachers. 
 
 
employees who are more senior and who are competent to perform a particular kind of 
service or teach a particular subject.  The district employed bumping to achieve a proper list 
of employees to receive layoff notices. 
 
 
Among the teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority in the district 
gives a greater legal entitlement to a position.  Seniority is defined as the date upon which an 
employee first rendered paid services in a probationary position.  (Ed. Code, § 44845.) 
 

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school district.  

Bumping describes the process by which the district identifies those 

14. 

15. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides that no senior employee may 

be terminated while any less senior employee is retained to render a service which the more 
senior permanent employee is “certificated and competent” to render.  “It [is] the district’s 
obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine whether any permanent 
employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic layoff possess[es] the 
seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned to another position.”   
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 137.) 

 

4

16. 

18. 

To reduce 1.0 FTE K-5 Kindergarten Teaching Position, the district skipped 

17.  At the elementary school level, the governing board determined it was 

Superintendent Olmos testified that the district maintains a seniority list of all 
certificated employees.  The seniority list was distributed to all employees prior to the March 
4, 2010 board meeting.  Employees were advised to review and update the list.  All valid 
corrections and updates were incorporated into the final seniority listed that was used to 
identify teachers for layoff.  This final seniority list was adopted by the board on March 4, 
2010, in the Tie-Breaking Resolution. 
 
Reduction of Positions at Murdock Elementary School 
 
 
necessary to reduce 1.0 FTE Kindergarten teaching position, 1.0 FTE Multiple Subject 
teaching position, and 1.0 FTE Physical Education (PE) teaching position for a total of 3.0 
FTE at Murdock Elementary School.  (Factual Finding 11.)  The district implemented the 
reduction by first looking at the seniority chart and identifying which employees held 
relevant credentials.  Tie-breaking procedures were implemented as necessary between those 
employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  Bumping was employed to 
ensure that the more senior teachers, certificated and competent to render a particular kind of 
service, were retained over those with less seniority.   
 
 
Cristina Cameron with a seniority date of August 18, 2003, because she possessed a 
BCLAD.  Wendy Farmworth had seniority date of August 19, 2002.  She was reassigned to 
Willows Intermediate School, bumping Cathy Fleming.  Cathy Fleming was reassigned to a 
different grade at Willows Intermediate School, bumping Melanie Perrin.  Ms. Perrin was 
reassigned to Willows Continuation High School, bumping Kim Welch whose position was a 
0.66 FTE assignment. Ms. Welch was the proper recipient of a layoff notice. 
 
 
Maureen Calonico.  She has a seniority date of August 25, 1999, and was assigned to teach 
Kindergarten at Willows Elementary.  She holds a clear standard elementary credential, a 
supplemental social science credential, and a CLAD authorization.  The district has since 
rescinded the notice to Ms. Calonico and she will no longer be reassigned. 
 
 
reassignment to Jack Townley.  He has a seniority date of August 10, 2000, and was assigned 
to teach PE at Murdock Elementary.  Mr. Townley holds a professional clear single subject 
social science credential, a supplementary authorization in introduction to PE and a CLAD 
authorization.  Mr. Townley bumped Lauren Albert.  Ms. Albert has a seniority date of 
August 16, 2004, and teaches history and comparative literature at Willows Intermediate 
School. 
 
 
cannot lawfully eliminate the position.  Respondents cited no authority for this contention.  
“As long as the required services will be provided, the district can properly change the 
manner of their provision and reduce or eliminate the existing particular kind of service used 

Respondents argued that elementary PE is a mandated service and as such, the district 

To reduce 1.0 FTE Multiple Subject Teaching Position, the district noticed 

 To reduce 1.0 FTE PE Teaching Position, the district sent a notice of 

20. 

19. 

 

5

21. 

22. 

To reduce 1.0 FTE Teaching Position, the district sent a notice of reassignment 

to provide them.”  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 640; 
Gallup v. Alta Loma School Dist. (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571, 1585-1586.)  The district may 
properly identify elementary PE as a particular kind of service to be reduced or eliminated. 
 
Reduction of Teaching Positions at Willows Intermediate School (K-6) 
 
 
The governing board determined it was necessary to reduce 1.0 FTE Teaching 
Position at Willows Community Day School, Kindergarten through sixth grades.  The district 
implemented the reduction by first looking at the seniority chart and identifying which 
employees held relevant credentials.  Tie-breaking procedures were implemented as 
necessary between those employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  
Bumping was employed to ensure that the more senior teachers, certificated and competent 
to render a particular kind of service, were retained over those with less seniority. 
 
 
to Mike Buckley.  Mr. Buckley has a seniority date of August 6, 2001, and is currently 
assigned to Willows Community Day School, grades one through six.  He holds a 
professional clear single subject credential in health sciences, a supplementary credential in 
food and nutrition (home economics), a preliminary multiple subject authorization, and a 
CLAD authorization.  He bumped Mike Rutherglen.  Mr. Rutherglen has a seniority date of 
August 28, 2004.  He teaches liberal studies at Willows Community High School, grades 
nine through 12.  Mr. Buckley is more senior and qualified to teach liberal studies at the high 
school level.  Mr. Rutherglen was the proper recipient of a layoff notice. 
 
Reduction of Teaching Positions at Willows Continuation High  School (7-12) 
 
 
Position at Willows Continuation Day School (High School), seventh through 12 grades.  
The district implemented the reduction by first looking at the seniority chart and identifying 
which employees held relevant credentials.  Tie-breaking procedures were implemented as 
necessary between those employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  
Bumping was employed to ensure that the more senior teachers, certificated and competent 
to render a particular kind of service, were retained over those with less seniority. 
 
 
sent a notice of reassignment to Sharon Busler.  Ms. Busler has a seniority date of September 
20, 2004, and is currently assigned to Willows Community Day School, grades seven 
through 12.  She was the proper recipient of a layoff notice. 
 
Reduction of Various Counseling Positions 
 
 
Elementary, Intermediate, and High School levels.  The district implemented the reduction 
by first looking at the seniority chart and identifying which employees held relevant 
credentials.   

The governing board determined it was necessary to reduce 1.0 FTE Teaching 

To reduce 1.0 FTE Continuation High School Teaching Position, the district 

The governing board determined to lay off 2.6 Counseling Positions at the 

24. 

25. 

23. 

 

6

For funding purposes, the district submitted census data to the State Department of 

26.  Dr. Olmos testified that the district’s non-English speaking student population 

The district identified Connie Funke (0.6 FTE), Sarah Wiggett (1.0 FTE), and Amy 
 
Steele (1.0 FTE), as the appropriate school counselors to receive layoff notices.  Ms. Steele 
was reassigned to teach at Willows Elementary.  Ms. Steele bumped Dianna Abold for this 
position. 
 
Issues Concerning Retention of BCLAD Authorized Teachers 
 
 
has grown dramatically in the last ten years.  In 1998, there were only 35 Spanish speaking 
students.  By 2010, the district had over 300 English Language Learners (ELL) who speak 
Spanish (261), Laotian (6), Hmong (36), and Russian.  The majority of ELL students are 
enrolled at Murdock Elementary and comprise 209 of the 644 enrolled elementary students.  
Willows Intermediate has 67 ELL students out of a total of 491 enrolled students.  Willows 
High School has 36 ELL students out of a total of 459 enrolled students.  The numbers tend 
to decline as grade level increases because students are transferred out of the ELL program 
as they become more proficient in English. 
 
 
Education, which shows the district’s highest growth in the Latino student population.  This 
population comprises 47 percent of the children at Murdock Elementary, 43 percent of the 
children at Willows Intermediate, and 36 percent of the children at Willows High School.  It 
is noted that ethnicity and language skills are different demographics. 
 
 
Spanish.  Murdock Elementary School has three teachers with a BCLAD authorization, 
Willow Intermediate has none, and Willows High School has two teachers with a BCLAD 
authorization.  The district also employees six bi-lingual Spanish speaking classroom aides.  
The high school and middle school have one aide each and the remaining four aides are 
located at the elementary school.  The district employs no certified teachers or aides who 
speak Hmong, Laotian, or Russian.  The district is in “program improvement” and as such, 
has implemented an ELD program at every school site.  A teacher funded through Title I is 
assigned to “pull-out” elementary students and work with them on acquiring English. 
 
 
28.  Dr. Olmos agreed that a teacher with a CLAD authorization can deliver 
effective instruction to ELL students.  He stated that possession of a BCLAD is “preferable” 
to a CLAD because being bi-lingual assists teachers in communicating with students and 
parents of ELL students. 
 
 
CLAD authorizations and received layoff notices, though each was more senior to a similarly 
credentialed teacher holding a BCLAD authorization.  These respondents challenged the 
board’s use of a BCLAD authorization as a skipping criteria.  
 
 

The district has a total of five BCLAD teachers, all of whom are bi-lingual in 

Three teachers, Melanie Perrin, Dianna Abold, and Lauren Albert, possess 

a. 
Ms. Perrin has a seniority date of August 18, 2003, and teaches sixth grade at 
Willows Intermediate.  She holds a professional clear multi-subject credential and a 

27. 

29. 

 

7

CLAD authorization.  She has provided instruction to Spanish, Laotian, and Hmong 
language students.  But for the BCLAD provision, Ms. Perrin would have been 
qualified to bump Gricelda Lozano-Trujillo and tie Cristina Cameron. 

 
Ms. Trujillo has a seniority date of October 9, 2006.  She is an ELD (English 
Language Development) teacher at Murdock Elementary School.  She holds a multi-
subject authorization and a BCLAD.  Ms. Cameron has a seniority date of August 18, 
2003 and teachers Kindergarten.  She holds a multi-subject credential, a single subject 
Spanish credential, and a BCLAD. 

Ms. Abold has a seniority date of August 28, 2003 and teaches English, art, 

b. 
and journalism at Willows Intermediate.   She holds a professional clear multiple 
subject credential, a supplemental authorization in English, and a CLAD 
authorization.  She stated that depending on the situation, she utilizes a Spanish 
speaking aid, a Spanish speaking Vice Principal, Ron Bazan, or other teachers.  But 
for the BCLAD provision, Ms. Abold would have been qualified to bump Ms. 
Lozano-Trujillo.  Further, Ms. Abold was bumped by a counselor, Amy Steele, when 
her position was eliminated.  But for the BCLAD provision, Ms. Steele would have 
bumped a different teacher, Eric Owen.  Mr. Owen has a seniority date of August 10, 
2009, and teaches English and history at Willows High School.  He holds single 
subject social science, English, and Spanish credentials and a BCLAD authorization. 

Lauren Albert has a seniority date of August 16, 2004, and teaches history and 

c. 
comparative literature at Willows Intermediate.  She holds a professional clear 
multiple subject credential, a supplementary authorization in science, single subject 
credentials in English and social science, and a CLAD authorization.  She has 
provided instruction to Spanish, Russian, Laotian, and Hmong language students.  
She has utilized bilingual aides to facilitate instruction.  But for the BCLAD 
provision, Ms. Albert would have been qualified to bump Eric Owen and Ms. 
Trujillo.  Ms. Albert has been trained in SDAIE (Specially Designed Academic 
Instruction in English) strategies.  SDAIE is a methodology or set of strategies that 
teachers employ to help English learners understand core subjects (such as social 
studies, science or literature). 

Ms. Perrin, Ms. Abold, and Ms. Albert all teach at Willows Intermediate 

d. 
where there are no BCLAD teachers.  All three have had ELL students of Spanish, 
Russian, Laotian, and Hmong heritage.  All three denied any prior difficulty 
providing competent instruction to or communicating with ELL students or their 
parents.  There is not evidence to the contrary. 

30. 

The Bi-lingual/Bi-cultural Education Act of 1976 (Education Code section 

 
 
52161, et seq.) specifically addresses the provision of instruction to children of limited 
English proficiency.  If the language census indicates that any school within a district has ten 
or more pupils of limited English proficiency with the same primary language in the same 

8

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

32. 

31. 

Tie-breaking criteria to be applied to teachers who first rendered paid service 

In order to meet student needs, the district prepared a Master Plan for English 

grade level or age group, the district must offer language program instruction to meet the 
specific ELL need.  (Ed. Code, §§ 52163, 52165.) 
 
 
Language Learners (updated February 2010).  Willow’s Board Policy, Section BP 4111, 
recognizes that student achievement is advanced by instructors who possess specific skills, 
knowledge, and abilities to meet an identified need.  The Master Plan is a detailed outline for 
legal compliance, program implementation, and staff development.  Ms. Olmos confirmed 
that for purposes of job recruitment, bi-lingual teaching is preferred though not required.  For 
ELD positions, the district’s job flyers provide that bilingual language skills are “preferred.” 
 
 
on the same date, can be based “solely” on the needs of the district and the students.  (Ed. 
Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)  Skipping is distinctly different and affects layoff determinations 
despite seniority.  Tenured teachers possess vested rights in being retained.  (Alexander v. 
Board of Trustees of Delano Joint Union High School Dist. (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 
572.)  The district may retain junior employees who are “certificated and competent to render 
services which more senior employees are not.”  (Id. at p. 571.)  There is no dispute that the 
district has a need to provide ELL program instruction to non-English speaking students.  
There is a dispute, however, as to whether senior teachers within the district are “competent” 
to teach ELL students.  Upon determining a need for a reduction in the number of permanent 
employees, a school district is required to comply with the lay-off procedures enumerated in 
section 44955.  (Id. at p. 570.) 
 
 
Bilingual-Bicultural Education Act of 1976. (Ed. Code, § 52160 et seq.)  These sections 
address teacher training and financial assistance to school districts.  Education Code section 
52172 states: 
 

The Alexander case referenced and considered statutes relevant to the 

33. 

Teachers and teacher aides who are not bilingual-crosscultural teachers 
and aides, as defined by … Section 52163, shall not be permitted to 
teach in programs authorized pursuant to subdivision (a), (b), or, unless 
waived by the board, (c) of Section 52613.  It is the intent of the 
Legislature that the provisions of Section 44955 shall apply to this 
section.  However, in no case shall a school district dismiss a fully 
certificated teacher, who previously taught in the bilingual-bicultural 
program pursuant to a waiver granted under Section 52178, solely on 
the basis that such waiver has expired.  Even if such person is unable to 
qualify for a bilingual credential or bilingual-crosscultural certificate of 
competence, he or she shall retain his or her status, seniority, and rights 
as a probationary or permanent employee, as the case may be, for the 
purpose of serving as a monolingual teacher in other programs offered 
by the school district. 

 

 

9

For purposes of teacher layoff proceedings, the district must demonstrate that more 

 
senior teachers do not possess the special training and experience necessary to teach a 
particular course or course of study.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).)  The three teachers, 
Ms. Abold, Ms. Albert, and Perrin, who were displaced by more junior teachers, each have 
up to six and seven years of experience teaching the district’s ELL students.  All three 
employees teach at Willows Intermediate School where there are no teachers with BCLAD 
authorizations currently assigned.  The district employs no bi-lingual Hmong or Laotian 
certificated employees or aids.  Yet, ELL instruction is provided to these students by teachers 
possessing CLAD and BCLAD authorizations.  The district conceded that a teacher 
possessing a CLAD authorization can deliver effective instruction to ELL students.  A 
statement that a BLCAD is “preferable” to a CLAD authorization falls short of  evidencing 
that the senior teachers identified for layoff at Willows Intermediate lack the “special 
training and experience” necessary to teach ELL students.  In fact, the evidence is to the 
contrary, that Ms. Abold, Ms. Albert, and Perrin, have provided competent instruction to 
ELL students in their present teaching assignments.  As such, their layoff notices are not 
proper and the accusation must be dismissed as to them. 
 
 
above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 

34.  Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 

and 44955.  All notices and jurisdictional prerequisites required by those sections were 
satisfied. 

2. 

The services the district seeks to eliminate in this matter, as set forth in the 
Layoff Resolution, are the particular kinds of service that may be reduced or discontinued 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted 
a proper exercise of the board’s discretion.  Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, legal cause exists for the district to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of 
services set forth in the Layoff Resolution.  The reduction or discontinuance of these 
identified particular kinds of services relates solely to the welfare of the district and its 
pupils. 

3.  With the exception of Dianna Abold, Lauren Albert, and Melanie Perrin, no 
certificated employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to render a 
service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render.  Legal cause exists 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to give respondents final notice that 
their services will not be required for 2010-2011 school year. 
 

4. 

Dianna Abold, Lauren Albert, and Melanie Perrin are certificated and 

competent to teach at their current assignments.  They are senior to employees being retained 

 

 

10

to teach at Willows Intermediate School.  Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, the 
accusations as to Ms. Abold, Ms. Albert, and Ms. Perrin must be dismissed.  (Factual 
Finding 33.)   
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

The Willows Unified School District’s action to reduce or eliminate the 

particular kinds of services identified in Layoff Resolution 2009-10-14, for the 2010-2011 
school year is AFFIRMED. 

2. 

The accusation as to Dianna Abold, Lauren Albert, and Melanie Perrin is 

DISMISSED.  They are considered reemployed for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

3. 

The Accusation against the remaining respondents is SUSTAINED.  The 

Willows Unified School District may give final notices to respondents, with the exception of 
Ms. Abold, Ms. Albert, and Ms. Perrin, that their services will not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year.  Notices shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
DATED:  May 5, 2010 
 
 

____________________________ 
DIAN M. VORTERS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

11

APPENDIX A  
2010 Willows Unified School District – List of Respondents 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
 

First Name  Procedural Status 
Dianna 
Lauren 
Cathryn 
Melanie 

 
 
Notice rescinded 
 

Last Name 
Abold 
Albert 
Fleming 
Perrin 

 

12

