BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
DOS PALOS-ORO LOMA JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Employment Status of: 
 
KIMBERLY BAKKER, et al., 
 
 
                                                   Respondents. 
 
 

 
 
 
    OAH No. 2010031244 
 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
Robert Walker, Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Dos Palos, California, on April 21, 2010. 
 

Kevin R. Dale, Attorney at Law,1 represented the complainant, Brian Walker, Ed.D., 

Superintendent of Schools, Dos Palos – Oro Lomo Joint Unified School District. 
 

There are 11 respondents, and they are listed in exhibit A. 

Jenna Hofer, one of the respondents, appeared in propria persona. 

Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law,2 represented the remaining 10 respondents.   

The matter was submitted on April 21, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
GENERAL FINDINGS CONCERNING STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS 
 
 
 

Respondents are certificated district employees. 

1. 

2. 

Not later than March 15, 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 

44949 and 44955,3 the superintendent of the school district caused the respondents to be 
                                                

1 Kevin R. Dale, Attorney at Law, 555 West Shaw Avenue, Suite C-1, Fresno, California 93704. 

2 Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, 750 East Bullard Avenue, Suite 101, Fresno, California 93710. 
 
3 All references to the Code are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

1

notified in writing that it was recommended that respondents be notified that the district 
would not require their services for the ensuing school year.  Except as to one of the 
respondents, the superintendent of the school district caused the governing board to be given 
a similar written notice.  The notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.  The 
recommendation was not related to respondents’ competency.  Superintendent Walker wrote 
a memorandum dated March 10, 2010, addressed to the board, and he met with the board on 
March 10, 2010.  In the memorandum, he listed 13 teachers and recommended that regular 
layoff notices be sent to them.  Doreen Castillo was not on the list.  When Dr. Walker met 
with the board, however, it was agreed that the services Ms. Castillo performs should be 
discontinued and that she should be sent a layoff notice.  The board’s resolution of March 10, 
2010, includes the services Ms. Castillo performs, “Alternative Ed School Classroom 
Instructional Services,” and identifies them as services that should be reduced or 
discontinued.  Code section 44949, subdivision (a), requires that, no later than March 15, the 
superintendent give the governing board “written notice” that it has been recommended that 
a layoff notice be given to the employee.  The written notice to the board must state the 
reason for the recommendation.  Thus, with regard to Ms. Castillo, Dr. Walker did not satisfy 
the requirement of subdivision (a) – the requirement that he provide written notice to the 
board.  Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), however, provides, in part, “Nonsubstantive 
procedural errors committed by the school district or governing board . . . shall not constitute 
cause for dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.”  It is found that the 
failure to provide written notice to the board regarding Ms. Castillo was a nonsubstantive 
procedural error that did not prejudice Ms. Castillo.  It is clear that Dr. Walker met with the 
board before March 15, 2010, and that, at the meeting, he and the board agreed that the 
services Ms. Castillo performs should be discontinued.  Also, there was no delay in notifying 
Ms. Castillo.  A copy of the layoff notice was personally given to her on March 11, 2010, 
which was substantially before the March 15, 2010, deadline. 
 
 
depositing the notice in the United States mail, registered, postage prepaid, and addressed to 
respondent’s last known address. 
 
 
hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, he or she had to deliver a request for a hearing in 
writing to the person sending the notice.  The request had to be delivered by a specified date, 
which was a date that was not less than seven days after the notice of termination was 
served.4  And the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a 
hearing. 
 
All but one of the respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to 
 
determine whether there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  Celine 
Castaneda filed a late request.  The district waived any objection to Ms. Castaneda’s 

The notice advised each respondent of the following: He or she had a right to a 

A notice was delivered to each respondent, either by personal delivery or by 

3. 

5. 

4. 

                                                

4 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

 

2

participating in the proceeding as a respondent, and she is one of the respondents listed in 
exhibit A.  An accusation was timely served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice 
that, if they were going to request a hearing, they were required to file a notice of defense 
within five days after being served with the accusation.5  Respondents filed timely notices of 
defense.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 

6. 

The governing board of the district resolved to reduce or discontinue particular 

kinds of services.  Within the meaning of Code section 44955, the services are “particular 
kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce or discontinue 
these services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 
SERVICES THE DISTRICT INTENDS TO REDUCE OR DISCONTINUE 
 

7. 

The governing board of the district determined that, because particular kinds 

The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to 

8. 

 
8.00 FTE   

1.24 FTE 
 
 

of services are to be reduced or discontinued, it is necessary to decrease the number of 
permanent or probationary employees in the district by 14 full time equivalents (FTE). 
 
 
reduce or discontinue are: 
 
Elementary Classroom Instructional Services 
Multiple Subject Teaching Services - Grades K-
5  
Intervention Teaching Services - Grades K-5 
 
Middle School Classroom Instructional 
Services 
English/Language Arts - Grades 6-8 
Intervention Teaching Services - Grades 6-8 
 
High School Classroom Instructional Services 
Leadership 
Printed Media and Design 
ROP Business/Marketing 
ROP Graphics 
Intervention Teaching Services   
 
Alternative Ed School Classroom 
Instructional Services 
Computer Applications 
                                                

1.00 FTE 
3.00 FTE   
 
 
.17 FTE 
.17 FTE 
.33 FTE 
.33 FTE 
1.00 FTE 
 
 

.56 

5 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a notice 
of defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
termination cases, the notice of defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

 

3

P.E. 
Art 
Math Intervention 
 
Counselor Positions 
Counselor - Grades 9-12 
Counselor – Alternative Education 
 
Other Positions 
Library Media Services 
 

Total: 
 

.15 
.15 
.14 
 
 
1.00 FTE    
1.00 FTE 
 
 
1.00 FTE 
 

19.24 FTE 

9. 

The 19.24 FTEs the district identified as being reduced or discontinued include 

5.24 FTEs of services provided by temporary employees.  The district is not reemploying 
those temporary employees.  Thus, the reduction or discontinuations connected with layoffs 
total only 14 FTEs.  The district delivered regular layoff notices to 14 teachers.  Ten of those 
requested a hearing.  As noted above, Ms. Castaneda, one of those ten, filed her request late.  
The district served a precautionary notice on Ms. Hofer because of a concern that a teacher 
senior to her might prove that he or she had a right to bump onto Ms. Hofer’s position.  The 
ten teachers and Ms. Hofer constitute the eleven respondents. 
 
RIGHT TO BE RETAINED ACCORDING TO SENIORITY AND QUALIFICATIONS – DATE OF HIRE 
 

10. 

Job security is not inherent in seniority.  The Legislature chose to provide 

teachers with limited job security according to their seniority. 
 
RIGHT TO BE RETAINED ACCORDING TO SENIORITY AND QUALIFICATIONS – BUMPING 
 

11. 

The second paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), does not add to 

teachers’ seniority rights.  It does, however, make it clear that governing boards must make 
assignments in such a way as to protect seniority rights.  Employees must be retained to 
render any service their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.  Thus, if a senior 
teacher whose regular assignment is being eliminated is certificated and competent to teach a 
junior teacher’s courses, the district must retain the senior teacher and reassign him or her to 
render that service.  This is commonly referred to as bumping.  The district must either 
reassign or terminate the junior employee.   
 

12. 

The district adopted competency criteria that teachers must satisfy in order to 

bump into a position held by another teacher.  The competency criteria are as follows: 
 

[F]or purpose of implementing this Resolution, a more senior 
employee is defined as “competent” for reassignment into a 

 

4

position currently held by a more junior employee if the 
employee currently possesses a preliminary or clear credential 
authorizing the subject(s) and grade level(s) to which the 
employee will be assigned at the beginning of the 2010-2011 
school year, and has taught in the subject area . . . to which 
he/she will be assigned at the beginning of the 2010-2011 
school year for at least one (1) year in the preceding three (3) 
years. 

CLARK DOES NOT HAVE A RIGHT TO BUMP INTO THE POSITION HELD BY SOARES 
 

13. 

Brenda Clark is a library media teacher.  That position is one of the services 

being discontinued.  Kelly Soares is a social science teacher teaching history in the high 
school.  Ms. Clark is senior to Ms. Soares and is certificated to teach the subjects Ms. Soares 
teaches.  Ms. Clark has taught history part of the time.  She, however, has not taught history 
for at least one year in the preceding three years.  Thus, she does not satisfy the competency 
criteria and, therefore, has no right to bump into the position Ms. Soares holds. 
 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS REGARDING RETENTION OF EMPLOYEES 
 

14.  With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district is not 

retaining any probationary employee to render a service that such a respondent is certificated 
and competent to render. 
 

15.  With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district is not 

retaining any employee with less seniority than such a respondent has to render a service that 
the respondent is certificated and competent to render.6 
 

16.  With regard to respondents who are either permanent or probationary 
employees, the district is not retaining any employee with less seniority than such a 
respondent has to render a service that the respondent’s qualifications entitle him or her to 
render. 7 
 
STIPULATION TO RESCIND ONE NOTICE 
 

17. 

Complainant stipulated that, in the event no one proved that he or she has a 

right to bump into the position Ms. Hofer holds, the notice served on her should be 
rescinded.  There was no evidence that anyone has a right to bump into the position Ms. 
Hofer holds. 
                                                

6 Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides seniority protection for a permanent employee in terms of 

the services the employee is “certificated and competent to render.”   

 
7 Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides seniority protection for both permanent and probationary 

employees in terms of the services an employee’s “qualifications entitle [him or her] to render.”  
 

 

5

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

The notice served on Ms. Hofer should be rescinded. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Code sections 44949 and 44955.  All 

 
 
notice and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
 
 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services and to give notices to all of the respondents 
other than Ms. Hofer that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year.  The 
cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils. 
 
 

3.  Within the terms of Code sections 44949 and 44955, the district has cause to 

ORDER 

1. 

The district may give notice to all of the respondents other than Ms. Hofer that 

_________________________________ 
ROBERT WALKER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

2. 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

The notice served on Ms. Hofer is rescinded. 

the district will not require their services for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated:  April 27, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6

EXHIBIT A 

RESPONDENTS 

Kimberly Bakker 
Klytia Burcham 
Celine Castaneda 
Doreen Castillo 
Brenda Clark 
Allison Dossetti 
Anna Fimbrez 
Jenna Hofer 
April Hogue 
Marta Stencel 
Michelle Worrell 

 
 

 

7

