BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
RIVERDALE JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Employment Status of: 
 
DEBORAH ACOSTA, et al., 
 
                                                  Respondents. 
 
 

 

 
 
    OAH No. 2010031186 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
Robert Walker, Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Riverdale, California, on April 12, 2010. 
 

David A. Moreno, Attorney at Law,1 represented the complainant, Elaine C. Cash, 

Superintendent, Riverdale Joint Unified School District. 
 

Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law,2 represented the respondents.  There are seven 

respondents, and they are listed in exhibit A. 
 

The matter was submitted on April 12, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
GENERAL FINDINGS CONCERNING STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS 
 

Respondents are certificated district employees. 

1. 

2. 

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955,3 provide for two notices to be 

given in connection with terminating an employee.  The first notice is given by the 
superintendent.  The superintendent makes a recommendation that certain employees be laid 
off, and the superintendent gives notice of that recommendation to those employees and the 
governing board.  The superintendent must give that notice no later than March 15.  That 
                                                

1 David A. Moreno, Attorney at Law, 2525 Alluvial Avenue, Suite 271, Clovis, California 93611. 

2 Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, 750 East Bullard Avenue, Suite 101, Fresno, California 93710. 
 
3 All references to the Code are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 
 

 
 

 

 

 

1

notice will be referred to as the Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff Recommendation.  There 
is no requirement that a governing board take any action in March.  But while it is 
unnecessary, governing boards usually adopt a resolution ratifying the superintendent’s 
recommendation. 
 

3. 

The second notice is a notice of a governing board’s decision to terminate an 
employee.  That notice is provided for in Code section 44955 and must be given before May 
15. 
 

4. 

In this case, not later than March 15, 2010, the superintendent of the district 

caused the governing board of the district and respondents to be notified in writing that it was 
recommended that respondents be notified before May 15 that the district would not require 
their services for the ensuing school year. 
 

5. 

The Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff Recommendation stated the reasons for 

the recommendation.  The recommendation was not related to respondents’ competency. 
 

6. 

A Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff Recommendation was delivered to each 
respondent, either by personal delivery or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, 
registered, postage prepaid, and addressed to respondent’s last known address. 
 

7. 

The Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff Recommendation advised each 

respondent of the following: He or she had a right to a hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, 
he or she had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person sending the notice.  
The request had to be delivered by a specified date, which was a date that was not less than 
seven days after the notice was served.4  And the failure to request a hearing would 
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 

8. 

Respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to determine whether 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  An accusation was timely 
served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice that, if they were going to request a 
hearing, they were required to file a notice of defense within five days after being served 
with the accusation.5  Respondents filed timely notices of defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 

9. 

The superintendent gave a Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff 

Recommendation to Marsha Grigsby, and Ms. Grigsby requested a hearing.  Before the 
hearing, however, she withdrew her request.  Therefore, she is not a respondent. 
                                                

4 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

5 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a notice 
of defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
termination cases, the notice of defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

 

2

10. 

The governing board of the district resolved to reduce or discontinue particular 

kinds of services.  Within the meaning of Code section 44955, the services are “particular 
kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce or discontinue 
these services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 
SERVICES THE DISTRICT INTENDS TO REDUCE OR DISCONTINUE 
 

11. 

The governing board of the district determined that, because particular kinds 

of services are to be reduced or discontinued, it is necessary to decrease the number of 
permanent or probationary employees in the district by 11.83 full time equivalents (FTE). 
 

12. 

The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to 

reduce or discontinue are: 
 

1.   Multiple Subject 

2.   Multiple Subject Reading Resource 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Secondary Single Subject Art  

Library Media Teacher 

Independent Study 

Careers in Education ROP 

7-8 Keyboarding 

4-8 Leadership 

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9. 

4-8 Academic Counselor 

10. 

4-8 Athletic Director   

11.  

9-12 Activities Director 

12.  

9-12 AVID 

 

TOTAL 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.0  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

 .5   FTE 

 .28 FTE 

 .43 FTE 

 .14 FTE 

 .14 FTE 

 .17 FTE 

 .17 FTE 

11.83 FTE 

 
STIPULATION TO RESCIND NOTICES 
 

13. 

Complainant stipulated that as to Amanda Collier-Mirelez, Karen Googooian, 

and Jennifer Hosler, the district will rescind the Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff 
Recommendation. 
 

 

3

WITHDRAWAL OF REQUESTS FOR HEARING 
 

14.  At the hearing, the remaining respondents – Deborah Acosta, Kjersti Denny-

Jordan, Camala Fowler, and Lisette Jost – withdrew their requests for a hearing. 
 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS REGARDING RETENTION OF EMPLOYEES 
 

15.  With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district is not 

retaining any probationary employee to render a service that such a respondent is certificated 
and competent to render. 
 

16.  With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district is not 

retaining any employee with less seniority than such a respondent has to render a service that 
the respondent is certificated and competent to render.6 
 

17.  With regard to respondents who are either permanent or probationary 
employees, the district is not retaining any employee with less seniority than such a 
respondent has to render a service that the respondent’s qualifications entitle him or her to 
render.7 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Code sections 44949 and 44955.  All 

 
 
notice and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
Collier-Mirelez, Karen Googooian, and Jennifer Hosler will be rescinded. 
 
 
 
 

The remaining respondents have withdrawn their requests for hearing.  

The Superintendent’s Notices of Layoff Recommendation given to Amanda 

3. 

ORDER 

1. 

The Superintendent’s Notices of Layoff Recommendation given to Amanda 

Collier-Mirelez, Karen Googooian, and Jennifer Hosler are rescinded. 
 

                                                

6 Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides seniority protection for a permanent employee in terms of 

the services the employee is “certificated and competent to render.”   

 
7 Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides seniority protection for both permanent and probationary 

employees in terms of the services an employee’s “qualifications entitle [him or her] to render.”  
 

 

 

4

2. 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

The district may terminate Deborah Acosta, Kjersti Denny-Jordan, Camala 

_________________________________ 
ROBERT WALKER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
Fowler, and Lisette Jost without giving them notices of termination pursuant to Code section 
44955. 
 
 
 
Dated:  May 3, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

5

EXHIBIT A 
RESPONDENTS  
 

Acosta, Deborah  

Collier-Mirelez, Amanda 

Denny-Jordan, Kjersti 

Fowler, Camala 

Googooian, Karen 

Hosler, Jennifer 

Jost, Lisette 

6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

