 

 

 

 

      
 
       Case No.  L2010030091 
 
 

BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD 
BAKERSFIELD CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF KERN 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Layoffs Of: 
 
Noemi Alcala and Other  
  Certificated Employees of the  
  Bakersfield City School District, 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
this matter on April 6 and 7, 2010, in Bakersfield, California. 
 
 
Director of Certificated Personnel, Bakersfield City School District (District). 
 
 
Thomas J. Driscoll, Attorney at Law, represented the certificated employees set forth in 
legal conclusion number 4 who appeared at the hearing, as well as other certificated employees 
against  whom  the  District  withdrew  the  accusations  during  the  course  of  the  hearing 
(Respondents).1  
 
 
                     

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard 

Candace  M.  Bandoian,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Linda  Goodspeed  (Goodspeed), 

PROPOSED DECISION

1  During  the  hearing,  the  district  withdrew  the  accusations  against  the  following 
individuals, thus retaining them for the 2010-2011 school year: Gloria Amezcua, Sue Ellen 
Anderson,  La  Vesha  Anthony,  Julie  Ashley,  Bertha  Barrera,  Michelle  Bateman,  Anne 
Bistany,  Theresa  Blair,  Kally  Bynum,  Michael  Caniff,  Toni  Carter,  Courtney  Castro, 
Michelle  Cazares,  Donna  Cervantes,  Maria  Chaney,  Demarcus  Clear,  Jennifer  Costner, 
Nancy Craig, Jade D’Agostino, Scott Floyd, Albert Garcia, Jamileh Ghazi Moradi, Amanda 
Gonzales, Diane Higueria, Teresa Iparraguirre, Angela Jarrett, Katy Johnson, Susan Johnson, 
Stephanie  Kurtz,  Kimberly  Larkin,  Tiffane  Llamas,  Laurie  Lopez,  Jeanette  Mai,  Donna 
Mason,  Babara  McCormack,  Ashley  Moore,  Jennifer  Morse,  Laura  Oftedal,  Silvia  Olmos, 
Cherie Payne, Glen Purvis, Desiree Romero, Mary Ellen Rose, Ramona Ross, Tanisha Ross, 
Cheryl  Salas,  Christina  Salazar,  Cecilia  Sandoval,  Stephanie  Tiede,  Katie  Venegas,  Ruth 
Villalobos, Samantha Wood, and Christine Ybarra.  
 

a. 

3. 

1. 

2. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

Director Goodspeed filed the Accusations in her official capacity. 

Jennifer Morse and Gricelda Elizalde represented themselves and appeared on the first 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence,  and  evidence  by  oral  stipulation  on  the  record,  was 

 
date of hearing.   
 
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
 
given  Respondents  and  other  certificated  employees  of  the  District  notice  of  its  intent  not  to 
reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year.  Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for  a 
determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
received at the hearing, and the matter was submitted for decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On  February  23,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing 
 
Board) adopted a resolution reducing or discontinuing the following services for the 2010-2011 
school year: 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal  
 
 
 
 
Vice Principals                          
 
 
 
Library Media Specialists 
 
Counselors        
 
 
 
 
Controlled Open Enrollment/TIIG Program  
 
 
Increase Class Sizes – Grades K-3 
 
 
 
Increase Class Sizes – Grades 4-6 
 
 
Increase Class Sizes – Grades 7 -8  
 
 
             
 
Art                     
Physical Education                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     

1.0 
 
6.0 
 
 
8.0 
          22.0 
          10.0 
          46.0 
          10.0 
          15.0 
1.0 
 
1.0 
 

                    FTE2 Equivalent Positions

 
                    120.0 

                      Service   

                         

 
Total 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 Full-time equivalent position. 

 

 
 
 

2

 

b. 

5. 

4. 

6. 

Respondents  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 

Following  adoption  of  the  resolution,  the  District  took  into  account 
 
anticipated attrition, and concluded that the actual number FTE positions that had to be reduced 
was 101, not 120. 
 
 
On  or  about  February  24,  25,  and  26,  2010,  the  District  provided  notice  to 
Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year due to the 
reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
On February 24, 2010, Director Goodspeed, acting on authority delegated to her 
by the Superintendent of the District, notified the Governing Board that she had recommended 
that  notice  be  provided  to  244  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  including  Respondents, 
that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of 
particular kinds of services. Of these notices, 68 were characterized as “precautionary,” issued 
as  a  precaution  in  the  event  that  layoff  notices  to  other  employees  were  not  sustained  after 
hearing.3
 
 
reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
them on Respondents.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code4 section 44955. 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuance of services set forth in factual finding number 3, 
in the context of the anticipated decline in revenue, is related to the welfare of the District and 
its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  as 
determined by the Governing Board.  
 
 
 
                    

On  or  about  March  15,  2010,  the  District  issued  the  Accusations,  and  served 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

Respondents thereafter filed timely notices of defense.  

11. 

10. 

8. 

9. 

7. 

 

3  Pursuant  to  a  stipulation  between  the  parties,  all  precautionary  notices  and  all 
accusations issued against certificated employees who received such a notice were rescinded 
at the hearing. 
 

4 All further references are to the Education Code. 

 

 
 
 

3

12.  On  February  23,  2009,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  a  resolution  setting  forth 
 
the  criteria  to  determine  seniority  among  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a 
probationary position on the same date (tie-breaking criteria). The criteria are reasonable as they 
relate to the skills and qualifications of certificated employees. 
 
 
service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.   
 

13.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

4. 

2. 

3. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 9. 
 
 
within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 and 10.   
 
 
Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue the particular kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers 1 through 13.  
 
Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondents  Noemi  Alcala,  Natasha 
 
Anaya,  Rebecca  Aranda,  Cassandra  Atkinson,  Gayla  Ballew,  Daniela  Baltazar,  Valerie 
Barksdale,  Shannon  Barnes,  Kristen  Behill,  Martha  Bentley,  Melissa  Bila,  Rebecca  Bolton, 
Mandy  Bradford,  Andrea  Brazier,  Esther  Castillo,  Maria  Ceballos,  Isabel  Chavez,  Shennel 
Clark, Jillian Collins, Steven Comstock Jr., Melissa Delehoy, Nicole Despot, Amy Dinsmore, 
January  Dinwiddie,  Kimberly  Doering,  Nicole  Eckberg,  Amy  Erickson,  Monica  Escalera, 
Aurora Federico, Dian Fernandez, Laura Figueroa, Paula Fitzgerald, Holly Fox, Monica Garza, 
Marty Gomez, Holly Gonzales, Molly Gutierrez, Carly Haardt, Constance Hennessy, Amanda 
Horton,  Melinda  Hufft,  Kayla  Illington,  Barbara  Iriart,  Jamie  Jenkins,  Colleen  Jiron,  Becky 
Johnson,  Rebecca  Larsen,  Mike  Long,  Christina  Lopez,  Monica  Lopez,  Evangelina  Luna, 
Heather Lundin, Jennifer Maddern, Cassie Magorian, Brooke Malley, Carrie Maxwell, Kenya 
McCormack, Ashley McDonald, Ryan McGowan, Claudia Medrano, Christina Mejia, George 
Moncier,  Sunny  Mueller,  Christine  Nelson,  Brian  Osborne,  Marci  Palla,  Terysa  Patterson, 
Marciel  Pelpelen,  Sarah  Peterson,  Melanie  Pratt,  Martha  Quiroz-Varela,  April  Ranguindin, 
Harmanjit  Rai,  Denise  Ramirez,  Jennifer  Reynolds,  Carly  Rhodes,  Richard  Ribaudo,  Alcia 
Rice,  William  Riley,  Leticia  Rodriguez,  Maranda  Rust,  Kelli  Schillinger,  Anna  Schrader, 
Veronica  Shepherd,  Shelly  Shultz-Johnson,  Zachary  Smith,  Caitlin  Sedegren,  Sandra  Taylor, 
Melynie Thomas, Heather Trubey, Jennifer Unruh, Brandon Ware, Amy Wiener, Melinda Witt, 
and  Sarah  Yanney,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  13  and  legal  conclusion 
numbers 1 through 3.  
 

 

 
 
 

4

ORDER 

 
 
The Accusations are sustained and the District may notify the Respondents set forth in 
legal conclusion number 4 that their services will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school 
year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
DATED:____________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 

 
Administrative Law Judge 
 

                                 
         
 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

SAMUEL D. REYES 

 
 

 

 
 
 

5

