BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
RAMONA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Involving the Respondents Identified in 
Appendices A and B. 
 
 
 

OAH No. 2010030124 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 14, 2010, in Ramona, California. 
 

William Diedrich, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented Ramona 

Jon Vanderpool, Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax, represented 12 of the respondents 

No appearance was made by or on behalf of respondents Joannn Akrawi, Stephanie 

Unified School District.  
 
 
listed in Appendix A.  
 
 
Andrus, Amanda Benedic, Shirley Buckley, Holly Cross, Chelsie Gammill, Rebecca Harris, 
Cody Jenkins, Tehra Lynn, Jami McFarland, Dallas Meadows, Stefanie Ortega, Gloria 
Quinn, and Diana Ramsey, who did not request a hearing.  
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 14, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1. 

Robert W. Graeff, Ed.D., made and filed the accusation in his official capacity 

as Superintendent of the Ramona Unified School District. 
 

2. 

The respondents listed on Appendix A, which is attached hereto and 

incorporated by reference herein, are permanent or probationary certificated employees of 
the district. 

 
3. 

The respondents listed on Appendix B, which is attached hereto and 

incorporated by reference herein, are temporary certificated employees of the district. 
 

 

 

 

1

5. 

4. 

On March 1, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2009-10-09, 

 
which reduced particular kinds of services and directed the superintendent to give 
appropriate notices to those certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the 
action.  The resolution identified the particular kind of service or program to be reduced or 
discontinued, the number of full-time equivalent (FTE) positions to be reduced or 
discontinued, the extent of positively assured attrition, and the net total reduction FTE 
positions.  The grand total of FTE positions identified for layoff was 37.37, but since there 
were 15 positively assured attrition FTEs, the net total reduction in FTE positions was 22.37. 
 
 
On March 1, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2009-10-10, 
which released the temporary certificated employees identified in Appendix B at the end of 
the 2009-2010 school year. 
 
 
Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources Development, gave written notice to 
approximately 35 certificated employees, including respondents, of the recommendation that 
their services would not be required for the 2010-11 school year.  The reasons for the 
recommendation were set forth in these preliminary layoff notices.  Many of the respondents 
timely filed a Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense to determine if there was legal 
cause for terminating their services for the 2010-11 school year.  An accusation was served 
on each respondent. 

On March 8, 2010,1 Assistant Superintendent Joe Annicharico, Jr., Ph.D., 

6. 

8. 

7. 

Before issuing the preliminary layoff notices, the district took into account all 
positively assured attrition.  The district is required to issue final layoff notices before May 
15, and before it does so, the district will take into account any additional attrition that 
occurs.  Further attrition occurring after May 15 will allow the district to rehire laid off 
employees.  
 
The district defined “competency” pursuant to Education Code section 44955, 
 
subdivision (b), as the possession of (1) a valid credential in the relevant subject matter area; 
(2) “highly qualified” status under the No Child Left Behind Act in the position to be 
assumed; (3) an appropriate EL authorization if required by the position to be assumed; (4) 
the positions which include, in part, AVID, special training and experience to teach AVID 
classes; (5) for positions which involve instruction based upon the Montessori curriculum, 
completion of Montessori training; and (6) for positions which include, in part, serving as 
ASSETS facilitator, at least one complete year of experience in the past five school years 
serving as an ASSETS facilitator.  
 
 
employee could bump into a position being held by a more junior employee.  
 

The district created a bump analysis to determine if a qualified senior 

9. 

10.  A school board may “reduce services” by eliminating certain types of services or 

by reducing the number of district employees who provide such services.  The decision to 
reduce services is not unfair or improper simply because a school board makes a decision it is 
                     
1 

The district introduced a sample of the notices sent to employees. 

 

2

empowered to make.  A district’s decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service 
is matter reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in a 
reduction in force proceeding.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School 
District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind 
of service must not be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. 
Allen (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 637.) 
  
Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c), set forth a general rule 
 
requiring school districts to retain senior employees over more junior employees and to retain 
permanent employees over temporary employees.  Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
(d), provides an exception to that general rule and permits the district to deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority when the district demonstrates a 
specific need for the service or to comply with constitutional requirements. 
 

11. 

12.  Under subdivision (d)(1), a district may skip a junior teacher and retain such a 

junior teacher over a more senior teacher for specified reasons.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified 
School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 131.)  But, junior teachers may be given retention 
priority over senior teachers only if the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities 
which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 
2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 
831, 842-843.)  A junior employee possessing special competence can be retained over a senior 
employee who lacks such competence.  (Alexander v. Delano Joint Union High School District 
(1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567.)  

 
13. 

The parties stipulated that 14 respondents had not requested a hearing, that all 

 
jurisdictional requirements were met, that the respondents listed in Appendix B were 
temporary employees of the district, and that the district could issue layoff notices to those 
respondents listed in Appendices A and B.  
 

14.  No respondent testified in this hearing. 

15.  No evidence established that the district’s competency criteria were arbitrary or 

 
 
that the criteria were applied in a capricious fashion, that a junior teacher lacked the required 
competence to be retained over a senior teacher, that any senior teacher possessing competence 
was being improperly terminated, or that the district’s failure to utilize the same criteria it 
previously utilized in prior resolutions was erroneous.2  
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, 

and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required. 
                     
2  
years’ resolutions.  
 

Ashley Butler, the one respondent subject to the “bump,” held a position that had been skipped in prior 

 

 

3

2. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 

3. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.)  Junior teachers 
may be given retention priority over senior teachers only if the junior teachers possess 
superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School 
District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) 

 
4. 

 
Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant 
to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.  The 
district properly identified the certificated employees who are providing the particular kinds 
of services that the Governing Board directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is 
recommended that the Governing Board give respondents notice before May 15, 2009, that 
their services will not be required by the District for the school year 2010-11. 
 
 
accusation subject to the recommendations listed in the factual findings.  This determination 
is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 
 
 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

5. 

 

4

RECOMMENDATION 
 
It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the respondents whose 
names are set forth below in Appendix A that their employment will be terminated at the 
close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed for the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 
It is further recommended that the governing board withdraw the accusations and 

 
rescind the precautionary layoff notices issued to the respondents whose names are set forth 
in Appendix B. 
 
 
 
DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 
 
                            
                               
 
 

________________________________ 
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

5

 
             RESPONDENTS 

 

Appendix A 

Bash, Robyn 

Beus Michele 

Brown, Nicole 

Butler, Ashley 

Cross, Holly 

Ellsworth, Marie Therese 

Harris, Rebecca 

Hill, Christine 

Jenkins, Cody 

Lynn, Tehra 

Mc Farland, Jami 

Morgan, Elizabeth 

Quinn, Gloria 

Schramm. Kimberly 

Soltero, Adriana 

Stewart, Tracey 

Tamburrino, September 

Utech, Jeana 

 

 

 

 

6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Appendix B 

 
             RESPONDENTS 

 

 

 

 

Akrawi, Joann 

Buckley, Shirley 

Benedic, Amanda 

Gammill, Chelsie 

Meadows, Dallas 

Ortega, Stefanie 

Ramsey, Diana 

 

7

