BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
LAS VIRGENES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2010031167 

In The Matter Of The Accusation Against: 
 
REGINA BRYANT, and other certificated 
employees of the LAS VIRGENES 
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,  
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Michael A. Scarlett, Presiding Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on May 4, 2010, at the Las Virgenes Unified 
School District, in Calabasas, California. 
 
 
fied School District (School District). 
 
 
nia Teachers Association.1   
 

James B. Fernow and Keith Yanov, Attorneys at Law, represented Las Virgenes Uni-

Tareq M. Hishmeh, Attorney at Law, represented respondent members of the Califor-

This was originally set for hearing on April 6, 2010.  Pursuant to a motion by the par-
ties, the hearing was continued to May 4, 2010.  Consequently, pursuant to Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (c), and 44955, subdivision (c), the dates prescribed in the provi-
sions are extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.  This matter was submitted 
May 4, 2010. 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

1  The Respondents included: Regina Bryant, Anush Chalian, Jessica Dickinson, Cath-
erine Foley, Garry Galvan, Casey Hambly, Jody Hepps, Natasha Hutchison, Bobbie Johnson, 
Jennifer Kestenbaum, Joanne Kress, Cathy Latty, Carrie McClellan, Linda Ordin, Jonathan 
Palarz, Marianne Pall, Gregory Poppen, Beth Quinlan, Nadia Rizk, Katherine Roland, Steve 
Scifres, Heidi Serbick, Amy Seror, Brittany Stone, Janet Svoboda, Lisa Villongco, Cindy 
Walczuk, Kim Wildman, Christine Zacha. 

1 

 
 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
1.     Assistant Superintendent Dan Stepenosky, Personnel Services of the Las 

Virgenes Unified School District (District), filed the Accusation in his official capacity as a 
public officer of the District. 
 

2.     Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

3.     Pursuant to a stipulation between the parties at hearing, the following Factual 

Findings and Legal Conclusions were made.  
 

4.     On or before March 15, 2010, the District personally served on each 

respondent a written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to respondents 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be 
required for the next school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation and noted that the Board had passed a Resolution reducing the certificated 
staff by 70.65 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) positions.   
 

Respondents timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is cause for 

not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.   
 

5.     The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each of the 

respondents who requested a hearing.  The Accusations with required accompanying 
documents and blank Notices of Defense were timely served pursuant to stipulation between 
the parties on April 14, 2010.   
 

6.     Respondents’ counsel filed a timely Notice of Defense on April 16, 2010, for 

the 29 respondents listed above. 
 

7.     Pursuant to stipulation, Respondent Beth Quinlan is deemed to have 

withdrawn her Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense. 
 

8.     Respondents in this proceeding are probationary or permanent certificated 

employees of the District. 
 

9.     Board Resolution No. 20-09, adopted on February 23, 2010, proposed a layoff 

of 70.65 FTE certificated employees.  Specifically, Board Resolution provided for the 
reduction or elimination of the following particular kinds of services: 
 
 
 
                                                 

               FTE2 Reduction

Service 

 

 

 

 

2 Full-time equivalent position. 

2 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
Elementary Teacher    
 
Counselor 
 
 
Middle School Assistant Principal 
 
Middle School Dean   
 
Middle School English Teacher 
Middle School Social Science Teacher 
 
Middle School Physical Education Teacher   
 
High School Social Science Teacher  
 
 
High School English Teacher  
 
High School Math Teacher 
 
 
 
High School Physical Education Teacher 
 
Total                                                                                                    70.65 F.T.E 
 

41.0 
  7.5 
  0.6 
  1.75 
  1.6 
  1.8 
  0.8 
  4.2 
  6.0 
  2.0 
  3.4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10.     Subsequent to the adoption of Board Resolution No. 20-09, on May 3, 2010, 

the Board amended the Resolution, and the District rescinded its Notices of 
Recommendations Not to Re-Employ as to all Respondents except one, Bobbie Johnson. 
 

11.     The parties stipulated that Respondent Bobbie Johnson submitted a timely 

request for hearing and a timely notice of defense.  
 

12.     It is further stipulated between the parties that Respondent Bobbie Johnson is 

the most junior counselor and she has no bumping rights as to any other junior certificated 
employee retained by the District. 
 

13.     Finally, the parties stipulated that the reduction of Respondent Bobbie 
Johnson’s counselor position is only as to twenty percent (20%) and that she shall continue 
with an eighty percent (80%) counselor position assignment in the 2010-2011 school year.  
 

14.     No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 

 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 

 
 
44949 and 44955 were met. 
 
 
services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The 
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor 
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 

The services identified in Board Resolution 20-09 are particular kinds of 

 

3 

3. 

Cause exists to reduce number of certificated employees of the District due to 

 
the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services by reason of Factual 
Findings 1 through 14.  The District identified the certificated employees providing the 
particular kinds of services that the Board directed be reduced or discontinued.   
 
 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice shall be given to Respondent Bobbie Johnson that twenty-percent 

(20%) of her full-time equivalent counselor position will not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  

The District may give notice to Respondent Beth Quinlan, who withdrew her 
notice of defense and request for hearing, that her services will not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year. 

 

 
2. 

 
3. 

The Accusations against Respondents Regina Bryant, Anush Chalian, Jessica 
Dickinson, Catherine Foley, Garry Galvan, Casey Hambly, Jody Hepps, Natasha Hutchison, 
Bobbie Johnson, Jennifer Kestenbaum, Joanne Kress, Cathy Latty, Carrie McClellan, Linda 
Ordin, Jonathan Palarz, Marianne Pall, Gregory Poppen, Nadia Rizk, Katherine Roland, 
Steve Scifres, Heidi Serbick, Amy Seror, Brittany Stone, Janet Svoboda, Lisa Villongco, 
Cindy Walczuk, Kim Wildman, Christine Zachain are dismissed. 
 
 
 
Dated: May 25, 2010 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
MICHAEL A.SCARLETT 
Presiding Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

4 

