 
BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE   
GILROY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of 
Certificated Employees, 
 
 
 
 
 

   Respondents. 

 

 

 

 
 
OAH No. 2010031102 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Michelle A. Welsh, Attorney at Law, Stoner, Welsh & Schmidt, represented all of the 

Administrative Law Judge Mary-Margaret Anderson, State of California, Office of 

James R. Lynch, Attorney at Law, represented the Gilroy Unified School District. 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Gilroy, California, on April 28, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
Respondents, except Victoria Coverson-Baxter. 
 
 
 
 
 

The record closed on April 28, 2010. 

No appearance was made by or on behalf of Respondent Victoria Coverson-Baxter.   

SUMMARY 
 

The Board of Trustees of the Gilroy Unified School District decided to discontinue 

 
particular kinds of services provided by teachers in the 2010-2011 school year for budgetary 
reasons.  The decision was not related to the competency and dedication of those whose 
services were proposed to be eliminated.  The process complied with Education Code 
requirements, except as set forth below.   
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Deborah A. Flores, Ph.D., filed the Accusation in her official capacity as 

 
 
Superintendent of the Gilroy Unified School District (District). 
 
 
Respondents is attached as Exhibit 1. 
 
 
On March 4, 2010, the Board of Trustees of the Gilroy Unified School District 
adopted Resolution Number 09/10-53, in which the Board resolved to reduce particular kinds 

 All Respondents are certificated employees of the District.  A list of the 

3. 

2. 

of services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year.  The reduction of the 
following full-time equivalent (FTE) positions was approved: 
 
  Kind of Service  

    Number of Full-time Equivalent Positions (FTEs)

 

 

Kindergarten – 8th Grade Teachers                       39.00 FTEs 
Teacher – Community Day Class Program  
 1.00 FTEs 
 
Total FTEs 
 
 
 

                      40.00 FTEs 

 

 

 

4. 

Resolution 09/10-53 also contains criteria (attached to the Resolution as 
Exhibit A) that the Board decided were sufficiently important to warrant deviating from 
seniority order when instituting the reductions.  These “skipping criteria” are as follows: 

 

 

1.  Any employee who possesses a BCLAD (Spanish) or 
equivalent authorization, whose experience includes teaching 
dual immersion classes in English/Spanish for the District in the 
2009-2010 school year, and who is expected to continue 
teaching such classes for the District in the 2010-2011 school 
year. 
 
2.  Any employee who possesses a single subject credential or 
subject matter authorization, authorizing the teaching of Math, 
whose experience includes teaching Math for the District in the 
2009-2010 school year, and who is expected to continue 
teaching such classes for the District in the 2010-2011 school 
year. 
 
3.  Any employee who possesses a single subject credential or 
subject matter authorization, authorizing the teaching  of 
Science (any form), whose experience includes teaching Science 
for the District in the 2009-2010 school year, and who is 
expected to continue teaching such classes for the District in the 
2010-2011 school year. 
 
4.  Any employee who possesses an Educational Specialist 
credential, whose experience includes teaching Special 
Education classes for the District in the 2009-2010 school year, 
and who is expected to continue teaching such classes for the 
District in the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
5.  Any employee who possesses a certificate of completion of a 
Gifted & Talented Education (GATE) program offered by an 
accredited  institution of higher education, whose experience 

 

 

2

includes teaching in GATE courses of study for the District in 
the 2009-2010 school year, and who is expected to continue 
teaching such classes for the District in 2010-2011 school year. 
 
6.  An employee who the Superintendent determines to retain 
because he/she possesses special skills, training, and/or 
education that is needed to teach a specific course or course of 
study in the 2010-2011 school year, that more senior employees 
do not possess. 
 

In addition, the Resolution contains the following language: 

 
The Superintendent or designee is authorized to determine 
which employees qualify to be “skipped” for the Reduction in 
Force and to determine the manner in which the foregoing 
criteria shall be applied to each employee. 

5. 

The Resolution also contains criteria (attached to the Resolution as Exhibit B) 
 
to be used to determine the order of termination of certificated employees with the same first 
date of paid service.  These criteria are commonly referred to as the tie-breaking criteria.  
They are as follows: 
 
Criterion 
Possession of credential(s) authorizing services for the 
District 

Points 
3 for each professional clear 
2 for each preliminary 
1 for each for any other 
credential 
1 per authorization 

1 per applicable column 
1 per SSC  
1 per DSLT 

1 per District Level Committee 
3 
1 

Subject matter authorizations, including supplemental 
authorizations, on credentials authorizing service for the 
District 
Column placement on salary schedule 
Service on a school site level committee:   
“SSC”  - School Site Council 
“DSLT” – District Site Leadership Team 
Service on a District Level Committee 
Service as a BTSA Mentor Teacher 
Possession of Bilingual Cross Cultural Language 
Development Certificate 
 
 
 

Further, the Resolution provides: 

Employees with a greater number of points shall be considered 
more senior than employees with a fewer number of points, for 

 

 

3

purposes of determining order of layoff and other of 
reemployment. 
 
If application of the foregoing criteria fails to resolve a tie 
among two or more employees, among the employees who 
remain tied the employee with the earliest date of issuance of a 
preliminary or professional clear credential shall be considered 
the more senior employee.  As among employees who remain 
tied who have never obtained a preliminary or professional clear 
credential, the employee with the earliest date of issuance of an 
intern credential shall be considered the more senior employee.  
As among employees who remain tied who have never obtained 
an intern, preliminary, or professional clear credential, the 
employee with the earliest date of issuance of an emergency or 
pre-intern credential, or short-tem staff permit shall be 
considered the more senior employee. 
 
The Superintendent is authorized to determine the number of 
tiebreaking points to be awarded to each employee and to 
determine the manner in which the tiebreaking criteria shall be 
applied to each employee. 
 
If application of all of the foregoing criteria fails to resolve a tie 
among two or more employees, the Superintendent or designee 
will use a device or program that randomly selects numbers.  
The employee with the highest number will be the most senior 
among those remaining tied, with other employees being 
appropriately ranked in descending numerical order. 

6. 

The District’s Seniority List was used to determine who would receive notices.  

 
 
District staff, including Superintendent Flores, prepared the list with information from 
employees, personnel records, and public records such as the website of the California 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC).  Four groups of teachers have the same start 
dates.  A Tiebreaking Calculation Worksheet was used to give each of these teachers a place 
on the list according to the tie-breaking criteria created by the Board.  All of the ties were 
broken when the supplementary criterion concerning the date of issuance of a credential was 
applied. 
 
 
will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year was served on 40 certificated employees, 
including Respondents. 
 
Each of the Respondents filed a timely request for hearing.  Accordingly, an 
 
Accusation was filed and served.  Each Respondent filed a timely notice of defense and this 
hearing followed. 

On March 5, 2010, written notice of the recommendation that their services 

 7. 

8. 

 

4

9. 

11. 

10. 

Respondent Shanna Aldridge teaches 6th grade math and science.  The District 

As of the date of hearing, the District had rescinded 14 layoff notices and was 

 
 
working on further rescissions.  
 
 
Superintendent Flores credibly testified about the reasons for the Resolution.  
The District needs to cut $6.3 million from its budget to balance it.  Flores explained that the 
skipping criteria were formulated to respond to District needs for specialized instruction.  
The District has a very successful dual-immersion program where students are taught in two 
languages.  A BCLAD is required to teach those classes and it is sometimes difficult to find 
teachers with BCLADs.  Similarly, it is difficult to fill positions in math, science, and special 
education, and the District determined it needed to skip teachers who have been teaching in 
those subject areas.  The District also needed to skip GATE certified teachers because of the 
programs at one elementary and one middle school. 
.  
Objections of particular teachers 
 
 
stipulated that her correct seniority date is August 13, 2009.  This correction creates a tie.  
Application of the tie-breaking criteria gives her six points, which ties her with Respondent 
Katherine Lee.  As Lee obtained her credential before Aldridge, Aldridge is junior to Lee on 
the Seniority List. 
 
 
to teach English and Business.  Her seniority date is August 13, 2009.  Janet Hill teaches 
English and, with a seniority date of August 20, 2009, she is junior to Lake.  (Hill was not 
noticed for layoff.)  The District stipulated that Lake possesses the credentials to teach in 
Hill’s assignment.  Given these facts, Lake may not be laid off. 
 
 
with others who also started on August 13, 2009.  She held an administrative services 
credential that expired December 1, 2009, and was re-issued April 5, 2010.  The District 
stipulated that Schnegelberger would receive three additional tie-breaking points (in addition 
to the ten already given her) if the CTC agrees to make the re-issuance retroactive to the date 
it expired. 
 
 
Academy (GECA) since August 4, 2009.  She holds a multiple subject credential and a 
supplementary authorization in math, which authorizes her to teach math curriculum 
designed for students in 9th grade and below.  Rigby teaches algebra and geometry, and the 
majority of her students are in 9th grade, although some are in 10th and fewer are in 11th 
grade.  GECA is an advanced program and some of the 9th grade students “jump into 
geometry.”  Rigby has received a preliminary assignment to teach algebra and geometry next 
year.  For all of these reasons, she asserts that she is entitled to be skipped under the 
District’s skipping criterion number two:   
 

13.   Respondent Marcie Schnegelberger is a 5th grade teacher tied for seniority 

Respondent Laura Rigby has taught math at the Dr. T. J. Owens Early College 

Respondent Perlene Lake holds a multiple subject credential and endorsements 

14. 

12. 

 

5

Any employee who possesses a single subject credential or 
subject matter authorization, authorizing the teaching of Math, 
whose experience includes teaching Math for the District in the 
2009-2010 school year, and who is expected to continue 
teaching such classes for the District in the 2010-2011 school 
year. 

16. 

15. 

Respondent Marcie Schnegelberger was trained as a BTSA (Beginning 

Respondent Matthew Romiti holds a multiple subject credential and his 

 
The evidence demonstrated that all three conditions specified in skipping criterion 
 
number two have been met.  The rationale behind the District’s decision that she did not 
qualify to be skipped was unclear.  Rigby’s argument is persuasive and the District will be 
required to exempt her from layoff.  
 
 
seniority date is August 14, 2008.  Respondent Cheryl Galloway holds a multiple subject 
credential and her seniority date is September 17, 2008.  Romiti and Galloway are 
credentialed and competent to teach CORE, which requires a multiple subject credential.  
Romiti and Galloway assert that there may be teachers junior to them who hold only single 
subject credentials and are being retained to teach CORE next year.  This assertion was not 
proven.  
 
 
Teacher Support Advisor) teacher in another district, but has not served in that position in 
any district.  Her contention that she qualifies to receive tie-breaker points for the training is 
rejected.  The criterion clearly states that one must have served as a BTSA mentor teacher.  
 
 
Respondent Sabrina Smallen teaches 4th grade.  She holds a multiple subject 
credential and a supplement in social science, which allows her to teach social science up to 
the 9th grade.  Her seniority date is August 14, 2008.  Karen Skahill holds a .6 FTE position 
teaching high school: .4 FTE in World History (10th grade) and .2 FTE Global History (9th 
grade).  Her seniority date is September 13, 2009, making her junior to Smallen.  (Skahill did 
not receive a layoff notice.) 
 
 
and should therefore not be laid off to that extent.  The District argues against this 
contention, citing Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 
334.  The court in Hildebrandt held that a part-time employee with greater seniority was not 
entitled to bump a full-time employee with less seniority.  In other words, the District was 
not required to create a part-time position to accommodate the more senior employee.  The 
facts are reversed in this case: Smallen is full-time and Skahill holds the part-time position.  
And, the factual situation differs further.  The high school assignments are already split into 
courses.  The District did not demonstrate that it would be unreasonable, or even impractical, 
to assign Smallen to teach the single course currently taught by Skahill that she is qualified to 
teach. 
 

Smallen contends that she is entitled to teach the .2 FTE Global History assignment 

17. 

 

6

18. 

Respondents together contend that the proposed reduction in services will be 

Education Code section 44055, subdivision (b), prevents the termination of a senior 
 
employee while retaining a junior employee to render a service that the senior employee is 
qualified to provide.  And subdivision (c) requires that assignments be made in such a way 
that employees who have the requisite seniority and qualifications are retained.  It is 
therefore concluded that Smallen’s layoff must be limited to .8 FTE. 
 
 
detrimental to the District, and that it therefore cannot be found, as required by Education 
Code section 44949, that “the charges sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of 
the schools and the pupils thereof.”  It is true that service reductions will likely be 
detrimental to students in the District, but the District is required to operate in a fiscally 
sound manner.  Without fiscal integrity, the District cannot adequately serve its schools or its 
pupils.  In circumstances such as these, where a District is facing a multi-million dollar loss 
of funding, and in the absence of proof that the District acted in an arbitrary or capricious 
manner, it is necessarily concluded that the service reductions are related to the welfare of 
the schools and pupils.  
 
 
solely on the basis of the needs of the District and its pupils. 
 
 
permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service 
which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.   
 

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was made 

Except as regards Respondents Perline Lake and Sabrina Smallen, no 

19. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
1. 

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 

2. 

3. 

Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 12, cause does not exist as 

44955 have been provided as required.  The District established jurisdiction for this 
proceeding as to each Respondent.  
 
 
reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction of 
particular kinds of services. 
 
 
required by Education Code section 44955 to give notice of layoff to Respondent Perline 
Lake. 
 
 
required by Education Code section 44955 to give notice of layoff to Respondent Laura 
Rigby. 
 
 
Education Code section 44955 to give notice to Respondent Sabrina Smallen of the 
reduction of only .8 FTE of her position. 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 14, cause does not exist as 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 17, cause exists as required by 

5. 

4. 

 

7

All contentions made by Respondents not specifically addressed above are 

6. 

 
 
found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 

ORDER 

1. 

5. 

4. 

3. 

2. 

The District shall make corrections to its Seniority List and other records as 

The Accusation against Respondent Laura Rigby is dismissed. 

The Accusation against Respondent Perline Lake is dismissed. 

 
 
necessary to conform to Factual Findings 11 and 13. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notice may be given to Respondent Sabrina Smallen that .8 FTE of her 
position will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction of 
particular kinds of services. 
 
 
be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction of particular kinds of 
services. 
 
 
 
DATED: ________________________ 
 
 
                                     
             
                                                           
            
 
 
            
 

______________________________ 
MARY-MARGARET ANDERSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

Notice may be given to the remaining Respondents that their services will not 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

8

EXHIBIT 1: LIST OF RESPONDENTS 

1.  Aldridge, Shanna  
2.  Bearden, Barbara 
3.  Canlas, Tracy 
4.  Coverson-Baxter, Victoria 
5.  Cummings, Analise 
6.  Fortino, Jill 
7.  Galloway, Cheryl 
8.  Gee, Tiffany 
9.  Iwanaga, Lauren 
10. Lake, Perlene 
11. Lee, Katherine 
12. Lopez, Sylvia 
13. Lu, Thanh (Katie) 
14. Middleton, Miranda 
15. Mikkelsen, Theresa 
16. Miller, Kristin 
17. O'Rourke, Crystal 
18. Rede, Chad 
19. Rigby, Laura 
20. Romiti, Matthew 
21. Schedler, Kris 
22. Schnegelberger, Marcie 
23. Smallen, Sabrina 
24. Tognetti, Ashley 
25. Vigilante-Tait, Sarah 

 
 

 

 

9

