BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE 
APPLE VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Involving 169 Credentialed Employees of  
the Apple Valley Unified School District, 
 
 
 
 
 

          Respondents. 

 

 

OAH No. 2010030231 
 
 
 

 

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 

Margaret A. Chidester, Attorney at Law, and Alexandria M. Davidson, Attorney at 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
California, heard this matter in Apple Valley, California, on April 8, 2010. 
 
 
Law, represented the Apple Valley Unified School District. 
 
 
appeared in this layoff proceeding. 
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 8, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
The Apple Valley Unified School District 

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented the certificated employees who 

 
1. 

The Apple Valley Unified School District (AVUSD or the district) is located 

 
in Apple Valley, California.  At an elevation of 3,000 feet, Apple Valley rests in the High 
Desert approximately 95 miles northeast of Los Angeles, 140 miles north of San Diego, and 
185 miles south of Las Vegas.  The community of Apple Valley comprises 78 square miles 
of incorporated area but has a sphere of influence of approximately 200 square miles. 
 
 
district has nine elementary schools, three middle schools, two comprehensive high schools, 
one continuation high school and an alternative education center.  Bus service is provided for 
students.  As a result of the budgetary crisis, there will be a reorganization of the schools and 
an existing school site will be turned into district offices in the 2010-11 school year.  The 

AVUSD serves over 13,500 students in kindergarten through grade twelve.  The 

 

1

2. 

3. 

Proposition 13 limited the imposition of local property taxes and reduced a 

The District is governed by an elected five-member Board of Education (the 

district also operates nine pre-school programs on five sites, serving several hundred 
preschool students.   
 
 
The district employs over 1,300 individuals, approximately 660 of whom provide 
certificated services.  AVUSD’s annual budget is approximately $112 million, about 85 
percent of which pays employee salaries and benefits.  
 
 
governing board).  Robert Seevers (Superintendent Seevers), the Superintendent of Schools, 
is the Board’s Chief Executive Officer.  Thomas Hoegerman (Deputy Superintendent 
Hoegerman), who has been with the district for 20 years, is currently responsible for hiring 
certificated employees, initiating disciplinary actions, conducting negotiations with the 
teachers’ association, and overseeing this layoff process.  Ann Green (Director Green) is 
AVUSD’s Director of Certificated Human Resources. 
 
The Continuing Fiscal Crisis – Economic Layoffs 
 
 
major source of assured revenue for funding public education in California.  After 
Proposition 13 was passed, public school districts have looked primarily to the State of 
California and to other governmental entities for funding.  
 
 
A school district cannot determine the level of state funding until the state budget is 
chaptered, an event usually occurring in July, but sometimes taking much longer.  A school 
board’s obligation to balance its budget often requires that some teachers, administrators or 
other certificated employees be given preliminary layoff notices, warning them that their 
services will not be required for the next school year.  Under Education Code section 44949, 
these preliminary layoff notices must be given no later than March 15. 
 
 
retention of senior employees over more junior employees and the retention of permanent 
employees over probationary employees and others with less seniority.  A public school 
district may deviate from the general rule requiring termination in reverse order of seniority 
only if it can demonstrate that identifiable junior employees possess a credential, special 
training or experience necessary to teach a course of study or to provide services which more 
senior employees do not possess, a process known as skipping. 
 
The District’s Response 
 
By early 2010, AVUSD’s governing board and administration (as well as the 
 
governing boards and staff of most other public school districts) were aware of the State of 
California’s continuing budget deficit and its probable crippling impact on public education.  
In addition, the district suffered declining enrollment in the 2009-10 school year.  As a result 
of the impending financial crisis, AVUSD projected a budget deficit of about $8.8 million for 
the 2010-2011 school year.  The district was required to look into ways to balance its budget 
including the reorganization of the existing school sites (which included the closing of a 

The economic layoff statutes found in the Education Code generally require the 

4. 

 

2

Deputy Superintendent Hoegerman and AVUSD staff prepared a recommendation for 

campus for academic purposes), increasing class size, and the reduction of certificated and 
classified staffing and the elimination of various programs.  
 
 
Superintendent Seevers to present to the governing board which outlined the reduction and 
elimination of particular kinds of services being provided by certificated employees.  
 
 
Superintendent Seevers recommended to AVUSD’s governing board that the district notify 
certain certificated employees that their services would not be required in the 2010-11 school 
year and the reason for the recommended reduction in force. 
 

On February 18, 2010, under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, 

5. 

6. 

On February 18, 2010, the governing board passed the following amended 

resolution and exhibits: 

 

“AMENDMENT to RESOLUTION #0910-24 

 
RESOLUTION OF THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
APPLE VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
REGARDING A REDUCTION OR DISCONTINUANCE OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF 
SERVICE 

 
WHEREAS,  the  District’s  Governing  Board,  upon  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent,  has 
determined  that  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the  District,  and  the  welfare  of  the  students  thereof,  to 
reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds of services hereinafter enumerated. 

NOW  THEREFORE,  IT  IS  HEREBY  RESOLVED,  DETERMINED  AND  ORDERED  AS 
FOLLOWS: 

1. 

 
Pursuant  to  Education  Code  §§  44949  and  44955,  the  following  particular  kinds  of 
service shall be reduced or discontinued at the close of the 2009-2010 school year.  These services, listed 
by full-time equivalent (F.T.E) and part-time equivalent (P.T.E.) positions, and performed by certificated 
employees are as follows: 

(1.1) 
(1.2) 
(1.3) 
(1.4) 
(1.5) 
(1.6) 
(1.7) 
(1.8) 
(1.9) 
(2.0) 
(2.1) 
(2.2) 
(2.3) 
(2.4) 
(2.5) 
(2.6) 
(2.7) 

 

 

 

  75 
K-5 Elementary Classroom Teachers 
    1  Middle School Instrumental Music Teacher 
    1  Middle School Choral Music Teacher 
    4  Middle School Physical Education Teachers 
    2  Middle School Math Teachers 
 
    1  Middle School Social Science Teachers   
 
    1  Middle School English Teachers  
 
    2  Middle School Science Teacher  
 
    2   Middle School Art Teacher 
 
 
    1  Middle School Computer Teacher 
 
    3   High School English Teachers 
 
    3 
High School Math Teachers 
 
    1 
High School Choral Music Teacher 
 
    1 
High School Spanish Teacher 
High School Physical Education Teacher 
    1 
High School Art Teacher 
    1 
 
Special Education Mild/Moderate Teachers 
   13 

 
 

 

 

(75  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(  4  F.T.E.) 
(  2  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(  2  F.T.E.) 
(  2  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(  3  F.T.E.) 
(  3  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(13  F.T.E.) 

 

 

 

3

(2.8) 
(2.9) 
(3.0) 
(3.1) 
(3.2) 
(3.3) 

 

 

Counselors 
Elementary School Principals 

    8 
    2 
    1  Middle School Principal  
    2  Middle School Assistant Principals 
    2 
    9 
137 

High School Assistant Principals 
 
Intervention Teachers   
 TOTAL  

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

(  8  F.T.E.) 
(  2  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(  2  F.T.E.) 
(  2  F.T.E.) 
(  9  P.T.E.) 

 
3. 

 
 
 
 

2. 

The Superintendent or his designee is hereby directed to serve notices of termination in 
accordance with and in the manner prescribed by Education Code §§ 44949 and 44955.  In addition, the 
Superintendent or his designee is authorized, where deemed necessary, to issue additional notices so that 
certain other employees whose rights may be affected will have an opportunity to be heard. 

In selecting those certificated employees who shall receive notice of termination pursuant 

to this resolution and the provisions of Education Code §44955, those certificated employees whose 
positions are set forth in Exhibit “A,” a copy of which is attached hereto and by this reference 
incorporated herein, shall receive notice; however, an exception from the order of layoff will be sought 
because of the special training and experience of certain certificated employees who are assigned to teach 
a course of study or to fulfill a particular administrative task which others with more seniority do not 
possess. 
 
4. 

The Governing Board has determined that as between certificated employees who first 
rendered service in a probationary position on the same date, the order of termination of said employees 
shall be determined by reference to the tiebreak criteria and points to be assigned as described in Exhibit 
“B,” a copy of which is attached hereto and by this reference incorporated herein. 
 
ADOPTED, SIGNED AND APPROVED THIS 18th DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2010 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

Robert E. Turner_______________ 
Robert E. Turner 
President, Governing Board 

 
 
Exhibit “A” To Layoff Resolution #0910-24 
 
CERTIFICATED PERMANENT, PROBATIONARY AND TEMPORARY PERSONNEL WHOM 
THE DISTRICT SHALL SEEK TO EXEMPT FROM THE ORDER OF LAYOFF BY VIRTUE 
OF THEIR CREDENTIALS, COMPETENCE, ASSIGNMENT, EXPERIENCE OR 
CERTIFICATION 

 
 
The  Governing  Board  will  seek  to  exempt  from  the  order  of  certificated  layoff,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  §  44955  because  of  special  training,  experience,  or  credential  that  others  with  more 
seniority do not possess: 
 

Certificated personnel who possess an administrative credential, who are currently assigned 
to administrative positions, and who will be assigned to administrative positions for the 2010-
2011 school year.  

Certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service in language, speech and 
hearing,  who  are  presently  assigned  within  the  scope  of  that  credential,  and  who  will  be 
assigned within the scope of that credential for the 2010-2011 school year. 

1. 

 
2. 

 

 

4

3. 

4. 

5. 

 

 

Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  waiver  authorizing  service  in  the  area  of  language, 
speech and hearing, who are presently assigned within the scope of that credential, and who 
will be assigned within the scope of that credential for the 2010-2011 school year. 

Certificated personnel who are presently assigned as a Teacher on Assignment, and who will 
be assigned in that position for the 2010-2011 school year. 

Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  credential  authorizing  service  in  Bilingual, 
Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  (BCLAD),  who  are  presently 
assigned within the scope of that credential, and who will be assigned within the scope of 
that credential for the 2010-2011 school year. 

 
 
Exhibit “B” To Layoff Resolution #0910-24 

TIEBREAKER CRITERIA AND POINT SYSTEM TO BE APPLIED WHEN CERTIFICATED 
PERMANENT AND PROBATIONARY PERSONNEL SHARE THE SAME FIRST DATE OF PAID 
SERVICE 

The District values the services of all employees who may, by coincidence, share the same date of 

 
 
first paid service in a probationary position.  Education Code section 44955(b) states in part:  
 

 “As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same date, the 
governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the 
district and the students thereof.” 

1.     The Governing Board has determined that as between certificated employees who first 

rendered service in a probationary position to the District on the same date, the order of termination of 
said employees shall be determined by reference to the tiebreaker criteria and points to be assigned as 
follows: 

A.    Seniority shall be determined according to the first day of work performed in 

probationary status.  

 
B.     Unit members with the same first day of work performed in probationary status 

shall have their seniority order determined by lot.  

 

 

1.   The lottery shall be conducted in the presence of at least two (2) 

 
2.  Seniority determined by lot shall remain effective while the unit member 

Association representatives. 

is employed in the District. 

 

 
C.  Criteria for Resolving Ties in Seniority Related to Certificated Layoffs            
 

1.  Whereas Education Code section 44955, subsection (b), related to 

certificated layoffs, provides, in relevant part, that “between employees who first 
rendered paid service to the district on the same date, the governing board shall determine 
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students 
thereof…”  

     

5

 

 

 

2.  Based upon the needs of the District and the students thereof, the 

following criteria shall be applied in order, one step at a time, to resolve ties in seniority 
between certificated employees as outlined in the contract agreement between Apple 
Valley Unified School District and Apple Valley Unified Teachers’ Association.  

 

a.  First day of full time teaching service in the district as a 

bargaining unit member. 
 
b.  Authorization to teach English Language Learners (CLAD, 

BCLAD, SDAIE, SB395, etc.). 

 
c.  Number of years credentialed teaching experience in the District 

(prior to seniority date). 
 
d.  Number of years credentialed teaching experience outside the 

District. 

 
e.  Teaching experience in different grades or subjects. 
 
f.  Number of additional credentials or supplemental authorizations. 
 
g.  Possession of a Masters Degree - earliest date prevails. 
 
h.  Possession of a Doctorate Degree - earliest date prevails. 

 
2.  Individuals who are specifically exempted by resolution and individuals who do not 

receive a notice of layoff due to the scope of their credential will be properly credited in the event of a 
dispute. 

 
3.  Employees who receive a notice and who share the same date of first paid service shall be 

ranked by the criteria set by the AVUTA contract.   

 
4.  If the criteria listed above does not break a tie, the District shall hold a lottery at least five 

work days prior to the layoff hearing.  Each group of tied employees shall have the right to attend the 
lottery and pick a lottery number.  In the absence of the employee, the Superintendent or designee will 
select a lottery number on behalf of the employee. 

 
5.  As between tied employees, low lottery numbers will indicate low seniority for that hire 

 
6.  These criteria have been determined to best serve the needs of the District and students 

thereof, and will be applied in the April, 2010 layoff hearing in which the issue may arise.” 

date.   

 

7. 

Jurisdictional Matters 
 
 
On and before March 15, 2010, 169 certificated employees of AVUSD were 
served with written notice that the Superintendent of Schools had recommended that their 
services be terminated at the conclusion of the current school year, and that their services 
would not be needed for the upcoming 2010-11 school year.  Each employee was notified of 
the right to a hearing.  Each employee who filed a request for a hearing was thereafter served 
with an accusation and other required jurisdictional documents.  

 

6

 

 

8. 

On April 8, 2010, the record in the administrative hearing was opened.  

Jurisdictional documents were presented.  An amendment to the amended resolution was 
proposed, which was accepted without objection.  The amendment made the following 
changes to the amended resolution: 

K-5 Elementary Classroom Teachers (the proposed reduction of 75 F.T.E. was 

Special Education Mild/Moderate Teachers (the proposed reduction of 13 F.T.E. 

Elementary School Principals (the proposed reduction 2 F.T.E. was reduced to 1 

  13 

 
(1.1) 
  75 
reduced to 68 F.T.E.) 
 
 (2.7) 
was reduced to 10 F.T.E.) 
 
(2.9) 
F.T.E.)  
 
 (3.1) 
eliminated.) 

    2 

    2  Middle School Assistant Principals (the proposed reduction of 2 F.T.E. was 

High School Assistant Principals (the proposed reduction of 2  F.T.E. was 

 
(3.2) 
    2 
eliminated.) 
 
Thereafter, stipulations were reached regarding the admissibility of the district’s 
documentary evidence, sworn testimony was given, documentary evidence was received, and 
the parties agreed that that the layoff notice served upon respondent Janet Ambie (employee 
number 248) be rescinded and that the accusation filed against her be dismissed.  Thereafter, 
closing arguments were given, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted. 
 
The Particular Kinds of Services 

 
9. 

The services identified in the governing board’s resolution were services the 

governing board could properly reduce and discontinue.  The reduction of those services was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and the reduction of services was a matter within the board’s 
discretion.  No particular kinds of services were lowered to levels below those levels mandated 
by state or federal law.  The district’s administrative staff considered all known positive 
attrition including resignations, retirements, military service obligations, and probationary non-
reelects to determine the number of layoff notices that needed to be issued.   
 
The Seniority List 
 
 
10.  AVUSD maintained a seniority list, a living document that is constantly updated 
as new employees are hired, when other employees retire or resign, and when new information 
concerning an employee’s credential status or other information is brought to the district’s 
attention.  An employee’s seniority date set forth in the seniority list is based on the employee’s 
first date of paid service with the district in a probationary position.1  

                                                
1  
 

Education Code section 44845 provides: 

7

Before issuing preliminary layoff notices, AVUSD provided employees with an 

11.  Under Deputy Superintendent Hoegerman and Director Green’s supervision, a 

12.  According to Deputy Superintendent Hoegerman, the district made assignments 

 
opportunity to review the seniority list and to advise of any need to make changes to it.  Changes 
were brought to the district’s attention and the seniority list was updated to reflect those changes 
until the day before this layoff proceeding.2  There is one job share position within the district, 
but the least senior of the two employees who participated in that job share had sufficient 
seniority that the position was not impacted by the layoff proceeding.   
 
 
final seniority list, a bumping list based on that seniority list, several schedules with the names 
of all persons who would not be with the district the following year as a result of attrition, and 
the results of lotteries for employees hired on the same dates were prepared.   
 
 
based on an employee’s seniority and the employee holding of an appropriate credential.  Under 
the board’s resolution, certain employees were “exempt” from the layoff process.  Those 
employees who were skipped included: certificated personnel who possessed an administrative 
credential who were currently assigned to administrative positions and who would be assigned to 
administrative positions for the 2010-2011 school year; certificated personnel who possessed a 
credential authorizing service in language, speech and hearing or a waiver authorizing service in 
the area of language, speech and hearing who were presently assigned within the scope of that 
credential and who would be assigned within the scope of that credential for the 2010-2011 
school year; certificated personnel who were presently assigned as a Teacher on Assignment3 
and who would be assigned in that position for the 2010-2011 school year; and certificated 
personnel who possessed a BCLAD authorization who were presently assigned within the scope 
of that credential and who would be assigned within the scope of that credential for the 2010-
2011 school year.   
 
 
appropriate credentials and possessed distinct experience that made their services particularly 
valuable to the district such that the retention of these properly credentialed and uniquely 
qualified employees was in the best interest of the district and the students thereof, even though 
the retention of some of these employees might impact the continuing employment of more 
senior employees who did not possess such credentials or qualifications.  It was not established 
that the district’s exemption of these individuals was not in good faith, or that arbitrary criteria 
were used to skip these junior employees, or that the skipping of these persons was not in the 
best interest of the district or its students.  
 

According to Deputy Superintendent Hoegerman, the individuals who were skipped held 

“Every probationary or permanent employee employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been 
employed on the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.” 

                                                                                                                                                       
 
 
 
2  
applied are separately discussed hereafter.   
 
3 
Special Assignment (TOSA) have special training, skills and acquired knowledge.  In the AVUSD, TOAs mentor 
other teachers, provide in-service training, and are responsible for acquiring grants and other funding.  

Employees assigned as Teachers on Assignment (TOA), sometimes known in other districts as Teachers on 

The use of the tie-breaking criteria and the criticism of the manner in which the tie-breaking criteria were 

 

8

13.  Although no temporary employees or substitute teachers were involved in this 

 
layoff proceeding, precautionary notices were sent to temporary employees. 
 
Core Assignments 
 
 
14.  Most elementary schools, regardless of the grade level configuration, are 
organized around a self-contained classroom where most or all subjects are taught to the 
same group of children by a single teacher.  Most elementary school teachers hold a Ryan 
Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, which permits an individual to teach multiple subjects 
to students in a self-contained classroom.  
 
Most high schools have departmentalized classes.  Most high school teachers hold a 
 
single subject teaching credential.  With a single subject teaching credential, a teacher may 
teach any class within the broad single subject area listed on the credentialing document. 
 
Middle schools and junior high schools4 provide a transition from the elementary 
 
school’s self-contained classroom to the departmentalized programs offered in high schools.  
As a result, middle schools and junior high schools may incorporate features not generally 
present at the elementary school or high school levels, and some authorizations to teach 
middle school are unique.  
 
If a middle or junior high school program is arranged so that one teacher provides 
 
instruction in several subjects, it is a self-contained classroom and that middle school or 
junior high school teacher must have a multiple subject credential.  But, when a middle 
school or a junior high school teacher teaches just one subject to several groups of students, 
he or she needs to have a credential that authorizes the teaching of that subject in a 
departmentalized setting.  
 
Within the middle school and junior high school milieu, a “core assignment”5 
 
involves a middle school or junior high school teacher providing instruction in a self-
contained classroom where he or she teaches two or more subjects for two or more periods 
per day to the same group of pupils, and, in addition, teaches any of those subjects to a 
separate group of pupils at the same grade level for an additional period or periods, provided 
that the additional period or periods do not exceed one-half of the teacher’s total assignment.  
  
 
Director Green established that she was extremely familiar with the kinds of credentials and 
authorizations that were required to teach in various subject matter areas and that she was 
knowledgeable about what constituted a core assignment.  Director Green carefully examined 
the credentials of each employee impacted by the layoff proceeding to determine if that 
employee was authorized to teach a core assignment, whether a senior teacher could become 

15. 

Based on her extensive training and many years of experience as an administrator, 

Middle schools are defined as schools that most frequently include grades six through eight but may have 

                                                
4  
any combination of grades five through eight.  Junior high schools often also include grade nine. 
 
5  

A core assignment is defined in Education Code section 44258.1. 

 

9

qualified by reason of the teacher’s education and training to teach a core assignment, and 
whether a displaced core assignment teacher had the seniority and competence to bump into a 
position held by a more junior teacher at either the elementary school or at the high school level 
including teaching exclusively in grade nine.  Director Green continued her examination and 
counsel until the day before the layoff proceeding, and her efforts were reflected in the bumping 
list.  There was no evidence that any of her judgments concerning seniority and credentials 
related to core assignments were incorrect, and there was no evidence that Director’s Green’s 
judgment concerning credential qualifications in other areas was incorrect.  
 
The Tie-Breaking Procedure 
 
 
Article 6 of the collective bargaining agreement between AVUSD and the Apple Valley Unified 
Teachers’ Association (the teachers’ association) and the interpretation that has been given to 
that agreement by the district and the teachers’ association for the past three years.  
 
 
first day of work performed in a probationary position.”  
 
 
 

16.  AVUSD’s tie-breaking procedure is unique.  AVUSD’s procedure is based upon 

Section A of the agreement provides:  “Seniority shall be determined according to the 

Section B of the agreement provides: 

“Unit members with the same first day of work performed in probationary status shall 
have their seniority order determined by lot. 
 

The lottery shall be conducted in the presence of at least two (2) 

1. 
Association representatives. 

Seniority determined by lot shall remain effective while the unit member is 

 

2. 
employed by the District.”  
 

Section C of the article provides in part: 

First day of full time teaching service in the district as a bargaining unit 

“Based upon the needs of the District and the students thereof, the following criteria shall 
be applied in order, one step at a time, to resolve ties in seniority between certificated 
employees: 
 
a. 
member. 
 
b. 
SB395, etc.). 
 
c. 
seniority date). 
 
d. 

Authorization to teach English Language Learners (CLAD, BCLAD, SDAIE, 

Number of years credentialed teaching experience in the District (prior to 

Number of years credentialed teaching experience outside the District. 

10

 
 

 

Teaching experience in different grades or subjects. 

Number of additional credentials or supplemental authorizations. 

e. 
 
f. 
 
g. 
 
h. 
 
17.  Deputy Superintendent Hoegerman testified that when the district determines 

Possession of a Doctorate Degree - earliest date prevails.” 

Possession of a Masters Degree - earliest date prevails. 

it is necessary to break a tie between employees who possess the same first paid date of 
probationary service, the district contacts the teachers’ association.  In the presence of 
representatives from the teacher’s association, the district applies the Article 6, Section C 
criteria as they existed on the employees’ first date of paid service.  The criteria are applied 
step by step, and the employees who possess the criteria that others in their class to do not 
are given senior status.  When all remaining members in the class do not meet a common 
criteria (for example, at step “c” no employee with the same date of hire has any teaching 
experience in the district before his or her seniority date), a tie is declared and a lottery is 
conducted for all of those employees.  The additional criteria below step “c” (number of 
years credentialed teaching experience outside the District, teaching experience in different 
grades or subjects, number of additional credentials or supplemental authorizations, 
possession of a m masters degree, possession of a doctorate Degree) are not considered even 
though an employee who is in a tied status may possess one or more of those criteria.  At that 
point, a lottery is conducted by teacher association representatives in which the seniority of 
the teachers who are tied is determined.  The lottery results are provided to the district.  

 
If an employee who was in a tie later establishes that he or she held a particular 
authorization, credential or degree, or possessed relevant experience on that employee’s first 
day of work performed in a probationary status, then that employee is credited with meeting 
the tie-breaking criteria and is given seniority over those in the tie who did not possess that 
criteria; a new lottery is then conducted. 

 
If an employee obtains a credential or degree or attains additional experience after the 
employee’s first day of work performed in a probationary status, the employee’s acquisition 
of that criterion does not change the employee’s seniority status under the agreed tie-
breaking criteria because that criterion was not possessed on the employee’s first day of 
work.  

 
Deputy Superintendent Hoegerman testified that the district has utilized the 
aforementioned tie-breaking criteria in the manner described for several years and did so 
with the assistance of representatives from the teachers’ association.   

 
No document or testimony was provided to establish that any teacher or any teachers’ 
association representative disagreed with the district’s application of the tie-breaking criteria 
before the day of the hearing, although argument was made that there was criticism of the 
tie-breaking procedure in at least two previous layoff proceedings.  

 

 

11

18. 

Pamela Hammond (Hammond), a teacher, testified that she was hired the same 

date as 30 others teachers, but unlike many of those teachers, she had a master’s degree and 
had significant teaching experience in other school districts before her employment with 
AVUSD.  She complained that AVUSD’s application of the tie-breaking criteria did not take 
this advanced degree and experience into consideration, and that as a result of the lottery, she 
was given seniority position 26 of the 31 teachers hired on the same date.  The employees in 
a tie who were given the first and second seniority positions based upon the lottery had no 
advanced degree and had no teaching experience at all before their employment with the 
AVUSD.  Based upon this, Hammond wondered how it could be concluded that the 
application of the tie-breaking criteria was in the best interest of AVUSD or its students. 

Stephanie White (White), a middle school physical education teacher hired in 
2004, expressed similar concerns to those expressed by Hammond.  White, like Hammond, 
held a master’s degree and had considerable teaching experience before she was hired by 
AVUSD.  She, too, wondered how the application of the tie-breaking criteria benefitted the 
district and its students.  

Erica Luke (Luke), who was hired in August 2007, held the same seniority 

date as 15 others.  Her position was listed as “temp” on the seniority list even though she had 
previously held tenured status.  Luke was concerned about the application of the tie-breaking 
procedure, as was Hammond and White, because Luke had ten years of teaching experience 
outside the district before she was hired.  

 
Green established that Luke’s employment was subject to termination following the 
2009 layoff proceeding, but that Green was able to find a temporary position for Luke in a 
categorically funded assignment.  Luke signed a “temporary” contract for this assignment, 
which was the reason the word “temp” was listed adjacent to Luke’s name on the seniority 
list.  However, Green established that the district did not consider Luke to be a temporary 
teacher for seniority purposes and that Luke’s employment status was not negatively 
impacted by the fact that she had been working in a temporary assignment.  Luke did not 
have sufficient seniority and competence (in terms of holding an appropriate credential) to 
bump a more senior employee and was thus subject to layoff in this proceeding.  

 
19. 

 
20. 

 
21. 

The district represented that even if the tie-breaking criteria were improperly 

applied, which it did not concede, such an error would be irrelevant since all persons who 
were subject to the purported misapplication would be subject to layoff in any event; in other 
words, there would be no prejudice. 

 
22.  Although there was heavy criticism of the district’s application of the tie-

breaking criteria and the assertion that the teachers’ association had no role in the district’s 
interpretation and application of the criteria, no testimony or documentary evidence 
controverted District Superintendent Hoegerman’s testimony to the contrary or refuted all of 
the inferences reasonably drawn from such testimony.  No seniority list was proposed that set 
forth the “correct” manner in which to assign seniority.  No employee testified that the 
misapplication of the tie-breaking criteria as applied should specifically result in that teacher 
being able to bump another teacher by reason of seniority.  

 

12

23.  AVUSD’s governing board resolved to reduce and discontinue particular kinds 

 
The Layoff Procedure 
 
 
of services provided by teachers and other certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  
This decision was not related to the competency or dedication of the employees whose 
services were proposed to be discontinued.  The governing board’s determination that certain 
employees were exempt from the layoff was lawful, reasonable, and in the best interest of the 
district and its students.   
 

The district’s administrative staff initiated and followed a systematic procedure for 

Except for employees who were exempted from the process, no junior credentialed 

identifying employees directly affected by the governing board’s resolution.  Careful 
evaluation of each employee’s seniority date, credential, and qualifications preceded the 
determination of what bumping rights, if any, an employee had.  Adjustments were made to 
the seniority list where indicated until the day before the layoff proceeding.  
 
 
employee was retained by the district to provide services which a more senior employee was 
certificated, competent and qualified to render. 
 
Teacher Testimony 
 
 
application of the tie-breaking process.  The testimony reflected the witnesses’ love of 
teaching, their desire to retain their employment, and their concern about what was in the 
best interest of the district and its students.  Their testimony established the frustration, 
sorrow and inevitable loss that accompany the termination of bright, young, highly skilled, 
enthusiastic teachers.  The teachers’ testimony did not establish that any mistakes were made 
in the assessment of seniority and competency related to a teacher’s credential. 
  
 

The heartfelt testimony of the teachers who testified raised questions about the 

24. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Statutory Authority  
 
 
 

1. 

Education Code section 44944 provides in part: 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the 
governing board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year . . . 
the governing board and the employee shall be given written notice by the 
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been recommended 
that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor . . . 
 
(b) 
The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying him or her for the ensuing year . . .  If an employee fails to request a 

 

13

hearing on or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his 
or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . . 

 
In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the proceeding shall be 

(c) 
conducted and a decision made in accordance with . . . the Government Code and the 
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency therein, except that all 
of the following shall apply: 
 
 
The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any, within five 
days after service upon him or her of the accusation and he or she shall be notified of 
this five-day period for filing in the accusation. 

(1) 

. . . 

(3) 

The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge who 

 
 
shall prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a determination as 
to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof.  The proposed decision shall be prepared for the 
governing board and shall contain a determination as to the sufficiency of the cause 
and a recommendation as to disposition.  However, the governing board shall make 
the final determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and disposition.  None of the 
findings, recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed decision 
prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding on the governing board.  
Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or governing board 
of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the charges unless the 
errors are prejudicial errors.  Copies of the proposed decision shall be submitted to the 
governing board and to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the 
proceeding is commenced. . . .”  

Education Code section 44955 provides in part: 

2. 
 
“(a)  No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes 
other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, 
inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 
cause other than as specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
(b)  Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not 
later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in the opinion of 
the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary . . . to decrease the 
number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate 
the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated 
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school 
year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee 
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary 
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service 
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.  

14

 

 
 

 

 
. . . 
 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis 
of needs of the district and the students thereof . . .   
 

. . . 

Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 15th of May . . 

 
(c) 
. and services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in 
which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with the 
provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or 
probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for 
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year. 
 
The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that 
employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and 
qualifications entitle them to render.  However, prior to assigning or reassigning any 
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught, 
and for which he or she does not have a teaching credential or which is not within the 
employee’s major area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the 
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter competency test 
in the appropriate subject. 
 
Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
(d) 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following 
reasons: 
 
 
specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services 
credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a 
school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, which 
others with more seniority do not possess. . . .” 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 

(1) 

3. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
Jurisdiction 
 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied 
as to all respondent employees who were identified in the accusation.   
 
The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
is not tied in with any statistical computation.  Where a governing board determines to 

A school board’s decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service 

4. 

 

15

5. 

discontinue or reduce a particular kind of service, it is within the discretion of the board to 
determine the amount by which it will reduce a particular kind of service as long as a district 
does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen 
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) 
 
Competence 
 
The intent of the Education Code is to leave to a school board the discretion of 
 
determining whether in addition to possessing seniority an employee is also “certificated and 
competent” to be employed in a vacant position.  The term “competent” in this regard relates 
to an individual’s specific skills or qualifications including academic background, training, 
credentials, and experience, but does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance.  
(Forker v. Board of Trustees (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)  In addition to seniority, the 
only limitation in placing a teacher in a vacant position is that the teacher selected be 
“certificated and competent” to render the service required by the vacant position.  Among 
employees who meet this threshold limitation, there is no room in the statutory scheme for 
comparative evaluation.  (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299.)  An 
employee holding a special credential or needed skill, if such credentials or competence are 
not shared by a more senior employee, may be retained though it results in termination of a 
senior employee.  (Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.) 
 
Seniority, Bumping, and Skipping  
 
 
 
 
subdivision (b), in part, as follows:  “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of 
no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while . . . any 
other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.”  Essentially this language provides 
“bumping” rights for senior certificated and competent employees, and “skipping” authority 
to retain junior employees who are certificated and competent to render services which more 
senior employees are not.  Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to 
subdivision (b) where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course of study and that a junior certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated employee does not possess.  
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.)  
 
 
 
 
its specific “needs” and there is nothing in the statute that requires such needs to be 
evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job descriptions, or program requirements.  
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at 138.) 
 

Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 expressly allows a district to demonstrate 

Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff statute, provides in 

The Statutory Scheme 

Skipping 

7. 

6. 

 

16

Bumping 

8. 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to 

 
 
determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an 
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be 
assigned to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at 136-137.) 
 
Tie-Breaking   
 
 
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b) provides in part: 

9. 

“As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 

same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the 
basis of needs of the district and the students thereof.  Upon the request of any 
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the governing board shall 
furnish in writing no later than five days prior to the commencement of the hearing 
held in accordance with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in 
determining the order of termination and the application of the criteria in ranking each 
employee relative to the other employees in the group.  This requirement that the 
governing board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for determining 
the order of termination shall not be interpreted to give affected employees any legal 
right or interest that would not exist without such a requirement.” 
 
10. 

Respondents argued that the application of district’s tie-breaking procedure 

was improper, that the tie-breaking procedure should have included consideration of all 
criteria on the tie-breaking list before a lottery was conducted, that the tie-breaking procedure 
did not take into account newly acquired credentials, degrees and experience, that the entire 
layoff process was tainted by these and other errors, and that the proper remedy for these 
egregious violations was “to throw out the entire proceeding.” 

 
The district argued that there was no error in the application of the tie-breaking 

criteria, but if so, then no actual injury was established as a result.  

 
11. 
 

Education Code section 44944, subdivision (c)(3) provides in part: 

“Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or 

governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the 
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.”  
 
12.  With regard to the application of tie-breaking criteria, an employee must 

 
establish prejudice.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at 144.)   
 
Even if error existed, invalidation of the entire layoff procedure as suggested 
 
by respondents would constitute an inappropriate remedy.  On this record, any tie-breaking 
error was a nonsubstantive procedural error that did not result in prejudice and does not 
invalidate the layoff proceeding.  This conclusion does not preclude the district and the 

13. 

 

17

association from revisiting and amending the tie-breaking process for purposes of rehire 
following this layoff proceeding and the use of a different system in future proceedings.  
 
Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees 
 

14.  As a result of the governing board’s lawful reduction and elimination of 

15. 

particular kinds of service, cause exists under the Education Code for the district to give 
notice to those respondents identified hereafter that their employment will be terminated at 
the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed by the district 
for the 2010-11 school year. 
 
Determination 
 
 
The charges set forth in the accusation were sustained by the preponderance of 
the evidence and were related to the welfare of the Apple Valley Unified School District and 
the pupils thereof.  AVUSD’s administrative staff made necessary assignments and 
reassignments in such a manner that the most senior employees were retained to render 
services which their seniority and qualifications entitled them to render, except as otherwise 
noted herein.  Unless exempted by board resolution, no employee with less seniority than any 
respondent will be retained to render a service which any respondent identified hereafter is 
certificated, competent and qualified to render.   
 
 
 

This determination is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 

 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
It is recommended that the governing board give final notice to the respondents 
whose names are set forth below that their employment will be terminated at the close of the 
current school year and that their services will not be needed for the 2010-2011 school year. 
  

Joshua McClane; Heather Fieler; Matthew Stiglich; Linda Shelton; Tracie Bennett; 
Kimberly Davis; Carrie Mondt; Luis Calderon; Susan Bennis; Brett Mondt; Kristy Croft; 
Brock Barrington; Jennifer Ulrich; Daniel Casady; Laura Rice; Karen Sabers; Barbara 
McNelis; Suzanne Smith; Victoria Reynolds, Jeniffer Manning; Philip Maglinte; Carmen 
Ponce de Leon; Aimee Kurtz; Violet Carter; Ranee Daudel; Shaun Ricker; Jessica Vargas; 
Vicky McDaniel; Melissa Bonneau; Melanie Moniz; Carol Olin; Tammy Scott; Megan Ross; 
Kristen Cabrera; Kerry Sapina; Wendy Bastianon; Adele Turner-McClain; Alicia Brown; 
Karen Rampley; Deanne Jennison; Martha Lopez; Kristin Dupree; Shana Gauger; Grant 
Pederson; Amy Reed; Nicole Steely; Sarah Grief; Kristine Robsahm; Kris Von Kaenel; Ryan 
Ostlie; Sandra Waller; Megan Lukehart; Guadalupe Del Real; Bridgitt Williams; Courtney 
O’Hara-Tsai; Kate Swick; Pamela Hammond; Georgina Barreda; Shannon O’Reilly; Holly 
Silvering; Laura Stewart; Esther Haskins; Sean Sooter; Olivia Allala; Oliver Hutfilter; Carrie 
Talataina; Cheryl Denny; Nichole Cataneso; Martell Olson; Debra Boyd; Angelica Munoz; 
Christopher Tyler; Cynthia Breves; Kittie Yonamine; Kyle Nettels; Erica Luke; Kenneth 
Cooper; Amber Vu; Melanie Thomson; Bramlett Browne; Casey Kemble; Robin Fowlie; 

 

18

Kyle Godfrey; Sherri Szabo; Louise Herington; Sean Sers; Wendy Thielen; David Luther; 
Jarom Viehweg; Justin Price; John Parker; Melissa Matthews; Lourdes Anderson; Vicki 
Angel; Golden Coates; Sara McCombie; Efrain Estrada; Erik Crull; Anthony Bonato; Emily 
Gollmyer; Julie Martinez; Kimberly Connolly; Inga Swearingen; Deniss De La Rosa; Tiina 
Collier; John Britt; Audrey Hovannesian; John Boyd; Eric Olson; Madhu Melvani; Karen 
Silz; Cynthia Bien; Jonathan Cahow; Julia Valadez; Kristen Celie; Lindi Hobbs; Paula 
Lohmann; and Meera Hupp. 
 
 
 
DATED:  ______________ 
 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
JAMES AHLER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

19

