BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF EDUCATION 
OF THE  
MOUNTAIN VIEW SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction of Force of 
the Mountain View School Districts: 
 
Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” 

 
 
OAH No. 2010030128 
 
 

 
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Mark W. Thompson, Esq. Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented 

Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of 
 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Ontario, California on April 7, 2010. 
 
 
David Creswell, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel & Administrative Services. 
 
 
Respondents listed on Exhibit “A”1.    
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 12, 2010.2

Henry R. Willis, Esq., Schwartz, Steinsapir, Dohrmann & Somners LLP, represented 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
The Board of Education of the Mountain View School District determined to reduce 
or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers for budgetary reasons.  The 
decision was not related to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose services 
are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.   
 

Renee Dives (Dives) and Brandy Hurt (Hurt) received layoff notices but did not request a hearing; Hurt has 

                                                 
1  
resigned. 
 
2  
The record remained open for receipt of briefs that were filed simultaneously on April 12, 2010.  The 
District’s Post-Hearing Brief was marked as Exhibit 19, and Respondents’ Post-Hearing Brief was marked as 
Exhibit A.   
 

On April 12, 2010, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted.  

 
1

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 

review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” “skipping” and breaking ties between/among 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in accordance 
with the requirements of the Education Code.  
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” (Respondents) are probationary or 
permanent certificated employees of the Mountain View School District (District). 
 

2. 

On February 11, 2010, Dr. Rick Carr, the District’s Superintendent 

(Superintendent) notified the District’s Board of Trustees (Board) of his recommendation to 
reduce or discontinue services for the ensuing school year due to financial conditions. 

 
3. 

On February 16, 2010, based on recommendation from the District’s 

Superintendent, the Board adopted a resolution reducing or eliminating particular kinds of 
services (PKS) and identifying “competency” criteria for purposes of bumping for the 2010-
2011 school year.  Further, the Board directed the Superintendent to initiate layoff 
procedures and give appropriate notice pursuant to Education Code sections 44955 and 
44949. 
 
4. 

On March 9, 2010, David Creswell, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel & 

5. 

On March 9, 2010, the Assistant Superintendent made and filed an Accusation 

Administrative Services (Assistant Superintendent), served Respondents with written notice 
that he recommended not to re-employ them in the 2010-2011 school year and stated the 
reasons therefor.  In addition, the notice advised Respondents of the right to hearing, that the 
request for hearing must be delivered to the District’s office no later than March 24, 2010, 
and that the failure to request a hearing would constitute waiver of the right to a hearing.  
 
 
against Respondents.  He served each individual who submitted a Request for Hearing with 
an Accusation, Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing and related materials in a timely 
manner. 
 
 
6. 
Defense.   
 
 
 

Each Respondent submitted a timely Request for Hearing and/or Notice of 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied. 

7. 

8. 

On February 16, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution number 2009-10-07 and 
thereby took action to reduce or eliminate the following particular kinds of 
services commencing the 2010-2011 school year: 

 
2

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

General Education Elementary Classroom Teaching 
Positions 
Middle School Physical Education Teaching Position 

Middle School Science Teaching Position 

23  F.T.E. 

1  F.T.E. 

1  F.T.E. 

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

25  F.T.E. 

 
The proposed reductions totaled 25.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.   
 
 
final layoff notices to be delivered to its certificated employees. 
 

9. 

The District considered all known attrition in determining the actual number of 

10. 

The Assistant Superintendent was responsible for implementing the technical 

aspects of the layoff.  The District developed a seniority list that contained, among other 
things, the teacher’s name, status, seniority date, site, assignment, credentials, supplemental 
authorizations and application of tie-breaker criteria.    

 
The seniority date was based on the first date of paid service rendered in a 

probationary position.3   

 
11. 

 
12. 

In reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services, the services of no 

permanent employee may be terminated while retaining any employee with less seniority to 
render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render. 

 
The District used the seniority list for permanent and probationary certificated 
employees to develop a proposed order of layoff and a “bumping” list to determine the least 
senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced.  The District then 
determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another area that would 
entitle them to “bump” other junior employees.  In determining who would be laid off for 
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions and determined 
the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  The District then checked the 
credentials of affected individuals and whether they could “bump” other employees.  In 
doing so, the District considered the “competency” criteria established by the Board in its 
resolution, which states, in pertinent part: 
 

“….That the ‘competency’ as described in Education Code section 44955(b) for the 
purposes of bumping shall necessarily include possession of: (1) a valid credential in 
the relevant subject matter area; and (2) ‘highly qualified’ status under No Child Left 
Behind Act in the position to be assumed….” 

                                                 
3  
 

Education Code section 44845. 

 
3

13. 

Respondents argued that Claudia Villavicencio (Villavicencio) was improperly 

On June 12, 2006, Terry Weatherby, the District’s former Assistant Superintendent 

   
 
After reviewing each Respondent’s credentials and competency, the Assistant 
Superintendent determined that no Respondent was credentialed and competent to bump any 
employee being retained. 
 
 
retained because she is not highly qualified in her position to teach English Language Arts 
teacher; therefore Villavicencio is subject to bumping by any Respondent who is more senior 
and is credentialed to perform the duties she is being retained to render. 
 
Villavicencio has a seniority date of August 30, 2001 and holds a clear multiple 
 
subjects credential.  During the current school year, she is assigned to Grace Yokley Middle 
School and teaches English Language Arts.  The Assistant Superintendent testified that she 
has achieved highly qualified status under the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB).  She did 
not receive a layoff notice.   
 
 
(Weatherby) executed a form certifying Villavicencio as highly qualified in English 
Language Arts using the “HOUSSE” (High Objective Uniform State Standard of Evaluation) 
method (Exhibit 17).  Weatherby assigned points for prior experience, advanced degrees and 
successful observations.  In order to be certified, a teacher must achieve 100 points.  Before 
issuance of the certification, Weatherby was obligated to verify the information provided by 
Villavicencio.  She received 110 points (30 points for three years experience in the area of 
assignment, 60 points for having a master’s degree and 20 points for a successful 
observation), exceeding the number of points required to achieve highly qualified status.   
 
 
years prior experience because, on the form, under “Core Academic Subject Area 
Assignment”, it states “ESL & Culture/Eng-LA4”.  Given the foregoing, Respondents argued 
that insufficient evidence was offered to establish that Villavicencio had three years 
experience teaching English Language Arts because her duties were divided between the 
subject areas.  
 
 
capacity as the District’s Assistant Superintendent, and the form was contained in the 
District’s personnel files.  Therefore, pursuant to Evidence Code section 664, it is presumed 
that Weatherby properly and correctly carried out his duty to make the determination.   
Respondents offered no testimonial or documentary evidence to rebut the District’s evidence. 
 
 
assumed is a valid competency criterion.  The District established Villavicencio was properly 
certified by the District under NCLB.  There is no evidence to the contrary.  Finally, there is 

Respondents questioned whether the District properly gave her 30 points for three 

Respondents acknowledge that NCLB highly qualified status in the position to be 

On June 12, 2006, Weatherby created and executed the form (Exhibit 17) in his 

                                                 
4  
 

“Eng-LA” means English Language Arts 

 

 
4

14. 

By the terms of its Resolution reducing or eliminating particular kinds of 

Given the foregoing facts, the District’s bumping determination was proper. 

no evidence that there is a more senior teacher in the District who is credentialed and 
competent to displace Villavicencio. 
 
 
 
 
services (Finding 5)5, the District will terminate the services of one FTE position physical 
education (PE) middle school teacher.  As a result, the District will have only one female PE 
teacher in the 2010-2011 school year.  During the current school year, there are two or more 
teachers which results in sufficient staff to provide for safety and other needs of students.  
The District plans to provide sufficient staff to meet the needs of the students, despite having 
only one female PE teacher in the ensuing school year. 
 

15. 

Between the employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the 

same date, the Board determined their order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the 
District and the students.  The Board adopted specific criteria and provided clear instructions 
for implementation of the criteria.  The order of termination was based on the needs of the 
District and its students.  According to the evidence in the record, the tie-breaker criteria 
were fairly applied to rank those employees hired on the same date.  

The services that the District proposes to reduce were “particular kinds of 

 
services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services relates to the 

 
welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District as 
determined by the Board.  

 
18.  No certificated employee junior to any Respondent is retained to perform any 

 
services which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 

 
16. 

 
17. 

 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

2. 

                                                 
5  

Exhibit 3 

 

 
5

3. 

deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
 
Mountain View School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The 
cause for the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to 
the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.    
 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the 

4. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

5. 

No employee with less seniority than any Respondent is being retained to 

continuing position which he/she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior 
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Lacy v. 
Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 469)   
 
 
render a service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
the law and therefore rejected. 
 
 

All arguments not addressed herein are not supported by the evidence and/or 

6. 

ORDER 
 

 

2. 

1. 

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

The Accusation served on Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” is sustained.  
Notice shall be given to each Respondent listed on Exhibit “B”6 before May 15, 2010 that 
his/her services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction 
or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED: _________________________ 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
VALLERA J. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

                                                 
6  

Notice is not required to be given to Brandy Hurt because she resigned. 

 

 
6

