 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Nancy  Beezy  Micon,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  2010030595 
 
 

BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD 
WALNUT VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Paul Anthony Acosta, and other Certificated 
Employees of the Walnut Valley Unified 
School District, 
 
 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
heard this matter on April 29, 2010, in Walnut, California. 
 
 
Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  by  Mark  W.  Thompson,  Attorney  at  Law, 
represented  Bryan  Cole  (Cole),  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources  Director,  Walnut 
Valley Unified School District (District). 
 
 
Schwartz,  Steinsapir,  Dohrmann  &  Sommers,  by  Henry  M.  Willis,  Attorney  at  Law, 
represented Jeffrey A. Blackstone, Irene Carter, Susan D. Chang, Crystal Dira, Laurie Eyestone, 
Jamie  Highstreet,  Jill  Igarashi,  Linda  Kim,  Christopher  Ko,  Bonnie  P.  Manuel,  Kimberly 
McNeil,  Sarah  Sherman,  Victoria  Silcock,  Valeria  Suarez-Moya,  Jennifer  Galang  Veneracion, 
Susan Marie Willmering, and Jana Young, collectively referred to as Respondents. 
 
 
California  Teachers  Association,  by  Susana  Salas,  Regional  Uniserv  Staff,  Ontario 
Regional  Resource  Center,  represented  Respondent  Natalie  Lawrence,  who  received  a 
precautionary layoff notice. 
 
 
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year. 
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying 
them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Prior to the start of the hearing, the District rescinded its notices of non-reemployment 
 
issued  to,  and  dismissed  the  Accusation  as  it  pertains  to,  Respondents  Paul  Anthony  Acosta, 
Glenda  Baker,  Patricia  Joan  Breitag,  Joshua  Cameron,  Jennifer  Carr,  Daniel  C.  Chan,  Connie 

2. 

1. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

Assistant Superintendent Cole filed the Accusation in his official capacity as the 

Evidence was received at the hearing by way of stipulation, testimony and documents. 

Chen, Gretchen Chung, Kimberly Dalton, Trina Marie Dreyer, Shelly Euckert, Miki Evangelista, 
Kathryn M. Frick, Trinidad Garcia, Mary Thibodeaux Gaxiola, Cindy Giang, Karen A. Hardin, 
Kasumi  Hoard,  Laura  Ise,  Sally  Sonhwa  Kim,  Vera  Korneff,  Jennifer  La  Certe,  Jessica  Lee, 
Amy  Elizabeth  Leinen,  Ryan  Maine,  Kylance  J.  Malveaux,  Jill  Courtney  Marquez,  John  A. 
Martin,  Darcy  Faye  Milam,  William  Monte,  Norma  Morales,  Kelly  C.  Morris,  Jeffrey  Nicoll, 
Tara  Noelte,  Kary  Marie  Penzes-Alfaro,  Lawrence  Joseph  Pinto,  Kelli  Seawright,  Wendy 
Simpson, Jonathan A. St Amant, Margaret Ann Strand, Susan Tang, Brandy Thomas, Keith R. 
Thompson, Kenneth Neil Weeks, Lisa Welch, Michelle Yim, and Therapi Zaw-Kaplan. 
 
 
The matter was submitted for decision at the close of the hearing on April 29, 2010. 
  
 
 
 
duly appointed designee of the District’s Superintendent. 
 
 
 
 
On  March  3,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
adopted  Resolution  Number  10-10,  reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the 
2010-2011 school year: 
 
 
 
Elementary School: 
Elementary k-5 teaching 
Independent Studies k-8 teaching 
Elementary Music teaching 
Elementary Physical Education teaching 
Pre-Kindergarten Teaching 
 
Middle and High School: 
Special Education teaching 
Independent Studies 9-12 teaching 
Math teaching  
Social Science teaching 
Science teaching 
English teaching 

  1.0 
  2.0 
  3.4 
  4.8 
  2.0 
  3.0 

               FTE1 Reduction

45.7 
  1.0 
  3.0 
  4.0 
  1.0 

Service 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

3. 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                     

1 Full-time equivalent position. 
 

 

 
 
 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  1.0 
  1.0 
  0.2 
  1.5 

  1.6 
  2.0 
  4.0 
  3.0 
  0.2 
  0.6 
  0.2 
  0.2 
  0.2 
  0.2 
  0.4 

Physical Education teaching   
Art teaching 
 
 
Designed Based Learning teaching 
Student Staff Resource Advisor 
Computer teaching 
 
Alt. Ed. Photo teaching 
Athletic Director – Walnut High 
Athletic Director – Diamond Bar High 
I.B. Coordinator – Walnut High 
 
I.B. Coordinator – Diamond Bar High 
Alt. Ed. Physical Education teaching  
 
Educational Services: 
Psychologist 
 
 
Full-time permanent teacher providing substitute teaching   
 
Adapted Physical Education teaching 
Elementary Teacher Technology Support 
 
 
Administrative Services: 
Instructional Dean 
Alternative Education Principal 
 
 
 
On  March  8,  2010,  District  Superintendent  Cynthia  S.  Simms,  Ph.D.  (Simms) 
 
provided written notice to the Governing Board and to Respondents that she recommended the 
termination  of  Respondents’  services  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of 
particular kinds of services.  
 
 
Between  March  8  and  March  12,  2010,  the  District  provided  notice  to 
Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  due  to  the 
reduction of particular kinds of services. Respondents filed timely requests for hearing.  
 
 
The District timely filed and served the Accusation and other required documents 
on Respondents. Respondents thereafter timely filed Notices of Defense, seeking a determination 
of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
 
/// 
 
 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

  2.0 
  1.0

Total 

90.2 

      

6. 

7. 

8. 

4. 

5. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

3

9. 

10. 

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.2  
 
 
The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
finding number 3 because of an anticipated decline in State funding. The decision to reduce or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a 
proper exercise of the District's discretion. 
 
The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  given  the 
 
anticipated reduction in State funding, is related to the welfare of the District and its students, 
and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by 
the Governing Board. The reduction or elimination of the FTE positions will not reduce services 
below mandated levels. 
 
 
The Governing Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements 
and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees.   
 
The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority 
 
dates,  current  assignments,  probationary  or  tenured  status,  and  credential  and  certificate 
information. 

12. 

11. 

13. 

 
 
The District used the Seniority List with seniority dates to develop a proposed 
layoff  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being 
reduced.  The  District  also  considered  each  teacher’s  credentials  and  certifications.  The 
District  determined  that  nobody  less  senior  than  Respondents  was  being  retained  to  render 
services Respondents are certificated and competent to render. 

 
14.  On March 3, 2010, the Governing Board set forth in Resolution Number 10-11 
 
criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid 
service on the same date.  It provided that the order of termination shall be based solely on 
the needs of the District and its students. The criteria are reasonable as they relate to the skills 
and qualifications of certificated employees. 
 
Respondents Susan Chang and Jill Igarashi 
 
 
Respondent Susan Chang (Chang) is an elementary classroom teacher (0.5 FTE). 
She disputes her seniority date of August 22, 2006. She was first employed by the District during 
the  2005-2006  school  year  as  a  temporary  teacher.  She  acknowledges  that  she  signed  a 
temporary  contract  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  Chang  returned  to  teach  for  the  District 

15. 

                    

 

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

 

 
 
 

4

16. 

during the 2006-2007 school year. She acknowledges that she again signed a temporary contract. 
Chang was hired by District as a probationary employee for the 2007-2008 school year and has 
since continued to teach for the District without a break in service. 
 
 
Respondent Jill Igarashi (Igarashi) is an elementary classroom teacher (0.2 FTE) 
currently  assigned  to  teach  second  grade.  She  disputes  her  seniority  date  of  August  22,  2006. 
Igarashi was first employed by the District in 2004 as a substitute teacher on an on-call status. 
She  returned  to  the  District  during  the  2005-2006  school  year  as  a  temporary  teacher.  She 
acknowledges that she signed a contract to work for the District as a temporary employee. She 
continued  teaching  for  the  District  during  the  2006-2007  school  year  as  a  temporary  teacher 
under a written temporary employment contract. Igarashi was hired by District as a probationary 
employee for the 2007-2008 school year. She has continued to teach for the District without a 
break in service. 
 
17.  On  January  15,  2010,  both  Chang  and  Igarashi  signed  a  form  verifying  their 
 
personnel  information,  which  included  verification of the August 22, 2006 date as the date of 
their first paid service in a probationary position in the District. Respondents Chang and Igarashi 
also participated as Respondents in the reduction in force proceedings that took place in 2009. In 
the 2009 proceeding, Respondents Chang and Igarashi were also assigned the seniority date of 
August 22, 2006. Respondents Chang and Igarashi did not challenge their seniority dates during 
the 2009 action.  
 
Respondents Valeria Suarez-Moya and Natalie Lawrence 
 
Respondent Valeria Suarez-Moya (Suarez-Moya) testified that she can teach the 
 
courses  that  Natalie  Lawrence  (Lawrence),  a  less  senior  employee,  was  retained  to  teach. 
Lawrence  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  with  a  bilingual,  cross-cultural,  language  and 
academic  development  (BCLAD)  certificate.  Lawrence  teaches  elementary  school  Spanish. 
Lawrence has an education code authorization, which authorizes her to teach the Spanish course. 
Although Respondent Suarez-Moya has taken courses in Spanish, her credential only authorizes 
her  to  teach  elementary  school.  Therefore,  she  is  not  certificated  to  teach  Lawrence’s 
assignment. 
 
Respondent Jeffrey A. Blackstone 
  
 
Judy L. Brunelle (Brunelle), who has a seniority date of August 27, 1996, 
provides services teaching elementary music. Her position is one of the three being eliminated 
due  to  the  reduction  in  elementary  music  teaching  services.  Brunelle  holds  a  standard  life 
elementary credential with authorization to teach music from kindergarten through ninth grade. 
Brunelle is “highly qualified” to teach music under the No Child Left Behind Act. She contends, 
however, that she is not qualified to teach classes in band or orchestration.  
 

19. 

18. 

a. 

 

 
 
 

5

 

 

 

c. 

b. 

d. 

The  District  determined  that  Brunelle  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
 
render  the  services  performed  by  Respondent  Jeffrey  A.  Blackstone  (Blackstone),  a  middle 
school  music  teacher  whose  assignment  includes  teaching  band.  The  District  determined 
Blackstone was the least senior employee that held a position that Brunelle was certificated and 
competent to render. Brunelle was therefore not served with a layoff notice.  
 
 
Brunelle testified at the hearing in support of the retention of Respondent 
Blackstone. Brunelle believe she is not qualified to teach band. Brunelle received a Bachelor of 
Arts  degree  in  1967  with  a  focus  on  piano  and  choral.  She  received  a  Master’s  Degree  in 
Education in 2006. Brunelle has taught at the elementary school level for the past approximately 
11  years.  She  teaches  at  nine  elementary  school  campuses,  working  with  elementary  school 
students  in  choral  music,  music  appreciation,  and  general  music  studies.  Brunelle  has  no 
education in band, has never taught a course in band, does not play any of the band instruments, 
and  cannot  read  a  band  score.  Brunelle  informed  the  District  she  is  not  comfortable  teaching 
band. 
 
 
Respondent  Blackstone,  who  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  21,  2007, 
holds a single subject (music) credential. He is “highly qualified” in music under the No Child 
Left Behind Act. There is no dispute that Blackstone is exceptionally qualified to teach in his 
assignment.  He  holds  a  Master’s  degree  in  music  from  the  University  of  Southern  California 
(USC), with a focus on trumpet performance and brass pedagogy, and is on track to receive his 
doctorate  degree  from  USC  in  August,  2010.  Blackstone  has  15  years  of  experience  as  a 
professional musician (trumpet). He is the brass and wind coach as well as a substitute conductor 
for the Los Angeles Youth Orchestra. He can demonstrate all instruments used in a performing 
band, including string instruments. He has taught conducting at the college level. Blackstone’s 
current teaching assignment for the District includes one period of teaching choir, one period of 
teaching  an  enrichment  “wheel”  (beginning  brass  and  band  instruments),  and  three  periods  of 
teaching band.   
 
 
The  District  has  not  yet  finalized  its  schedule  for  music  teaching 
assignments  at  the  middle  school  level.  There  are  four  middle  school  music  teacher  positions 
remaining after the FTE reductions. 
   
 
applied the legal competence standard adopted by the Board in Resolution Number 10-10, as 
follows:   
 

In making the determination to “bump” Respondent Blackstone, the District 

20. 

e. 

 

That “competency” as described in Education Code section 44955(b) for 
the purposes of bumping shall necessarily include (1) possession of a valid 
credential in the relevant subject matter area, (2) “highly qualified” status 
under the No Child Left Behind Act, (3) an appropriate EL authorization 
(if required by the position), and (4) for the TOSA [teacher on special 

 

 
 
 

6

assignment] ELD Program Specialist position, the training and experience 
related to that position, including at least one year of District experience 
within the last five years. 
  
The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to any Respondent to 

21. 

 
render a service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

4. 

3. 

1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 7. 
 
 
The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 
and 8.   
 
 
Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction of the particular 
kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause relates solely to the welfare 
of the District's schools and students, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 21. 
 
 
The Education Code (Code) permits certificated employees to be classified in one 
of  four  ways:  permanent,  probationary,  substitute,  or  temporary.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma 
County  Union  High  School  District  (2003)  29  Cal.4th  911,  916  (Kavanaugh).)  A  certificated 
employee is classified as permanent, i.e., acquires tenure, if, after having been employed for two 
complete successive school years in a position requiring certification qualifications, he or she is 
reelected  for  the  following  year.  (§  44929.21,  subd.  (b);  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers 
Association  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  District  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1278-1279 
(Bakersfield).)  Probationary  employees  are  “those  persons  employed  in  positions  requiring 
certification  qualifications  for  the  school  year,  who  have  not  been  classified  as  permanent 
employees  or  as  substitute  employees.”  (§  44915.)  “[S]ection  44915  has  been  understood  to 
make  probationary  status  the  default  classification  for  certificated  employees  who  are  not 
otherwise  required  by  the  Code  to  be  classified  as  permanent,  substitute,  or  temporary 
employees. [Citations].” (Bakersfield, supra, 145 Cal.App.4th at p. 1281.) Substitutes are “those 
persons employed in positions requiring certification qualifications, to fill positions of regularly 
employed persons absent from service. . . .” (§ 44917.) Temporary employees are those requiring 
certification  qualifications,  other  than  substitute  employees,  who  are  employed  for  limited 
assignments,  as  defined  in  the  Code.  (California  Teachers  Association  v.  Vallejo  City  Unified 
School District (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135, 146 (Vallejo).)  
 
 
Employment as a substitute or other temporary status may become employment in 
a probationary capacity in some circumstances. “A year of employment as a temporary teacher 
may,  in  some  cases,  be  treated  as  a  year  of  probationary  service  for  purposes  of  attaining 

 

 

 
 
 

7

 

 

permanent status if the employee is rehired for the following year ‘as a probationary employee in 
a position requiring certification qualifications’ (§ 44909); ‘in a position requiring certification 
qualifications’  (§  44917);  ‘as  a  probationary  employee’  (§  44918);  or  ‘in  a  vacant  position 
requiring certification qualifications’ (§ 44920). . . .” (Bakersfield, supra, 145 Cal.App.4th at p. 
1279, fn 11.)  
 
 
Section 44918, subdivision (a), provides: “Any employee classified as a substitute 
or temporary employee, who serves during one school year for at least 75 percent of the number 
of days the regular schools of the district were maintained in that school year and has performed 
the duties normally required of a certificated employee of the school district, shall be deemed to 
have served a complete school year as a probationary employee if employed as a probationary 
employee for the following year.” Section 44918, subdivision (d), provides an exception to the 
rule, as follows:  “Those employees classified as substitutes, and who are employed to serve in 
an on-call status to replace absent regular employees on a day-to-day basis shall not be entitled 
to the benefits of this section.” 
 
 
In the case of Respondents Susan Chang and Jill Igarashi, the District established 
that  they  were  serving  as  temporary  employees  for  both  the  2005-2006  school  year  and  the 
2006-2007 school year. They were informed in writing of their temporary status. Respondents 
Chang and Igarashi were hired as probationary employees during the 2007-2008 school year and 
given  a  seniority  date,  pursuant  to  section  44918,  subdivision  (a),  of  August  22,  2006,  which 
provided seniority credit for the preceding year of temporary employment. Respondents Chang 
and Igarashi did not present evidence to refute their temporary status during the 2005-2006 and 
the  2006-2007  school  years.  The  seniority  date  for  Respondents  Chang  and  Igarashi  was 
correctly determined to be August 22, 2006, as set forth in factual finding numbers 15, 16, and 
17.   
 
 
precluded from raising the issue under the legal doctrine of collateral estoppel is rejected. In 
order to establish collateral estoppel, several threshold requirements must be met. First, the 
issue sought to be precluded from litigation must be identical to that decided in a former 
proceeding. Second, this issue must have been actually litigated in the earlier action. Third, it 
must have been necessarily decided in the earlier action. Fourth, the decision in the former 
proceeding must be final and on the merits. Finally, the party against whom preclusion is 
sought must be the same as, or in privity with, the party to the former proceeding. (See, 
Zapata v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1991) 2 Cal.App.4th 108, 112.) Chang and Igarashi 
did not litigate the issue in the 2009 proceeding. No decision was therefore made in that 
proceeding on the issue of the validity of their seniority date. Chang and Igarashi were not  
estopped from raising the issue in this proceeding. They failed, however, to present 
convincing evidence to establish an error in the assignment of their seniority dates. 
 
   

Section 44955, subdivision (c), provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he governing board 

In reaching this decision, the District’s argument that Chang and Igarashi were 

5. 

 

 

 
 
 

8

 

Sections 44949 and 44955 set forth the process through which certificated 

shall make assignments and reassignments in such manner that employees shall be retained to 
render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.”  Section 
44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides,  in  pertinent  part:  “[t]he  services  of  no  permanent  employee 
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or any 
other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.”  (Emphasis added.) “Certificated” is defined 
by  the  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  pertaining  to  credentials,  but  “competent”  is  not 
specifically defined.  In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 19, the Court 
defined the term in a reemployment proceeding under section 44956, in terms of the teachers’ 
skills and qualifications, specifically, as “relating to special qualifications for a vacant position, 
rather than relating to the on-the-job performance of the laid-off permanent employee.” In doing 
so, the Court noted that courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing Board 
(1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and  Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109 
Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, had interpreted the term in a similar manner. 
 
 
employees may be laid off following reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 
The statutes embody a legislative choice for seniority-based layoffs, subject to specific 
limitations set forth in the statutes. Section 44955 plainly requires examination of both 
certification and competence in reduction in force decisions. 
 
The District established that Respondent Valeria Suarez-Moya, an elementary 
 
school teacher with a seniority date of August 22, 2006, whose position is being eliminated, is 
not certificated to render the services currently being rendered by Respondent Natalie Lawrence, 
an elementary Spanish teacher with a seniority date of August 21, 2007. Lawrence holds an 
education code authorization which authorizes her to teach elementary Spanish. Suarez-Moya 
does not possess such a credential or authorization. Respondent Lawrence may therefore be 
retained to render this service, which was not eliminated as part of the reduction in services. 
 
 
Unlike  Suarez-Moya,  witness  Judy  Brunelle  (Brunelle),  an  elementary  school 
music teacher with a seniority date of August 27, 1996, whose position was eliminated, is both 
certificated and competent to render the services of Jeffrey Blackstone, a middle school music 
teacher with a seniority date of August 21, 2007, whose position was not eliminated. Brunelle 
was therefore retained to render the middle school music teaching services.  
 
 
Brunelle, who was not served with a layoff notice, contends she is not qualified to 
teach the band courses currently assigned to Blackstone. Blackstone would like to be retained for 
this assignment. There is no dispute that Blackstone is eminently qualified for the music teaching 
position he holds. A senior teacher, however, has a right to have a competency determination 
focused  on  his  or  her  specific  training  and  experience  as  they  relate  to  the  duties  of  a 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

9

 

If a senior teacher is competent, that is the end of the inquiry, and a district 

position.3    A  school  district  may  not,  in  the  guise  of  determining  whether  a  teacher  is 
competent, promote some policy that is not focused on that question. 
 
 
may not change the focus of the inquiry in order to pursue a policy of retaining the most 
competent teacher. In Martin v. Kentfield School District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, a former 
elementary school teacher who had been terminated pursuant to Code sections 44949 and 
44955 asserted the teacher’s preferred right of reappointment pursuant to Code section 
44956. The Court observed that employers have adopted a broad spectrum of policies 
regarding the weight to be given to seniority in making personnel decisions. The Court said, 
however, that the California Legislature has clearly articulated the preferred right of 
reappointment of teachers on lay-off status. 
 

[T]he Legislature has made seniority the sole determinant as to 
which tenured teachers on lay-off status should be appointed to 
a vacant position.  The only limitation is that the teacher 
selected be “certificated and competent” to render the service 
required by the vacant position.  Among the employees who met 
this threshold limitation, there is not room in the statutory 
scheme for comparative evaluation.  Thus, . . . which of the two 
employees under consideration . . . was “better” qualified for 
the job is not the question here, nor was it properly the question 
before the board.  The question for the board’s determination 
was simply whether Martin, the senior tenured teacher on layoff 
status, was “certificated and competent” to render the required 
service. 

Such determinations, it has been held, involve “discretionary 
decisions” which are within the “special competence” of the 
school districts.4  (Italics added.) 

 

 

 
 
 

 
Brunelle  holds  a  credential  which  authorizes  her  to  teach  music  at  the  middle 
 
school  level.  She  has  the  knowledge  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  music.  She  has 

 

                    

 

 
3 In King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1019, note 

2, the Court of Appeal noted the trial court’s conclusions of law – one of which was that 
competence has to do with “the correlation between [a teacher’s] specific training and 
experience and the duties of the available position.” 

 
4 Id. at p. 299. 
 

10

 

6. 

In  reaching  this  outcome,  it  was  not  necessary  to  address  the  District’s 

approximately  11  years  of  music  teaching  experience  in  the  District  with  a  demonstrated 
expertise  in  choral  music.  There  are  four  music  teaching  positions  remaining  at  the  middle 
school level. The District established that it has not yet finalized its schedule concerning which 
middle school music teachers will be teaching which courses. Brunelle is competent in terms of 
her certificated-based and experience-based criteria to establish competence for teaching music 
at the middle school level. Respondent Blackstone, a middle school music teacher, is the least 
senior  employee  who  holds  a  position  that  Brunelle  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach. 
Section  44955  plainly  requires  the  District  to  examine  both  certification  and  competence  in 
reduction in force decisions. It was not unreasonable for the District, in exercising its discretion, 
to decide to retain Brunelle to render the services of a middle school music teacher.   
 
 
“competency” resolution factors, which were not determinative in the cases at issue here. 
 
Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondents Jeffrey A. Blackstone, Irene 
 
Carter,  Susan  D.  Chang,  Crystal  Dira,  Laurie  Eyestone,  Jamie  Highstreet,  Jill  Igarashi,  Linda 
Kim, Christopher Ko, Bonnie P. Manuel, Kimberly McNeil, Sarah Sherman, Victoria Silcock, 
Valeria Suarez-Moya, Jennifer Galang Veneracion, Susan Marie Willmering, and Jana Young, 
by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 21, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 5.  
 
 
Cause  does  not  exist  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondents  Paul  Anthony 
Acosta,  Glenda  Baker,  Patricia  Joan  Breitag, Joshua  Cameron,  Jennifer  Carr,  Daniel  C.  Chan, 
Connie  Chen,  Gretchen  Chung,  Kimberly  Dalton,  Trina  Marie  Dreyer,  Shelly  Euckert,  Miki 
Evangelista, Kathryn M. Frick, Trinidad Garcia, Mary Thibodeaux Gaxiola, Cindy Giang, Karen 
A.  Hardin,  Kasumi  Hoard,  Laura  Ise,  Sally  Sonhwa  Kim,  Vera  Korneff,  Jennifer  La  Certe, 
Natalie Lawrence, Jessica Lee, Amy Elizabeth Leinen, Ryan Maine, Kylance J. Malveaux, Jill 
Courtney Marquez, John A. Martin, Darcy Faye Milam, William Monte, Norma Morales, Kelly 
C. Morris, Jeffrey Nicoll, Tara Noelte, Kary Marie Penzes-Alfaro, Lawrence Joseph Pinto, Kelli 
Seawright, Wendy Simpson, Jonathan A. St Amant, Margaret Ann Strand, Susan Tang, Brandy 
Thomas,  Keith  R.  Thompson,  Kenneth  Neil  Weeks,  Lisa  Welch,  Michelle  Yim,  and  Therapi 
Zaw-Kaplan, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 21, and legal conclusion numbers 1 
through 5.  
 

7. 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

 
 
It  is  recommended  that  the  Accusation  be  dismissed  as  to  Respondents  Paul 
Anthony Acosta, Glenda Baker, Patricia Joan Breitag, Joshua Cameron, Jennifer Carr, Daniel C. 
Chan,  Connie  Chen,  Gretchen  Chung,  Kimberly  Dalton,  Trina  Marie  Dreyer,  Shelly  Euckert, 
Miki Evangelista, Kathryn M. Frick, Trinidad Garcia, Mary Thibodeaux Gaxiola, Cindy Giang, 
Karen  A.  Hardin,  Kasumi  Hoard,  Laura  Ise,  Sally  Sonhwa  Kim,  Vera  Korneff,  Jennifer  La 
Certe,  Natalie  Lawrence,  Jessica  Lee,  Amy  Elizabeth  Leinen,  Ryan  Maine,  Kylance  J. 
Malveaux, Jill Courtney Marquez, John A. Martin, Darcy Faye Milam, William Monte, Norma 

 

 
 
 

11

2. 

Morales,  Kelly  C.  Morris,  Jeffrey  Nicoll,  Tara  Noelte,  Kary  Marie  Penzes-Alfaro,  Lawrence 
Joseph Pinto, Kelli Seawright, Wendy Simpson, Jonathan A. St Amant, Margaret Ann Strand, 
Susan Tang, Brandy Thomas, Keith R. Thompson, Kenneth Neil Weeks, Lisa Welch, Michelle 
Yim, and Therapi Zaw-Kaplan.  
 
 
It is recommended that the Accusation be sustained, and the District may notify 
Respondents  Jeffrey  A.  Blackstone,  Irene  Carter,  Susan  D.  Chang,  Crystal  Dira,  Laurie 
Eyestone,  Jamie  Highstreet,  Jill  Igarashi,  Linda  Kim,  Christopher  Ko,  Bonnie  P.  Manuel, 
Kimberly  McNeil,  Sarah  Sherman,  Victoria  Silcock,  Valeria  Suarez-Moya,  Jennifer  Galang 
Veneracion,  Susan  Marie  Willmering,  and  Jana  Young  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed 
during the 2010-2011 school year, due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. 
 
DATED:  May 6, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 
 

____________________________ 
Nancy Beezy Micon 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
                                 
         
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

12

