 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  2010030033 
 
 

BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD 
MARIPOSA COUNTY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF MARIPOSA 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Layoff of: 
 
Marita  Dietz,  Jennifer  Housler,  Christine
VanDenover, and Erin Vereschagin, 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this matter on April 20, 2010, in Mariposa, California. 
 
 
Superintendent of the Mariposa County Unified School District (District). 
 
 
Ernest  Tuttle,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Marita  Dietz  (Dietz),  Jennifer  Housler 
(Housler),  Christine  VanDenover  (VanDenover),  and  Erin  Vereschagin  (Vereschagin), 
collectively referred to as Respondents.  
 
 
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year. 
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying 
them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
for decision. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing and the matter was submitted 

James  Scot  Yarnell,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Aaron  Rosander  (Rosander),  Acting 

Acting Superintendent Rosander filed the Accusation in his official capacity. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. 

2. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

5. 

3. 

4. 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Total 

Service 

          16.92  

               FTE1 Reduction

1.00 
 
          13.92 
 
1.00 
            1.00 

 
 
On  March  4,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
adopted  Resolution  Number  10-05,  reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the 
2010-2011 school year: 
 
 
 
High School English    
K-8 Multiple Subject Instruction 
K-8 Principal (LDP)   
K-8 Principal (MMS)  
 
 
 
On  March  5,  2010,  Acting  Superintendent  Rosander  provided  written  notice  to 
 
the Governing Board and to Respondents that he recommended the termination of Respondents’ 
services for the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
On March 9, 10, and 12, 2010, the District provided notice to Respondents that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of 
particular kinds of services. Respondents filed timely requests for hearing.  
 
 
The District timely filed and served the Accusation and other required documents 
on Respondents. Respondents thereafter timely filed Notices of Defense, seeking a determination 
of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.2  
 
The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
 
finding number 3 because of an anticipated decline in State funding. The decision to reduce or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a 
proper exercise of the District's discretion. 
 
 
 

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  given  the 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

10. 

6. 

8. 

7. 

9. 

                     

1 Full-time equivalent position. 
 
2 All further references are to the Education Code. 

 

 
 
 

2

 

a. 

a. 

b. 

11. 

12. 

anticipated reduction in State funding, is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and 
it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the 
Governing Board. 
 
 
In  Resolution  Number  10-05,  the  Governing  Board  created  two  new 
positions, described as “teaching principals.” The specific positions are, “K-8 Principal/Teacher 
(LDP)”  and  “K-8  Principal/Teacher  (MMS),”  which  refer  to  teaching  principals  at  Lake  Don 
Pedro Elementary and Mariposa Middle School, respectively. The resolution provides that “the 
following particular kind of certificated administrative/teaching services shall be created not later 
than the beginning of the 2010-11 school year to form a single, indivisible position. . . .” (Exhibit 
1, at p. 2.)    
 
 
Bill Atwood’s position as K-8 Principal at Mariposa Middle School was 
eliminated,  but  he  is  scheduled  to  assume  the  newly-created  principal/teacher  position  at  the 
same school.  Ron Henderson’s position as K-8 Principal at Lake Don Pedro Elementary was 
eliminated,  but  he  is  scheduled  to  assume  the  newly-created  principal/teacher  position  at  the 
same school. His teaching load is expected to be three hours per day. 
 
 
The  District  has  two  existing  teaching  principal  positions.  These  have 
been structured as single positions for operational considerations, including the small size of the 
schools and their geographic isolation.   
 
 
One  of  the  positions  is  at  Spring  Hill  High  School  (Spring  Hill),  the 
continuation  high  school  for  students  with  behavior  and/or  academic  deficits.  The  incumbent, 
Monty  Thornburg,  has  a  seniority  date  of  October  15,  2002,  and  holds  multiple  subject  and 
administrative  services  credentials.  He  spends  a  significant  amount  of  his  day  providing 
instruction,  although  he  also  has  administrative  responsibility  for  all  District  alternative 
education programs. 
 
 
The second teaching principal position is held by is Daniel Hoffman, who 
is  the  principal  at  Coulterville-Gridley  Elementary  School  and  who  also  has  oversight  over  a 
small  high  school  in  Coulterville.  He  teaches  for  part  of  his  day  in  grades  Kindergarten  to 
Eighth.  His  seniority  date  is  August  1,  2008,  and  he  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential,  with 
supplemental  authorizations  in  Social  Sciences  and  in  Civics/Government,  and  a  pre-
administration credential.   
 
 
Respondents  do  not  possess  administrative  credentials,  but  assert  that  they  are 
certificated and competent to discharge the duties of the teaching portion of the assignments at 
issue. Respondent Vereschagin is working toward an administrative credential and, if selected by 
the District, could also discharge the administrative duties of the positions.  
 
 

The  Governing  Board  set  forth  in  Resolution  Number  10-05  its  tie-

13. 

14. 

b. 

a. 

c. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

3

 

 

c. 

b. 

breaking criteria for employees with the same seniority date. Points were awarded for meeting 
one  or  more  of  the  following  criteria:  possession  of  a  valid  preliminary  or  clear  credential; 
possession of multiple credentials; highest current placement on the certificated salary schedule; 
possession of one or more English Language Learner certifications; possession of one or more 
post  graduate  degrees;  possession  of  an  undergraduate  major  or  minor  in  math,  science,  or 
special  education;  overall  excellence  of  most  recent  evaluation;  “Current  or  prior  [District] 
coaching experience with a certificate of completion of the California Intercollegiate Federation 
approved  Fundamentals  of  Coaching  in  accordance  with  [District]  policy;”  and,  if  individuals 
were  still  tied,  then  the  last  four  numbers  in  their  social  security  number  would  be  used.  The 
criteria are reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of certificated employees. 
 
 
As  pertinent  to  this  matter,  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  applied  to 
employees with a seniority date of August 20, 2002. As a result, Respondent Vereschagin was 
ranked ahead of Respondent VanDenover and another teacher who did not request a hearing.   
 
 
Respondent VanDenover challenges application of the criteria because the 
District  did  not  give  her  credit  for  coaching  a middle  school  girls’  basketball  team  during  the 
2010 school year. The team competed at home and away, and was allowed to leave school early 
on some occasions to attend away games. Respondent did not receive a school stipend, and team 
expenses were paid by parent volunteers. While her site principal encouraged the team activities, 
the team was not sanctioned by the District. The District has discontinued athletics programs in 
all schools except for high school. Respondent VanDenover did not have a coaching certificate 
until on or about March 20, 2010. Respondent VanDenover did not meet the criteria set forth in 
factual finding number 14.a. to receive a point for her coaching experience because she did not 
have the required coaching certificate and because her experience was not in coaching a District 
team. Therefore, the District properly applied the tie-breaking criteria in her case. In any event, 
even if the point had been awarded it would not have affected the order of layoff. 
 
Resolution  Number  10-05  also  contains  the  following  language:  “That 
 
‘competency’ for the purposes of Education Code section 44955 shall be determined solely upon 
current  possession  of  a  preliminary  or  clear  credential  for  the  subject  matter  or  grade  level  to 
which the employee will be assigned at the beginning of the 2010-11 school year and at least one 
year  of  experience  within  the  preceding  ten  (10)  years  teaching  the  subject  matter  at  the 
applicable elementary or middle school level. Further, that due to the specific need of the District 
to  retain  only  highly  qualified  teachers  in  academic  subject  areas,  ‘competency’  shall  require 
current  confirmation  of  qualification  of  academic  subject  competency  (‘highly  qualified’)  in 
accordance with the [No Child Left Behind law], or verifiable eligibility for competency if not 
previously  reviewed  by  the  District,  in  all  subjects  of  a  proposed  assignment,  including 
assignments teaching multiple academic subjects, assignments in secondary alternative schools, 
and/or necessary small high schools.” 
 
The District has several alternative education programs, in addition to Spring Hill: 
Sierra  Home  School  (Sierra);  Jesse  B.  Fremont  Community  Day  School  (Fremont);  and 

15. 

16. 

 

 
 
 

4

 

a. 

a. 

b. 

18. 

17. 

opportunity  classroom  programs  at  the  various  elementary  school  sites.  In  the  opportunity 
classroom  programs,  students  requiring  special  education  or  otherwise  falling  behind  in  their 
school work, as well as those not performing at grade level due to behavior problems, receive 
instruction in self-contained classrooms. 
 
 
Sierra  is  an  independent  studies  school  that  serves  students  in  multiple 
grades. Students meet once a week with one of the five certificated employees employed at the 
site.  During  this  weekly  encounter,  the  certificated  employees  review  the  work  performed, 
answer  questions,  provide  instruction  as  needed,  and  assign  material  for  the  following  week. 
Students  are  then  expected  to  work  on  the  assignment  during  the  following  week.  Teachers 
provide  instruction  and  supervision  in  multiple  subjects,  regardless  of  the  teacher’s  specific 
credential.3  
 
 
One of the certificated employees working at Sierra is Katie Pike (Pike). 
She  has  a  seniority  date  of  November  14,  2005,  and  holds  a  single  subject  (Social  Science) 
credential. 
 
Fremont is a community day school that serves at-risk youth primarily in 
 
high school grades, and, occasionally, eighth graders. At the time of the hearing, there were six 
students enrolled and they received instruction in all subject matters. 
 
Travis Blagg (Blagg), who has a seniority date of January 5, 2005, is the 
 
only  certificated  employee  regularly  teaching  at  the  school.  He  holds  a  single  subject  (social 
science) credential. He has been qualified under the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) federal law 
to provide instruction in English. 
 
 
Respondent Housler has a seniority date of March 15, 2002. She holds a multiple 
subject credential, with supplemental authorizations in English, Business, and Home Economics. 
She teaches Kindergarten and First Grade at Coulterville-Gridley Elementary School. 
 
 
She holds a multiple subject credential and a supplemental authorization in English.  
 
 
 
 
Respondent VanDenover holds a multiple subject teaching credential, and 
has been qualified under NCLB to teach Algebra in Ninth Grade and lower. She teaches First 
Grade. She is working to complete a supplemental authorization in Mathematics. She has taught 

Respondent  Vereschagin  teaches  Sixth  Grade  at  Mariposa  Elementary  School. 

19. 

21. 

20. 

b. 

a. 

 

                    

 

3 This finding is based on the testimony of several witnesses familiar with the school. 
However,  when  in  conflict,  I  have  credited  the  testimony  of  the  only  witness  who  has 
actually worked at the school, Respondent Dietz.  

 

 
 
 

5

 

b. 

22. 

Math, Pre-Algebra, and Algebra to seventh and eight graders, although it was not established if 
this  was  in  a  self-contained  classroom  or  if  it  was  done  pursuant  to  Governing  Board 
authorization.  
 
 
Respondent VanDenover testified that she can teach the courses that a less 
senior employee was retained to teach. The employee, Robert Collins (Collins), whose seniority 
date is August 20, 2007, holds a single subject (Math) credential and teaches Math at Mariposa 
Middle  School.  However,  Collins  teaches  in  departmentalized  Math  classes,  and  Respondent 
VanDenover’s credential only authorizes her to teach Algebra. Therefore, she is not certificated 
to teach Collins’ assignment. 
 
 
Respondent Dietz has a seniority date of December 2, 2004, and holds a multiple 
subject credential. She teaches in the educational opportunity program at Woodland Elementary. 
 She has also taught, as a substitute, at Sierra. 
 
 
23.  All  respondents  are  certificated  to  teach at the alternative schools, as they meet 
the requirements of section 44865. Although not previously asked by the District, all testified at 
the hearing that they would consent to employment in these schools if offered a position in lieu 
of  being  laid  off.  However,  they  have  not  actually  taught  for  at  least  one  year  of  experience 
within the preceding ten in alternative education. While Respondent Dietz has the experience at 
the elementary school level, the positions presently occupied by the two more junior individuals, 
Blagg and Pike, are in the upper grades; her substitute experience was not shown to have been 
for a full year. 
 
 
render a service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 

The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to any Respondent to 

24. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 7. 
 
 
The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 
and 8.   
 
 
Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction of the particular 
kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause relates solely to the welfare 
of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 24.  
 
Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he services of no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service 

4. 

3. 

 

 
 
 

6

which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.”    (Emphasis  added.) 
“Certificated” is defined by the provisions of the Education Code pertaining to credentials, but 
“competent” is not specifically defined.  In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994) 160 Cal.App.3d 
13, 19, the Court defined the term in a reemployment proceeding under section 44956, in terms 
of the teachers’ skills and qualifications, specifically, as “relating to special qualifications for a 
vacant  position,  rather  than  relating  to  the  on-the-job  performance  of  the  laid-off  permanent 
employee.” In doing so, the Court noted that courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. 
Governing Board (1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and  Moreland Teachers Association v. 
Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, had interpreted the term in a similar manner. 
 
Courts in analogous layoff and reemployment contexts, construing provisions similar to 
 
section 44955, have recognized that school districts have discretion to establish rules to define 
teacher competency.  Thus, after reviewing earlier cases, the Court in Duax v. Kern Community 
College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565 (Duax), wrote: “Hence, from these authorities 
we conclude that a board’s definition of competency is reasonable when it considers the skills 
and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.” (See also: Martin v. Kentfield School 
District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299-300; Forker v. Board of Trustees, supra.)  
 
 
In Duax, the governing board had established a standard of competency that required one 
year  of  full-time  teaching  in  the  subject  area  within  the  last  ten  years.    The  Court  found  such 
standard  “clearly  related  to  skills  and  qualifications  to  teach”  and  therefore  a  reasonable  one. 
(Duax, supra, 196 Cal. App.3d 555, at p. 567.)  The Court also concluded that the standard did 
not  define  competency  too  narrowly.  Consistent  with  the  foregoing  authorities,  part  of  the 
District’s  competency  rule  relates  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  its  certificated  employees, 
and may be used by the District in implementing the layoffs. Its requirement that a teacher have 
taught one year in the past ten in the subject matter in question is in fact the rule upheld in Duax.  
 
 
However, the remainder of the District’s competency rule does not relate to the skills and 
qualifications of a certificated employee in the same manner as the rule in Duax and the other 
cited cases does. Rather than defining skills and qualifications in terms of past experience, the 
District’s rule relies exclusively on teacher certification or other credential authorizations. And 
while  such  certificate-based  qualifications  may  indeed  bear  on  competency,  section  44955 
precludes its use to define competency.  
 
Statutes  must  be  interpreted  in  such  a  manner  as  to  ascertain  and  effectuate  the 
 
legislative intent. (Hughes v. Board of Architectural Examiners (1998) 17 Cal.4th 763, 775; 
California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Governing  Bd.  of  Rialto  Unified  School  District  (1997)  14 
Cal.4th  627,  632;  People  v.  Hull  (1991)  1  Cal.4th  266,  271;  Steketee  v.  Lintz,  Williams  & 
Rothberg  (1985)  38  Cal.3d  46,  51-52.)  The  first  step  in  determining  legislative  intent  is  to 
scrutinize  the  actual  words  of  the  statute,  giving  them  a  plain  and  commonsense  meaning. 
(Hughes v. Board of Architectural Examiners, supra at p. 775; California Teachers Assn. v. 
Governing Bd. of Rialto Unified School District, supra at p. 633; Steketee v. Lintz, Williams 

 

 

 
 
 

7

& Rothberg, supra at p. 51.) “Ordinarily, if the statutory language is clear and unambiguous, 
there  is  no  need  for  judicial  construction.”  (Hughes  v.  Board  of  Architectural  Examiners, 
supra at 775, citing California School Employees Assn. v. Governing Board (1994) 8 Cal.4th 
333,  340.)  In  addition,  each  and  every  word  in  the  statute  must  be  given  meaning  to 
accomplish a result consistent with the legislative purpose. (Hughes v. Board of Architectural 
Examiners supra at 775; California Teachers Assn. v. Governing Bd. of Rialto Unified School 
District, supra at 634.) “A statute must be construed in the context of the entire statutory system 
of which it is a part, in order to achieve harmony among the parts [Citations].” (People v. Hull, 
supra at p. 272.)  Further,  a  construction  that  renders  language  of  the  enactment  superfluous 
must  be  avoided.  (California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Governing  BB.  of  Rialto  Unified  School 
District, supra at pp. 633-34; Shoemaker v. Myer (1990) 52 Cal.3d 1, 22 .)  
 
 
Sections  44949  and  44955  set  forth  the  process  through  which  certificated  employees 
may  be  laid  off  following  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The 
statutes embody a legislative choice for seniority-based layoffs, subject to specific limitations set 
forth  in  the  statutes.  Section  44955  plainly  requires  examination  of  both  certification  and 
competence  in  reduction  in  force  decisions.  The  District competency rule blurs the distinction 
between  the  two  requirements  and  makes  possession  of  certain  credentials  the  basis  to  also 
establish competency.  
 
 
There  are  two  problems  with  such  competency  rule.  First,  the  District  modifies 
“certificated”  in  a  manner  not  authorized  by  44955  or  any  other  statute,  in  effect  imposing  a 
“super certificated” criteria for more senior employees to meet before they are retained. Second, 
it  renders 
the  “competent”  requirement  partially  superfluous,  as  credentials  become 
determinative. Such additions to, and subtractions from, statutory the language are inconsistent 
with established rules of statutory construction and are contrary to expressed legislative intent.  
 
 
In Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127 (Bledsoe), the 
court was faced with a competency rule that defined competency as, “at a minimum, possession 
of  a  preliminary,  clear,  professional  clear,  lifetime,  or  other  full  credential,  or  at  least  one 
semester actual teaching experience in alternative education within the last five years.” Bledsoe, 
supra, 170 Cal.App.4th 125, at 135. The court did not need to address, and did not specifically 
address,  the  foregoing  issues  of  statutory  construction.  In  Bledsoe,  unlike  here,  a  certificated 
employee  could  establish  competence  either  in  terms  of  credentials-based  or  experience-based 
criteria. Therefore, the disjunctive criteria in the rule were consistent with the legislative intent, 
and  the  district’s  rule  in  that  case  did  not  modify  or  render  superfluous  key  words  of  section 
44955. 
 
Applying  the  foregoing  to  the  instant  case  does  not  result  in  any  changes  in  the 
 
individuals selected for layoff. While all Respondents are more senior than Blagg and Pike, they 
are not competent to teach their assignments because Respondents have not taught one year of 
the last ten in alternative education.  

 

 
 
 

8

5. 

 
 
The teaching principal assignments are integrated positions that the District is not 
required to break up to enable Respondents to bump the incumbents from part of their positions. 
(Hildebrandt  v.  St.  Helena  Unified  School  District  (2009)  172  Cal.App.4th  334;  Murray  v. 
Sonoma  County  Office  of  Education  (1989)  208  Cal.App.3d  456;  King  v.  Berkeley  Unified 
School  District  (1979)  89  Cal.App.3d  1016.)  Nor  do  Respondents  possess  the  certification  or 
competence to bump the current occupants from of any of the four full time positions. 
 
 
Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondents  Marita  Dietz,  Jennifer 
Housler, Christine VanDenover, and Erin Vereschagin, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 
through 24, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 5.  
 

6. 

ORDER 

 
The  Accusations  against  Respondents  Marita  Dietz,  Jennifer  Housler,  Christine 
 
VanDenover,  and  Erin  Vereschagin  are  sustained,  and  the  District  may  notify  them  that  their 
services will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular 
kinds of services. 
 
 
DATED:____________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 

 
Administrative Law Judge 
 

                                 
         
 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

SAMUEL D. REYES 

 
 

 

 
 
 

9

