 
 
 

 
 
 

 

BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
WHITTIER UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
SAMIYA HAI-WAHEED, 
DIANA SALAZAR, 
SARAH R. JENSEN, and 
LINNEA HENDERSHOT, 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

 
 
OAH No. 2010020884 

PROPOSED DECISION 

The Law Offices Eric Bathen, by Eric Bathen, Attorney at Law, represented the 

 
 
Erlinda G. Shrenger, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, heard this matter on April 27, 2010, at the Whittier Union High School 
District in Whittier, California 
 
 
School District. 
 
 
employees Samiya Hai-Waheed, Diana Salazar, Sarah R. Jensen, and Linnea Hendershot 
(collectively, Respondents).  All Respondents were present at the hearing except for Sarah R. 
Jensen. 
 
 
employees Angela Castellanos, Damaris Flores, Veronica Medina, and John Yessian. 
 

Reich, Adell & Cvitan, by Kent Morizawa, Attorney at Law, represented certificated 

Prior to the hearing, the School District rescinded the layoff notices of certificated 

Evidence was received by stipulation, documents, and testimony.  The matter was 

submitted on April 27, 2010. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Sandra Thorstenson is the Superintendent of the Whittier Union High School 
District (District).  Martin J. Plourde, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel Services, and his 
staff were responsible for implementation of the technical aspects of the layoff. 
 

1 

 

2. 

3. 

Respondents in this proceeding are certificated employees of the District. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the District served on each Respondent a written 

notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to Respondents pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be required for the 
2010-2011 school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation. 
 

4. 

Respondents timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is 

cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.   
 

5. 

The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each of the 

Respondents.  The Accusations with required accompanying documents were timely served 
on Respondents.  Neither party contested that all prehearing jurisdictional requirements have 
been met. 
  

6. 

On March 9, 2010, the Governing Board of the District adopted a Resolution 

 

that proposed a layoff of 9.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated employees.  Specifically, 
the Board Resolution  provided for the reduction or elimination of the following particular 
kinds of services: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Service 
Home Economics 
Business Education 
Counseling 
Spanish 
Math 
 
Physical Education 
English 

 FTE Reduction
1.0 
 
1.0 
 
2.0 
 
2.0 
 
1.0 
 
1.0 
 
 
1.0 

TOTAL 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9.0 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. 

On March 9, 2010, the Governing Board approved tie-breaker criteria for 

determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service 
on the same date.  The criteria provide that the order of termination shall be based on the 
needs of the District and its students in accordance with credentials and authorizations, 
assignments, years working as a contracted teacher in the District, and advanced college 
degrees. 
  

8. 

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

dates (first date of paid service), current assignments and locations, and credentials and 
authorizations.  Certificated employees, including Respondents, were given the opportunity 
to verify their seniority date and credential information, which Respondents did. 
 

9. 

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and "bumping" 

list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced.  

2 

The District then determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another 
area and were entitled to "bump" other employees.  In determining who would be laid off for 
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by 
the known vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of 
seniority.  The District then checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they 
could “bump” other employees. 
 

10. 

The District used the information from the District's seniority list and personnel 

records to apply the tie-breaker criteria adopted in the Resolution. 
 

11. 

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations, and 

retirements in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its 
employees and in rescinding some of the notices.   
 

12. 

Respondent Sarah R. Jensen and Victor Gomez (not noticed for layoff) are 
math teachers who both have a seniority date of August 28, 2009.  The relative seniority 
between these two employees was determined by tie-breaker criterion number 1, which is 
"Fully Credentialed (Preliminary or Clear Credential) in the subject area of the class being 
taught by March 1, 2010."  Respondent Jensen holds an internship single subject credential 
in foundational math.  Gomez holds a preliminary clear credential in foundational math.1  
The District properly identified Respondent Jensen as the employee to receive the layoff 
notice corresponding to the 1.0 FTE reduction in math. 
 

13. 

Respondent Linnea Hendershot and Carla Coyle (not noticed for layoff) are 
home economics teachers who both have a seniority date of August 31, 2005.  The District 
applied the tie-breaker criteria to determine the relative seniority between these two 
employees.  Both employees remained tied until criterion number 6, which is "Possession of 
multiple high school credentials or supplemental authorizations."  Respondent Hendershot 
has a clear single subject credential.  Coyle has a clear single subject credential and a 
supplemental authorization in biological science.  In addition, under criterion number 7, 
which is "Possession of a Master's Degree or Doctorate," Coyle has a Ph.D.  The District 
properly identified Respondent Hendershot as the employee to receive the layoff notice 
corresponding to the 1.0 FTE reduction in home economics. 
 

14. 

(A)  Respondent Diana Salazar is a counselor with a seniority date of August 
18, 2008.  She holds a Ryan Clear Pupil Personnel Services credential in school counseling 
and child welfare & attendance.  In general, the duties of a counselor include assisting 
students with matters pertaining to class schedules, academic difficulties, graduation 
requirements, and parent-teacher conferences. 
 
 
A counselor position will be open in the next school year due to the recently announced 
                                                 
1 Since Gomez received his preliminary clear credential in January 2010, it is not 
 
shown on the seniority list (Exhibit 4), which was approved by the Board in December 2009.  

(B)  Respondent Salazar contends that her layoff notice should be rescinded.  

 

3 

 

retirement of Michael Poizner, a counselor, at the end of the current school year.  Salazar is 
credentialed to perform the duties of that position.  The District, however, has assigned 
another counselor, Edgar Ulloa (not noticed for layoff), to Poizner's position.  Ulloa has a 
seniority date of August 27, 2004.  He holds a Ryan Clear Pupil Personnel Services 
credential in school counseling and child welfare & attendance, a clear single subject 
credential in social science, a certificate of eligibility in administrative services, and a 
BCLAD in spanish. 
 
 
(C)  Currently, Ulloa is a counselor assigned to the position of dean at Pioneer 
High School.  In the District, each school site has a set number of counselors.  A school has 
the option to assign the counselor handling student discipline to the position of dean.  Ulloa 
has been a dean/counselor for the District since 2008.  Ulloa's transfer to the counselor 
position will result in an opening of a dean position in the District for the next school year.  
Respondent Salazar is not credentialed to perform the duties of a dean because, starting in the 
next school year, the District is requiring that a counselor serving as a dean must also have an 
administrative services credential.  Salazar currently does not hold an administrative services 
credential. 
 

15. 

Samiya Hai-Waheed is a business teacher with a seniority date of August 30, 

2006, which she does not dispute.  She holds a clear single subject credential in business.  
She is the last hired business teacher in the District.  She is properly identified as the 
employee subject to layoff corresponding to the 1.0 FTE reduction in business education. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 

 

44949 and 44955 were met. 
 

2. 

The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services that 

could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s 
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, 
and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of 
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44949. 
 

3. 

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 

4. 

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due 

to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District identified 
the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board directed 

4 

be reduced or discontinued. 
 

5. 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 

6. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Under Education Code 
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior 
teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior 
counterparts lack.  (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of 
Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)   
 

7. 

The District properly identified Respondent Salazar as an employee subject to 

layoff.  A school district generally has wide discretion to make assignments and 
reassignments.  (Thompson v. Modesto City High School District (1977) 19 Cal.3d 620, 623.)   
Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), a school district is required to "make 
assignments in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which 
their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render."  In this case, Respondent Salazar 
and employee Edgar Ulloa are authorized by their credentials to render services as a 
counselor for the District.  Ulloa, however, has four more years of seniority with the District 
than Respondent Salazar.  As such, and relative to Respondent Salazar, Ulloa has the 
seniority and qualifications entitling him to the counselor position that will be open in the 
next school year due to retirement.   
 

 

Notice may be given to Respondents Samiya Hai-Waheed, Diana Salazar, 

Sarah R. Jensen, and Linnea Hendershot, that their services will not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  
 
 

Dated: May ___, 2010 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

___________________________ 
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

ORDER 
 

 

5 

