 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  L2010030610 
 
 

BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD 
SIERRA SANDS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF KERN 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Layoff of: 
 
Alison Bachety and other certificated  
employees of the Sierra Sands Unified  
School District, 
 
 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
this matter on April 8, 2010, in Ridgecrest, California. 
 
 
Superintendent of the Sierra Sands Unified School District (District). 
 
 
Paul A. Welchans, Attorney at Law, represented Alison Bachety (Bachety), Keith Barnes 
(Barnes),  Natalia  Casco  (Casco),  Erin  Courtemanche  (Courtemanche),  Stacey  Crow  (Crow), 
Doug  Dalton  (Dalton),  Lori  Durell  (Durell),  Margaret  Holm  (Holm),  Tristan  Kratz  (Kratz), 
Arwen  Kyte  (Kyte),  Shelley  MacKenzie  (MacKenzie),  Heidi  Miller-Costanzo  (Miller-
Costanzo),  Laura  Olinger  (Olinger),  and  Eileen  Poole  (Poole),  collectively  referred  to  as 
Respondents.  
 
 
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year. 
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying 
them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
presented at the hearing, and the matter was submitted for decision. 
  
 
 
 
 

Dean  T.  Adams,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Joanna  Rummer  (Rummer), 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence,  and  evidence  by  oral  stipulation  on  the  record,  was 

Superintendent Rummer filed the Accusation in her official capacity. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

2. 

3. 

8.0 

Service 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

               FTE1 Reduction

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

 
 
 
On  March  11,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
adopted Resolution Number 25 0910, reducing or discontinuing the following services for the 
2010-2011 school year: 
 
 
 
Elementary Education (K-5) 
  Elementary Teaching 
Middle School Education (6-8) 
 
  Home Economics 
 
  Industrial Arts 
  School Counselor 
 
High School Education (9-12) 
 
 
 
  Business 
 
 
  English 
 
 
 
  Foreign Language 
 
 
  Home Economics 
 
  Music 
 
 
  Physical Education   
 
 
  ROP Auto Shop 
 
 
  Science 
 
  Social Science 
 
 
Alternative Education Programs  
  ROP Foods 
 
  Elementary Special Day Class 
  Middle School Special Day Class 
Management Positions 
 
  Elementary Principal  
  Alternative Education Principal 
 
  Middle School Assistant Principal   
 
 
 
 
Superintendent  Rummer  thereafter  provided  written  notice  to  the  Governing 
Board and to Respondents that she recommended the termination of Respondents’ services for 
the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
  .60 
1.0 
  .33 
1.0 
1.0 

1.0 
 
1.0 
           1.0 

  .64 
1.0 
1.0 

          24.57  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Total 

4. 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                     

1 Full-time equivalent position. 
 

 

 
 
 

2

5. 

9. 

7. 

8. 

6. 

10. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

On  or  before  March  15,  2009,  the  District  provided  notice  to  Respondents  that 
 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of 
particular kinds of services. Respondents filed timely requests for hearing.  
 
 
The District timely filed and served the Accusation and other required documents 
on Respondents. Respondents thereafter timely filed notices of defense, seeking a determination 
of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.2  
 
 
The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
finding  number  3  because  of  anticipated  declines  in  State  funding.  The  decision  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a 
proper exercise of the District's discretion. 
 
 
The reduction of services set forth in factual finding number 3, in the context of 
reductions necessitated by the anticipated cuts in State funding, is related to the welfare of the 
District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees as determined by the Governing Board. 
 
 
number of certificated employees it would have to lay off.  
 
 
filed against Respondents Bachety and Dalton, retaining them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
On  March  11,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  26  0910, 
setting  forth  its  tie-breaking  criteria  for  employees  with  the  same  seniority  date.  Points  were 
awarded for meeting one or more of the following criteria: credentialing; No Child left Behind 
Authorization;  English  Learner  Authorizations;  and  Education/Training.  The  criteria  are 
reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of certificated employees. 
 
 
The  District  applied  the  criteria  to  withdraw  the  accusation  filed  against 
Respondent  Bachety.  Respondents  Bachety  and  Poole  were  tied  on  points  awarded,  and  the 
District resorted to chance to break the tie. Respondents have not challenged application of the 
criteria in this instance. 
 

In addition, before the start of the hearing, the District withdrew the accusations 

The  District  took  into  account  assured  attrition  in  order  to  reduce  the  actual 

13. 

12. 

11. 

b. 

a. 

 

                    

 

2 All further references are to the Education Code. 

 

 
 
 

3

 

 

c. 

a. 

b. 

14. 

Respondents Casco, Courtemanche, and Holm disputed the seniority date 
 
assigned  to  them  by  the  District,  August  14,  2006,  and  asserted  that  their  first  date  of  paid 
service should be adjusted because of their attendance at an orientation prior to that date.  They 
did not recall the exact date of the orientation, but it occurred one or two days prior to August 14, 
2006.  
 
 
The  orientation,  held  exclusively  for  first  year  teachers  at  District 
headquarters,  included  presentations  about  District  programs  and  supports,  motivational 
speeches,  and  meetings  with  other  teachers  and  administrators.  Representatives  of  the 
certificated  employees’  collective  bargaining  representative,  the  Desert  Area  Teachers 
Association  (DATA),  provided  information  about  its  benefits,  and  sought  to  enroll  new 
members.  A luncheon followed the meetings and presentations. 
 
 
Article  III,  subdivision  A.5,  of  the  collective  bargaining  agreement 
between  the  District  and  DATA  provides:  “Returning  teachers’  work  year  shall  be  182  days; 
teachers new to the District will work 183 days with the extra day being paid at the teacher’s 
regular rate of pay.” (Exhibit D, at p. 3.)  Maureen Glennon, DATA President, was involved in 
the negotiation of the article, and testified that the parties expected the extra day to be used for 
the orientation or other work before the start of the school year, absent contrary directive by site 
administrators. Respondents attending the 2006 orientation received pay in accordance with this 
provision, and the pay was in addition to that set forth in their employment contract.  
 
 
Attendance  at  the  orientation  was  strongly  encouraged,  but  was  not 
mandatory.  Although Article III of the collective bargaining agreement requires new employees 
to  work,  and  receive  pay  for  one  extra  day,  it  does  not  actually  require  that  day  to  be  the 
orientation  day  before  the  start  of  the  school  year.  Employees  who  fail  to  attend  are  not 
disciplined. The orientation was scheduled before the date on which teachers were contractually 
required to be at their work sites.    
 
 
The  District  retained  certificated  employees  to  provide  instruction 
pursuant  to  Governing  Board  resolutions  issued  under  the  authority  of  sections  44256  and 
44263.  These  Code  provisions  allow  school  districts  to  assign  teachers,  with  their  consent,  to 
provide instruction in areas in which they have a certain number of units in a subject matter area 
outside  their  major  or  minor  but  which  are  insufficient  to  obtain  a  State-issued  credential  or 
authorization.   
 
 
During  the  2009-2010  school  year,  13  certificated  employees  were 
authorized pursuant to section 44256 to teach in departmentalized classes below grade Nine in 
English, Mathematics, Physical Education, Science, Social Science, and Spanish. Testimony was 
received  at  the  hearing  with  respect  to  four  of  these  individuals,  whom  the  District  plans  to 
retain.  Their  names,  assignment  areas,  and  seniority  dates  are  as  follows:  Maureen  Flatebo 
(Flatebo) (Science; August 17, 2007); Rebekah Howard (Howard) (English; August 14, 2006); 

15. 

d. 

b. 

a. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

4

 

 

 

e. 

c. 

d. 

Matthew  Smith  (Smith)  (Social  Science;  August  17,  2007);  and  Tonya  Wicker  (English  and 
Spanish; August 17, 2007). All hold multiple subject credentials and are teaching in junior high 
schools. The District plans the same assignments for these four individuals and expects to issue 
the necessary certifications through Governing Board resolutions.  
 
 
During  the  2009-2010  school  year,  ten  certificated  employees  were 
authorized  pursuant  to  section  44263  to  teach  outside  their  major,  minor,  or  credential 
authorization. One of these employees was April Griffin (Griffin), who taught English in high 
school.  Her  seniority  date  is  August  14,  2006.  She  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subject 
credential. Her major was Liberal Studies. The District plans the same assignment for Griffin for 
the 2010-2011 school year, and expects to issue the necessary certifications through Governing 
Board resolutions.  
 
 
Individuals  selected  for  the  positions  at  issue  were  chosen  pursuant  to  a 
process  set  forth  in  the  collective  bargaining  agreement  between  the  District  and  DATA.  The 
process  involves  the  posting  of  the  available  positions  and  an  interview  if  multiple  qualified 
applicants vie for any given position.  
 
 
Several Respondents have college units in the areas of English, Science, 
and Social Sciences, and expressed a willingness to accept, or in Respondents Holm’s case, to 
consider, assignments pursuant to sections 44256 or 44263.  None of the following respondents 
applied for the positions when posted. 
 
 
Respondent Holm holds a clear multiple subject credential, and teaches fifth grade. Her 
given seniority date is August 14, 2006. Her Bachelor’s Degree is in Human Development. She 
has completed approximately 30 units in Social Science, and has started the process to obtain a 
supplemental authorization in this area.  
 
Respondent  MacKenzie  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential  and  has  a 
 
seniority date of August 15, 2005. She teaches Kindergarten. She has approximately 25 semester 
units in Science and 28 semester units in Social Studies.   
 
 
Respondent Miller-Costanzo holds a clear multiple subject credential. Her seniority date 
is September 1, 2005. She teaches fifth grade. She received a Bachelor’s Degree in English, and 
has  approximately  36  units  in  this  subject  matter  and  between  50  and  60  in  Social  Science. 
However, she needs to complete a California History class in order to teach social sciences. 
 
 
The District operates a continuation school, Mesquite School. As pertinent 
to this proceeding, three certificated employees who did not receive layoff notices work at the 
school.  Nancy  Cox,  who  holds  a  preliminary  vocational  education  credential  and  whose 
assignment  was  described  as  “infant  care,”  has  a  seniority  date  of  February  23,  2004.  Erik 
Duncan (Duncan) holds a clear single subject (social science) credential, teaches Social Science 

 
16. 

a. 

 

 
 
 

5

 

b. 

and Physical Education, and has a seniority date of August 15, 2005.  Holly Bergevin (Bergevin) 
holds a clear multiple subject credential, teaches Math, and has a seniority date of August 14, 
2006.   
 
 
Respondents  Casco,  Courtemanche,  Holm,  MacKenzie,  and  Miller-
Costanzo expressed interest in teaching at the continuation school, but were not asked for their 
consent, as required before such assignments were made. Respondents MacKenzie and Miller-
Costanzo testified that they would accept a position at Mesquite if offered. Respondents Casco, 
Courtemanche, and Holm testified that they would consider such an assignment if asked. They 
all meet the requirements set forth in section 44865 for teaching at a continuation school: they 
hold Bachelor degrees; they completed student teaching; and they hold teaching credentials.   
 
 
Except for Respondents MacKenzie and Miller-Costanzo, and with the possible 
exception  of  Respondents  Casco,  Courtemanche,  and  Holm,  the  District  did  not  retain  any 
certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  to  render  a  service  which  the  remaining 
respondents are certificated and competent to render. 
 

17. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

4. 

2. 

3. 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 7. 
 
 
within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 and 8.   
 
 
Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction of the particular 
kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause relates solely to the welfare 
of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 17.  
 
 
The seniority date of a certificated employee is defined as the date the employee 
“first rendered paid service in a probationary capacity.” (§ 44845.)  These words must be given 
their  plain  and  commonsense  meaning  in  order  to  effectuate  the  legislative  intent.  (Hughes  v. 
Board of Architectural Examiners (1998) 17 Cal.4th 763, 775; California Teachers Assn. v. 
Governing Bd. of Rialto Unified School District (1997) 14 Cal.4th 627, 632-633; Steketee v. 
Lintz,  Williams  &  Rothberg  (1985)  38  Cal.3d  46,  51-52.)  The  statute  requires  crediting  a 
certificated  employee  with  the  seniority  date  on  which  he  or  she  was  first  paid  to  render 
service  in  a  probationary  capacity.    The statute does not expressly require a particular salary 
rate  or  schedule,  a  particular  type  of  service  in  a  probationary  capacity,  or  that  the  service  be 
“mandatory.” 
 
 
The  collective  bargaining  agreement  between  the  District  and  DATA  provides  for  an 
additional day of paid service for new employees, at their regular rate. This additional day of pay 

 

 
 
 

6

is anticipated to be used for orientation, and employees are encouraged to attend. The facts that 
employees are not mandated to attend, suffer no disciplinary repercussions for failing to attend, 
and that they may actually work on another day of the year to fulfill the requirement of 183 days 
of work, does not change the fact that Respondents Casco, Courtemanche, and Holm, and other 
similarly-situated  certificated  employees,  performed  service  in  a  probationary  capacity  for  the 
District by attending the orientation and were paid for such service.  
 
The  District  points  out  that  another  administrative  law  judge  with  the  Office  of 
 
Administrative Hearings, Mark E. Harman, arrived at a different result in layoff proceedings in 
2009  (OAH  Case  Number  2009030156).  Respondents,  on  the  other  hand,  point  out  that 
Administrative Law Judge Jonathan Lew, in a 2008 proposed decision involving another district, 
Western  Placer  Unified  School  District  (OAH  Case  Number  2008030489),  concluded  that 
attendance  at  a  similar  orientation  constituted  the  respondents’  first  day  of  paid  service  in  a 
probationary capacity. While neither case is binding on the Administrative Law Judge, it is noted 
that the respondents in the case before Judge Harman did not introduce in evidence the collective 
bargaining  agreement  setting  forth  the  additional  duty  day  and  those  before  Judge  Lew  did, 
which fact is significant.  
 
 
If the date on which the employee first rendered paid service in a probationary capacity is 
incorrect,  the  employee’s  seniority  date  must  be  adjusted  to  reflect  the  earlier  first  date  of 
probationary service. (Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City School 
District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1273.) 
 
 
 
Accordingly,  the  seniority  dates  of  Respondents  Casco,  Courtemanche,  and  Holm,  and 
those of all other certificated employees who attended the 2006 orientation, shall be adjusted to 
reflect their earlier first date of paid service in a probationary capacity.  
 
 
Section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  provides,  in  pertinent:  “[T]he  governing  board 
shall make assignments and reassignments in such manner that employees shall be retained to 
render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. . . .” (emphasis 
added.)  Respondents  Holm,  MacKenzie,  and  Miller-Costanzo  argue  that  they  are  senior  and 
qualified to teach the assignments filled pursuant to sections 44256 or 44263 and that the District 
should have made the necessary assignments and reassignments to retain them to teach in those 
positions, even if those positions represent only a portion of their assignment. The District, on 
the other hand, maintains that issuance of such certifications is discretionary, and Respondents 
may not compel the District to assign them to the positions in question. 
 
 
The District is correct that Respondents may not compel it to seek a certification pursuant 
to section 44256 or 44263, nor have Respondents presented any authority for such proposition. 
However,  the  District  is  not  being  compelled  to  offer  the  courses  in  question,  but,  rather,  has 
decided  to  offer  the  courses  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  and  plans  to  issue  the  requisite 
certifications  pursuant  to  Governing  Board  resolution  under  sections  44256  or  44263  to 

5. 

 

 
 
 

7

authorize  the  incumbents  to  teach  the  assignments.  Inasmuch  as  the  courses  in  question 
constitute  teaching  services  offered  by  the  District,  they  are  subject  to  the  requirements  of 
section 44955, which, as highlighted above, requires assignments and reassignments into “any” 
service for which the certificated senior employee is qualified.  
 
 
The  only  action  the  District  would  be  required  to  take  is  to  issue  the  certifications  to 
Respondents instead of the incumbents.  In this regard, the District has not offered a valid reason 
to favor retention of the junior employees. The District argues that the incumbents were selected 
pursuant  to  procedures  set  forth  in  the  collective  bargaining  agreement,  which  included  an 
interview.  Even if the contract requires such result, courts have made clear that provisions of a 
collective bargaining agreement must yield to contrary provisions of the Education Code. (San 
Mateo City School District v. Public Employment Relations Board (1983) 33 Cal.3d 850, 864-
66; Raven v. Oakland Unified School District (1989) 213 Cal.App.3d 1347; United Steelworkers 
of America, Local 8599, AFL-CIO v. Board of Education of the Fontana Unified School District 
(1984)  162  Cal.App.3d  823.)  In  any  event,  all  certificated  employees,  including  Respondents, 
were selected for their assignments for the 2009-2010 school year in some manner, whether it 
was through a collective bargaining process or not, and retention for the 2010-2011 school year 
is subject to the procedures and requirements of 44949 and 44955.  
 
 
In  this  case,  section  44955  requires  retention  of  Respondents  MacKenzie,  Miller-
Costanzo, and possibly Respondent Holm, to teach the assignments the more junior employees 
were  retained  to  teach  pursuant  to  anticipated  Governing  Board  resolution(s).  Respondent 
MacKenzie has sufficient units in Science and Social Studies and greater seniority than Flatebo, 
who  was  retained  to  teach  Science,  and  Smith,  who  was  retained  to  teach  Social  Science. 
Respondent Miller-Costanzo has greater seniority than Howard and Griffin, and sufficient units 
in English to obtain the required certification. Respondent Holm has sufficient units to qualify, 
pursuant  to  Governing  Board  resolution,  to  teach  Social  Science,  but  has  less  seniority  than 
Respondent  MacKenzie,  and  unless  Respondent  MacKenzie  is  assigned  to  teach  Science, 
Respondent Holm will not be able to teach the classes Smith has been retained to teach.    
 
 
Another  service  the  District  plans  to  offer  next  school  year  is  that  of  a 
continuation  school  teaching.  In  this  regard,  the  District  retained  Duncan  and  Bergevin,  who 
share  the  same  seniority  date  with,  or  are  more  junior  to,  Respondents  Casco,  Courtemanche, 
Holm,  MacKenzie,  and  Miller-Costanzo.  The  continuation  school  positions  are  also  services 
subject  to  section  44955  and,  unlike  the  situation  in  Bledsoe  v.  Biggs  Unified  School  District 
(2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 170, the District did not argue or present evidence to support retaining 
these employees pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d).  
 
Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondents  Barnes,  Crow,  Durell, 
 
Kratz, Kyte, Olinger, and Poole for the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular 
kinds  of  services,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  14,  and  17,  and  legal 
conclusion numbers 1 through 3.  

7. 

6. 

 

 
 
 

8

8. 

Cause exists to terminate the services of one or two certificated employees from 
 
among Respondents Casco, Courtemanche, and Holm for the 2010-2011 school year due to the 
reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  depending  on  adjustment  of  seniority  dates  and 
application  of  tie-breaking  criteria,  by  reason of  factual  finding  numbers  15  and  16,  and  legal 
conclusion  numbers  4,  5,  and  6.  These  Respondents  presently  share  their  seniority  date  with 
Bergevin, who was retained to teach at the continuation school, and this position should go to the 
person with the greatest seniority. Respondent Holm may also be retained to teach the position 
Smith was retained to teach, depending on whether Respondent MacKenzie is retained to teach 
Science or Social Science.    
 
9. 
 
Miller-Costanzo. 
 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondents  MacKenzie  or 

ORDER 

1. 

2. 

3. 

 
 
The Accusations are sustained and the District may notify Respondents Barnes, 
Crow, Durell, Kratz, Kyte, Olinger, and Poole that their services will not be needed during the 
2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
The  accusations  are  dismissed  against  Respondents  MacKenzie  and  Miller-
Costanzo,  and  they  shall  be  retained  for  the  2010-2011  school  year,  provided  that  if  they  are 
offered a position that requires their consent, such consent is given. 
 
 
The District shall adjust the seniority dates of Respondents Casco, Courtemanche, 
and Holm, and the seniority dates of all similarly-situated certificated employees who attended 
the 2006 orientation, apply the tie-breaking criteria as necessary, and determine, consistent with 
this  Proposed  Decision,  whether  the  new  seniority  dates  entitle  any  of  these  Respondents  to 
provide  services  pursuant  to  sections  44256  or  44263  or  at  the  continuation  school.  If  any  of 
these Respondents is retained to provide services in a position that requires her consent, retention 
is contingent on such consent. 
 
 
DATED:____________________      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 

 
Administrative Law Judge 
 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

SAMUEL D. REYES 

 
         
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

9

