 

 
 

 

BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
LITTLE LAKE CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT  
 

OAH No. L2010011288 

In The Matter Of The Accusations Against: 
 
Traci Mauricio, Megan Marshall, Krystle 
Hatton-Grover, Alonna Van Scoy, Grace 
Villagomez, Danielle Motruk, Dianne 
Digalbo, Sabrina LaRosa, Dulce Aguilar, 
Susan Sieng, Erin Dunroe, Frances 
Heinselman, Soraya Espinoza, Maria Mesa, 
Christina Ball, Maclovia Garcia, Nicole 
Gutierrez, Denisse Frenes-Gomez, Peggy 
Chong, Eva Sanchez, Lisa Jones, Gregory 
Kaufman, Jennifer Santley, Christopher 
Pilato, Jennifer Lam, Nathan Poole, Jaclyn 
Reed, Andrea Hannibal, Susie Luu Hoang, 
and Maria Martinez,  
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Julie Cabos-Owen, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 13, 2010, at the Little Lake City School 
District Offices in Santa Fe Springs, California. 
 
 
School District (District).  Kent Morizawa, Esq., of Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented all 
Respondents.   
 

Eric Bathen, Esq., of the Law Offices of Eric Bathen, represented the Little Lake City 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard.  The record 

was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on April 13, 2010. 
 

 

 
1.     Complainant, Phillip Perez, Ed.D., Superintendent, filed the Accusation while 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

acting in his official capacity as the Superintendent of the District.   
 

2.     Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

1 

 

 

 
4. 

 
6. 

3.     On February 23, 2010, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted a 

resolution (Resolution 10-036) to reduce and discontinue the following particular kinds of 
services provided by the District no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year:   

 
Services 

 

Number of Full-Time 
Equivalent Positions

 
Multiple Subject Credentialed Teachers 
Elementary Music Teachers  
Middle School Language Arts Teacher 
Teacher on Special Assignment (Math) 
Middle School Science Teacher 
 
Total Full Time Equivalent [FTE] Reduction: 

 
 
 
 
 

     

 

 

32.0 FTE 
  2.0 FTE 
  1.0 FTE  
  1.0 FTE   
  1.0 FTE 

 37.0  FTE 

     

     

 

 

 

 

The Board further determined that the reduction in services necessitated a 

decrease in the number of certificated employees at the close of the 2009-2010 school year 
by a corresponding number of FTE positions, and directed the Superintendent to notify the 
appropriate employees to implement the Board’s determination. 
 

5. 

Following the adoption of the Resolution 10-036, the District determined that 
the following terminated FTEs would be addressed by way of attrition:  4.0 Multiple Subject 
Credential Teacher FTEs, 1.0 Middle School Language Arts Teacher FTE, 1.0 Teacher on 
Special Assignment (Math) FTE, and 1.0 Middle School Science Teacher FTE.  
Consequently, the District concluded that the number of certificated employees required to 
be terminated pursuant to this proceeding is 30.     
 

On March 5, 2010, the District gave notice to each Respondent of the potential 

elimination of his/her position for the 2010-2011 school year.  On March 19, 2010, the 
District served the Accusation on each Respondent who requested a hearing.  

7. 

All Respondents served with the Accusation timely filed requests for hearing 

and Notices of Defense to determine if there was cause for not reemploying them for the 
2010-2011 school year.   

8. 

The services set forth in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services 

 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code  section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified particular kinds of 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  
 
 
solely to the needs and welfare of the District and its pupils.   
 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services was related 

9. 

2 

10. 

The Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements and 
 
requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees. 
 

11.  On February 23, 2010, the Board adopted a resolution (Resolution 10-035) 
which established tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated 
employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  According to Resolution 10-
035, the order of termination shall be based on the needs of the District and its students in 
accordance with the following:  
 

4.    As between certificated employees with a professional 

clear or preliminary credential (or equivalent) possessing 
the same seniority date, the following criteria shall be  
utilized to resolve ties between employees having the  
same seniority date in priority order:  
a. 

Meet the criteria to be NCLB Compliant for 
current assignment  
Possession of a Bilingual Cross-Cultural  
Language Academic Development (BCLAD)  
Certificate (or equivalent)  
Possession of a Cross-Cultural Language  
Academic Development (CLAD) Certificate (or  
equivalent)  
Issuance of a Temporary County Certificate  
(TCC) for a BCLAD or CLAD (or equivalent)  

b.   

c.   

d.   

e.    National Board Certification 
f. 
g.   

Hold credential for the longest period of time  
Total number of years of teaching experience in  
the District  
Total number of years of teaching experience in  
education  

h.   

The District maintains a Seniority List which contains employees’ seniority 

 
dates, current assignments, and credential and certificate information. 
 

The District used the Seniority List with seniority dates to develop a proposed 

layoff list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being 
reduced.  The District also considered each teacher’s credentials and certifications.   

The District used information from the District’s Seniority List to apply the tie 

breaking criteria of Board Resolution 10-035.   

The District determined that nobody less senior than Respondents was being 

retained to render services which Respondents are certificated and competent to render.  

  
12. 

 
13. 

 
14. 

 
15. 

 

3 

16.  One of the revenue-saving changes the Board made for the 2010-2011 school 

year was the increase in class size from a 20:1 ratio to a 26:1 ratio, thus resulting in less 
classrooms/teachers at each site.  In implementing the class size increase, the District 
determined what positions would be terminated at each site and the employees affected by it.  
Although the District’s witness, Toni Traster, testified that the more senior employees whose 
positions at each site were being cut would “bump” the less senior employees receiving 
layoff notices, this was a mischaracterization.  This situation did not involve “bumping,” 
where a senior employee, subject to layoff in his/her PKS, is allowed to “bump” a junior 
employee, not subject to layoff, after the District determines that the senior employee is 
certificated and competent to render the services which the junior employee is performing.  
After further testimony by Ms. Traster, and as substantiated by the Seniority List, the District 
demonstrated that only the least senior employees in each PKS, the Respondents, were issued 
layoff notices.  
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 

 
 
44949 and 44955 were met.   
 
 
Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees in the District due 
to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils 
within the meaning of Education Code sections 44955.   
 
  
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part:  

 
3.  

  

[T]he services of no permanent employee may be terminated . . . while 
any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, 
is retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certi-
ficated and competent to render.   

[¶] . . . [¶] 
 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on 
the same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termi-
nation solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students 
thereof. 

4. 

 
No certificated employee junior to any Respondent is being retained to 
 
perform any services which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.    
 
 
terminating or reducing Respondents’ employment for the 2010-2011 school year, as set 
forth in Factual Findings 1 through 15 and Legal Conclusions 1 through 4.     
 

Cause exists within the meaning of Education Code section 44955 for 

5. 

4 

ORDERS 

1. 

The Accusations served on Respondents are sustained.  Notice may be given 

 
 
to Respondents that their services will be reduced or terminated for the 2010-2011 school 
year because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated.   
 

2. 

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.     

Dated: April 23, 2010 

________________________________ 
JULIE CABOS-OWEN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

 
 
  
 
   

 

5 

