BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF EDUCATION  
OF THE 
BEAR VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
Respondents listed in Appendix A. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

    OAH No. 2010030276 
 

Sherry G. Gordon, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, APLC, represented the 

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
of California, heard this matter in Blue Jay, California on April 14, 2010. 
 
 
Rim of the World Unified School District.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 14, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Ronald G. Skipper, Esq., represented the respondents listed in Appendix A.  

1. 

Tim Larson, Director of Special Programs/Personnel of the Bear Valley 

 
 
Unified School District, made and filed the accusation dated March 12, 2009, in his official 
capacity as the designee of Dr. Nancy Wright, District Superintendent.  
 
 
 

Respondents1 are certificated District employees. 

2. 

3. 

On March 3 and 11, 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 

and 44955, the superintendent notified the Board of Trustees of the Bear Valley Unified 
School District in writing of her recommendation to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 

The District initially identified 36 certificated employees as respondents.  That number was gradually 

                                                
1  
reduced, so that by the date of the hearing there remained the 21 respondents identified in Appendix A.  The term 
“respondents” as hereafter used in this Proposed Decision refers collectively to these 21 remaining individuals.   
   

 

1

services for the upcoming school year.  The superintendent stated the reasons for the 
recommendation.  The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment 
was not related to their competency as teachers.   

On March 3, 2010, the board adopted Resolution No. 09-10-011, determining 
that it would be necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of 
the current school year.  On March 12, 2010, the board adopted amended Resolution No. 09-
10-012, again authorizing a reduction in particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school 
year.2  The board determined that the particular kinds of services that must be reduced for the 
2010-2011 school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE) positions: 

Full-Time Equivalent

 

 

 

 

 
Particular Kind of Service 
 
 
ES Self-Contained Classroom TS 
 
MS Core Teaching Services   
 
MS English/Language Arts TS 
 
 
MS Math TS   
 
MS Science TS 
 
 
MS Social Science TS 
 
ES Special Education TS 
 
HS Chomistry TS 
 
HS Physics/Physical Science TS 
HS Advanced Placement Physics TS 
 
HS Math TS   
HS French TS  
 
 
The proposed reductions totaled 26.8 FTE positions.3  
 
5. 

15 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0.4 
0.4 
0.2 
1 
0.8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

The board directed the superintendent or her designee to determine which 

employees’ services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of the 
reduction of the foregoing particular kinds of services.  The board further directed the 
superintendent or her designee to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the 
district who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services.   

The board further determined in Resolution No. 09-10-012 that “competency,” 
as described in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for the purposes of bumping, 
“shall necessarily include possession of a valid credential in the relevant subject matter area, 
‘highly qualified’ status under the No Child Left Behind Act in the position into which the 
employee is bumping, an appropriate El Authorization (if required by the position), and for 

                                                
2  
 
3  
and TS refers to teaching services. 

The circumstances attending the adoption of the amended resolution are set forth below. 

In this Finding, ES refers to elementary school (K-6), MS refers to middle school, HS refers to high school, 

2

 
4. 

 
6. 

 

 

 
7. 

 
8. 

counseling positions, at least one (1) year of experience in the past three (3) years in a 
counseling position.”  (Emphasis in original.4) 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district timely served on respondents a 
written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services would not be 
required for the upcoming school year.  The notice set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation.  The notice advised respondents of their right to a hearing, that each 
respondent had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person sending the notice 
by the date specified in the notice, a date which in each case was more than seven days after 
the notice was served, and that the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of 
the right to a hearing.  Along with the written notice, the district timely served on 
respondents the accusation and required accompanying documents.  

 
The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment was not 

related to their competency as teachers.  

Certain respondents timely filed written requests for hearing and notices of 
defense to determine if there was cause for not reemploying them for the upcoming school 
year.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.5

10. 

11. 

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of the 

The services the board addressed in Amended Resolution No. 09-10-012 were 

 
9. 
district.   
 
 
“particular kinds of services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these 
particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious and constituted a proper exercise 
of discretion.  
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
welfare of the district and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as 
determined by the board.  
 
 
The board considered all positively assured attrition, including resignations, 
retirements and requests for transfer, in determining the actual number of necessary layoff 
notices to be delivered to its employees.  
 
 
addition to his multiple subject credential, Kinder also holds a PPS (pupil personnel services) 
credential, which authorizes him to serve as a school counselor.  Kinder previously served as 
                                                
4  
09-10-011. 
 
5  
district waived any jurisdictional defects resulting from such failures. 

Respondent Robert Kinder is in an elementary school teaching position.  In 

The language in bold-face type was not present in and represents the amendment to original Resolution No. 

Certain respondents failed to file timely requests for hearing and/or notices of defense.  At the hearing, the 

13. 

12. 

 

3

a counseling intern in Anchorage, Alaska (in 1997) and provided unspecified counseling 
services in Poway, California in 2002.6  Based on his counseling credential and experience, 
Kinder asserted that, though he is slated for lay off as a low seniority elementary school 
teacher, he should be permitted to bump Rob Benson, a district high school counselor with 
less seniority than Kinder.  
 
 
Pursuant to the competency criteria set forth in Amended Resolution 09-10-012, 
Kinder is not competent to bump Benson because Kinder has not had at least one year of 
counseling experience in the past three years.  Kinder asserted that the language of the 
Amended Resolution requiring a bumping individual to have at least a year of counseling 
experience within the past three years was added by the board for the specific purpose of 
excluding him from bumping into Benson’s counseling position.  He based this assertion on 
the following chronology of events:  (i) The board adopted Resolution 09-10-011, which did 
not require an individual seeking to bump into a counseling position to have served as a 
counselor for at least a year during the preceding three years (March 3, 2010); (ii) Kinder 
sent an email to the district, advising the district that he believed he should be able to bump 
Benson (March 9, 2010); and (iii)  the board approved Amended Resolution 09-10-012, 
which included language requiring an individual seeking to bump into a counseling position 
to have the year of experience in the preceding three years (March 11, 2010).   
 
 
motivation and actual purpose of the district and the board in amending the lay-off 
resolution.  However, Tim Larson, the district’s Director of Special Programs/Personnel, 
credibly testified that the decision to amend the resolution originated from Larson’s 
realization, while at a conference that took place between March 4 and 6, 2010, that the 
qualifying language requiring a year of recent counseling experience was necessary in order 
to protect the high school counseling positions, which for budgetary reasons had over the 
past two years dwindled from four to two.  In other words, though formal board action took 
place after the district received Kinder’s email, the intention to amend the bumping criteria 
originated before the district received Kinder’s email.  Further, Larson credibly denied that 
the amendment to the bumping criteria was motivated by an intention to exclude Kinder from 
being able to bump a school counselor.  Finally, no evidence was presented that would 
support an inference of any improper animus against Kinder on the part of the district or the 
board.  
 
 
evidence presented, the district’s decision to amend the bumping criteria as expressed in 
Amended Resolution No. 09-10-012 were neither arbitrary nor capricious and constituted a 
proper exercise of its discretion.  

The concerns expressed by Kinder are understandable.  However, based on all of the 

The foregoing chronology, viewed in isolation, raises a potential concern about the 

                                                
6  
Though Kinder presented no documentation in support of his claim that he served as a counselor in Poway 
in 2002, and though he did not provide this information when he applied for a teaching position with the district (he 
did, in contrast, state on his application that he had served as a counseling intern in 1997), his testimony that he 
served as a counselor with Poway Unified School District in 2002 is credited.  However, he did not describe the 
specifics of his service in that capacity, and since he stated on his application only that he had served as a teacher 
with Poway Unified, it is inferred that his involvement in counseling duties in that district in 2002 was on a limited, 
less than full time basis. 

 

4

14.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any 

 
 
services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

3. 

2. 

1. 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

School districts retain discretion to determine standards of competency for 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
purposes of teacher layoffs, and those standards will be upheld as long as they are 
reasonable.  (Duax v. Kern Community College District ( 1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.)7
 
 
accusation.  Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the district to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the welfare of the schools and 
the pupils thereof.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the district 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The district 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the board 
directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is recommended that the Board give respondents 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services are no longer required by the district. 
 
 

ADVISORY DETERMINATION 
 

The following advisory determination is made: 

 
 
The accusations served on respondents are sustained.8  Notice shall be given to 
 
respondents before May 15, 2010, that their services will not be required because of the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated. 
 
DATED:  ________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
7  
applicable here by analogy. 
 
8  
full-time-equivalent position is indicated in parentheses opposite the individual’s name. 

_____________________________ 
DONALD P. COLE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

Where the lay off of a respondent is less than a full-time-equivalent position, the applicable fraction of a 

Duax involved the layoff of community college teachers pursuant to Education Code section 97743, but is 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

5

Appendix A 

Kathryn Carpenter (0.8) 

Amy Ellis  

Amy Fuller 

Julie Herrera 

Robert Kinder 

Rachel Edwards 

Molly Anderson 

Susan Isles (0.4) 

Mark DesRochers 

Rosie DesRochers 

 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
7. 
 
8. 
 
9. 
 
10. 
 
11.  Ann Licona (0.2) 
 
12.  Manuel Marquez 
 
13. 
 
14. 
 
15.  Andrea McLinn 
 
16. 
 
17. 
 
18. 
 
19. 
 
20.  Katherine Williams 
 
21. 
 

Julia Seaman (0.2) 

Susan Maya (0.2) 

Sharon Meagher 

Jennifer Maybin 

Shauna Ward 

Jana Roberts 

Joy Wright 

 

6

