BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ACALANES UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
CONTRA COSTA COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 

OAH No.  2010020966 

     
 
 
     
    
  
 

In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 
 
BEAR BEGELMAN, KARA BLOODGOOD,  
AMY CLARKSON, KATHLEEN COLEBOURN, 
CHRISTI COSTA, JAKE DONOHOE,  
KELLY GINOCCHIO, DESPINA GOUSIOS, 
CATHERINE GORDON GROSS,  
JAMIE GRUTZMACHER, JULEE HENDERSON, 
DONNA HENSEN, TARON HENSLEY,  
LISA HERZIG, CHARLOTTE HOWARD,  
MICHAEL IVANKOVICH, PATRICIA JOHNSON, 
JAMES KARAS, STACEY KIKKAWA,  
JILL LANGSTON, MARILYN LEWIS-HAMPTON, 
MARK LITTON, LINDA LONG, CHERYL LUA, 
SUSAN MARTIN, SUSAN McCAULEY, 
RAYMOND MEADOWS, EDWARD MEEHAN, 
ADELAIDA MELGOZA, LYNN MILLAR, 
KATHLEEN MOONEY, NATALIE MOORE, 
JAMES NOLTE, VALERIE PETERSON,  
ROBERT PORTER, MELISSA QUITER, 
EMILY REICHARDT, THOMAS RENNO,  
DANIEL REYES, ANNE SCALLON,  
ANNE SCHONAUER, BRIAN SMITH,  
COLLETTE SWEENEY, MEREDITH TATE, 
STEPHANIE VERBANSZKY,  
HANALEE WASHBURN, DEE DEE WORTHING, 
VALERIE WRIGHT-SMITH, JENNA WROBEL, and 
VICKI ZALEWSKI,  
 
 
 

                  Respondents. 

 

 
PROPOSED DECISION 

On April 13, 2010, in Walnut Creek, California, Perry O. Johnson, Administrative 

 
 
Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California (OAH), heard this matter. 
 
 
Street, San Francisco, California, 94105, represented the Acalanes Union High School 
District. 

Sandra Woliver, Esq., of Dannis, Woliver, Kelley, Attorneys at Law, 71 Stevenson 

 

1

 
 
Dale L. Brodsky, Esq., Beeson, Tayer & Bodine, Attorneys at Law, 1404 Franklin 
Street, Fifth Floor, Oakland, California 94612, represented Respondents Bear Begelman, 
Kara Bloodgood, Amy Clarkson, Kathleen Colebourn, Christi Costa, Jake Donohoe, Kelly 
Ginocchio, Despina Gousios, Catherine Gordon Gross, Jamie Grutzmacher, Julee Henderson, 
Donna Hensen, Taron Hensley, Lisa Herzig, Charlotte Howard, Michael Ivankovich, Patricia 
Johnson, James Karas, Stacey Kikkawa, Jill Langston, Marilyn Lewis-Hampton, Mark 
Litton, Linda Long, Cheryl Lua, Susan Martin, Susan McCauley, Raymond Meadows, 
Edward Meehan, Adelaida Melgoza, Lynn Millar, Kathleen Mooney, Natalie Moore, James 
Nolte, Valerie Peterson, Robert Porter, Melissa Quiter, Emily Reichardt, Thomas Renno, 
Daniel Reyes, Anne Scallon, Anne Schonauer, Brian Smith, Collette Sweeney, Meredith 
Tate, Stephanie Verbanszky, Hanalee Washburn, Dee Dee Worthing, Valerie Wright-Smith, 
Jenna Wrobel, and Vicki Zalewski.  
 
 
Camino Real, Suite 29, Palo Alto, California 94306, represented Respondents Jim Nolte and 
Valerie Peterson.  
 
 
The record was held open to afford an opportunity to the parties to reduce to writing 
stipulations, which were verbalized at the hearing of this matter.  On April 19, 2010, OAH 
received, via telefacsimile transmission, a single-page writing that recited the stipulations.  
The document, signed1 by Ms. Woliver and Ms. Brodsky, was marked as Exhibit “12,” and 
received as a binding agreement of the parties.  
 

 
Mr. Samuel DeHaven, a labor union representative, of Award Consulting, 4173 El 

On April 19, 2010, the parties were deemed to have submitted the matter and the 

record closed.  
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
Jurisdictional Matter 
 
 On March 31, 2010, John Stockton, Superintendent, (the Superintendent), 
 
Acalanes Union High School District (the District), made and filed the Accusation in his 
official capacity with regard to the respondents to this matter.  Respondents are all 
certificated employees of the District.  

1. 

On February 3, 2010, the District’s Governing Board unanimously adopted 

Resolution No. 09-10-13.  The resolution recites that it has become necessary for the District 
to reduce and/or to discontinue, no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year, 
particular kinds of services in the form of an array of several distinct categories in the sum of 
56.9 FTE (full time equivalent) certificated positions as follows: 

 
2. 

 

                                                

1  The five-paragraph stipulation was not signed by Mr. DeHaven, who was the duly appointed 

representative of Respondent Nolte and Respondent Peterson.       

 

2

Number of Full Time Equivalent (FTE) 
             Positions Eliminated  

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Particular Kinds of Services  
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative School Principal  
 
Athletic Director Release Periods 
 
Choral Music  
 
 
Computer Science 
 
 
 
Counselors 
 
 
 
Dance  
 
 
 
Drama  
 
 
 
English 
 
 
Industrial Arts 
 
 
Instrumental Music 
 
 
Journalism/Newspaper 
 
 
 
Leadership Class 
 
Leadership Release Periods   
 
 
 
Librarians 
 
 
 
 
Math 
 
 
Nurse   
 
 
 
Physical Education 
Psychologist   
 
 
Public Speaking/ Oral Interpretation 
 
Science 
 
 
Social Science 
 
Tech Coordinator 
 
Visual Arts/Digital Arts 
 
World Language-French 
 
World Language-German 
 
World Language-Japanese 
 
World Language-Latin 
 
World Language-Spanish 
 
Yearbook  
 
Total 
 
3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

  1.0 
  0.8 
  1.0 
  0.4 
13.0 
  0.4 
  1.0 
  5.6 
  1.0 
  0.6 
  1.4 
  1.0 
  0.8 
  3.0 
  2.6 
  1.3 
  1.0 
  0.8 
  1.6 
  2.6 
  8.0 
  1.2 
  4.0 
  0.8 
  0.2 
  0.2 
  0.2 
  0.6 
  0.8 

56.9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3

 At the hearing of this matter, the parties stipulated that “each and every 

certificated employee, who is represented by Beeson, Tayer & Bodine  and who requested a 
hearing pursuant to Education Code section 44949 [, subdivision] b, has met all notice 
requirements set forth in Education Code section 44949.”  And the parties also stipulated that 
Respondents Valerie Peterson and James Nolte met all notice requirements set forth in 
Education Code section 44949.   

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.    

 

 
4. 

 
 

 

5. 

6. 

At the hearing of this matter, the parties stipulated to several issues.  The 

Exhibit 9 represents the seniority list, which contains a column titled “LO” 

Stipulations    
 
 
stipulations are set out in the following Factual Findings 6 through 8.  
 
 
that identifies by FTE positions, those respondents who have been determined by the District 
to receive a final notice of termination of services in accordance with Education Code section 
44955, subdivision (c).  (During the course of the hearing, the Superintendent made five 
handwritten amendments or revisions to Exhibit 9, which pertained to either the first date of 
paid service to the District by a respondent, the seniority list’s “LO” column or the seniority 
list’s “points” column.) 
 

7. 

Also by way of stipulation, the District withdrew the accusations regarding the 

following respondents: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

     Respondent  
Adelaida Melgoza 
Taron Hensley 
Edward Meehan 
James Nolte 
Valerie Peterson 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

First Date of Paid Service 
 
 
 
 
 

August 10, 2006 
August 27, 2007 
August 27, 2007 
August 21, 2006 
August 21, 2006 

By its withdrawal of the Accusation, the District will retain the services of those 

8. 

And by way of stipulation, the District partially rescinded the layoff notices 

Respondents  First Date of Paid Service   FTE Rescission 
 
Jill Langston      
August 22, 2005 
 
Charlotte Howard  August 22, 2005 

respondents named immediately above. 
 
 
for the following respondents: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FTE employee of the District.  And Respondent Howard, who has a mathematics teacher 
assignment, will remain a 0.8 FTE employee.  
 
The District’s Case-in-Chief 
 

Respondent Langston, who has a social studies teacher assignment, will remain a 0.4 

Resulting FTE Layoff 
         0.6 
 
         0.2 
 

0.4 
0.4 

 
 

 

9. 

The Superintendent for the District appeared at the hearing of this matter to 

provide credible and persuasive evidence regarding the basis for the prospective layoff 
action. 
 
The Superintendent is responsible for advising the District’s Governing Board on all 

aspects of the District’s provision of educational services including fiscal matters. The 

 

4

Superintendent manages the District’s mission in serving 5,600 students, who populate four 
comprehensive high schools, one continuation school (which is to close at the end of this 
school year) and an alternative/independent study program.   

 
The District is a high-performance high school district, which sends a large number of 

its students to universities.  The District is a revenue-limited district so that it is greatly 
impacted by California’s state government budgetary difficulties.  The District is confronted 
with a potential multiple-million dollar deficit for the coming school year.  
 

The prospective elimination of particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school 
year directly results from a prospective shortfall in money for the District’s budget.  In order 
to partially aid the District in crafting a reasonable budget for the ensuing school year, the 
Superintendent recommended that certain certificated positions be eliminated due to a lack of 
funds for the ensuing school year.  Those particular kinds of services are set out above in 
Factual Finding 2.   

 
10.  Among the particular kinds of services to be eliminated, the Superintendent 

gave notice to 13 counselors that they would not be retained for the coming school year.  The 
District is retaining five counselors to provide counseling services.  The Superintendent is 
cognizant that with such a large loss of counselors, the “job will have to change” for 
counselors with the District.  The Superintendent was persuasive that the District’s 
administrators are capable to effect the process of developing a range of new counseling 
duties for those five certificated employees who will provide counseling services for the 
ensuing school year.   (It is now contemplated that each school will have an assigned 
counselor and that the counselor, working as the “Bilingual Counselor,” may travel from 
school-to-school.)  

 
11. 

Even though the District plans to layoff 13 counselors, the Superintendent has 

determined that Ms. Lois Halls, who is junior to eight other counselors, should be retained. 
Ms. Halls now occupies the position of “Head Counselor,” which is considered by the 
Superintendent to be a management position.  The first day of paid service to the District by 
Ms. Halls is August 22, 2005.   
 
 
12.  Ms. Lois Halls, who currently serves as Head Counselor at Miramonte High 
School, was given a “precautionary” layoff notice2 that pertains to the potential elimination 
of her 1.0 FTE position.  Ms. Halls, however, is not a respondent in the Accusation that 
resulted in the hearing in this matter.   
 

 
The first date of paid service to the District by Ms. Halls is August 22, 2005.  She 
holds a “Clr PPS-School Counseling” credential.  That credential enables her to perform 
services as a school guidance counselor.  

                                                

2  The layoff notice to Ms. Halls, which was served upon her before March 15, 2010, cited 

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 as the basis of the potential layoff; and, hence, the layoff 
notice designated Ms. Halls as a certificated employee rather than as an administrator.    

 

5

 

 
The Superintendent informed Ms. Hall that the District intends to retain her service 

The District did include in Resolution No. 09-10-13 provisions that pertains to 

for the ensuing school year as the Superintendent maintains that he may exercise “skipping” 
privileges to retain her even though eight other counselors have greater seniority than her.  
The District categorizes the status of Ms. Halls as “ADM,” that is administration.  She does 
not, however, hold a clear administrative services credential as do many District personnel 
who have been given “Adm” status on the seniority list.   (None of the three counselors who 
are classified as “Head Counselor” holds an administrative credential.)  
 
 
skipping criteria that would enable the District to “deviate from terminating certificated 
employees in order of seniority, based on a specific need for personnel who possess special 
training and/or experience, or competency, necessary to teach specific courses or courses of 
study or to provide specific services, which others with more seniority do not possess.”3  But 
the resolution did not prescribe guidelines for the retention of a junior counselor to act as 
“Head Counselor” for the coming year where more senior counselors are competent to 
perform those services.  
 
 
Neither the Superintendent nor Ms. Halls offered evidence at the hearing of this 
matter regarding Ms. Halls having such unique skills, experience and training that render her 
more capable than respondent-counselors, who are subject to layoff but who have greater 
seniority than her.  And the Superintendent was not persuasive that Ms. Halls is competent to 
be retained as “Head Counselor” when arguing that Ms. Halls is a “manager” whom the 
District can exercise discretion to retain. 
 
 
The Superintendent noted that a marked difference between the position of Head 
Counselor and the classification of Lead Counselor pertains to the duty of the former position 
holder to craft a “master schedule” and the degree of supervision by a Head Counselor of 
other counselors.  But the evidence was legally insufficient to determine Ms. Halls to be 
competent so as to skip her over more senior counselors, who are competent and qualified to 
perform those services.  First, the Superintendent failed to establish that certain respondents, 
and especially Respondent Millar, did not possess the experience, training and skill to 
perform the duties of a counselor in the District next year.   

                                                

3  The resolution’s skipping criteria, as set out on page three of Resolution No. 09-10-13, 

pertained to retaining a junior counselor for the assignment of “Bilingual Counselor” and retaining a 
drama teacher for the “Drama Program.”  As to the Bilingual Counselor, the special skills and needs of 
the District’s program were clearly defined as “Experience as a secondary level school counselor 
developing and providing workshops for Spanish speaking parents and students regarding academic 
opportunities and higher education options, developing academic enrichment programs for Spanish 
speaking students, conducting outreach activities for Spanish speaking parents, providing counseling 
services to Spanish speaking students, and competency as a fluent Spanish language speaker.”  

 

6

Respondents’ Contentions-Reductions of Counselors 

 
13. 

Respondents contend that the District’s proposed layoff action will result in 

 
school programs, which are administered by school counselors, being dramatically impacted 
so that such programs will not be in compliance with state law or federal law on the matter of 
counseling service requirements.  In particular, the layoff action purportedly may result in a 
cut in counselor personnel that is arbitrary and illegal with regard to services rendered to 
Special Education students.  Respondents aver that with the layoff of 13 counselors, the 
District will not be able to meet its obligations with only five counselors next year.   
   

Further, respondents contend the District’s proposed action is procedurally defective 

and improper insofar as the prospective layoff of the subject credentialed employees does not 
fully account for seniority of those persons in light of the District’s retention of a 
credentialed employee who is junior in time of service to certain respondents.  Those senior 
counselors, who challenge the Superintendent’s determination to retain a junior employee, 
namely Ms. Halls, are: 
 
 
 
 
 

 Respondent Counselors  
 
 
 

 
 

Patricia Johnson 
Marilyn Lewis-Hampton 
Valerie Wright-Smith 
 
Jake Donohoe  
 
Linda Fore 
 
 
Dee Dee Worthing 
 
Lynn Millar 
 
Hanlee Washburn 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

First Date of Paid Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

        September 3, 1991 
August 28, 1996 
 
August 14, 2000 
 
August 24, 2000 
 
August 15, 2002 
 
August 15, 2002 
 
August 15, 2002 
 
August 18, 2003 
 

 

 

 

 
14. 

Respondent Patricia Johnson appeared at the hearing to offer evidence under 

 
Evidence of Individual Teachers at Hearing  
 
 
oath.    
 
 
Respondent Johnson works for the District as a counselor during the current school 
year.  Her first day of paid service to the District is September 3, 1991.  At the hearing she 
noted that the current school year is her 20th year of being associated with the District and 
that she has been a paid for 19 years as a District employee.  (She intimated that she was an 
unpaid intern or a volunteer for her first year with the District.)  

 
Respondent Johnson holds a “Clr PPS-Basic Pupil Personnel Services” credential.  

Respondent Johnson now holds a 0.8 FTE counselor assignment at Acalanes High 

 
 
School.   She is one of the four counselors working at that particular high school, which has 
slightly less than 350 high school students this year.   
 

 

 

 

7

15. 

Respondent Johnson was not persuasive that with the elimination of 13 

 
counselors, so that only five counselors will remain employed for the coming school year, 
the District will be “at risk” or exposed to “legal liability” for failure to meet obligations to 
students with special needs in such a manner as to render defective the proposed layoff 
action.  Respondent Johnson is troubled that the District contemplates using only one 
counselor to serve at each school site for the coming year. And, she does not believe that a 
single counselor at Acalanes High School will be able to properly aid college-bound seniors 
next year.  But Respondent Johnson’s testimony did not refute the Superintendent’s evidence 
that the elimination of 13 District counselor positions will not drastically affect the manner 
by which counseling services will be delivered to students during the coming school year in a 
way as to violate regulations or statutes.    
 
 
voluntarily relinquished the job a few years ago and took a position as a staff guidance 
counselor to work with a reduced work load now consisting of a 0.8 FTE position.   

Respondent Johnson once held the classification of “Head Counselor,” but she 

16. 

 
Respondent Johnson has greater seniority relative to Head Counselor Halls and Head 

Counselor Wahlander (first date of paid service (August 31, 1992).  (Ms. Wahlander4 has 
been given a “precautionary” layoff notice that she may be reassigned to a position other 
than as a counselor.)  But Respondent Johnson did not offer evidence that she is available to 
occupy a full-time (1.0 FTE) position as a Head Counselor for the ensuing school year.  
Hence, Respondent Johnson did not provide persuasive evidence that the District has 
retained a counselor junior to her for which Ms. Johnson possesses a credential and is 
competent to teach or to provide service to the District’s students.    
 

Respondent Lynn Millar appeared at the hearing to offer evidence under oath.    

 
 
Respondent Millar’s first date of paid service to the District was August 15, 2002. 
During the current school year, she has worked as the “Lead” counselor at Acalanes High 
School, which she has held for about one and one-half school years.    
 

Respondent Millar holds a “Clr PPS-School Counseling” credential.   
 
Respondent Millar possesses the requisite knowledge, experience and skills to enable 

 
her to perform all tasks required of a “Head Counselor.”  Respondent Millar was credible 
that she has performed the tasks of a management-oriented counselor, which is called Lead5 
                                                

4  In addition to the “Clr PPS-Basic Pupil Personnel Services” credential held by her, Ms. 
Wahlander holds a Life Secondary credential, a single-subject Home Economics credential and a single-
subject English credential.  
 

5  In the only document, which was offered into evidence, regarding a chart for the District’s 

counseling services staff among the District’s school sites, there were three  “Head Counselors” for three 
high schools; but, the chart shows that at Acalanes High School there was no assigned head counselor, but 
rather Ms. Millar was classified as “Lead Counselor.”  At the other high schools, except for Las Lomas 
High School where there were four other counselors in addition to the Head Counselor, Head Counselors 

 
17. 

 

8

18. 

Counselor, that Ms. Halls now performs during the current school year.  As Lead Counselor 
for the current year, Respondent Millar is paid a stipend, which provides her with higher pay 
than other counselors.  And the work is exceedingly similar to the work of Head Counselor. 
 
 
The Superintendent established that in light of there being but five counselors 
for the ensuing school years, the District “has no interest in continuing the Head Counselor 
position in the future.”   The position of Head Counselor will be eliminated as employees 
who are now paid as a head counselor retire.   Provided there are no retirements, deaths or 
permanent disabilities, there will be three full-time Head Counselor positions next year with 
the District.  
 
 
competence in the way of possessing greater experience, skill and ability so that the District 
may “skip” her relative to a more senior certificated counselor employee, namely 
Respondent Millar.  
 

The District has failed to establish that Ms. Halls does not possess such 

19. 

20. 

Respondent Millar provided persuasive evidence that the District has retained 

a counselor junior to her for which Ms. Millar possesses a credential and is competent to 
teach or to provide service to the District’s students.    
 
Ultimate Findings  

The recommendation of the District’s superintendent and the Board’s decision 

to eliminate or discontinue 56.9 FTE positions, including the positions held by each 
respondent, were neither arbitrary nor capricious.  Rather, the Superintendent’s 
recommendation and the Board’s decision were within the proper exercise of the District’s 
discretion.  

The District’s proposed elimination or discontinuation of a number of FTE 

positions, including the positions held by respondents, for the ensuing school year is related 
to the welfare of the District and its overall student population.    

 
The Board determined that it will be necessary, due to the elimination of 
particular kinds of services, to decrease the number of certificated employees before the 
beginning of the next academic year.  The Board lawfully directed the notification to 
respondents of the elimination of the certificated positions held by each respondent. 
 

                                                                                                                                                       
work with three other counselors.  Similarly, Respondent Millar led or “supervised” three other 
counselors at Acalanes High School. 

 
The Head Counselors in the pamphlet, titled Counseling Services, were Scott Swain (first date of 
paid service: September 2, 1986), who worked at Las Lomas High School; Judith Wahlander (first date of 
paid service August 31, 1992), who worked at Campolindo High School; and Ms. Hall who was assigned 
to Miramonte High School.  

 
21. 

 
22. 

 
23. 

 

9

24. 

The Superintendent has considered all known attrition, including resignations 
and retirements, in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered 
to its employees.    
 

25. 

Except as to a counselor, namely Respondent Lynn Millar, no competent and 

credible evidence establishes that as a result of the proposed elimination of the full time 
equivalent positions respectively held by respondents herein, the District will retain any 
certificated employee who is junior to such respondents to perform services for which 
respondents have been certificated or found to be competent to perform in such FTE 
positions for the next school year. 
 
 
experience and skill and that the District’s program needs as well as the needs of the students 
of the District so as to determine Ms. Halls to possess such competence as to be retained 
while Respondent Johnson and Respondent Millar, who have greater seniority are not 
retained for the ensuing school year. 
 
 

The Superintendent did not establish that Ms. Halls has such training, 

26. 

  

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

2. 

The District provided all notices and other requirements of Education Code 

3. 

Judgments entered by a tribunal on the stipulation of the parties have the same 

sections 44949 and 44955.  This conclusion of law is made by reason of the matters set forth 
in Factual Findings 1 and 4.   
 
 
effect as acts tried on the merits.  (John Siebel Associates v. Keele (1986) 188 Cal.App.3d 
560, 565.)  The District stipulates to withdraw the Accusation, or portions of the layoff 
action, against those certificated employees named in Factual Findings 8 and 9.  The 
stipulations are binding on the parties. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

4. 

Although services may be drastically rationed or sparingly dispensed by counselors, 
the evidence does not establish that the mandated services for the ensuing academic year are 
being reduced below the number required by law. (California Teachers Assn. v. Board of 
Trustees (1982) 132 Cal. App. 3d 32, 34-35; Rutherford v Board of Trustees supra 64 Cal. 
App. 3d 167.)  The District may exercise its discretion to reduce the number of counselors 
from 18 to five for the coming year.   

 

10

5. 

The primary legal question to be resolved in this matter is whether the District 

 
 
may, pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), skip a junior certificated 
employee, who currently serves as a Head Counselor, relative to other counselors, who 
possess greater seniority than the employee who is proposed for skipping.  The 
Superintendent’s assertion that the District may skip the junior counselor is based, in large 
measure, on the premise that the junior counselor occupies a “management” position.    
 

6. 

Education Code section 44955 provides in pertinent part:  

 

(c)    Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 
 
15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and services of such 
employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in which they were 
employed, as determined by the board in accordance with the provisions of 
Sections 44844 and 44845. . . . 
      
The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a 
manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which their 
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.  However, prior to 
assigning or reassigning any certificated employee to teach a subject which he 
or she has not previously taught, and for which he or she does not have a 
teaching credential or which is not within the employee's major area of 
postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the governing board shall 
require the employee to pass a subject matter competency test in the 
appropriate subject.  
   
(d)    Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the 
following reasons:  
   
(1)    The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services 
credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for 
a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and 
experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide 
those services, which others with more seniority do not possess. . . .   

  

(Emphasis added.) 
 

7. 

The District is permitted to depart from a seniority-based economic layoff in 

situations only where the District “demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 
specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee (to be exempted 
from layoff) has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of 
study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.” (Ed. 
Code, § 44955, subd. (d) (1).)  The issues here are: (a) whether the District demonstrated a 

 

11

“specific need” for personnel “to provide those services”; (b) if so, whether the junior 
employee possesses special qualifications necessary to teach such course or course of study; 
and, (c) whether senior certificated employees do not possess those special qualifications. 
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127.)  The analysis of these 
factors by the court in Bledsoe makes it clear that ordinarily these are factual questions and 
the school district bears the burden of proving each element. (Id. at pp. 138-144.) 

 

 
8. 

The decision in Hilderbrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 

Junior certificated employees may be given retention priority over senior employees 
if the junior certificated employees possess superior skills or capabilities which their more 
senior counterparts lack.  (Poppers vs. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 
Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 vs. Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  Here, the Superintendent failed to 
demonstrate that Ms. Lois Halls, who is a the junior certificated employee may be skipped 
because of special qualifications necessary to perform the counselor service.  And the 
District did not adequately establish that the senior employees, who are subject to layoff, do 
not possess such qualifications.    
 
 
Cal.App.4th 334 stands for the proposition that in a layoff action, a part-time permanent 
certificated employee, who does not seek to be employed full-time, may not exercise 
bumping rights with respect to a less senior full-time employee if the District reasonably and 
in good faith does not wish to split the full-time position into part-time positions.  Although 
in the past she possessed a full-FTE counselor position for most of her two decades with the 
District including a period of time as a Head Counselor, for the current school year 
Respondent Johnson occupies a 0.8 FTE counselor position.  Respondent Johnson did not 
established she is eligible to occupy a full-time FTE position next year, and she did not 
demonstrate the District will not be compelled to split the full-time position between herself 
and another qualified and competent employee.  Hence, the Hilderbrandt ruling applies to 
preclude Respondent Johnson being retained to hold the full-time FTE position as Head 
Counselor.  
 
 
Union High School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause 
for the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to the 
welfare of the District and its overall student population.  
 
 
consistent with the law.  And, the District’s contemplated layoff action is reasonable in its 
execution.  
 
 
accusation regarding Respondent Millar.  The District shall retain Respondent Millar in the 
Head Counselor position for the ensuing school year.  
 

The District’s layoff action is necessary.  The District’s proposed action is 

By reason of Factual Findings 12 and 17, cause exists to dismiss the 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the Acalanes 

 
10. 

11. 

9. 

 

12

12.  Other than the matter of Respondent Millar, no employee with less seniority 
 
than any Respondent is being retained to render a service which a respondent, who is not a 
counselor, is certificated and competent to render. 

 
ORDER 

 
1. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

The accusations served on Respondents Adelaida Melgoza, Taron Hensley, 

Edward Meehan, James Nolte, and Valerie Peterson are dismissed, and the layoff action as to 
those five individuals is rescinded.    

The accusation served on Respondents Jill Langston and Charlotte Howard are 

withdrawn, in part, and the layoff action is partially rescinded as to Respondents Langston 
and Charlotte Howard. The District will retain Respondent Langston for the 2010-2011 
school year to perform as a teacher with a 0.4 FTE teaching assignment.  And the District 
will retain Respondent Charlotte Howard for the 2010-2011 school year to perform as a 
teacher with a 0.8 FTE teaching assignment. 

 

The accusation is dismissed as to Respondent Lynn Millar, and the proposed 

layoff against her will be rescinded.   

The accusations served on all other respondents, not named above in this 

5. 

 Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

order, are sustained.  Notice may be given before May 15, 2010, to the affected respondents 
that their services will not be required for the 2010-11 school year because of the reduction 
or discontinuance of particular kinds of services by the Acalanes Union High School District. 
 
 
 
DATED:   May     , 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________ 
PERRY O. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

13

