BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
SALIDA UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

OAH No. 2010021007 
 

 
 

 

In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
JOHN ALFARO, JENNIFER 
BRINKMAN, STEVEN CLEEK,  
CHRIS COSTIN, JAMES DEWING,  
ELIZABETH INMAN, LOIS KELLER, 
JULIE NOEL, JASON OLSON,  
ELISA PEREZ, MELISSA PEREZ,  
HEATHER PRATT, REBECCA 
SCHMIDT, LAURA SKAVDAHL,  
CHRIS STEFFANIC, SUSAN 
STEPHENSON, and DAVID YEAKLE, 
 
 
                                                   Respondents. 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Marilyn Anne Woollard, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 15, 2010, in Salida, California. 
 
 
represented the Salida Union School District (District).  Interim Superintendent Twila Tosh 
was present on the District’s behalf.   
 

Marisa R. Lincoln, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

Ernest Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Ernest Tuttle, IV, represented all 

Testimony was heard, documents were introduced, and the parties offered oral closing 

arguments.  The record was then closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 
15, 2009. 

 
 
 

 

respondents. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

The Salida Union School District (District) provides education to students 
from kindergarten through the eighth grade (K-8).  It currently operates four elementary 
kindergarten through fifth grade (K-5) schools, with 400 to 500 pupils at each site, and a 
middle school for 986 sixth through eighth grade students.  The District also has an 
independent study charter school with 20 students.  Due to an approved school closure, 
beginning in the 2010 through 2011 school year, the District will only have three elementary 
schools. 
 

2. 

Twila Tosh is the Interim Superintendent of the District.  Ms Tosh has served  

in this capacity for approximately two months.  Ms. Tosh has worked at the District for 12 
years in a variety of positions, including as a classroom teacher, a program specialist, a 
learning coordinator and as an assistant superintendent for educational services.  Since 
becoming Interim Superintendent, Ms. Tosh has worked with the District’s Governing Board 
(Board) to determine the need for, and to take the necessary legal steps toward, a reduction in 
certificated employees for the 2010 through 2011 school year. 
 

Ms. Tosh described the District’s financial problems.  The District is currently in 

“self-qualified” status, which means that it is unable to meet its financial obligations for the 
current year or for the next two consecutive years.  It needs to reduce $3.2 million dollars 
from its general fund budget, based on various factors, including permanent reductions in 
state ADA funding, negative COLAs, an accounting error that had to be rectified, and the 
fiscal effect of some declining enrollment.  As a result of its qualified status, the Stanislaus 
County Office of Education assigned a fiscal advisory consultant, Teri Ryland, to the 
District, who prepared a Recovery Plan that reduces $3.2 million dollars.  The Recovery Plan 
has been adopted by the Board. 
 
Board Resolution 
 

3. 

On March 8, 2010, at the Interim Superintendent’s recommendation, the Board 
adopted Resolution No. 0910-18 (Resolution) entitled “Resolution of the Governing Board of 
the Salida Union School District Regarding the Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular 
Kinds of Services (Certificated Layoff).”  Pursuant to the Resolution, the Board determined 
it was necessary to reduce or discontinue 24.35 full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated 
positions, no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year: 
 

  1.00   FTE  
  2.00  FTE 
  2.60  FTE 
16.40  FTE 
  1.00  FTE 
  0.60  FTE 
  0.75  FTE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Principal 
Counselors 
Music Teacher 
K-6 Elementary 
Physical Education Teacher 
Learning Coordinator 
Independent Study Teacher 

2

 

 

 

Notice of Recommendation for Lay Off 
 

4. 

On March 11, 2010, Ms. Tosh servedon the affected certificated employees a 

“Notice of Recommendation That Your Services Will Not Be Required for the Ensuing 
School Year” (Notice), advising them of her recommendation to the Board that they be given 
notice, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that their services would not 
be required for the next school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation and noted that the Board had passed a Resolution reducing the certificated 
staff by 24.35 FTE positions.  Copies of the Resolution and Education Codes were attached 
to each notice. 
 

The Notices and related documents were either personally served by Ms. Tosh or 

were served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
 

None of the respondents challenged the District’s compliance with the Notice 

6. 

5. 

Each of the above-named respondents filed a timely request of a hearing. 

requirement of Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a).  
 
Request for Hearing 
 
 
 
Accusation 
 
 
made and served an Accusation against each of the certificated employees who timely 
requested a hearing.  The Accusation requests authorization for the Board to give notice to 
each respondent that their certificated services be terminated for the 2010-2011 school year, 
based upon its Resolution reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of service.  The 
Accusations, with required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense, were 
timely served on those certificated employees. 
 
Notice of Defense/Respondents 
 

On March 24, 2010, Interim Superintendent Tosh, in her official capacity, 

7. 

Notices of Defense were timely filed by 13 certificated employees, named as 

respondents in this matter.  In addition to these respondents, four certificated employees 
wished to participate in the hearing, but had failed to file, or failed to timely file, Notices of 
Defense.  These individuals are John Alfaro and Jennifer Brinkman (no Notices of Defense), 
and Heather Pratt and Chris Steffanic (untimely Notices of Defense). 
 

At hearing, the District advised that it had no objection to allowing these four 
certificated employees to participate as respondents in the layoff hearing, despite their failure 
to file or failure to timely file Notices of Defense.  Thus, 17 certificated employees are 
named respondents in this matter. 
 
 

 

3

Seniority Lists 
 

8. 

In determining which certificated employees were affected by the reduction in 
force required by the Resolution, the District’s Human Resources Department prepared two 
seniority lists.  Ms. Tosh supervised the preparation of these lists. 
 

The “Amended Certificated Seniority List” (Seniority List), current as of March 26, 

2010, is a basic list containing employees’ seniority dates and credentials.  The District 
shares this Seniority List with certificated staff on request, as well as with the Salida 
Teachers’ Association.  The Seniority List contains a notation on the bottom of each page, 
advising teachers to contact the District’s Human Resource Personnel “with any discrepancy 
or question.”  Prior to the commencement of layoff proceedings, the District sent its 
certificated employees a memorandum reminding them to verify the accuracy of the 
information contained on the Seniority List.1  
 

The “2009-2010 Low-Seniority Certificated Employees Seniority List” (Low 

Seniority List) contains all the information from the Seniority List, with additional 
information relating to each certificated employee’s area of assignment, contract signing 
date, supplemental authorizations, and CLAD status.  The District used this list to determine 
which of its certificated employees were subject to layoff pursuant to the PKS Resolution.   
 

None of the respondents raised any challenges to the accuracy of either of these 

seniority lists. 
 
Attrition 
 

9. 

As indicated in the Resolution and in Ms. Tosh’s testimony, in determining 

which certificated employees were affected by the reduction in force, the Board considered 
all positively assured attrition, including all deaths, resignations, retirements, non-reelections, 
and other permanent vacancies for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Competency Criteria 
 

10.  Ms. Tosh testified that, in determining which certificated employees were 

affected by the reduction in force, it was not necessary for the District to apply the 
competency criteria adopted in the Resolution.  There were no issues pertaining to more 
senior certificated employees “bumping” into positions held by less senior certificated 
employees.   
 

                                                 

1 Ms. Tosh testified that three respondents (Steven Cleek, Lois Keller and David Yeakle) informed the 

District of discrepancies in their information on the seniority list (principally, updating credentials).  It was 
determined that these discrepancies did not affect the layoff of these respondents, but pertained primarily to rehire 
rights.   

 

 

4

None of the respondents raised any challenges to the District’s competency criteria or 

to its determination that it was not necessary to apply the competency criteria for bumping 
purposes.  
 
Tie Breaking Criteria 
 

11. 

In the Resolution, the Board adopted “tie breaking” criteria to determine 

relative seniority between employees with the same first date of paid service to the District.  
Ms. Tosh testified that, in determining which certificated employees were affected by the 
reduction in force, it was not necessary to apply these criteria to any of the respondents. 
 

None of the respondents raised any challenges to the District’s determination that it 

was not necessary to break any seniority ties. 
 
Particular Kinds of Services to Be Reduced or Discontinued 
 

12.  None of the respondents raised any challenges to the District’s determination 
of the particular kinds of services to be reduced or discontinued.  The services identified in 
the Resolution are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued. 
 
District Recovery Plan 
 

13. 

The District’s “Recovery Plan Budget Options 2010-11,” prepared by Ms. 

Ryland, identifies $3,244,840 in planned reductions to the District’s general fund.  The 
Recovery Plan includes cost savings from various sources, including the release of all eleven 
District temporary teachers, the reduction of one nurse due to retirement, the closure of one 
elementary school, and 10 FTE teacher reductions by use of a student to teacher ratio of 30:1. 
 
Class Size Reduction 
 

14. 

In December 2009, the District entered into a Memorandum of Understanding 

(MOU) with the Salida Teachers’ Association regarding “K-3 Class Size Flexibility.”  In 
pertinent part, the MOU provides that, “for the 2010-2011 school year only, the parties agree 
to amend Article 7 to provide a maximum class size of 25 students in the District’s K-3 
classes.  No District teacher shall receive any additional stipends or compensation for 
teaching a K-3 class that does not exceed 25 students.” 
 

Ms. Tosh helped to negotiate the MOU, under the direction of the District’s former 

Superintendent.  At the time the District agreed to the MOU, an accounting error existed 
which made it appear as if its general fund was not in a deficit status.  The District learned of 
the error and the deficit after the MOU was executed.  Ms. Tosh testified that the Board was 
aware of this MOU at the time it signed the Resolution, and that the Board considered the 
MOU in calculating the layoffs required.  According to Ms. Tosh, maintaining the District’s 
fiscal integrity is paramount.  As set forth in the Recovery Plan, the 30:1 ratio is required to 
help the District meet its budget.  The K-3 student teacher ratio will increase to 30:1 in 2010-

 

5

2011, unless the Salida Teachers’ Association agrees to cost-saving concessions.  If the 
student teacher ratio of 25:1 was maintained in K-3 in the next year, only 10.4 FTE would be 
reduced, rather than the 16.4 FTE discontinued by the Board in the Resolution. 
 

Respondents’ contention that the District has abused it discretion because the 
Resolution demonstrates that it intends to violate a legally-binding MOU is without merit.  
Such an assertion is mere speculation. The District and STA are engaged in ongoing 
negotiations.  Further, the purpose of this hearing is to determine whether the District has 
complied with the Education Code so that the Board may proceed with the reduction in force.  
This is not the proper forum to raise possible collective bargaining disputes that may arise 
between the District and the Salida Teachers’ Association in the future. 
 

15.  No more junior employees are being retained to render services that more 

The District’s reductions and discontinuances of particular kinds of services 

16. 

senior respondents are certificated and competent to perform. 
 
 
relate solely to the welfare of its schools and pupils. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education Code section 44949 provides, in pertinent part, as follows: 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

(a)   No later than March 15 and before an employee is given  
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not  
be required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in  
Section 44955, the governing board and the employee shall be  
given written notice by the superintendent of the district or his  
or her designee, or in the case of a district which has no  
superintendent by the clerk or secretary of the governing board,  
that it has been recommended that the notice be given to the  
employee, and stating the reasons therefor. 

 [¶]. . .[¶] 

(b)   The employee may request a hearing to determine if there  
is cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. . . 
If an employee fails to request a hearing on or before the date  
specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his or her  
waiver of his or her right to a hearing. The notice provided for  
in subdivision (a) shall advise the employee of the provisions of  
this subdivision. 

6

2. 

Education Code section 44955 provides, in pertinent part, that: 

(b)   Whenever in any school year . . . a particular kind of service  
is to be reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the 
following school  year, . . . and when in the opinion of the governing  
board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any  
of these conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees  
in the district, the governing board may terminate the services of not  
more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated employees  
of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the  
school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of  
no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of  
this section while any probationary employee, or any other employee  
with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district  
on the same date, the governing board shall determine the order of  
termination solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students 
 thereof. Upon the request of any employee whose order of termination  
is so determined, the governing board shall furnish in writing no  
later than five days prior to the commencement of the hearing held  
in accordance with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria  
used in determining the order of termination and the application of  
the criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other employees  
in the group.  This requirement that the governing board provide, on  
request, a written statement of reasons for determining the order of  
termination shall not be interpreted to give affected employees any legal  
right or interest that would not exist without such a requirement. 

(c)   Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the  
15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and services  
of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in  
which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance  
with the provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a 
permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices and a  
right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be  
deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year. 

3. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949  
and 44955.  As set forth in Factual Findings 1 through 7, all notices and jurisdictional 
requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. The District has the burden  

7

 

 

 

 

 

 

of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the proposed reduction or elimination of 
particular kinds of services and the preliminary notice of layoff served on respondents are 
factually and legally appropriate.  The District has met its burden. 
 

4. 

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular  
kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another manner. 
(Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California Teachers Association 
v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)  A school 
board may reduce services within the meaning of the statute either by determining that a 
certain type of service shall not be performed at all or by reducing the number of district 
employees who perform such services.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower 
Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) 
 

As set forth in Factual Findings 3 and 12, the services identified in the Resolution are 

particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  
Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949 and 
44955. 
 

5. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, the 

District has established that no employees junior to respondents are being retained to perform 
the services which respondents are competent and certificated to render. 
 
 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice shall be given to employees occupying 24.35 full-time equivalent 

certificated positions that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year 
because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  
 

2. 

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

 
 
 
DATED:  April 20, 2010 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
    

___________________________ 
MARILYN A. WOOLLARD 

                  Administrative Law Judge 
                  Office of Administrative Hearings 

8

