BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
WATERFORD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
OAH No. 2010021006 

In the Matter of the Non-
Reemployment/Reduction in Force of:  
 
 
MATTHEW BENNETT 
CHRISTINA BRIONEZ 
TARAH CLARK 
ROBIN IRELAND 
JASON JERICOFF 
AMY N. KISSEE 
JENNIFER PARMAN 
JESSICA RODRIGUEZ 
MATT STEFFEN 
 
                                                Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Rebecca M. Westmore, Administrative Law Judge, Office 

Marisa R. Lincoln, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of the Waterford Unified 

Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of respondents Matthew 

 
 
of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 30, 2010, in Waterford, California. 
 
 
School District. 
 
 
Bennett, Christina Brionez, Tarah Clark, Robin Ireland, Jason Jericoff, Amy N. Kissee, 
Jennifer Parman and Jessica Rodriguez (represented respondents). 
 
 
 
 
decision on April 30, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondent Matt Steffen (unrepresented respondent) appeared on his own behalf. 

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for 

1

 
 
 

 
 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1.     Don Davis is the Superintendent of Waterford Unified School District (District).  

Ysabel Rockwell is the Director of Personnel at the District.  Their actions and the actions of 
the District’s Governing Board (Board) were taken in their official capacities. 
 

2.     Respondents are permanent certificated employees of the District. 

3.     On March 2, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 100302-01 (Resolution), 
entitled “Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of Service (Certificated Layoff).”  
Pursuant to the Resolution, the Board determined that it was necessary and in the best interest 
of the District to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services (PKS) and to decrease a 
corresponding number of certificated District employees not later than the beginning of the 
2010-2011 school year.  In order to limit the number of reductions, the Board considered all 
positively-assured attrition, including deaths, resignations, retirements, non-reelections, and 
other permanent vacancies. 
 

4.     Pursuant to the Resolution, the following particular kinds of services were 

identified for reduction or elimination: 
 

Certificated Positions  

 

 

 

 

 

FTE 

 

 
 
 

 
 
  

K-5 Elementary Teachers 
K-12 Instrumental Music Teacher 
K-12 Roving Substitute Teacher 
Middle School Computers/Yearbook Teacher 
Middle School Physical Education Teacher 
 
Middle School Science Teacher 
 
High School Business/Yearbook Teacher 
High School Computer Teacher 
 
High School Academic Decathlon Teacher  
 
High School Independent Study Teacher 
Continuation High School Health and Life Science Teacher 
Vice Principal Alternative Education 
Intermediate Resource Teacher 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
          13.00 FTE 
 
Total 

6.00                             
1.00  
1.00  
0.20  
0.40 
0.20 
0.20 
0.60  
0.20 
0.80 
0.40 
1.00                              
1.00  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.     On March 2, 2010, the Board defined the “competency” of a senior employee 

for reassignment into a position currently held by a junior employee as follows: 
 

a.  currently possesses preliminary, clear, professional clear, 
lifetime, or other full credential(s); and  
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

2

b.  has at least one semester actual teaching experience in the 
subject area at the corresponding grade span (K-6, 7-8, 9-12) 
within the last five years; and 

c.  has “highly qualified” status under the No Child Left Behind 
Act (NCLB) for the subject matter and grade level to which 
he/she will be assigned at the beginning of the 2010-2011 
school year, and 

d.  possesses a currently valid and properly filed CLAD, 
BCLAD, SDAIE or other regular (non-emergency) EL 
certificate valid for the 2010-2011 school year which will permit 
the employee to provide instruction to English Language 
Learners in his/her assignment for the 2010-2011 school year. 

6.     The Board directed Superintendent Davis to send appropriate notices to all 

employees whose services will be reduced or eliminated by virtue of the PKS reductions and 
eliminations.  The PKS reductions and eliminations are based solely upon economic reasons, 
and are not related to the skills, abilities or work performance of the affected teachers.   
 

7.     On March 2, 2010, in accordance with the Resolution, and pursuant to 

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the District served preliminary layoff notices on 13 
certificated teachers advising that their services would be reduced or would not be required for 
the 2010-2011 school year.  Nine certificated teachers timely filed Requests for Hearing to 
determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.   
 

8.     On March 25, 2010, Superintendent Davis made and filed Accusations against 

the nine respondents who requested a hearing.  All nine respondents timely filed Notices of 
Defense to the Accusations. 
 
District’s Layoff Procedures 
 

9.     The District maintains a Certificated Seniority List Detailed (Seniority List) 

which contains data obtained from the District’s records and its employees, including, but not 
limited to, employees’ names, start dates, assignments, credentials, and school sites.  
 

10.     Ysabel Rockwell has served as the District’s Director of Personnel for six years.  

She is responsible for monitoring personnel files, verifying credentials, authorizations and 
certificates, and ensuring NCLB compliance.  At hearing, Ms. Rockwell asserted that the 
decision to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services was based on the fiscal condition of 
the district, declining enrollment, and a projected revenue deficit for the 2010-2011 school 
year.  Ms. Rockwell stated that “the staff reductions are related to the welfare of the students in 
the District,” and are necessary to keep the District solvent.  According to Ms. Rockwell, the 
District’s “reserves will be gone in three years” and the District will be “upside down,” so they 
“have to make cuts now.”  Ms. Rockwell testified that all positively assured attrition had been 

3

 

 

 

 

considered when the District made its layoff determinations.  There was no evidence presented 
at the hearing to indicate that the District failed to properly take into consideration any 
positively assured attrition. 
 

11.     Ms. Rockwell also asserted that the Board’s “competency” criteria reflect the 

District’s need to ensure that all teachers have the requisite knowledge and experience to teach 
the subject matter “throughout the grade levels.”  In addition, the District’s requirement that all 
certificated teachers obtain their English Learner (EL) Certificate was based on the District’s 
need to provide equal opportunity to all of its students.  According to Ms. Rockwell, it is “not 
the practice of the District to single out and remove EL students” from classes being taught by 
non-EL Certified teachers.  Ms. Rockwell asserted that EL students comprise 23 percent of the 
students in the District, and 41 percent of the EL students attend Moon School.  She is unaware 
of any classes without EL students in attendance.  In 2007, in order to ensure that certificated 
teachers complied with the District’s requirement, the District offered to assist the teachers, 
and pay for the classes and tapes necessary to obtain their EL certification.  According to Ms. 
Rockwell, every certificated teacher in the District took advantage of the offer, except 
respondent Robin Ireland. 
 
CLAD Certification 
 

12.     Robin Ireland has a seniority date of August 20, 2001.  She holds a 

Professional Clear Multiple Subject Credential and Supplementary Authorization in Art.  She 
is currently assigned to a 1.00 FTE Roving Substitute position at Richard M. Moon 
Elementary School (Moon Elementary School).  According to Ms. Rockwell, Ms. Ireland was 
affected by the “competency” criteria established by the Board, and is ineligible to “bump” 
into a position held by a more junior teacher because she does not have her EL Certificate. 
 

13.     Ms. Ireland admitted at hearing that she was aware of the requirement to obtain 

her EL Certificate in 2006, and “started working on it” in the fall of 2007.  However, eleven 
months later, she learned that she had not passed one of the classes, because she did not timely 
submit a portfolio to the San Joaquin County Office of Education.  She has now completed 
three classes, and will take her fourth and final class from June 12 through August 12, 2010.  
She is required to submit a portfolio within two months after her last class, and expects to 
receive her EL Certificate approximately 10 days after completion.  Ms. Ireland admitted at 
hearing that in the beginning of the 2009-2010 school year, she taught 2nd grade at Moon 
Elementary School, and six of her students were EL students.  In her current position as a 
Roving Substitute, she also has EL students in her classes.  
 

14.     The District’s rationale for laying off Ms. Ireland is the District’s belief that it is 

required to provide equal opportunities to all of its students, and it is “not the practice of the 
District to single out and remove EL students” from classes being taught by non-EL Certified 
teachers.  At hearing, the District established that EL students comprise 41 percent of the 
students at Moon Elementary School where Ms. Ireland substitute teaches. 
 
 

 

4

15.     Ms. Ireland did not establish that the Board engaged in arbitrary or capricious 

action or violated its discretion by requiring that certificated teachers obtain their EL 
Authorization.  The District established that it is does not single out and remove EL students 
from classes being taught by non-EL certified teachers, and that EL students comprise 41 
percent of the students attending Moon Elementary School.  Therefore, Ms. Ireland does not 
meet the “competency” criteria set forth in the Board’s Resolution, which requires that she 
possess a currently valid and properly filed CLAD, BCLAD, SDAIE or other regular (non-
emergency) EL certificate valid for the 2010-2011 school year, and is subject to layoff. 
 
Tarah Clark’s Bumping Rights 
 

16.     Tarah Clark has a seniority date of August 11, 2005.  She holds a Clear 

Multiple Subject Credential, Clear Single Subject Credential in Social Science, and CLAD 
Certificate.  She is currently assigned to teach 4th grade Gifted & Talented Education (GATE) 
at Lucille Whitehead Intermediate School. 
 

17.     Matt Steffen has a seniority date of August 14, 2006.  He holds a Clear 
Preliminary Single Subject Credential in Social Science, and CLAD Certificate.  He is 
currently assigned to teach three sections of United States (U.S.) History and two sections of 
World History at Waterford High School.  Mr. Steffen received a preliminary layoff notice for 
0.20 FTE for his Academic Decathlon Class, but will be retained to teach 0.80 FTE of U.S. 
History at Waterford High School. 
 

18.     Ms. Clark asserted at hearing that she has a Bachelor of Arts degree in History 
with a minor in Education.  She admitted that she has not taught U.S. or World History in the 
school district, but believes she is “highly qualified” under NCLB to teach U.S. History.  Ms. 
Clark is willing to teach High School Social Science and argued that she should be permitted 
to “bump” into 0.80 FTE of Mr. Steffen’s U.S. History assignment.   The District and Mr. 
Steffen disputed Ms. Clark’s argument, asserting that Ms. Clark did not meet the 
“competency” criteria set forth in the Board’s Resolution because she does not have at least 
one semester of actual teaching experience in U.S. History within the last five years.  
Therefore, according to the District and Mr. Steffen, Ms. Clark should not be permitted to 
“bump” into the 0.80 FTE U.S. History assignment held by Mr. Steffen. 
 

19.     Ms. Clark does not meet the “competency” criteria set forth in the Board’s 

Resolution, which requires that she have “at least one semester actual teaching experience in 
the subject area at the corresponding grade span (K-6, 7-8, 9-12) within the last five years.”  
By her own admission, Ms. Clark has not taught U.S. or World History during the five years 
she has been employed by the District.  Therefore, Ms. Clark is not entitled to “bump” Mr. 
Steffen. 
 
 
 
 

 

 

5

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
 
The District employees who received notices that their services would be 
reduced or would not be required in the 2010-2011 school year are not being laid off for 
reasons related to their ability or performance. 
 

2. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
proposed reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and the preliminary notice of 
layoff served on respondents are factually and legally appropriate.  The District has met its 
burden.  The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next school year is an 
appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955.  As stated in San Jose 
Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of particular 
kinds of services on the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that section, and, 
“in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section 
44955 is the only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.”  
The District must be solvent to provide educational services and cost savings are necessary to 
resolve its financial crisis.  The Board’s decision to reduce particular kinds of services was a 
proper exercise of its discretion.  In addition, all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth 
in Education Code sections 44944 and 44945 were met. The notices sent to respondents indicate 
the statutory basis for the reduction of services and adequately describe the particular kinds of 
services to be reduced, and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due process.  
(Ibid., at p. 627; see also, Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831; Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838; and Degener v. 
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 

3. 

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular  

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another manner. (Gallup 
v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California Teachers Association v. Board of 
Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)  A school board may reduce 
services within the meaning of the statute either by determining that a certain type of service 
shall not be performed at all or by reducing the number of district employees who perform 
such services.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 
64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  As set forth in Factual Finding 4 the services identified in the Resolution 
are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  
Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
 
more senior respondent is certificated and competent to render.  Therefore, cause exists to give 
notice to respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2010-
2010 school year because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services. 
 

No junior certificated employees are being retained to perform services that a 

4. 

 

6

RECOMMENDATION 

Final Notices may be given to respondents that their services will be reduced or will not 

be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction and discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services.  
 
 
 
DATED:   May 5, 2010 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
REBECCA M. WESTMORE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

7

