BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD 
YUCAIPA-CALIMESA JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
Respondents listed in Appendix A. 
 
 
 
 

 

    OAH No. 2010030263 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

Mark W. Thompson, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, Attorneys at Law, 

Ronald G. Skipper, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents listed in Appendix 

 
 
of California, heard this matter in Yucaipa, California on April 1, 2010. 
 
 
represented the Yucaipa-Calimesa Joint Unified School District.  
 
 
A., except for those listed immediately below. 
 
Susan M. Popovich, Emeritus Consultant, California Teachers Association, 
 
represented respondents William Davidson, Cathleen Groves, Jessica Gustafsson, Catherine 
Hertel, Albert Opdyke, Myralynn Reichmann, Evan Sternard, and John Taylor. 
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 1, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Melissa Moore, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources of the Yucaipa-

 
 
Calimesa Joint Unified School District, made and filed the accusation dated February 25, 
2010, in her official capacity as the designee of Dr. Sherry Kendrick, District Superintendent. 
 
 

Respondents1 are certificated district employees. 

2. 

The district initially identified 73 certificated employees as respondents designated for layoff.  The district 

                                                 
1  
subsequently dismissed several of these employees so that by the conclusion of the hearing, there remained 65 
named respondents.  These 65 named respondents are listed in Appendix A.  The district also designated a number 
of employees for precautionary layoffs, in the event that the district’s proposed actual layoff list was not upheld in 
its entirety.  In light of the conclusion below that the district properly identified its certificated employees for layoff, 
the individuals identified for precautionary layoff are excluded from the list of respondents contained in Appendix 
A. 

 

1

3. 

On February 23, 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955, the superintendent notified the Board of Education of the Yucaipa-Calimesa Joint 
Unified School District in writing of her recommendation to reduce or discontinue particular 
kinds of services for the upcoming school year.  The superintendent stated the reasons for the 
recommendation.  The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment 
was not related to their competency as teachers. 
 

4. 

On February 23, 2010, the board adopted Resolution No. R-15/2009-2010, 

determining that it would be necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services at 
the end of the current school year.  The board determined that the particular kinds of services 
that must be reduced for the 2010-2011 school year were the following full time equivalent 
(FTE) positions: 
 

Particular Kind of Service 

 

 

Full-Time Equivalent

 

Elementary Teachers  
 
Drafting/Work Experience Teacher  
 
 
English Teachers 
 
 
Math Teachers 
 
Biology Teachers 
 
 
Physical Education Teachers 
 
Middle School Science Teachers 
Middle School Social Science Teachers 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

51.5 
1 
3 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 

The proposed reductions totaled 61.5 FTE positions.  

5. 

The board further determined in Resolution No. R-15/2009-2010 that 

“competency,” as described in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for the 
purposes of bumping, “shall necessarily include:  (1) Possession of a valid credential and 
Highly Qualified status under NCLB in the relevant subject matter area(s); (2) an appropriate 
EL authorization if required by the position; (3) to bump a single subject credential holder in 
a secondary assignment, an appropriate single subject credential; and (4) for specialty 
positions such as Counseling, School Psychologist, Community Day School, Advanced 
Placement, and secondary Designated Dual Assignment, at least one (1) complete year of 
District experience in the same assignment within the last five (5) years.” 
 

An issue was raised with regard to including one year of experience within the past 

five years as one of the bumping competency criteria.  However, the board’s determination in 
this regard was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and constituted a reasonable exercise of its 
discretion. 
 

6. 

The board further determined in Resolution No. R-15/2009-2010 that it would 

be necessary to retain certificated employees who possess special training and competency 
that other certificated employees with more seniority might not possess, to wit:  teachers who 
have authorization to teach English Learner (EL) students, as determined by the California 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing, and the special training and experience that comes 

2

 

 

 

 

therewith; teachers who have special training and experience to teach Advanced Placement 
classes; and teachers who are assigned to Designated Dual Assignments at the secondary 
level.  Based on the evidence presented at the hearing, the board’s determinations in this 
regard were neither arbitrary nor capricious, and constituted a reasonable exercise of the 
board’s discretion. 
 

7. 

The board directed the superintendent or her designee to determine which 

employees’ services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of the 
reduction of the foregoing particular kinds of services.  The board further directed the 
superintendent or her designee to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the 
district who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services. 
 

8. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district timely served on respondents a 
written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services would not be 
required for the upcoming school year, along with the related accusation.  The notice set 
forth the reasons for the recommendation.  The notice advised respondents of their right to a 
hearing, that each respondent had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person 
sending the notice by the date specified in the notice, a date which in each case was more 
than seven days after the notice was served, and that the failure to request a hearing would 
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 

The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment was not 

related to their competency as teachers. 
 
 
All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 

9. 

Respondents timely filed written requests for hearing and notices of defense.  

10. 

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of the 

11. 

The services the board addressed in Resolution No. R-15/2009-2010 were 

district. 
 
 
“particular kinds of services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these 
particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious and constituted a proper exercise 
of discretion.  No particular kinds of services were lowered to levels less than those levels 
mandated by state or federal law. 
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
welfare of the district and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as 
determined by the board. 
 
The board considered all positively assured attrition, including resignations, 
 
retirements and requests for transfer, in determining the actual number of necessary layoff 
notices to be delivered to its employees. 
 

12. 

13. 

 

3

15.  Matthew McIntosh currently teaches science and math at a continuation 

14.  Heather Seaton currently teaches high school English, and has a single subject 

16.  Margaret Stevenson is a reading specialist at a district elementary school.  She 

 
credential in English.  She felt she could bump Jessica Gustafson, a high school English 
teacher with a single subject English credential, who has taught advanced placement 
language for four years and has also participated in advanced placement training summer 
institutes.  The district properly exempted Gustafson from layoff pursuant to the advanced 
placement experience skipping criteria.  Further, since Seaton does not have a year of 
advanced placement teaching experience within the past five years, she did not meet the 
district’s bumping criteria. 
 
 
school.  He has a preliminary single subject credential in social science, which authorizes 
him to teach any subject at that school, based on student need.  McIntosh was bumped by 
Kendall Jarish, an elementary school teacher with a multiple subject credential and a 
supplementary authorization to teach English.  Jarish is also authorized by her credential to 
teach at a continuation school; Jarish is also competent to bump McIntosh pursuant to the 
board’s bumping criteria. 
 
 
has both a multiple subject and a reading specialist credential.  She was bumped by 
elementary school teacher Elizabeth Tremain, who has a multiple subject credential, a 
supplementary authorization in English, and a reading certificate.  Last year, but not this 
year, reading specialists were exempted from layoff pursuant to the board’s skipping criteria.  
Due to the nature of her assignment, and the students she works with, Stevenson does not 
believe that an individual who only has a reading certificate, and not a credential, should be 
able to bump her.  Stevenson did not, however, assert that she was exempt from layoff under 
the board’s present skipping criteria.  Further, Tremain was competent to bump Stevenson 
pursuant to the board’s bumping criteria. 
 
17.  Darla Clough teaches in a middle school math and science core assignment.  
 
Clough has a multiple subject credential plus a supplementary authorization to teach math.  
She has taught ASB (associated student body) and science 8 as well as several algebra 
classes.  Her credential and supplementary authorization permits her to teach algebra through 
the ninth-grade level.  She was properly bumped by Monica Grisham, an elementary school 
teacher with a multiple subject credential, who is credentialed and competent to teach in a 
core assignment pursuant to the board’s bumping criteria. 
 
 
personnel services) school counseling credential.  From 2006 to 2009, at her principal’s 
request, she served a half day as a counselor, and a half day teaching.  She has completed 
350 field hours in counseling at the junior and senior high level in the district.  During her 
two internship years, she served as a counselor in the high school summer school setting.  
She had other related experience, such as working at the University of Redlands admissions 
office for three years.  She thus feels she is qualified to bump a high school counselor with 
less seniority than she.  However, she has never been assigned as a high school counselor in 
the district—her (unpaid) summer internship does not constitute such an assignment.  

Tamie Fawcett teaches first grade, and has a multiple subject and a PPS (pupil 

18. 

 

4

20. 

Patricia Buchmiller has been an elementary school assistant principal, but is 

19.  Vickie Lyn Nelson teaches elementary school sixth grade, and has a multiple 

Accordingly, she was not competent to bump a more junior counselor pursuant to the 
district’s bumping criteria. 
 
 
subject and a PPS school psychology credential.  She has extensive experience working with 
at-risk youth, and also has counseling experience as an unpaid intern.  She has never worked 
in a paid school psychologist position, however.  More specifically, she does not have a year 
of district counseling experience, and is thus not competent to bump a less senior counselor 
pursuant to the district’s bumping criteria. 
 
 
presently serving in an elementary school teaching assignment.  She has both a multiple 
subject and an administrative services credential.  Her seniority date is August 15, 2006.  She 
was hired by the district as a long-term substitute on September 20, 2005, and served as in 
that capacity for 136 or 137 days during the 2005-2006 school year.  She believes she should 
receive credit for the 2005-2006 year for seniority purposes, based on her understanding that 
she served 136 out of 180 teaching days, so that she taught 76% (i.e., over three-fourths) of 
the school days.  However, her calculation did not take into account that pursuant to the 
collective bargaining agreement, the number of teaching days was either 184 or 185, so that 
she taught at most 74.5%2 of teaching days during the school year in question.  While 
Buchmiller’s situation is truly heartbreaking, she fell just short of the 75% of school days 
required in order for her service in the 2005-2006 year to be included for seniority purposes.3  
 
 
services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

21.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 

3. 

Pursuant to section 44995, a senior teacher whose position is discontinued has 
the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to 

This percentage assumes she worked 137 days and the full school year was 184 days. 

                                                 
2  
 
3  
however, the earlier seniority date could be significant for purposes of recall and rehire.   

Even if Buchmiller is given credit for her service in the 2005-06 school year, she would still be laid off; 

 

5

fill.  In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is 
filling that position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  
Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Santa 
Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified 
School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843; Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. 
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.) 
 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine 

4. 

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in 

whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic 
layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned 
to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at 136-137.) 
 
 
with any statistical computation.  It is within the governing authority’s discretion to 
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued 
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law.  (San Jose 
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)  A school district has wide 
discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or 
so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of 
law.  (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 
318, 322.) 
 

5. 

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district 

7. 

6. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44845, certificated employees are deemed 

and establishing requirements for employment.  This discretion encompasses determining the 
training and experience necessary for particular positions.  Similarly, school districts have 
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a 
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.  
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) 
 
 
“to have been employed on the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a 
probationary position.” 
 
 
classified as a substitute or temporary employee, who serves during one school year for at 
least 75 percent of the number of days the regular schools of the district were maintained in 
that school year and has performed the duties normally required of a certificated employee of 
the school district, shall be deemed to have served a complete school year as a probationary 
employee if employed as a probationary employee for the following school year.” 
 
 
accusation.  Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the district to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the welfare of the schools and 
the pupils thereof.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the district 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44918, subdivision (a), “an employee 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

8. 

 

6

due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The district 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board 
be directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is recommended that the board give respondents 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services are no longer required by the district. 
 
 

ADVISORY DETERMINATION 

The following advisory determination is made: 

The accusations served on respondents are sustained.  Notice may be given to 

 
 
respondents before May 15, 2010, that their services will not be required because of the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated. 
 
 
 
DATED:  ________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
DONALD P. COLE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

7

Appendix A 

Brandy Smith 
Chad Spencer 

Carrie Powell  
45. 
46. 
Sarah Ring 
47.  Kasaundra Salinas 
48. 
Juliana Sauvao 
49.  Heather Seaton 
50. 
51. 
52.  Michelle Spencer 
53. 
Susan Steinerlund 
54.  Margaret Stevenson 
55.  Melanie Stewart 
56.  Amanda Stockham 
57. 
58.  Antoinette Velardes 
59.  Kerry Vizzini 
60 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 

Lindy Ward 
Charissa Wiedlin 
Julie Wilson 
Casey Woodgrift 
Justin Woodside 
Sherry Young 

Cartha Tennille 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Scott Colin 

Heather Aguilar 
Jessica Alonzo 
Cheryl Arthur  
Gina Aten 
 
Deborah Bagg 
Michelle Benware 
Kristin Bernier 
Tara Bickford  
Melinda Blanton-Crites 
Patricia Buchmiller 
Jennifer Burton 
Barbara Caballero 

 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
 
10. 
 
11. 
 
12. 
 
13.  Darla Clough  
 
14. 
 
 
15.  Davina Correa 
 
16.  Kimberly Correll 
 
17.  Melissa Crosby 
 
Paula Deantonio 
18. 
 
Crystal Farritor 
19. 
 
Tamie Fawcett 
20. 
21.  Gwendalyn Flowers   
22.  Misty Foy 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27.  Amber Kidd 
28.  Melissa Kumanski 
Jennifer Lacanfora 
29. 
30. 
Julie Lattuca 
Esther Lehr 
31. 
32.  Debbie Logsdon 
Priscilla Martin 
33. 
Eric Martinez 
34. 
35.  Matthew McIntosh 
36. 
Christine McLaughlin 
37. 
Jill Meidinger 
Kurt Meidinger 
38 
39.  Kathleen Miller 
40. 
Stacey Monarrez 
41.  Krestin Mullen 
42.  Vickie Nelson 
43. 
44.  Kirsten Paul 

Lindsey Gilsen 
Lisa Hanlon-Amini 
Philip Hudec 
Bridgette Kennedy 

Brittany Olufson 

 

8

