BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
DAVIS JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF YOLO 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 
 
CONSTANCE ALEXICH, et al., 
 
                                                        Respondents.
 
 

 
 
 
    OAH No. 2010021035 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Dian M. Vorters, Office of 

 
 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 13, 2010, in Davis, California. 
 

James Scot Yarnell, Attorney at Law,1 represented complainant, Kevin French, 

Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law,2 represented respondents who are listed on 

Associate Superintendent, Davis Joint Unified School District. 
 
 
Appendix A. 
 
 
 

Blair Howard was present and represented himself at hearing. 

The matter was submitted on April 13, 2010. 

 
 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
General Findings Concerning Statutory Requirements 
 
 
 
 

1. 

Respondents are certificated district employees. 

                                                

95833. 

1 James Scot Yarnell, Attorney at Law, 2485 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 240, Sacramento, California  

 
2 Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law, 735 Sunrise Avenue, Suite 208, Roseville, California  95661. 
 

1

2. 

On February 18, 2010, the governing board of the district resolved to reduce or 

discontinue particular kinds of services.  To that end, the board adopted Resolution 32-10 
(Layoff Resolution).  Within the meaning of Code section 44955, the services are “particular 
kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce or discontinue 
these services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 

3. 

Not later than March 15, 2009, the superintendent of the school district caused 

5. 

4. 

A Notice of Intent to Dismiss was delivered to each respondent, either by 

The notice advised each respondent of the following:  He or she had a right to 

the governing board of the district and respondents to be notified in writing of his 
recommendation that preliminary notice be given respondents, pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955,3 that the district would not require their services for the 2010-
2011 school year.  The notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.  In recommending 
reductions in certificated staff, the superintendent considered the qualified condition of the 
district’s budget.  The district is expecting a $5.7 million budget deficit for the 2010-2011 
school year.  The recommendation was not related to respondents’ performance as 
certificated employees. 
 
 
personal delivery or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, registered, postage 
prepaid, and addressed to respondents’ last known address. 
 
 
a hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, he or she had to deliver a request for a hearing in 
writing to the person sending the notice.  The request had to be delivered by a specified date, 
which was a date that was not less than seven days after the notice of termination was 
served.4  And the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a 
hearing. 
 
 
Respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to determine whether 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  An accusation was timely 
served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice that, if they were going to request a 
hearing, they were required to file a Notice of Defense within five days after being served 
with the accusation.5  Respondents filed timely notices of defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
 
 

6. 

                                                

3 All references to the Code are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 
 
4 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

5 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a Notice 
of Defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
termination cases, the Notice of Defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

 

2

7. 

The Board must allow for positively assured attrition such as voluntary 

Positively Assured Attrition 
 
 
resignations and retirements which occur during the “computation period.”  (Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School Dist. (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831, 847.)   The district must “consider evidence of positively assured attrition, 
involuntary retirements for the [upcoming] school year which were known to the board when 
it made its preliminary determination on 15 March … and when it made its final 
determination on 15 May.”  (Lewin v. Bd. of Trustees of Pasadena Unified School Dist. 
(1976) 62 Cal.App.3d 977, 983.) 
 
 
positively assured attrition, including deaths, resignations, retirements and other permanent 
vacancies, for 2010-2011, in determining the needed services to be reduced or eliminated.   
 

As set forth in the Layoff Resolution, the governing board considered all 

8. 

9. 

Of the 46 certificated employees who were served with valid notices of layoff 

and requested a hearing pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (b), 38 
teachers timely returned a Notice of Defense.  Seven teachers failed to return a Notice of 
Defense.  One teacher, Lance Gunnersen, returned his Notice of Defense after the deadline of 
March 19, 2010.  As to the eight certificated employees who failed to timely return a Notice 
of Defense, the matter proceeded as a default pursuant to Government Code section 11520. 
(Appendix A.) 
 
Competency Criteria 
 

10. 

The Layoff Resolution includes competency criteria adopted by the board, for 

use in implementing layoffs.  The competency criteria provision states: 
 

That “competency” as described in Education Code Sections 44955, 
44956 and 44957 for the purpose of bumping and reemployment rights 
shall be determined upon current possession of a preliminary or clear 
credential for the subject matter or grade level to which the employee 
may bump or will be assigned; a BCLAD if the assignment requires 
that authorization (Elementary Spanish Immersion, EL Teacher); an EL 
authorization if the assignment requires that authorization; a certificate 
issued by the American Montessori Society or American Montessori 
International if the assignment requires that authorization (Davis 
Montessori Program); and service within the last five (5) years for 
teachers on special assignment as English Learning Specialists or Math 
Specialists. Further, that due to the specific need of the District to hire 
and retain only highly qualified teachers in academic subject areas, 
“competency” shall require (highly qualified) current confirmation of 
qualification of academic subject competency, or verifiable eligibility 
for competency if not previously reviewed by the District, in all 
subjects of a proposed assignment, including assignments teaching 

 

3

multiple academic subjects and assignments in secondary alternative 
schools, in accordance with the NCLB. 

11. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b) provides that no senior 

employee may be terminated while any less senior employee is retained to render a service 
which the more senior permanent employee is “certificated and competent” to render.  “It [is] 
the districts obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine whether any 
permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic layoff 
possess[es] the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned to 
another position.”  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 137.) 
 

12. 

The competency definition contained in the resolution was created for layoff 

purposes only.  The competency definition adopted in the Layoff Resolution is within the 
district’s discretion. 
 
Services the District Intends to Reduce or Discontinue 
 

13. 

The governing board of the district determined in the Layoff Resolution that  

because particular kinds of services were to be reduced or eliminated, it was necessary to 
decrease the number of permanent employees in the district by 80.25 full-time equivalents 
(FTE).  The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to reduce 
or discontinue are: 
 

(A)  Elementary (Grades P-6) Classroom Instructional Services: 
 
 
 
 

1.  
2.  
3.   Montessori Teaching Services 
 

Elementary Classroom Teaching Services       
Spanish Immersion Teaching Services 

    36.0 FTE 
      4.0 FTE 
      1.0 FTE 
    41.0 FTE 

Total   

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

(B) 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Secondary (Grades 7-12) Departmentalized Instructional Services: 
 
1.  
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
7. 
 
8. 
 
9. 
 
10.  
 
11. 
 
12. 
 
13. 
 
14.   Home Economics 
 
15.  Agriculture 

English 
 
Mathematics   
Physical Education 
Social Science       
Spanish 
Science (Life/Biological) 
 
Health  
Art 
 
 
Industrial Technology 
Science (Physical) 
 
Computer Technology 
 
Fashion/Textiles 
 
Food Sciences 
 
 

      5.0 FTE 
      4.0 FTE 
      3.0 FTE 
        3.0 FTE  
      3.0 FTE 
      2.0 FTE 
      2.0 FTE  
      1.0 FTE 
      1.0 FTE 
      1.0 FTE 
        .8 FTE 
        .6 FTE 
        .6 FTE 
        .4 FTE  
        .4 FTE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

4

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

16.  Woods  
Total   
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

(C)  Educational Services: 
 
 

Secondary Counseling Services 
Physical Education Specialist  
Gate Coordinator 
EL Coordinator 
Total   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

(D)  Administration Services 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

        .2 FTE 
    28.0 FTE 

 

      7.0 FTE 
      1.0 FTE  
        .6 FTE 
        .4 FTE 
      9.0 FTE 

 

 
 

 
Flap Grant Manager   
Adult School Principal 
 
Continuation High School Principal  
 
Co-Director of Special Education 
Total   
 
             
 

 
 
             

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
        
 
 

      1.0   FTE 
        .5   FTE 
        .5   FTE 
        .25 FTE 
      2.25 FTE  

TOTAL   80.25 FTE   

1.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
 
 
 

14. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), the governing 

 
Use of Tie-Breaking Criteria Based on the Current Needs of the District and Students 
 
 
board of the district established, in the Layoff Resolution, criteria for determining the order 
of termination as among employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  The 
Board authorized a point system to be “applied only where the implementation of layoffs or 
rehire actually impacts two or more employees with the same first date of paid service and is 
applied only to those employees.”  Points were granted to each affected employee based 
upon all the following criteria:6
 

Possession of a currently valid preliminary or clear California professional, 
standard or general teaching credential;  2 points 

Possession of more than one valid preliminary or clear California teaching 
credential;  2 points 

Possession of one or more language certifications (e.g., LDS, CLAD, SB 
1969, SB 395, BCC, BCLAD, Certificate of Completion of Staff 
Development) authorizing instruction to English Learners;  2 points 

Possession of one or more of the following currently valid subject matter 
authorizations:  RSP, SDC, Psychologist, Speech and Language, Reading 

                                                
 
Academic Development), a certificate; CLAD ( Cross-cultural, Language and Academic Development); GATE 
(Gifted and Talented Education), an honors program for gifted students.   

6 NCLB (No Child Left Behind), a mandated program; BCLAD (Bilingual, Cross-cultural, Language and 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

5

Credential, Sciences, Math, Foreign Languages - 1 point for each listed 
authorization. 

(Applicable only to a tie between an employee holding a valid Intern 
Credential and an employee holding a lesser credential/certificate including, 
but not limited to, provisional credentials/certificates, Short Term Staffing 
Permit, Pre-Intern Certificated, Provisional Intern Permit, Special Temporary 
Certificate or State issued waiver) The certificated employee with a valid 
Intern Credential shall receive 2 points. 

e. 

f. 

In any case where a tie results after calculating the cumulative points for each 
the above criteria, then the tie shall be broken by ranking the tied employees 
from lowest to highest according to the last four digits of their social security 
number, with the lower number deemed less senior than the next higher 
number. 

15. 

Skipping describes the process by which the district may deviate from the 

 
Skipping/Bumping/Seniority 
 
 
order of seniority when there is an identified need for a particular type of service, there is a 
junior employee who is uniquely qualified to provide that service or teach a subject, and 
there is no senior employee who is certificated and competent to provide the service.  (Ed. 
Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).)  Complainant employed skipping to achieve a proper list of 
employees to receive layoff notices. 
 
 
teachers in the specific courses or courses of study identified below due to their specialized 
training and experience related to those courses which more senior employees do not 
possess, the Superintendent and/or his designee is authorized to deviate from terminating 
those certificated employees in order of seniority in instances where they are currently 
assigned to teach those courses and will be assigned to teach those courses again for the next 
school year and more senior employees do not possess the same specialized training and 
experience related to the course: 
 
 

The board determined that due to the need of the District to retain those individual 

Teachers holding a BCLAD and teaching Spanish Immersion Classes; 

a. 

Instructors in the Elementary Reading Program who hold specialized reading 
certification; 

Special Education Program; or 

Teachers holding an American Montessori Society Certificate or American 
Montessori International Certificate and teaching Davis Montessori Program 
classes. 

 
 

 

b. 

c. 

d. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6

16. 

Bumping describes the process by which the district identifies those 

 
employees who are more senior and who are competent to perform a particular kind of 
service or teach a particular subject.  Complainant employed bumping to achieve a proper list 
of employees to receive layoff notices. 
 
 
Among the teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority in the district 
gives a greater legal entitlement to a position.  Seniority is defined as the date upon which an 
employee first rendered paid services in a probationary position.  (Ed. Code, § 44845.) 
 

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school district.  

17. 

Associate Superintendent Kevin French testified that a seniority list of all certificated 
employees is maintained.  Employees verify the information and the seniority list is updated 
annually for accuracy.   He stated that no certificated employee was retained in lieu of a more 
senior employee qualified to render that service. 
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping at the Elementary School Level 
 
18.  At the elementary school level, the governing board determined it was 
 
necessary to reduce 36.0 FTE Elementary Classroom Teaching positions, 4.0 FTE Spanish 
Immersion Teaching positions, and 1.0 FTE Montessori Teaching position for a total of 41 
FTE.  (Factual Finding 13.)  The district implemented the reduction by first looking at the 
seniority chart and identifying which employees held relevant credentials.  The district 
skipped those employees who were currently assigned to teach specific courses that meet a 
specific need and require specialized training and experience.  (Factual Finding 15.)  Tie-
breaking procedures were implemented as necessary between those employees who first 
rendered paid service on the same date.  Bumping was employed to ensure that the more 
senior teachers who were certificated and competent to render this particular kind of service, 
were retained over those with less seniority. 
 
 
To reduce 1.0 FTE Elementary/Montessori instruction, the teacher with the 
least seniority received a layoff notice.  A temporary employee received this notice.  The 
remaining Elementary teachers currently assigned and qualified to teach in Montessori 
classrooms were skipped pursuant to the resolution. 
 
 
To reduce 4.0 FTE Elementary/Spanish Immersion instruction, teachers with 
the least seniority received layoff notices.  One position was held by a probationary teacher 
whom the district chose not to re-elect.  The next three Spanish Immersion teachers had 
seniority dates of August 27, 2007 or later:  Elizabeth Castro, Jose Bermudez, and Lara 
Erica.  These employees were the proper recipients of layoff notices. 
 
 
teachers not subject to skipping with seniority dates of August 25, 2006 or earlier were 
retained.  Those teachers with a seniority date after August 25, 2006, properly received 
layoff notices.  Three elementary teachers first rendered paid service to the district on August 
25, 2006.  Eva Dopico-Serantes and Mele Echiburu hold a multiple subject credential and a 

To reduce 36.0 FTE Elementary instruction, the remaining Elementary 

20. 

21. 

19. 

 

7

22. 

The governing board determined it was necessary to reduce 28.0 FTE 

BCLAD in Spanish.  Mayra Ramos holds a multiple subject credential and a BCLAD.  After 
the district applied the tie-breaking criteria, all three received three points.  The district broke 
the continuing tie using their social security numbers (SSN’s).  Ms. Dopico-Serantes had the 
highest number and was deemed to have the most seniority, followed by Mr. Echiburu, and 
last by Ms. Ramos.  As such, Mr. Echiburu and Ms. Ramos received layoff notices.  Ms. 
Dopico-Serantes received a precautionary notice. 
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping at the Secondary School Level 
 
 
Secondary (Grades 7-12) Departmentalized Instruction positions.  (Factual Finding 13.)  The 
District implemented the reduction in secondary school teachers by first looking at the 
seniority chart and identifying which employees held relevant credentials.  Tie-breaking 
procedures were implemented as necessary between those employees who first rendered paid 
service on the same date.  Bumping was employed to ensure that the more senior teachers, 
certificated and competent to render this particular kind of service, were retained over those 
with less seniority. 
 
 
Mathematics, 3.0 FTE in Physical Education,  3.0 FTE in Social Science, 3.0 FTE in 
Spanish, 2.0 FTE in Life/Biological Science, 2.0 FTE in Health, 1.0 FTE Art, 1.0 FTE 
Industrial Technology, 1.0 FTE Physical Science, 1.0 FTE Computer Technology, 0.6 FTE 
Fashion/Textiles, 0.6 FTE Food Science, 0.4 FTE Home Economics, 0.4 FTE Agriculture 
Instruction, and 0.2 FTE Wood Shop. 
 
 
The district reduced 3.0 FTE of Social Science instruction by noticing two 
temporary employees (1.2 FTE) and the three least senior Social Science instructors (1.8 
FTE).  
 
 

23.  At the secondary level, the district eliminated 5.0 FTE in English, 4.0 FTE in 

Blair Howard has a seniority date of August 25, 2008.  He currently teaches 
Social Science (0.4 FTE) and Science (0.1 FTE) at King High School.  He 
received a layoff notice for 0.4 FTE Social Science.   

24. 

a. 

 

Tie-breaking was employed as to the four Social Science secondary teachers 
who share a seniority date of August 27, 2007. Ian Stevenson and Tyler 
Millsap each received six points and were not noticed for Social Science 
instruction layoff.  Caitlin Butler and Kristin Swanstrom each received four 
points, and using their SSN’s to break the continuing tie, Ms. Butler was 
deemed more senior.  Ms. Swanstrom received a notice for 1.0 FTE Social 
Science instruction and Ms. Butler received a notice for 0.4 FTE Social 
Science instruction. 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

8

The district reduced 2.0 FTE in Health instruction by noticing four employees.  

25. 

 
Bumping was employed.   
 
 

a. 

Dianna Henrickson bumped Blair Howard for 0.1 FTE of Health instruction.  
Ms. Henrickson has a seniority date of January 28, 2003.  She teaches Health 
and science (0.8 FTE) at Holmes Junior High.  She holds a single subject life 
science/health credential, a certificate of staff development, and an EL 
authorization. 

 
 

b. 

Mr. Howard has a seniority date of August 25, 2008.  He teaches Social 
Science and Science (0.5 FTE) at King High School.  He holds a single subject 
social science credential, foundational level General Science, and an EL 
authorization.  Ms. Henrickson is more senior and is qualified to bump Mr. 
Howard in 0.1 FTE of Social Science instruction. 

27. 

The district eliminated particular kinds of Educational Services including 

 
 
26.  Mr. Howard testified at hearing.  He contends that he is uniquely credentialed 
to teach multiple subjects within his core curriculum at Martin Luther King Alternative High 
School.  His class instruction includes United States History and Food Science/Economics.  
Mr. Howard’s credentials qualify him to teach a broad range of Science and Social Science 
subjects at the secondary level.  However, he has the least seniority of similarly qualified 
credentialed employees.  As such, he properly received a notice of layoff for the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping of Educational Services 
 
 
Secondary Counseling (7.0 FTE), Physical Education Specialist (1.0 FTE), Gate Coordinator 
(0.6 FTE), EL Coordinator (0.4 FTE).  Bumping was employed to ensure that the more 
senior teachers, certificated and competent to render this particular kind of service, were 
retained over those with less seniority.  Respondents in these positions, identified by the 
district, were the proper recipients of layoff notices. 
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping of Administrative Services 
 
 
Flap Grant Manager (1.0 FTE), Adult School Principal (0.5 FTE), Continuation High School 
Principal (0.5 FTE), and Co-Director of Special Education (0.25 FTE).  Bumping was 
employed to ensure that the more senior teachers, who are certificated and competent to 
render this particular kind of service, were retained over those with less seniority.  
Respondents in these positions, identified by the district, were the proper recipients of layoff 
notices. 
 
Issues Related to Seniority Dates 
 

The district eliminated particular kinds of Administrative Services including 

28. 

 

9

29. 

30.  Kelly Carlson has a seniority date of August 27, 2007.  She was employed 

Philip Raymond has a seniority date of August 27, 2007.  He was employed 
 
for the 2006-2007 and the 2007-2008 school years as a temporary employee.  The district 
employs temporary employees to fill in for permanent employees who are on leave of 
absence.  This ensures that when a permanent employee returns from leave, a position will be 
available.  A temporary employee does not accrue seniority.  During the 2007-2008 school 
year, Mr. Raymond was converted from a temporary to a probationary employee.  The 
district “tacked him back” for a period of one year giving him an August 2007 seniority date. 
 
 
with the district previously but there was a break in her service.  Ms. Carlson was employed 
again with the district as a temporary employee for the 2006-2007 school year.  She was 
converted to a permanent employee for the 2007-2008 school year giving her an August 
2007 seniority date. 
 
Education Code section 44848 states that “when any certificated employee shall have 
 
resigned or been dismissed for cause and shall thereafter have been reemployed by the board, 
his date of employment shall be deemed to be the date on which he first accepted 
reemployment… or rendered paid service… after his reemployment.”   
 
 
above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 
 

31.  Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 

and 44955.  All notices and jurisdictional prerequisites required by those sections were 
satisfied. 
 

2. 

The services the district seeks to eliminate in this matter, as set forth in Layoff 

Resolution 32-10, are the particular kinds of service that may be reduced or discontinued 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted 
a proper exercise of the board’s discretion.  Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, legal cause exists for the district to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of 
services set forth in the layoff resolution.  The reduction or discontinuance of these identified 
particular kinds of services relates solely to the welfare of the district and its pupils. 
 

3. 

No certificated employee with less seniority than any respondent is being 
retained to render a service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
Legal cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to give respondents 
final notice that their services will not be required for 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

10

 

 

1. 

The Davis Joint Unified School District’s action to reduce or eliminate the 

particular kinds of services identified in Layoff Resolution 32-10, for the 2010-2011 school 
year is AFFIRMED. 

2. 

The Accusation against respondents is SUSTAINED.  The Davis Joint Unified 

School District may give final notices to respondents that their services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year.  Notices shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 30, 2010 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
DIAN M. VORTERS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

11

APPENDIX A  
2010 Davis Joint Unified School District – List of Respondents 
 
Last Name 
 
1 
ALEXICH 
2 
ALMEIDA 
3 
ANDERSON 
4 
ANGELO 
5 
ARADHYA 
6 
AVILA-TUTTLE 
7 
BERMUDEZ 
8 
BERNADAC 
9 
BIEWER-ELSTOB 
10 
BUTLER 
11 
CARIDI 
12 
CARLSON 
13 
CRUZ 
14  DAUGHERTY 
15  DOPICO-SERANTES 
16 
FINGERMAN 
17  GINN 
18  GUENTHER 
19  HANSEN 
20  HERRERA 
21  HOWARD 
22 
LARA 
23  MEADE-LEE 
24  MITCHELL 
25  MOY 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37  WALTHER 
38  WEIR 
 

First Name  Procedural Status 
CONSTANCE 
THEREZA 
LAURA 
LYNN 
LAKSHIMI 
GABRIELA 
JOSE 
CHRISTINA 
LINDA 
TRISHA 
ANN 
KELLY 
ANA 
WILLIAM 
EVA 
LEONARD 
LAUREEN 
LUISA 
JOSH 
ALICIA 
BLAIR 
ERICA 
SHANNON 
J 
JENNIFER 
SALLY 
CARMEN 
MAYRA 
PHILIP 
KELLY 
MARIE 
ELIZABETH 
HEATHER 
CAROL  
MAITE 
KRISTIN  
BONNIE 
KRISTINE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represented himself at hearing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PALOW 
PARKS 
RAMOS 
RAYMOND 
RIDGEWAY 
RUNDLE 
SATER 
SHORT 
STEWART 
SUREDA 
SWANSTROM 

 

12

