BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE 
DESERT SANDS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Involving 158 Certificated Employees of the  
Desert Sands Unified School District, 
 
 

          Respondents. 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
OAH No. 2010030639 
 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Dana Martinez, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Joshua Alvarez, Ella 

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 

Candace M. Bandolan, Attorney at Law, represented the Desert Sands Unified School 

 
 
California, heard this matter in La Quinta, California, on April 23, 2009. 
 
 
District. 
 
 
Anderson, Debra Apple, Susan M. Baker,  Jennifer Baxa, Deborah Bray, Phyllis Brown, 
Shira Brynjegard, Bridget Burden, Brenna Carnt, Vanessa Castro, Susan Cercone, Haimanti 
Tanya Chakraborty, Helen Chang, Brenda Cohagan, Jennifer Costello, Astria Cota, Darcie 
Cotton, Michael Daugherty, Mona Davidson-Murray, Patricia Doherty, Tracie Dohrman, 
Victoria Dougherty, Deanna Dreweatt, Eileen Ellis, Nicole Faay Dean, Jennifer Fanton, 
Veronica Fernandez, Jason Fosselman, Jane Gallegos, Ada Jeanne Gatherum, David Gibbs, 
Jr., Jesse Gill, Jared Goldman, Ileana Gomez, Maria G. Gonzalez-Mares, Maria Gonzalez-
Salazar, Amber Granik, Leticia Hernandez, Veronica Hernandez, Melissa Hollis, Cassandra 
Howell, Devin Howell, Allison Hualde, James Hutcheson, Howard Todd Johnson, Michele 
Jones, Lisa Kenmuir, Melanie Kiss, Linda Knight, Jana Lew, Lynn Lockard, Paulina Lowrie, 
Sandra Mangan, Stephanie Mann, Justin Martin, Charles Mazet, Liliana Mazet, Yvonne 
Marie McLoud, Kelly Meka, Melissa Melchor, Maria Mendoza, Stephen Merritt, Rosa Mesa, 
Carol Miller, Morgan Miller, Jaimee Montali, John Mook, Xochitl Moore, Cynthia Mulvey, 
Jessica Nettimi, Jeannine Nielsen, Tiffany Norton, Veronica Ortega, Michelle Ostendorf, 
Karla Otten,  Katherine Overley, Belma Pera, Nicole Phillips, John Preston, Robert 
Quintana, Shirley Ramsay, David Ritland, Melissa Rizzo, Richard Romero, John Romero, 
Maria Ruelas, Wendy Rush, Michele Sanchez, Noemi Sanchez, Ashley Schantz, Kari 

 

 1

Schwartz, Philip Solis, Laura Spradlin, Michelle St. Louis, Michael Sugarman, Katherine 
Thompson, Serena Van Leuven, Anna Velasquez, Kristin Walker-Tierney, Michael Walsh, 
Eve Wehler, Megan Weitz, Floyddell Wilson, Steven Wood, Tracy Workman-Gross, and 
Kira Zabrowski.  
 

 
Respondents Athena Milis, Gabriel Gutierrez, Melissa Labayog, Bettyrae Easley, 

Trina Champagne-Belmonte represented themselves.    
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 23, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Desert Sands Unified School District (DSUSD or the district) provides 

The district is governed by an elected five member Board of Education (the 

 
The Desert Sands Unified School District 
 
 
educational services to approximately 29,000 pre-Kindergarten through adult education 
students in the communities of Indio, La Quinta, Palm Desert, Indian Wells, Bermuda Dunes, 
and Rancho Mirage.  DSUSD maintains and operates 20 elementary schools, six middle 
schools, one charter middle school, four comprehensive high schools, and three alternative 
high schools. The district employs about 1,300 certificated employees and about 1,000 
classified employees.  The district’s annual budget is approximately $205 million, about 85 
percent of which pays for employee salaries and benefits. 
 
 
governing board).  Dr. Sharon McGehee is the Superintendent of Schools.  Sherry Johnstone 
is the Assistant Superintendent, Personnel Services.   
 
The Fiscal Crisis – Economic Layoffs 
 
 
until the state budget is chaptered, an event occurring each year in late June but sometimes 
taking place much later in the year.  Before then, a school district’s governing board must 
take steps to make certain that ends meet if the worst-case financial scenario develops.  
 
 
administrators and other certificated employees be given preliminary layoff notices, warning 
them that their services will not be required for the next school year.  Under Education Code 
section 44949, these preliminary layoff notices must be given no later than March 15. 
 
 
school districts) became aware of California’s continuing budget deficit and its likely 
crippling impact on the district in the next school year.  As a result of the crisis, the district 
projected the need to trim its budget by more than $15 million for the 2010-11 school year.  

A school board’s obligation to balance its budget often requires that some teachers, 

In early 2010, DSUD’s administration (as well as the administrators of most other 

A school district cannot determine the level of state funding it will receive 

3. 

 2

 

4. 

The economic layoff statutes found in the Education Code generally require the 

The district was once again required to look into ways to balance its budget, including the 
elimination or reduction of various educational programs and downsizing its staff. 
 
 
retention of senior employees over more junior employees, and the retention of permanent 
employees over probationary employees and others with less seniority.  A public school 
district may deviate from the general rule requiring termination in reverse order of seniority 
only if it can demonstrate that identifiable junior employees possess specific credentials, 
special training, experience or unique qualifications necessary to teach a course of study or to 
provide services which more senior employees do not possess and that the junior employees 
will be assigned to provide services requiring such special education, training or experience. 
 
The District’s Response 
 
The district established a budget study committee to look into various methods 
 
by which the district might be able to meet the projected budgetary shortfall.  The committee 
included district administrators, certificated employees, parents and others with an interest in 
the process.  Community meetings were held.  After gathering data and recommendations, 
the superintendent’s cabinet met and conferred.  Following deliberations, it was painfully 
concluded that it would be in the best interest of the district and the students thereof to 
reduce certificated services by 211 full time equivalent (FTE) positions.  Many of the 
reductions were a result of increasing the student-teacher classroom ratio at all grade levels.  
A recommendation was provided to Dr. McGehee concerning the specific reduction and 
elimination of particular kinds of services being provided by certificated employees to help 
meet the projected budgetary shortfall.  
 
 
recommended to the governing board the need to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
services, to notify certain employees that their services would not be required in the 2010-
2011 school year, and to notify those employees of the reason for the proposed reduction in 
force. 
 
The Governing Board’s Resolutions 

On March 10, 2010, under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, Dr. McGehee 

On March 10, 2010, the district’s governing board passed Resolution No. 

 

5. 

 
27.2009-2010.  It provided:  
 

RESOLUTION NO. 27/2009‐2010 
TO DECREASE THE NUMBER OF CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES 
DUE TO A REDUCTION OR ELIMINATION OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES 

 
WHEREAS, Education Code section 44955 permits the Governing Board to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of programs and services not later than the beginning of the 
following school year; and 
 

 3

WHEREAS, the Governing Board of the Desert Sands Unified School District (“District 
Board”) has determined that it shall be necessary to decrease the following programs 
and services of the District no later than the beginning of the 2010‐2011 school year; 
and 
 
WHEREAS, it shall be necessary to terminate at the end of the 2009‐2010 school year 
the employment of certain certificated employees of the District as a result of the 
reduction or elimination of the programs and services; 
 
THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED,  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Desert  Sands  Unified 
School District that the following services shall be reduced or eliminated no later than 
the beginning of the 2010‐2011 school year: 

NUMBER OF FULL TIME 
EQUIVALENT (FTE)  

 
 

PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES 

ELEMENTARY SCHOOL EDUCATION
Kindergarten Class Size:  Increase Student to Teacher Ratio, 31:1 to 34:1 
Grades 1‐2 Class Size:  Increase Student to Teacher Ratio, 24:1 to 31:1 
Grades 3‐5 Class Size:  Increase Student to Teacher Ratio, 31:1 to 35:1 
Subtotal – Elementary School Program
 
MIDDLE SCHOOL EDUCATION
Grades 6‐8 Class Size:  Increase Student to Teacher Ratio, 30:1 to 35:1 
“CORE” Classes taught by personnel possessing only a general or multiple 
credential including but not limited to:  Math/Science; Humanities; 
Humanities/Language Arts; English/Social Science 
Opportunity (Middle) 
Subtotal – Middle School Program
 
HIGH SCHOOL EDUCATION
Grades 9‐12 Class Size:  Increase Student to Teacher Ratio, 30:1 to 33:1 
Subtotal – High School Program
 
Physical Education Instruction
 
CERTIFICATED SUPPORT SERVICES
Elementary Counselors 
AB 1802 Counselors 
Behavior Specialists 
Librarians 
District Level Project Facilitators, Project Teachers, and Teachers on 
Special Assignment  
School Site Level Project or Middle School Facilitators, Project Teachers, 
and Teachers on Special Assignment  
Subtotal – Support Staff

 4

‐15.0
‐39.0
‐30.0
‐84.0

‐25.0
‐10.0

‐2.0
‐37.0

‐24.0
‐24.0

‐10.0

‐14.0
‐5.0
‐2.0
‐3.0
‐14.5

‐10.5

‐49.0

 
ADMINISTRATION
Assistant Principals – Secondary (Grades 6‐12) 
Assistant Principals – Adult Education  
Psychologists 
Subtotal – Administration
 
TOTAL FTE REDUCTIONS – ALL PROGRAMS
 

‐3.0
‐1.0
‐3.0
‐7.0

‐211.0

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the District may deviate from terminating 

certificated employees in order of seniority, based on a specific need for personnel 
who possess special training and/or experience, or competency, necessary to teach 
specific courses or courses of study or to provide specific services, which others with 
more seniority do not possess, as follows: 

All Regular and Pre‐K Special Education Programs and Services (excluding 

Behavior Specialists and Psychologists). 

Art teachers with experience within the past five (5) years teaching 

Digital Photography and/or Video Production and/or Graphic Design at grade levels 6‐
12 and who are in possession of a credential in Art. 

Music teachers with experience within the past five (5) years of teaching 

Band and/or Choral/Choir at grade levels 9‐12 and who are in possession of a 
credential in Music. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

 
4. 

Authorized Single Subject Credentials in the following areas: 

Mathematics including Foundational Level but excluding 

Introductory and Supplemental credentials  

Sciences including but not limited to Geosciences and 
Biological Sciences but excluding Supplemental, Introductory and/or 
Specialized credentials   

a. 

 
b. 

 

ROTC 

5. 
 
6. 
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that the Superintendent or her designated 

Nurse 

representative is directed to send appropriate notices to all employees whose positions 
may be lost by virtue of this action.  Nothing herein shall be deemed to confer any 
status or rights upon temporary certificated employees or any other employee in 
addition to those specifically granted to such employees by statute. 

 5

 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Governing Board of the Desert Sands Unified 

School District on March 2, 2010. 

 

7. 

6. 

The services identified in the governing board’s resolution to reduce or 

 
The Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
eliminate particular kinds of services were the kinds of educational services that properly 
could be reduced or discontinued.  The reduction or elimination of those services was not 
arbitrary or capricious and constituted a matter within the proper exercise of the governing 
board’s discretion.  No particular kinds of services were proposed to be lowered to levels less 
than those levels mandated by state or federal law.  
 
Skipping 
 
 
Johnstone’s credible testimony established that DSUSD experienced difficulty 
filling certain positions.  For example, special education teachers and ROTC instructors were 
not easy to recruit and retain.  The district “skipped” junior employees holding appropriate 
credentials providing services in these difficult to fill fields on the basis of the junior 
employee’s specialized training, experience or other unique qualifications, attributes that 
more senior employees did not possess, in those areas where there was a need for such 
services.  These junior employees thereby became exempt from termination in this layoff 
proceeding.  The skipping of these junior employees was not arbitrary or capricious, was in 
the best interests of the districts and its students, and was a matter well within the discretion 
of the governing board.     
 
 
The district retained Monica Guarino (rank 125), a school counselor who holds 
a pupil personnel services credential and a single subject teaching credential in Spanish, over 
more senior counselors because of her ability to speak Spanish, the need for a Spanish-
speaking counselor, and the lack of other Spanish-speaking counselors within DUSD.  While 
the governing board did not specifically exempt Guarino from the layoff in Resolution No. 
27/2009-2010, Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d) does not require that skipping 
criteria be in writing, simply that the district demonstrate a specific need for personnel to 
teach a specific course or course of study or to provide services authorized by a services 
credential and that the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to 
teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, which others with more 
seniority do not possess.  There was no objection to the district’s skipping Guarino over more 
senior employees, and the district’s doing so was supported by the evidence. 
 
The Seniority List 
 
 
constantly evolving document that is updated as new certificated employees are hired and as 
other employees resign or retire.  The seniority list is a spreadsheet containing the 

Johnstone’s testimony established that DSUSD maintains a seniority list, a 

9. 

8. 

 6

10. 

In January 2010, when it became apparent that a reduction in force might be 

employee’s rank (from the most recently hired certificated employee to the most senior 
certificated employee), the employee’s name, a seniority date (listed as “prob. date’), the 
employee’s status, the school site where the employee provides services, the employee’s 
teaching credentials, any special certificates held by the employee, and the employee’s 
current assignment.  
 
 
required, DSUSD circulated a preliminary seniority list to all employees with the request that 
each employee review and verify or update his or her seniority information if there was an 
error or if additional information should be included.  In response to that request, many 
employees provided verifications or updates.   Several weeks after the initial request for 
information was sent out, DSUSD directly contacted the employees who did not respond to 
the earlier request.  Most of those who were contacted in February 2010 provided 
verification or updates.   
 
 
11.  According to Johnstone, DSUSD continued to accept newly filed information 
and to include such information in the seniority list until early March 2010.  The governing 
board adopted the seniority list on March 2, 2010.  After that date, an error made by the 
district could be corrected and the list could be updated, but new information provided by a 
district employee after March 15, 2010, was not relevant to this layoff proceeding unless the 
new information arose out of an error made by the district or some other governmental entity.  
The district’s use of a March 15 cutoff date was not arbitrary, and the use of that date was 
reasonable because the district was required by the Education Code to serve preliminary 
layoff notices by then.   
 
The Issuance of Layoff Notices 
 
 
12.  Using the updated seniority spreadsheets, Johnstone’s staff began the 
painstaking process of identifying those certificated employees who should receive 
preliminary layoff notices and those who should not.  Whenever an employee was tentatively 
slated to receive a preliminary layoff notice as a result of the governing board’s resolution, 
that employee’s seniority and credentials were considered to determine if that employee was 
eligible to “bump” into a position held by a more junior employee.   
 
 
applied the governing board’s tie breaking resolution.  The criteria set forth in that resolution 
were reasonable, and the application of the tie breaking criteria was in the best interest of the 
district and the students.  The use of a lottery was not required. 
 
 
Before issuing the preliminary layoff notices, the district’s administrative staff 
considered all known positively assured attrition to determine the number of layoff notices 
that should be served.  More layoff notices were served than full time equivalents were 
proposed to be reduced to protect against the possibility of error and because many 
employees had the same seniority date.  Some believed that the amount of the district’s 
reduction and elimination of particular kinds of services was unreasonable, but the extent to 

For those employees who first provided service on the same day, Johnstone’s staff 

 

 7

13. 

158 of the certificated employees who were served with the preliminary layoff notices 

Taking into account all known attrition, the district identified those individuals 

All parties to this reduction in force proceeding stipulated that all prehearing 

The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment was not 

which more notices were served than number of positions were ultimately reduced and 
eliminated was not outrageous and it did not result in any prejudice.  
 
 
whose employment was impacted by Resolution No. 27/2009-2010.  The district timely 
served upon each of those employees a written notice advising that the superintendent had 
recommended that their services would not be required for the upcoming school year.  
Resolution No. 27/2009-2020 was provided.  The formal notice and accompanying 
explanatory letter set forth the reasons for the recommendation.  The permanent and 
probationary employees served with the preliminary notice were advised of the right to a 
hearing, and each of them was instructed that the failure to submit a written request for a 
hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing.  A blank request for hearing form 
was provided to each employee who was served with the preliminary layoff notice.   
 
 
related to their fitness or abilities as teachers.  
 
 
requested a hearing.  These employees were served thereafter with the formal accusation 
packet.  These employees are the respondents in this reduction in force proceeding.   
 
 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
The Administrative Hearing 
 
 
14.  On April 23, 2010, the record in the layoff proceeding was opened.  
Jurisdictional documents were presented, an opening statement was given on the district’s 
behalf, an opening statement was given on behalf of the respondents who were represented 
by Ms. Martinez, the respondents representing themselves waived the presentation of an 
opening statement, sworn testimony was taken, documentary evidence was received, several 
stipulations were reached, closing argument was given, the record was closed, and the matter 
was submitted. 
 
Precautionary Layoff Notices 
 
 
to skip certain junior employees.   For this reason, the district issued precautionary layoff 
notices to respondents Helen Chang, Diego De La Luz, James Floyd, Craig Gahnz, Kelly 
Gill, Alison Hutcheson, Tisa Kopstein, Norbert Guy Lake, Darren Loney, Darcy B. Maio, 
Gidion Murrell, Brandon Newby, Jennifer Robinson, Gabriel Rocha, James Serven, and 
Delores Uribe.  During the course of this proceeding, all parties stipulated that there was no 
objection to the district’s skipping criteria.  Based upon this stipulation, the parties agreed 
that the precautionary layoff notices issued to these respondents should be withdrawn and 
that the accusations filed against them should be dismissed.    

The district believed it possible that there might be a challenge to its proposal 

15. 

 

 8

17.  Melissa Labayog (rank 203) has a seniority date of August 31, 2006.  She 

Labayog asserted that her seniority date should be June 24, 2006, the date she began 

 
Other Issues 
 
16.  Athena Milis (rank 102) has a seniority date of August 30, 2007.  She holds a 
 
single subject teaching credential in English and CLAD authorization.  She teaches English 
in high school.  Milis is subject to layoff in this proceeding by virtue of her seniority date.  
She was concerned that a more senior teacher with a multiple subject teaching credential and 
a supplemental authorization in English (which permits the teaching of English in a 
departmentalized setting through 9th grade) would be given rehiring priority at the high 
school level.  Johnstone testified that the district honors the value of single subject teaching 
credentials at the high school level and that persons holding such credentials will be rehired 
in the order of their seniority to teach high school English in a departmentalized setting over 
individuals with multiple subject credentials and a supplemental authorization in English.   
 
 
holds a single subject teaching credential in English and CLAD and GATE authorizations.  
She teaches English in high school.  Labayog is subject to layoff in this proceeding. 
 
 
AVID training to serve as an AVID provider at her school site.  To support her claim, 
Labayog provided a letter from the district’s fiscal services department to change the 
reservation for an individual who could not attend the AVID training to Labayog’s name, a 
registration form, a request to attend the conference, and an email dated April 23, 2010,  
from Labayog’s (then) school site supervisor (now employed by a different school district) 
that stated Labayog was “required to attend the AVID Summer Institute in August of 2006 as 
part of your AVID teacher duty at LQHS” and “to continue to certify LQHS and maintain 
LQHS’s AVID status.”  Labayog was uncertain if attending the conference was required 
under her employment agreement with DSUSD or if she was paid by the district for 
attending that conference.  The district produced a written offer of employment that 
established that Labayog was offered employment commencing August 31, 2006 and it 
produced a written notice of intent to employ and conditions of employment indicating a 
beginning date of employment of September 2006.  Nothing in either of those documents, 
each of which Labayog signed, stated that Labayog’s attendance at the AVID training was a 
condition of her employment with the district.  The preponderance of the evidence 
established that attendance at the AVID training was required if Labayog wished to serve as 
the AVID teacher at her high school; it was not established that her attendance at the AVID 
training was required under her contract of employment with the district.   
 
Labayog did not establish that her seniority date should be changed.1  The district 
 
correctly assigned August 31, 2006, as Labayog’s first paid date of probationary service.   
 

                                               
 
1  
evidentiary record, Labayog would still receive a layoff notice because of her relative lack of seniority.  
 

Even if Labayog were given a June 24, 2006, seniority date, which would not be appropriate given the 

 9

Watson testified that she filed all of the necessary paperwork to receive a clear 

All parties stipulated that the district’s seniority list should be amended to show 

18.  Devin Howell (rank 263) is one of many employees with a seniority date of 
 
September 1, 2005.  Howell and many others with this seniority date hold multiple subject 
credentials, CLAD certification and teach elementary school.  Howell was concerned that his 
International Baccalaureate (IB) certificate2 had not been considered in the application of the 
tie-breaking criteria.  Johnstone reviewed the district’s seniority list and established that staff 
had considered Howell’s IB certificate.     
 
19.  Kimberly Watson (rank 246) is one of many employees with a seniority date 
 
of September 1, 2005.  Watson holds a preliminary multiple subject teaching credential and 
CLAD certification.  She teaches elementary school.   
 
 
credential with the Riverside County Office of Education in July 2009 and that due to an 
error by that office or the district, her clear credential was not on file by March 15, 2010.  
Watson is attempting to obtain verification of her clear credential and believed it would be 
obtained a few days after the hearing. 
 
 
Watson’s possession of a clear credential on and before March 15, 2010, and that Watson’s 
status would be updated upon verification of her clear credential before that date.      
 
 
persons who taught science.  It was not established that Mook’s seniority date was incorrect, 
that the district improperly noticed him, or that he has sufficient seniority and credentials to 
bump a junior employee.  
 
 
credential and a CLAD authorization, teaches 10th grade.  The district assigned Fanelle a 
seniority date of November 19, 2007.  Fanelle testified that he found numerous errors with 
regard to his seniority date and that it should be November 2, 2007.  Even if that were the 
case, the district properly served Fanelle with a layoff notice.   
 
 
seniority and credentials to bump a more senior employee.  The district invited Fanelle to 
bring the evidence he claimed supported his November 2, 2007, seniority date to its attention 
and promised to change his seniority date if the evidence he presented supported his claim.  
 
 
Jason Fosselman (rank 276) has a seniority date of September 1, 2005, as do 
many other elementary school teachers with a single subject teaching credential and CLAD 
authorization.  Fosselman holds a bachelor’s degree and teaching credential issued by a 
school in Pennsylvania, where it takes four years to obtain a credential rather than the five 

Fanelle did not establish that he was improperly noticed of that he had sufficient 

Ron Fanelle (rank 56), who holds a clear social science single subject teaching 

John Mook (rank 186) was concerned that a preference was given to retain 

21. 

22. 

20. 

The International Baccalaureate (IB) is an international educational foundation headquartered in Geneva 

                                               
 
2  
sponsored by UNESCO.  Founded in 1968, IB offers educational programs for children ages 3–19 and establishes a 
unique curriculum.  Consequently, “IB” can refer to the organization itself, any of the three programs or the diploma 
or certificates awarded at the end of the diploma program. 
 10

Fosselman did not establish that the school board’s tie breaking criteria were arbitrary 

years it takes in California.  Fosselman asserted that the school board’s tie breaking criteria 
unfairly discriminated against persons in his position. 
 
 
or capricious.  He did not establish that the tie breaking criteria were improperly applied in 
his situation.  Fosselman did not establish that he was improperly noticed, that his seniority 
date was incorrect, that his seniority ranking was incorrect, or that he had the seniority and 
credentials to bump a more junior employee who was being retained.  
 
   

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing 
board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year . . . the 
governing board and the employee shall be given written notice by the superintendent 
of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been recommended that the notice 
be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor . . . 

Education Code section 44944 provides in part: 

1. 

 
Statutory Authority for Reduction in Force Proceedings  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 

 
 
 

(b) 
The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying him or her for the ensuing year . . . If an employee fails to request a 
hearing on or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his 
or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . . 

In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the proceeding shall be 

(c) 
conducted and a decision made in accordance with . . . the Government Code and the 
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency therein, except that all 
of the following shall apply: 

The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any, within five 

(1) 
days after service upon him or her of the accusation and he or she shall be  
notified of this five-day period for filing in the accusation. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge who  

(3) 
shall prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a  
determination as to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related  
to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision  
shall be prepared for the governing board and shall contain a determination as  
to the sufficiency of the cause and a recommendation as to disposition.   
However, the governing board shall make the final determination as to the  

 

. . . 

 11

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2. 

 
sufficiency of the cause and disposition. None of the findings,  
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed decision  
prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding on the governing  
board.  Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or  
governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing  
the charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.  Copies of the proposed  
decision shall be submitted to the governing board and to the employee on or  
before May 7 of the year in which the proceeding is commenced. . . .”  

 

Education Code section 44955 provides in part: 

“(a)  No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes 
other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, 
inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 
cause other than as specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 

(b)  Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not 
later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in the opinion of 
the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary . . . to decrease the 
number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate 
the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated 
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school 
year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee 
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary 
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service 
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.  

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis 
of needs of the district and the students thereof . . .   

(c) 
Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 15th of May  
. . . and services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in 
which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with the 
provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or 
probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for 
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year. 

 The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner 
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and 

. . . 

. . . 

 12

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

(2) 
For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with  
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.” 

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
(d) 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following 
reasons: 

(1) 
The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a  
specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a  
services credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or  
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special   
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to  
provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess. 

qualifications entitle them to render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any 
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught, 
and for which he or she does not have a teaching credential or which is not within the 
employee’s major area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the 
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter competency test 
in the appropriate subject. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jurisdiction 
 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied 
as to all respondent employees.   
 
The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the board acted unfairly or 
improperly simply because it made a decision that it was empowered to make under the 
statute.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.)  A school board’s 
decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in with any statistical 
computation.  It is within the discretion of a school board to determine the amount by which 
it will reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service as long as a district does not reduce a 
service below the level required by law.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) 
 
Competence 
 
 
The Education Code leaves to a school board’s discretion the determination of 
whether in addition to possessing seniority an employee is also “certificated and competent” 
to be employed in a vacant position.  The term “competent” relates to an individual’s specific 
skills or qualifications including academic background, training, credentials, and experience, 

A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service is to be 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

3. 

5. 

4. 

 

 13

6. 

The Statutory Scheme 

Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff statute, provides in 

but it does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance.  (Forker v. Board of 
Trustees (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)  In addition to seniority, the only limitation in 
placing a teacher in a vacant position is that the teacher selected be “certificated and 
competent” to render the service required by the vacant position.  Among employees who 
meet this threshold limitation, there is no room in the statutory scheme for comparative 
evaluation. (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299.)  An employee 
holding a special credential or needed skill, if such credentials or competence are not shared 
by a more senior employee, may be retained even though it results in termination of a senior 
employee.  (Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.) 
 
Seniority, Bumping, and Skipping  
 
 
 
 
subdivision (b), in part, as follows: “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of 
no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while . . . any 
other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.” Essentially this language provides 
“bumping” rights for senior certificated and competent employees, and “skipping” authority 
to retain junior employees who are certificated and competent to render services which more 
senior employees are not.  Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to 
subdivision (b) where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course of study and that a junior certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated employee does not possess.  
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.)   
 
 
 
 
determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an 
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be 
assigned to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra. at pp.136-137.) 
 
 
 
 
its specific “needs” and there is nothing in the statute that requires that such needs to be 
evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job descriptions, or program requirements. 
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra., at p. 138.) 
 
Information Filed with DSUSD after March 15, 2010 
 
 
A school district must issue and serve preliminary layoff notices no later than 
March 15.  Before then, a district must consider all information on file that assists the district 

Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 expressly allows a district to demonstrate 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to 

Bumping 

Skipping 

8. 

9. 

7. 

 14

10.  As a result of the governing board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of 

in making assignments and reassignments based on seniority and qualifications.  After March 
15 the district has no authority to issue a layoff notice to an employee who has become junior 
by reason of another employee’s filing of proof of additional qualifications.  Thus, a 
credential filed with a district after March 15 could not be the basis for bumping. (Degener v. 
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689, 698.)  
 
Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees 
 
 
service, cause exists under the Education Code for the Desert Sands Unified School District 
to give final notice to those respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment 
will be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services will not be 
needed by the district for the 2010-2010 school year. 
 
Determination 
 
 
The charges set forth in the accusation were sustained by the preponderance of 
the evidence and were related to the welfare of the Desert Sands Unified School District and 
its pupils.  The district’s administrative staff made necessary assignments and reassignments 
in such a manner that the most senior employees were retained to render services which their 
seniority and qualifications entitled them to render, except as otherwise noted herein.  No 
employee with less seniority than any respondent will be retained to render a service which 
any respondent is certificated, competent and qualified to render. 
 
 
 

This determination is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 

11. 

 
RECOMMENDATION 

It is recommended that the district’s seniority list be amended to show that Kimberly 

It is recommended that the governing board withdraw the precautionary layoff notices 

 
 
served upon respondents Helen Chang, Diego De La Luz, James Floyd, Craig Gahnz, Kelly 
Gill, Alison Hutcheson, Tisa Kopstein, Norbert Guy Lake, Darren Loney, Darcy B. Maio, 
Gidion Murrell, Brandon Newby, Jennifer Robinson, Gabriel Rocha, James Serven, and 
Delores Uribe and that it dismiss the accusations filed against these respondents. 
 
 
Watson (rank 246) held a clear preliminary multiple subject teaching credential before March 
15, 2010, upon Watson’s submission of verification thereof.  
     
 
certificated employees: Susan Finch; Crystal Gentry; Shalaby Masoud; Jesse Gill; Marlon 
Martinez; Andrew Smith; Lynsey Haij; Stephanie Smith; Robert Rojo; Steve May; Brian 
Gleeson; David Montes; James Hamann; Phyllis Brown; Philip Jess; Ronald Fanelle; 
Michael Daugherty; Claudia Santos; Bridget Burden; Heidi Knigge; Michael Holtz; George 
Ihara; Julie Warner; John Romero; James Adkins; Lauren Young; Wendy Rush; Morgan 

It is recommended that the governing board issue final notices to the following 

 

 15

Miller; Rosa Mesa; Lara Runck; Sean Dougherty; William Lampi; Kendra Bennett; Michael 
Sugarman; Michael Tyler; James Wiesen; Athena Milis; Steven Eelkema; Christie Angelo; 
Linda Arseo; Adela Tili; Philip Solis; Xochitl Moore; Astria Cota; Trina Champagne-
Belmontez; Mark Brenner; Laura F. Spradlin; Deirdre K. Murphey; Jared Goldman; 
Floyddell Wilson; Martha Raim; Wende Hamann; Rachelle Sakemi; Victoria Dougherty; 
Belma Pera; Darcie Cotton; Maria Mendoza; Brenna Carnt; Mark Wipf; Allison Hillman; 
Cynthia Mulvey; Ashley Gervin; Kara Contreras; Michael Walsh; Verdlee Stegvenson; 
Meredith Zengler; Kimberly Jenkins; Carol Miller; Veronica Fernandez; Christa Aubry; 
Danette Shipley; Katherine Thompson; John Preston; Kathleen Cummings; Haimanti 
Chakraborty; Tiffany L. Norton; Shirley Ramsay;  Danielle Reynolds; Nicole Faay Dean; 
Monica Rodriguez; Justin Martin; James Hutcheson; John Mook; Karen De Novi; Mark 
Winsten; Kevin Campbell; Briana Samuelson; Nicole Phillips; Kira Zabrowski; Michelle St. 
Louis; Jennifer Fanton; Lisa Kenmuir; Melissa Labayog; Julia Morgan; Mara Freeman; 
Gabriel Gutierrez; Debra Apple; Ada Jeanne Gatherum; Benjamin Bridges; Shaw Saidins; 
Mandy Wiltrout; Veronica Hernandez; Christina Taylor; Michele Sanchez; Anna Maria 
Velasquez; Shane Cain; Yvonne McLoud; Lynn Lockard; Stephanie Mann; Bethany 
Martinez; Sarah Doyle; Jeanette Rudolph; Kimberly Watson; Maria Duenas Ruelas; Paul 
Hernandez III; Ella Anderson; Brenda Cohagan; Kirsten Hill; Tracy Workman-Gross; Jana 
Lew; Eve Wehler; Liliana Mazet; Devin Howell; Melissa Rizzo; Amy Hisgen; Richard 
Romero; Cassandra Howell; Jennifer Costello; Jason Fosselman; Deborah Bray; Kelly May; 
Martha Laberge; Jorge Rosales; Michael Macro; Stephanie Mendoza; Angelina Head; Kelly 
Meka; Anita Carstairs; Jennifer Baxa; Tracey Scoggin; Leticia Hernandez; Noemi Sanchez; 
and Krissy Gross.   
 
 
Dated: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
JAMES AHLER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 16

