BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
WHITTIER CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
Certain Certificated Employees of the  
Whittier City School District, 
  
                                           Respondents. 

 
OAH No. 2010030754 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

David B. Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 1, 2010, at the Mill School in Whittier, 
California. 
 

Aaron V. O’Donnell, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Rudd & Romo, represented 

Carlos R. Perez, Esq., Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented Andrea Adame, Maria 

Whittier City School District, whose representative was also present. 
 
 
Alvarado, Kathryn Araiza, Patricia Cardiel, Rachel Chavez, Mary Dishigrikyan, Leah 
Elmange, Virginia Franco, Jana Fuentes-Long, Janay Hamrick, Brian Hansen, Claudia 
Herrera, Nilda Huerta, Vanessa Jayme, Gloria Jimenez, Domani Kem, Bernadette Leeper, 
Elizabeth Martel, Arlene Martinez, Catherine Miyagishima, Marisa Mnoian, Jenon Mocilac, 
Jennifer Munoz, Kevin Nielsen, Myra Orozco, Sharon Quirarte, Inez Robles, Merced 
Rodriguez, Kristy Rosander, Ginger Sparks, Yvonne Spitzer, Alisha Zepeda and Alexandria 
Zirschky (Respondents).  Each Respondent was present, except for Bernadette Leeper. 
 
 
was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 1, 2010. 

Evidence was received by way of stipulation, testimony and documents.  The record 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
The Governing Board of the District (Board) determined to reduce or discontinue 
particular kinds of services provided by certificated teachers for budgetary reasons.  The 
decision was not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals whose services 
are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.   
 

1 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 

 
review of credentials and seniority.  The selection process was in accordance with the 
requirements of the Education Code.  The Board may proceed as indicated herein. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 

4.  Thirty two certificated employees, referred to as Respondents, submitted timely 

3.  Before March 15, 2009, the District served 48 teachers, including Respondents, by 

Jurisdiction and Parties
 
 
1.  The District provides educational services for approximately 6,700 students at nine 
elementary schools, two middle schools and one preschool.  The District employs certificated 
staff in permanent or probationary positions, as well as temporary and substitute teachers. 
 
 
2.  Ron Carruth is the Superintendent of the District. Dr. Laurie Bruton is the 
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources of the District.  Their actions were taken in 
their official capacity.  Mr. Carruth, Dr. Bruton and their staffs were responsible for 
implementation of the technical aspects of the layoff. 
 
 
personal service and/or certified mail, with a written notice (layoff notice) that it had been 
recommended that notice be given to them pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955 that their services would not be required for the next school year.  Each layoff notice 
set forth the reasons for the recommendation and noted that the Board had passed a 
resolution reducing the certificated staff by 46.5 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.  
 
 
written requests for a hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the 
ensuing school year.  
 
5.  The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each of the Respondents 
 
and the District served Respondents either in person or by certified mail with an Accusation 
along with required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense.   
 
 
District agreed that: any Respondent who submitted a written request for hearing and/or a 
Notice of Defense could participate in the hearing as a Respondent; and any teacher 
receiving a layoff notice who was present at the hearing could participate in the hearing as a 
Respondent, even if he or she did not submit a written request for hearing and/or a Notice of 
Defense. 
 
 
employees of the District.   
 
 
// 
 

6.  The District received a Notice of Defense on behalf of 17 Respondents.  The 

7.  Respondents in this proceeding are probationary or permanent certificated 

2 

 
The Board and the Layoff Resolution
 
8.  On February 22, 2010, the Board was given notice of the Superintendent’s 
 
recommendation that certificated employees in 46.5 FTE positions be given notice that their 
services would not be required for the next school year and stating the reasons therefore. 
 
9.  Board Resolution number R14, adopted on February 9, 2010 (Resolution), 
 
proposed a layoff of certificated employees in 46.5 FTE positions.  Specifically, the 
Resolution provided for the reduction or elimination of the following particular kinds of 
services: 
 
POSITIONS (FTE); SERVICES OR PROGRAMS TO BE REDUCED 
 
1. 28.0;  Elementary Teaching Services 
2.   6.0;  Middle School 6th Grade Multiple Subject Classroom Teaching Services 
3.   0.5;  Successmaker Multiple Subject Teaching Services 
4.   1.0;  Middle School Single Subject Physical Education Teaching Services 
5.   2.0;  Middle School Single Subject English Teaching Services 
6.   2.0;  Middle School Single Subject Social Studies Teaching Services 
7.   1.0;  Assistant Superintendent of Instructional Services 
8.   3.0;  Middle School Counseling Services 
9.   1.0;  Alternative Education Counseling Services 
10. 2.0;  Program Improvement Coach1

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    46.5 FTE Total Full Time Equivalent reduction 

12.  In a separate resolution, the Board established tie-breaker criteria for determining 

11.  The decision to reduce services was not related to the capabilities and dedication 

 
 
10.  The Resolution was required by the District’s fiscal situation due the uncertainty 
in the amount of state funding to be expected, and the need to reduce services to maintain a 
budget for the welfare of students. 
 
 
of the individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated. 
 
 
the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same 
date.  More specifically, the tie-breaker criteria provide for a priority system including, 
among other things, status of credentials, possession of certifications such as a BCLAD, 
CLAD or SDAIE, additional credentials, advanced degrees and college unit credits, to 
establish seniority within the shared date of first paid service.  In the event of a tie after 
reference to all listed criteria, a random drawing would be held. 
 
                                                 
 
prejudice to any Respondent as a result of this error. 

1 The Resolution inadvertently listed item #10 as a second item #9.  There was no 

3 

15.  The District used information from the seniority list, personnel files, a county 

13.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority dates 

The Seniority List and the Layoffs
 
 
(first date of paid service), current assignments, credentials and certifications.  
 
 
 
14.  The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the least 
senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced.  In determining 
who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of 
reductions not covered by the known vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent 
staff in inverse order of seniority.   
 
 
database and information from the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing to apply 
the tie-breaker criteria.   
 
 
of services that the Board directed be reduced or discontinued.  The District used its available 
information to determine if and when those employees were capable, due to their credentials, 
of displacing more junior employees (known as “bumping”).  No junior certificated 
employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services which a more senior employee is 
certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s 
decisions to reduce or discontinue the identified services were neither arbitrary nor 
capricious, and were a proper exercise of its discretion.  The decisions were based on the 
welfare of the District and its pupils.  
 

16.  The District identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds 

17.  The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services that 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing 

1.  Education Code2 section 44949, subdivision (a), states in pertinent part: 

 
 
 
 
board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year for the reasons 
specified in Section 44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given written 
notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been 
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.”  
 
 
 
 
“(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes other 
than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, 
and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as 
                                                 
 

 
2.  Section 44955 provides, in pertinent part:   

2 All statutory citations are to the Education Code. 

4 

“As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 

“(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not 

“(c)  [S]ervices of such employees shall be terminated in the reverse order in which 

specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
 
later than the beginning of the following school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the 
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these 
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing 
board may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the 
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the 
school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee 
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or 
any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.  
  
 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of 
needs of the district and the students thereof.  Upon the request of any employee whose order 
of termination is so determined, the governing board shall furnish . . . a statement of the 
specific criteria used in determining the order of termination and the application of the 
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other employees in the group. . . . . 
  
 
they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with Sections 44844 and 
44845.  In the event that a permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices and a 
right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for 
the ensuing school year. 
 
 
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications 
entitle them to render. . . .  
 
 
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons:  
 
 
course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee has special training and 
experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, 
which others with more seniority do not possess.” 
 
 
and jurisdictional requirements set forth therein were met.  (Factual Findings 3 through 7.) 
  
 
4.  A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, subdivision 
(b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, thereafter, be 
performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered 

“(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a 

3.  Sections 44949 and 44955 establish jurisdiction for this proceeding, and the notice 

“The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner 

“(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 

 

5 

services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to deal with 
the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)  
  
5.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to 
 
the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils 
within the meaning of section 44949.  (Factual Findings 8 through 17.) 
 
 
6.  The services at issue have been recognized as particular kinds of services subject to 
layoff proceedings.  (See, e.g., San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 
627; Campbell v. Abbott (1978) Cal.App.3d 796; Zalac v. Governing Board of the Ferndale 
Unified School District (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.) 
 
 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)   
 

7.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

ORDER 

 
 
1.  Notice may be given to employees occupying 46.5 full-time equivalent certificated 
positions that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the 
reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services.   
 
 
 
 
 DATED: April 5, 2010. 
 

  2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.   

/s/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 
DAVID B. ROSENMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

6 

