BEFORE THE 
 BOARD OF EDUCATION 
CYPRESS SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OAH No. 2010020072 

In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
WENDY DESSERO, COLLEEN 
FERREIRA, JAMIE FOURNIER, ANNA 
PARK, MELINDA PFAFFLIN, OLIVIA 
SMITH, LISA STALLER PRENOVOST, 
ANN STEINBRINK, EUNICE TASSER 
 
                                        Respondents. 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Humberto Flores, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 12, 2010, at the district office of the Cypress 
School District, Cypress, California. 
 
 
 

David C. Larsen, Attorney at Law, represented the Cypress School District.   

Steven T. Nutter, Attorney at Law, represented the Respondents Wendy Dessero, 

Colleen Ferreira, Jamie Fournier, Anna Park, Melinda Pfafflin, Olivia Smith, Ann 
Steinbrink, and Eunice Tasser. 

 
Prior to the hearing, Respondent Lisa Staller Prenovost withdrew her Request for 

Hearing. 
 
 
 

Evidence was received and the matter was submitted for decision. 

SUMMARY 

 
 
The Board of Education (Board) of the Cypress School District (District) decided to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by certificated personnel for the 
2010-2011 school year for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the 
capabilities and dedication of the teachers whose services were proposed to be reduced or 
eliminated.  District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process 
involving review of seniority, credentials, and criteria for breaking ties between employees 
with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process complied with Education 
Code requirements. 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.  Linda Snell, Assistant Superintendent of the District, filed the Accusations in her 

 
 
official capacity. 
 

2.  Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

3.  On March 11, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 090-11 whereby the Board 

 
 
resolved to discontinue or reduce the particular kinds of services.  The Board further 
determined that based on the discontinuance or reduction of services, it would be necessary 
to decrease the number of certificated employees at the close of the present school year by a 
corresponding number of full-time equivalent (FTE) positions as follows: 
 
 
 

Principal (K-6) 

2.0 FTE  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Multiple Subject Self-Contained Instruction  

          36.0 FTE 

Resource Specialist Program 

Special Day Class (SDC), Early Childhood   
 
Speech Therapist 

 

 

 

 

Site Program Coordinator 

 

 

 

 1.0 FTE 

 1.0 FTE 

 1.0 FTE 

 1.5 FTE 

   

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Teacher on Special Assignment (Special Education/Title II) 

 0.4 FTE 

Title I Teacher 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 1.1 FTE 
 

 

 

           44.0 FTE 

4.  Pursuant to Resolution 090-11, the Board directed the Superintendent to notify the 

5.  Resolution No. 090-11, set forth a selection process involving review of 

employees affected by the Board’s resolution and give notice to said employees that their 
services would not be required for the ensuing school year and state the reasons therefore. 
 
 
credentials and other criteria for breaking ties between employees with the same first dates of 
paid service.  Respondent Colleen Ferreira, Jamie Fournier, Anna Park, Olivia Smith, and 
Ann Steinbrink asserted that the tie breaking criteria established by the Governing Board was 
not fair for various reasons stated at the hearing.  However, these Respondents did not 
establish that the Governing Board was arbitrary or capricious in establishing or applying the 
tie-breaking criteria.  The process complied with Education Code requirements. 
 

2

9.  Notices of Defense and Requests for Hearing were timely filed by all of the 

7.  On or prior to March 15, 2010, the Superintendent recommended that the Board 

10.  The Board considered attrition, including resignations, retirements and requests 

8.  The Assistant Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each Respondent 

11.  The District maintains a Seniority List which contains employees’ seniority dates, 

 
 
6.  On or about March 12, 2010, Ms. Snell notified Respondents, in writing, that it 
had been recommended their services would not be required for the next school year.  The 
mailing included the reasons for the notification, a copy of the Accusation and other 
jurisdictional documents as required by the Education Code.  
 
 
give notice that certain services performed by certificated employees, including Respondents, 
be reduced or eliminated, and that the services of Respondents would not be required for the 
ensuing school year.  
 
 
on March 22, 2010. 
 
 
employees who appeared for the hearing.  All jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
 
for leave, in determining the necessary layoff notices to be delivered to employees. 
 
 
current assignments and locations, advanced degrees, credentials, and authorizations.   
The District then identified the most junior employees working in a particular kind of service 
being reduced or discontinued and determined which employees would receive layoff 
notices.   
 
 
the 2006-07 school year to spend a year in Italy.  On March 11, 2007, Respondent Tasser 
informed Assistant Superintendent Snell via email that she would not be returning for the 
2007-08 school year and requested another leave of absence.  She also stated that “If they 
[the District] only permit one year, then do I need to mail in my formal resignation or can I 
just email it?”  On March 12, 2007, Ms. Snell informed Respondent Tassel via email that the 
District would not grant another leave of absence for the 2007-08 school year.  She also 
directed Respondent Tasser to mail an official letter of resignation.  Ms. Snell further stated 
in the email: “When you do return to the area, you will need to reapply, but if hired back 
within 39 months of your resignation, you retain your permanent status and placement on the 
salary schedule.”  After receipt of this email, Respondent Tasser submitted a letter of 
resignation. 
 
 
2005.  Respondent Pfafflin disputes her assigned seniority date because she attended staff 
development training on August 31, and September 1, 2005.  Respondent Pfafflin’s 
contention is not persuasive because she was not paid for the days she attended the training.  
Further, pending receipt of Respondent Pfafflin’s California teaching credential, the District 
filed an “Application for Issuance of a Temporary County Certificate” with the Orange 

13.  The District determined that Respondent Pfafflin’s seniority date is September 2, 

12.  Respondent Eunice Tasser took a leave of absence from her teaching position in 

 

3

County Department of Education on September 6, 2005.  This document, which was signed 
by Respondent Pfafflin, states that the “beginning date of employment under this certificate 
will be 9/2/05.”  This supports Ms. Snell’s testimony that Respondent Pfafflin’s first date of 
paid service is September 2, 2005. 
  
 
Factual Finding 3, related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  
 
 
performed by any employee with less seniority who is being retained. 
 

14.  The reduction or discontinuation of the particular kinds of services set forth in 

15.  Respondents are not certificated and competent to render a service being 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
 

The doctrine of equitable estoppel is available in certain circumstances to those who 

 
1.  All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 
were met.  Therefore, jurisdiction was established for this proceeding as to all Respondents. 
 
 
2.  Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to reduce the 
number of certificated employees due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds 
of services.  The Board’s decisions to reduce or eliminate the identified services were neither 
arbitrary nor capricious.  The decisions relate solely to the welfare of the District’s schools 
and the pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.   
 
 
3.  Respondent Tasser contends that her original seniority date should be restored 
because at the time she made her decision to resign, she was not aware that she would lose her 
seniority date.  Respondent Tasser further contends that based on Assistant Superintendent 
Snell’s March 12, 2006 email, Respondent Tasser believed that her decision to resign would not 
affect her seniority date if she were to return to the District within 39 months after resigning. 
 
 
detrimentally rely on representations made by another. In order for equitable estoppel to apply, 
the following requirements must be met: “(1) the party to be estopped must be apprised of the 
facts; (2) she must intend that her conduct shall be acted upon, or must so act that the party 
asserting the estoppel had a right to believe it was so intended; (3) the other party must be 
ignorant of the true facts; and (4) she must rely upon the conduct to her injury.”  (Lentz v. 
McMahon (1989) 49 Cal.3d 393, 399, quoting City of Long Beach v. Mansell (1970) 3 Cal.3d 
462, 489.)   
 
 
Equitable estoppel does not apply in this case.  Respondent Tassel had already made up 
her mind not to return to the District and indicated in her March 11, 2006 email that she would 
resign if the District would not grant her a second leave of absence.  Ms. Snell did not make any 
statements concerning the effect of a resignation on Respondent Tasser’s employment status 
until the following day.  Further, Ms. Snell’s statements did not contain any representations 
regarding Respondent Tasser’s seniority date.  Therefore, Respondent Tassel did not establish 
that she based her decision to resign on any statement made by Ms. Snell.   
 

 

4

4.  The District properly determined the seniority date for Respondent Pfafflin.  
 
Education Code section 44845 states: “Every probationary or permanent employee employed 
after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on the date upon which he first 
rendered paid service in a probationary position.”  Respondent Pfafflin’s first date of paid 
service was September 2, 2005.  Respondent Pfafflin was not paid for the training she 
received before the school year began, so she cannot use the earlier training as a basis for a 
seniority date.  Further, the “Application for Issuance of a Temporary County Certificate,” 
which was signed by Ms. Pfafflin, states that her first day of employment was September 2, 
2005. 
 
 
senior employee subject to layoff is certificated and competent to render. 
 

5.  No junior certificated employee is being retained to perform services which a more 

Notice may be given to Respondents that their services will not be required for the 

ORDER 
 

 
2010-2011 school year. 
 
Dated: April 15, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

_________________________________ 
HUMBERTO FLORES 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

5

