BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE WESTMINSTER SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of the 
Certificated Staff of the Westminster School 
District, 
 
 
                               Respondents. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

     OAH Case No. 2010030755 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard, but the record 

The hearing in the above-captioned matter was held on April 27, 2010, at 

 
 
Westminster,  California.  Joseph D. Montoya, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), presided.  Complainant was represented by Joshua E. 
Morrison, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo.  Respondents were represented by 
Michael D. Hersh.   
 
 
was held open until April 30, 2010, so that the Complainant could file a revised layoff 
implementation chart.  That document was timely received, and will be received as Exhibit 
21, along with Mr. Morrison’s cover letter.  The District’s Pre-hearing brief is identified as 
Exhibit 22, and its Supplemental Brief is identified as Exhibit 23.   
 
 
near the end of the hearing.  Mr. Morrison’s cover letter that is part of Exhibit 21 responded, 
in advance, to the issues raised by Mr. Hersh.  Mr. Hersh’s letter will be received as Exhibit 
D.  The issues raised in the correspondence will be resolved hereafter. 
 
 
Judge hereby makes his factual findings, legal conclusions, and order, as follows. 
 
 

On April 29, Mr. Hersh wrote to the ALJ regarding the scope of a stipulation made 

The case was submitted for decision on April 30, 2010.  The Administrative Law 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.  Complainant Sharon Nordheim filed and maintained the Accusation1 in the above-

 
 
captioned matter while acting in her official capacity as Superintendent of the Westminster 
School District (District).    
                                                
1 The term “accusation” refers to a type of pleading utilized under the Administrative 
 
Procedure Act, Government Code sections 11500 and 11503; that statutory scheme governs 
the hearing procedures in this case.  The Respondents are not “accused” in the everyday 
sense of that word; they have done nothing wrong, and all appear to be dedicated 

2.  The following persons are certificated employees of the District and are the 

 
 
Respondents in this case: 
 

Michelle Branch, Stephanie Carlson, Leticia Flores, Adrianna 
Glazener, Marisa Kanemaki, Linda Kawabata, Nicole Lagmay, Francis 
Landman, Raquel Martinez, Leanne Mondt, Rita Neumann, Miki 
Okura-Schooley, Keturah Prom, Kim Julia Thach, Quynh-Tram, 
Jessica Ash, Kim Besancon, Ann Bui, Juliann Dodash, Erin Gordon, 
Hanh Huynh, Linda Lam, Jaime LeBlanc, Valerie Rusiecki, Sandra 
Steele, and Monica Zamudio.    

 

 

3. 

(B)  The FTEs that the Board determined to reduce are described in the 

(A)  On March 8, 2010, the Governing Board of the District (Board) adopted  
Resolution number 09-10-19, entitled “Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of 
Service” (Reduction Resolution). The purpose of the Reduction Resolution was to reduce 
and discontinue particular kinds of certificated services no later than the beginning of the 
2010-2011 school year.  Specifically, the resolution requires the reductions of 110.3 
“FTE”—Full Time Equivalents—by reducing various types of services.  This decision was 
based on financial concerns as the District faces a budget shortfall.    
 
 
Reduction Resolution, as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

K-6 Classroom Teaching 
 
Counseling Services   
 
 
Nursing Services 
 
K-6 Reading   
 
 
K-6 Physical Education 
 
 
K-6 Music 
Middle School Pre-Algebra/Algebra 
 
Middle School Band   
 
Middle School 6th Grade Math 
Middle School Language Arts/Reading 
Middle School Physical Education   
 
Middle School Leadership 
 
 
Middle School Social Studies 

81.0 
  8.0 
  1.7 
  5.5 
  3.0 
  2.0 
  2.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  2.9 
    .9 
    .1 
  1.2 

Total FTE to be reduced: 

          110.3  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                                                                                                                       
professionals.  It might be said that they are simply accused of not having enough seniority 
or other qualifications to retain their positions with the District in the face of a resolution to 
reduce positions.     
 

 

 

2

4.  On March 8, 2010, the Board adopted resolution 09-10-21, which established “tie 

 
breaking” criteria for determining seniority in cases where two or more certificated 
employees share the same seniority date.  The tie-breaking criteria were based solely on the 
needs of the District.   
 

5.  The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are particular kinds 

  

7. 

(A)  The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of 

8.  The Board, in an effort to meet the need to reduce 110.3 FTE, adopted a resolution 

6.  The decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was neither arbitrary 

of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.2   
 
 
nor capricious, but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s discretion given the 
uncertainty regarding the state budget and the District’s financial resources.  
  
 
the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees as determined by the Board. 
 
 
(B)  It was not established, as alleged, that the failure to maintain counseling 
services in the District violates the laws governing the education of children in California.  
Nor was it established that any detriment that might occur because counselors are not 
available outweighs the detriment that would be suffered by the District if its budgetary 
shortfall is not addressed and eliminated. 
 
 
on March 8, 2010, to give notice of non-reelection and release of employment to 85 
temporary certificated employees.    
 
 
teachers were given written notice that pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, their services 
would not be required in the 2010-2011 school year (hereafter the preliminary notices).  
Thereafter, Respondents requested a hearing, and then each was served with an Accusation 
and other documents pertaining to the hearing process.  Each Respondent filed a notice of 
defense, although Respondent Erin Gordon filed her notice of defense after the statutory 
deadline.  No evidence was provided as to why her notice of defense was late.    
 
 
(B)  Following the service of the preliminary notices, and prior to the hearing, 
the District rescinded preliminary notices to 52 certificated employees.  Thus, at the time of 
the hearing, the District had accounted for all but 14 FTE to reduce, so that it was required to 
reduce 4 FTE of counseling services and 10 FTE of K-6 classroom teaching services.  This 
left 15 respondents at the time of the hearing, including Ms. Gordon, who had filed a late 
notice of defense.     
 

(A)  On or about March 10, 2010, each Respondent and other certificated 

9. 

 

                                                
 
 

2   All further statutory references are to the Education Code.  

 

3

 

  

10. 

(D)  All jurisdictional requirements have been met.   

(A)  To implement  the reduction in force, the District created a seniority list.   

(C)  The District served a number of preliminary notices to persons the District 
 
believed to be temporary employees, but who nonetheless might have rights as permanent or 
probationary employees.  It also served precautionary notices on persons who are not 
temporary employees, in order that it could meet the goal of eliminating all 110.3 FTE called 
for in the Reduction Resolution.  By the time the hearing commenced, the teachers who 
received precautionary notices and who remained in the proceeding were respondents Jessica 
Ash, Kim Besancon, Ann Bui, Juliann Dodash, Erin Gordon, Hanh Huynh, Linda Lam, 
Jaime LeBlanc, Valerie Rusiecki, Sandra Steele, and Monica Zamudio. 
 
 
 
 
That seniority list took into account a number of factors, including first date of paid service 
and the tie-breaking criteria.  However, in the course of the hearing, evidence was presented 
to the District to the effect that the seniority dates of some respondents were incorrect, that 
two respondents were not, asserted by the District, temporary employees, and that in some 
cases inaccurate information had been utilized in determining tie-breaking criteria.   
 
 
(B)  Based on information obtained from some Respondents during the 
hearing, the parties stipulated that Jessica Ash and Juliann Dodash are not temporary 
employees, but are permanent or probationary employees, of sufficient seniority that the 
preliminary notices to them must be rescinded.  It was further stipulated that respondents 
Quynh-Tram Vu, Kim Thach, and Linda Kawabata, who had received precautionary notices 
although not temporary employees, were of such seniority that the preliminary notices to 
them would be rescinded.  Finally, it was determined that the preliminary notices to 
Stephanie Carlson, Leticia Flores, and Adrianna Glazener would have to be rescinded, based 
on their seniority.  Therefore, those eight respondents are to be dismissed from the 
proceeding.   
 
 
(C)  As a result of the modifications to the seniority list, Respondent Miki 
Okura-Schooley may bump Alicia Nelson from her .5 FTE position, such that Ms. Okura-
Schooley shall be laid off .5 FTE, leaving her with .5 of her position.     
 
 
position which a senior employee is certificated and competent to fill.     
 
 

11.  As a result of the foregoing, no junior certificated employee is being retained in a 

  

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction was established to proceed in this matter, pursuant to sections 44949 

 
 
and 44955, based on Factual Findings 1 through 9(D). 
 
 
meaning of section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of 
service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce 

(A)  A District may reduce particular kind of services (PKS) within the 

2.   

 

4

 

3. 

(B)  The services to be discontinued are particular kinds of services within the 

services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of 
Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)   The Court of Appeal has made clear that a 
PKS reduction does not have to lead to fewer classrooms or classes; laying off some teachers 
amounts to a proper reduction.  (Zalac v. Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. 
(2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 853-85; see also San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627, 631, 637 [reduction of classroom teaching can be a reduction of a PKS; as 
long as there is a change in the method of teaching or in a particular kind of service in 
teaching a particular subject any amount in excess of the statutory minimum may be 
reduced]; California Teachers Assn. v. Board of Trustees (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)   
 
 
meaning of section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion. 
Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.  This Legal Conclusion is 
based on Factual Findings 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8 and the foregoing authorities. 
 
 
(A)  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to 
a continuing position which he or she is certificated to fill.  In doing so, the senior employee 
may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Lacy v. Richmond 
Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  At the same time, a junior teacher may be 
given retention priority over one or more senior teachers—may be “skipped” in favor of 
senior employees—if the junior teacher possesses superior skills or capabilities not possessed 
by more senior colleagues which must be utilized a course or course of study that is 
specifically needed in the District.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District 
(1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing 
Bd. of Santa Clara Unified School Dist. (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) 
 
 
employee or that he or she should have been skipped, based on the foregoing rules, and 
Factual Findings 10 and 11.      
 
 
information tendered by respondents, as described in Factual Finding 10(B).  No other 
respondents offered evidence that would affect the outcome as proposed by Complainant’s 
counsel when he offered the stipulation, which appeared unambiguous.  The stipulation 
stands as placed in the record, and given the reliance of Complainant and the ALJ on the 
stipulation, the respondents should be estopped to avoid its effect.   
 
 

4.  Counsel entered into a stipulation regarding the effect of the documents and other 

(B)  No Respondent established that he or she had the right to bump a junior 

   

 
 
1.  The following Respondents may receive final layoff notices:  Rita Neumann, 
Leanne Mondt, Michelle Branch, Kimberly Kensy, Miki Okura-Schooley as to .5 FTE, 

ORDER 

 

5

2.  Respondents Jessica Ash, Juliann Dodash, Quynh-Tram Vu, Kim Thach, Linda 

Nicole Lagmay, Alicia Nelson as to .5 FTE, William Wohlgezogen, Raquel Martinez, 
Ashley Cope, Keturah Prom, Francis Landman, Marisa Kanemaki, and Catherine Fitzpatrick.     
 
 
Kawabata, Stephanie Carlson, Leticia Flores, and Adrianna Glazener are dismissed as 
Respondents and they shall not receive a final layoff notice.   
 
April ___, 2010  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 

_______________________________ 
Joseph D. Montoya 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

  

 

 

6

