BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
DOWNEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
 
 LAURIE BERLYN, 
 
 DOMENICA COWAN, and 
 
SOLEDAD NOBUMOTO, 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
OAH No. 2010011286 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Eric Bathen, Attorney at Law, represented Stanley Hanstad (Hanstad), Assistant 

Administrative Law Judge, Sophie C. Agopian, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 26, 2010, in Downey, California. 
 
 
Superintendent, Personnel Services, of the Downey Unified School District (District). 
 
 
District, Laurie Berlyn, Domenica Cowan (a.k.a. Domenica Cowen), and Soledad Nobumoto 
(a.k.a. Soledad Zermeno), (Respondents).  Respondents Berlyn and Nobumoto were present 
at the hearing.  Respondent Cowan was not present. 
 

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented three certificated employees of the 

The matter was submitted for decision on April 26, 2010. 
 
 

ISSUES 

The issues to be determined in this matter are:  (1) Whether the District properly 

 
 
relied upon terms in a collective bargaining agreement to establish Respondents’ seniority 
dates; and (2) Whether Respondents established that they are entitled to earlier seniority 
dates as a result of substitute and/or part-time employment with the District prior to earning 
“probationary” status. 
 

1 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 

 

Jurisdiction 
 
1. 

District Superintendent Wendy L. Doty, Ed.D. (Doty) filed the Accusations 
against Respondents in her official capacity.  Respondents are certificated employees in the 
District’s Adult Education program. 
 

2. 

On February 16, 2010, the Governing Board of the District (Board) adopted 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

3. 

4. 

1. 
2. 

Total 

3.0 FTE 

2.0 FTE 
1.0 FTE

In determining the amount of service to be reduced, the board properly 

The Board further determined that the reduction and elimination of such 

Adult Education—Facility Teacher   
Adult Education—ARC1 Teacher 
 

Resolution No. 200910-06 (Resolution) and determined to reduce and discontinue particular 
kinds of certificated services (PKS) for the 2010-2011 school year by three full-time equivalent 
(FTE) positions, as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
services made it necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District 
by a corresponding number of FTE positions prior to the ensuing school year. 
 
 
considered all assured attrition known at the time it adopted the Resolution.  As of the date of 
the hearing, there was no attrition at the adult school that would cause the Board to decrease 
the number of certificated employees to notify regarding the proposed reductions.   
 
 
procedures required for a reduction in force.  Dr. Doty timely and properly notified the Board 
and Respondents of the recommendation that Respondents’ services will not be required for 
the 2010-2011 school year, and stating the reasons therefor.  The notices recommending their 
lay-off are hereinafter referred to as “lay-off” notices.  The lay-off notices were hand-
delivered to Respondents Cowan and Nobumoto, and notice was sent by certified mail to 
Respondent Berlyn.  The notices contained a copy of the Board’s Resolution. 
 
 
in response to the Accusation. 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
tion provided to disabled adults. 
 

1 “ARC” is the Association of Retarded Citizens, and is used herein to refer to instruc-

The parties stipulated that all pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 

All three Respondents timely requested a hearing and filed a notice of defense 

The Board directed Superintendent Doty, or a designee, to implement the 

5. 

6. 

7. 

2 

8. 

9a. 

  b. 

Board’s Discretion Regarding “Particular Kinds of Service” 

The Board’s decision to reduce and discontinue the services set forth in 

The Board’s decision to reduce and discontinue adult school services was 

The adult school facility teachers provide instructional services at community 

 
 
 
Factual Finding 2 was not arbitrary or capricious and constitutes a proper exercise of the 
Board’s discretion.  The certificated services identified in Factual Finding 3 are “particular 
kinds of services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education 
Code section 44955.2
 
 
related to the needs and welfare of the District and its pupils.  The District operates 21 
schools for kindergarten through grade 12, including an adult school, and serves 
approximately 22,000 students.  The District has been impacted by a $9.5 million budget 
reduction and is expected to reduce its budget an additional $5 million for 2010-2011 school 
year.  The District decided to eliminate the services provided by adult school facility teachers 
and to reduce the services provided by adult school ARC teachers because the services, unlike 
other adult school services, are provided on a “non-fee” basis, meaning that the District does not 
collect a fee to recover the cost of providing the service. 
 
 
centers for seniors.  Only two positions existed at the time the Board adopted the Resolution 
and both positions were eliminated. 
 
 
The ARC teachers provide instruction to disabled adults.  When the Board 
adopted the Resolution, the District employed four ARC teachers.  The Board decided to 
reduce ARC instruction by one FTE because the remaining ARC services will be funded, in 
part, by non-District resources during the 2010-2011. 
 
 
 
 
10a.  Because the PKS to be reduced or eliminated were exclusively adult school 
services, and because no adult school teacher affected by the lay-off possessed a credential 
that would permit him or her to teach in the K-12 schools, the District properly developed a 
seniority list consisting only of certificated adult school teachers.  Although the District’s 
Board adopted tie-breaking criteria to break ties among certificated teachers with the same 
seniority dates, no ties existed among the certificated adult school teachers.  Therefore, the 
tie-breaking criteria was not necessary nor utilized in this process. 
 
 
 
 
 

Implementation of the Lay-Off 

  c. 

                                                 
 
 

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

3 

The Parties’ Contentions 

11a.  Respondents do not dispute their tenure status or the credentials held as 

    c.  The seniority list is in inverse order and contains the employees’ “seniority 

    b.  All but one of the 24 adult school teachers identified on the seniority list 
 
possess either a life, clear, or preliminary “designated subjects” credential authorizing them 
to teach in an adult education program.  The adult school credential does not authorize the 
holder to teach in K-12 schools.3
 
 
dates,” tenure status, and the type of credentials held.  The adult school teachers are 
credentialed in one or more of a number of subject areas, including but not limited to, 
computer application, nursing services, court reporting, cosmetology, dental services, self-
maintenance skills for adults with disabilities, food preparation, Spanish, English as a Second 
Language (ESL), and/or home economics.  The designated subjects credential authorizes the 
holder to teach specific subjects in which the holder has demonstrated experience, and that 
are identified on the credential. 
 
 
 
 
indicated on the seniority list.   
 
 
 b.  Berlyn and Nobumoto are permanent employees and are, respectively, ranked 
numbers 12 and 13 on the seniority list, with the most senior employee ranked number 24.  
Berlyn is credentialed to teach instructional aide training and vocational skills for 
handicapped.  Nobumoto is credentialed to teach self-maintenance skills for adults with 
disabilities.  According to the District, Berlyn and Nobumoto are the only two adult school 
facility teachers in the District.  They are subject to lay-off because their positions are being 
eliminated.  Although the District did not establish the correlation between their credentials 
and their assignments as facility teachers at senior centers, Respondents Berlyn and 
Nobumoto did not present evidence to establish that their credential and competency would 
permit them to “bump” or displace a less senior or probationary adult school teacher who is 
being retained.  As such, there are no less senior or probationary certificated adult school 
teachers that are being retained to provide a service that either Berlyn or Nobumoto are 
credentialed to teach. 
 
 
She is credentialed to teach self-maintenance skills for older adults, clothing construction, 
small business, food preparation, arts and crafts, “deco arts,” and interior design.  According 
to the District, Cowan currently provides food preparation instruction in the ARC program to 
disabled adults.  Because she is the least senior ARC teacher, as the others are ranked 
numbers 19, 20, 23 and 24 on the seniority list, Cowan has been identified for lay-off.  The 
three adult school teachers who are ranked below Cowan on the seniority list did not receive 
lay-off notices, and possess designated subject credentials in the areas of cosmetology, dental 

    c.  Cowan is a probationary teacher who is ranked number 4 on the seniority list. 

3 The exception is James Turnbough, who possesses a clear multiple subject creden-

                                                 
 
tial.  His position is not affected by the lay-off. 
 

4 

 
12. 

Respondents dispute the seniority dates assigned to them by the District.  

13a.  The District established the manner in which it determined Respondents’ 

services/medical services, and health education/health occupations.  These are areas in which 
Cowan is neither credentialed or competent to teach.  Consequently, no less senior or 
probationary certificated adult school teacher is being retained to render a service that Cowan 
is credentialed and competent to teach.  
 
 
Respondents contend that the District miscalculated their seniority dates because it 
impermissibly relied on the teachers’ collective bargaining contract (contract) to determine 
the dates in which Respondents first became probationary employees with the District. 
 
 
seniority dates as set forth below. 
 
 
   b.  The District assigned Respondents their seniority dates based upon the 
District’s review of their payroll records and information obtained about their status toward 
permanency.  According to the District, adult school teachers are generally hourly 
employees, whose employment status is “at will,” and therefore, they have not historically 
been provided with a contract.  It was not until the 2009-2010 school year, that the District 
provided adult school teachers with an “employment status agreement” notifying them of 
their tenure status.  The notices were first provided to Respondents in September 2009, in 
anticipation of lay-offs.  The notices identified each Respondent as probationary or 
permanent, and identified their date of “first hire in probationary status,” and “date of 
[acquiring] permanent status” if applicable.  In response to the notices, each Respondent 
stated that she agreed with the dates indicated therein. 
 
 
   c.  The District also reviewed payroll records and the employees’ personnel files 
to determine if there were any Board memoranda identifying an employee as probationary or 
permanent.  The District did not observe any such memoranda for Respondents. 
 
 
   d.  The District contends that in determining seniority dates, it properly relied on 
the following contract provision regarding how adult school teachers obtain permanency to 
determine Respondents’ first date of paid service in a probationary position: 
 
 
education teachers become “probationary” employees, and thereafter, how they become 
“permanent.”   Article XX, Section B, states in relevant part: 
 

Article XX, section B, of the contract sets forth criteria by which certificated adult 

 
 
 

Permanency 

Thirty-four and three quarter (34.75) hours a week is considered 

1. 
a full time assignment at the Adult School.  Twenty-one (21) hours or 
more per week must be worked in order to receive permanency. 
 

5 

To attain permanency, an Adult School teacher must teach a 
2. 
minimum of 75% of the regular school year for two (2) consecutive 
years. 

The contract is in effect for the period of September 1, 2009, through August 31, 

   e.  The District followed the contract and determined Respondents’ first date of 

 
 
2012.  It was not established whether the relevant provision was in effect prior to September 
1, 2009. 
 
 
paid service in a probationary position is the date that each began to work “21 hours or more 
per week.”  By this calculation, the District determined that Cowan’s seniority date is 
September 1, 2008, Nobumoto‘s seniority date is October 1, 2001, and Berlyn’s seniority 
date is September 11, 2000.  If the District properly relied on the contract language, its 
calculation of their seniority dates is correct. 
 
 
positions with the District, ranging from 6 to 20 hours per week, from April 16, 1986 through 
September 10, 2000, prior to her assigned seniority date. 
 
 
substitute and/or part-time positions for 10 hours or less each week.  The payroll records 
establish that Nobumoto participated in training on September 24 and 25, 2001, for a period 
of, at most, 15.5 hours that week and was paid for the training.  However, she was assigned a 
seniority date of October 1, 2001. 
 
 

15.  Nobumoto has worked for the District since November 1993 in various 

The parties stipulated that Berlyn held a series of substitute and/or part-time 

14. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this matter was established pursuant to sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955, by reason of Finding Findings 1 through 7. 
 
A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App. 3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 
 
under sections 44949 and 44955 because the services identified in the Board’s Resolution are 
particular kinds of services that can be reduced or eliminated within the meaning of section 
44955, and because the District established that the reduction of such services is related to 
the welfare of its schools and students pursuant to section 44949, subdivision (c)(3).  (Factual 
Findings 8 and 9.) 
 

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 

3. 

6 

4. 

Section 44955, subdivision (b), further provides that: 

 
 

[T]he services of no permanent employee may be terminated… while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained 
to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and 
competent to render. 
 
[¶]…[¶] 
 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 
same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely 
on the basis of needs of the district and the students thereof. 
 
5. 

 
The District complied with the requirements of section 44955, subdivision (b), 

6. 

Whether the District Assigned Proper Seniority Dates to Respondents 

 
with respect to Respondents, as set forth in Factual Findings 10 through 12, because it 
established that no junior certificated employee, or probationary employee, will be retained 
to render a service which a more senior Respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
This conclusion depends, in part, on whether the District properly determined Respondents’ 
seniority dates, and if not, whether Respondents established that they are entitled to earlier 
seniority dates as a result of them becoming probationary employees by default prior to their 
assigned seniority dates. 
 
 
 
The seniority date of a certificated employee is defined as the date the employee 
 
“first rendered paid service in a probationary capacity.” (Educ. Code § 44845.)  If the date on 
which  the  employee  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  capacity  is  incorrect,  the 
employee’s  seniority  date  must  be  adjusted  to  reflect  the  earlier  first  date  of  probationary 
service.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  District 
(2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1273.) 
 
Respondents contend that the District should adjust their seniority dates to 
 
earlier dates because the District did not properly determine their first date of service in a 
probationary position. 
 
 
 
 
on the contract provision to determine that they did not achieve probationary status until they 
worked 21 or more hours per week.  Respondents assert that the Education Code, and not an 
employee contract, is determinative regarding how employees acquire tenure.  While 
Respondents are correct that tenure is established by statute, and not by contract, the contract 
was considered for the limited purpose of establishing how the District determined 

Respondents specifically contend that it was improper for the District to rely 

Reliance on the Contract 

 
7. 

8. 

7 

Classification 

In addition, as set forth below, the District’s reliance on the contract to determine the 

employees’ first date of probationary status.4  For example, the contract established that a 
full-time adult school assignment consisted of 34.75 hours per week.  As noted in Steinberg 
v. Los Angeles City Unified School District (1979) 95 Cal.App.3d 437, school boards have 
broad discretion in determining what constitutes a “full-time” position.  Here, the District 
relied on the negotiated agreement with the teachers to establish what constitutes a full-time 
adult school position.  That is within its discretion.  Respondents did not refute that a full-
time assignment is 34.75 hours per week.   
 
 
minimum number of hours that adult school teachers must work each week to be deemed 
“probationary” was not improper or prejudicial because it sets a standard that is similar to 
what is provided in the Education Code.5  
 
 
 
 
 9a.  Respondents contend that the District misclassified and/or failed to classify 
them prior to their assigned seniority dates.  They contend that they should have become 
probationary prior to such dates, and therefore their and seniority dates should be adjusted. 
 
 
  b.  As established in Bakersfield Elementary Teachers’ Ass’n v. Bakersfield City 
School District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1278, the Education Code permits certificated 
employees to be classified in one of four ways: permanent, probationary, substitute, or 
temporary.  It also authorizes school boards to hire, classify, promote and dismiss certificated 
employees under a “complex and somewhat rigid scheme to govern a board's exercise of its 
decision-making power." (Id.)  In this case, the District established that Respondents did not 
achieve probationary status prior to their assigned seniority dates, under the more liberal 
contract, or under the relevant statute, because they did not work a sufficient number of 
hours per week to achieve such status.   
 
 
employees may be classified as “temporary.”  (California Teachers Ass’n v. Vallejo Unified 
School District (2007) 149 Cal.App. 4th 135.)  Two sections establish how adult school 
teachers become temporary employees.  Section 44919, subdivision (a), states: 
                                                 
4 It is established that the tenure statutes under the Education Code cannot be 
 
amended by agreement or otherwise.  Fleice v. Chualar Union Elementary School (1988) 
206 Cal.App.3d 886 [tenure statutes may not be altered by agreement, mistake or estoppel]; 
Board of Education vs. Round Valley Teachers Ass’n (1996) 13 Cal.4th 269, 281 [parties 
may not negotiate greater protections than afforded by statute].) 
   
5 In this case, the District correctly contended that the contract provides Respondents 
 
with greater rights than what is provided in the Education Code because the contract grants 
them “probationary” status when they meet the statutory requirements to become 
“temporary.” 
 

The Education Code is strictly interpreted regarding the terms by which 

  c. 

8 

 

Governing boards of school districts shall classify as temporary employees 
those persons requiring certification qualifications, other than substitute 
employees, who are employed to serve from day to day during the first three 
school months of any school term to teach temporary classes not to exist after 
the first three months of any school term or to perform any other duties which 
do not last longer than the first three months of any school term, or to teach in 
special day class and evening classes for adults or in schools of migratory 
population for not more than four school months of any school term.  If the 
classes or duties continue beyond the first three school months of any school 
term or four school months for special day and evening classes for adults, or 
schools for migratory population, the certificated employee, unless a 
permanent employee, shall be classified as a probationary employee.  The 
school year may be divided into not more than two school terms for the 
purposes of this section. 
 
A special provision in the code applies to adult school teachers.  Section 44929.25 

provides: 

 
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, any person who is 
employed to teach adults for more than 60 percent of the hours per week 
considered a full-time assignment for permanent employees having 
comparable duties shall be classified as a temporary employee, and shall not 
become a probationary employee, under the provisions of Section 44954.6  
(Emphasis added.) 
 
 
In Kettering v. Los Angeles Unified School District (2009) 167 Cal.App.4th 507, 516, 
adult school teachers who met the “60 percent rule” were classified as temporary employees 
regardless of whether they would qualify as temporary teachers under section 44919.  (Id. 
citing Peralta Federation of Teachers v. Peralta Community College District (1979) 24 
Cal.3d 369.) 
 
 
For Respondents to meet the 60 percent rule, they would have to establish that 
they worked more than 20.85 hours per week, which is 60 percent of a full-time position, i.e. 
34.75 hours, as set forth in the contract.  Because Respondents failed to establish that they 
met the 60 percent rule prior to their seniority dates, they are not entitled to adjusted dates.  
The evidence did not establish that Respondents worked more than 20.85 hours per week 
during the time before they were assigned a seniority date. 
 

d. 

6 Section 44954 provides for the release of temporary teachers at the discretion of a 

                                                 
 
governing board prior to serving at least 75 percent of the school year, and at the end of 
completing one school year, for the next succeeding year, upon timely notice. 
 

9 

 

 

i. 

ii. 

Berlyn was assigned a seniority date of September 11, 2000, because 
 
that was the first day she began to work 21 or more hours per week.  As set forth in Factual 
Finding 14, the parties stipulated that Berlyn held a series of substitute and/or part-time 
positions with the District, ranging from 6 to 20 hours per week, from April 16, 1986 through 
September 10, 2000.  The stipulation, however, is insufficient to establish that Berlyn met 
either the statutory or contractual threshold to become temporary or probationary because it 
does not establish the number of hours she worked each week during that time.7
 
 
Nobumoto was assigned a seniority date of October 1, 2001, because 
that was the first day she taught in a position consisting of 21 or more hours per week (21-
plus position).  As set forth in Factual Finding 15, she has worked for the District since 
November 1993 in various substitute and/or part-time positions for 10 hours or less each 
week.  Nobumoto did not testify at the hearing and did not dispute such facts.  She contends, 
however, that her 21-plus assignment for the 2001-2002 school year began on the date that 
she participated in training for the position.  However, the payroll records establish that the 
week of the training, Nobumoto worked, at most, 15.5 hours.  This does not amount to 60 
percent of a full-time position.  Even if Nobumoto’s seniority date is amended to the first 
date of the training, on September 24, 2001, her credential will not allow her to bump 
another adult school teacher with a later seniority date.  (See Factual Finding 11b.) 
 
 
was the first day in which she rendered service to the District in a probationary position.  
Cowan did not produce evidence to establish that she should have another seniority date, or 
that she is entitled to bump any other employee, and remain employed for the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 
 
teachers or part-time adult school teachers, who are statutorily excluded from temporary 
classification, prior to their assigned seniority dates, they are not entitled to adjusted seniority 
dates. 
 
 
 
 
their seniority dates, Respondents contention that they were entitled to notice of their 
classification under section 44916, and became probationary by default, is not persuasive.  
  

10a.  Because Respondents did not establish that they were misclassified prior to 

As Respondents did not establish that they were anything other than substitute 

iii.  Cowan was assigned a seniority date of September 1, 2008, because that 

Lack of Notice of Classification 

e. 

 

                                                 
7 Assuming arguendo that Berlyn’s seniority date should be amended to April 16, 
 
1986, Berlyn would be entitled to bump or displace a more junior teacher, who did not re-
ceive a lay-off notice, and therefore both teachers would be retained the following year.  
However, Berlyn did not establish that her seniority date should be adjusted.  
 

10 

  b. 

Respondents rely on Education Code sections8 44915 and 44916, and the 

 
Supreme Court’s interpretation in Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High School 
(2003), 29 Cal. 4th 911. 
 
 
 

Section 44915 states: 

Governing boards of school districts shall classify as probationary employees, 
those persons employed in positions requiring certification qualifications for 
the school year, who have not been classified as permanent employees or as 
substitute employees. 
 
Section 44916 provides that: 
 
The classification shall be made at the time of employment and thereafter in 
the month of July of each school year.  At the time of initial employment 
during each academic year, each new certificated employee of the school 
district shall receive a written statement indicating his employment status and 
the salary that he is to be paid.  If a school district hires a certificated person as 
a temporary employee, the written statement shall clearly indicate the 
temporary nature of the employment and the length of time for which the 
person is being employed.  If a written statement does not indicate the 
temporary nature of the employment, the certificated employee shall be 
deemed to be a probationary employee of the district, unless employed with 
permanent status. 
 
 c. 

Kavanaugh applied the default principle set forth in section 44916 to elevate a 

11.  Accordingly, cause exists to sustain the Accusations against Respondents 

temporary teacher to probationary status due to the school district’s failure to provide her 
with timely notice of her temporary status.  Unlike Kavanaugh, Respondents are not entitled 
to earlier seniority dates because they did not establish that they were temporary or 
probationary employees prior to their assigned seniority date.  Their service as substitutes 
excluded them from the notice requirement set forth in section 44916. 
 
 
because the District complied with the requirements of section 44955, subdivision (b), and 
ensured that no junior certificated employee will be retained to render a service which a more 
senior Respondent is certificated and competent to render.  (Factual Finding 10.) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
erwise indicated. 
 

8  As previously noted, all statutory references are to the Education Code unless oth-

11 

Notice may be given to Laurie Berlyn, Domenica Cowan, and Soledad Nobumoto that 

ORDER 

  
 
their services will not required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 

 Dated:  May 6, 2010 

________________________________ 
SOPHIE C. AGOPIAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 
 
  
 
   

 

12 

