 
 

 

 

 

BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
WILSONA SCHOOL DISTRICT 

In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
Certificated Employees of the Wilsona 
School District Listed in Appendix 1,  
 
                                             Respondents. 

 
OAH No. 2010031394 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard by Eric Sawyer, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 6, 2010, in Palmdale, California.   
 

Peter C. Carton, Esq., Schools Legal Service, represented the Wilsona School 

 

 

District (District). 

 
 
Respondents. 
 
 

Richard J. Schwab, Esq., Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, represented the 

The record was closed and the matter was deemed submitted for decision at 

the conclusion of the hearing on April 6, 2010. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
Parties and Jurisdiction 
 

2. 

3. 

1. 

Teresa Grey, the District’s Interim Administrator in Charge, made and filed 

the Accusations in her official capacity. 
  

Each Respondent is a certificated District employee. 

On March 4, 2010, the Governing Board of the District (Board) adopted 

Resolution No. 2009-10-08, which recommended the reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

4. 

On or before March 15, 2009, the District served Respondents with written 
notice, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that Respondents’ services 
will not be required for the following school year. 
 

5. 

Respondents were timely served with an Accusation and other required 

materials, and each were deemed to have timely submitted a request for a hearing. 

1 

The Board’s Layoff Decision 
 

6. 

Resolution No. 2009-10-08 specifically provides for the reduction or 

elimination of the following particular kinds of services: 
 

Services Being Reduced or Eliminated  Net Full-Time 

Equivalent (FTE) Re-
ductions 

8 FTE 

 
.5 FTE 
2.5 FTE 
1 FTE 
 
+2 FTE (increase) 

Self-Contained Classroom 
Instruction, Grades K-6 

Support Programs, Grades K-6 

EL Coordinator 
Literacy Coach 
Elementary Admin. Assistant 
(teacher) 
Instructional Teacher/Coach 

Core Team Instruction, Middle School, 
Grades 7-8 
ELA 
Language Arts/Soc. Stud. 
Math/Science 
Science 
History/Social Science 
Math 
Physical Education 

 
Electives 
         Art 

District-Wide Programs 
Special Day Class 
Resource Specialist Program 
Speech 
Psychologist 
RTI Coordinator 
Administration 
Nurse 
Wilsona Achievement Academy- 
    Self Contained 7/8 

 
Total 

 
 

 
 
0 FTE 
0 FTE 
0 FTE 
1 FTE 
0 FTE 
1 FTE 
0 FTE 
 
 
1 FTE 

 
0 FTE 
0 FTE 
 
0 FTE 
0 FTE 
0 FTE 
0 FTE 
0 FTE 
0 FTE 
 
13 FTE 

2 

7. 

The services identified in Resolution No. 2009-10-08 are particular kinds of 

services within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. 
 

8. 

The Board decided that it was necessary to reduce the above-described 

particular kinds of services.  During the hearing, Interim Administrator in Charge Grey 
testified that the Board’s decision, in part, was based on a projected decline in District 
enrollment for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

9. 

It was not established that the reduction or elimination of the 13 FTE positions 

will reduce services below mandated levels. 
 

10. 

It was not established that, prior to the adoption of Resolution No. 2009-10-08, 

there was any known positively assured attrition, including retirements and resignations, 
which the Board needed to consider. 
 

11. 

The District developed a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

dates, credentials and authorizations. 
  

12.  On February 18, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution 2009-10-09, which 

established tie-breaking criteria to determine the relative seniority of certificated employees 
who have the same seniority date.  The application of the tie-breaking criteria was not at 
issue in this case. 
 

13. 

In determining who would be subject to layoff, the District counted the 

number of reductions, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of 
seniority.  The District then determined whether the least senior employees held other 
credentials or were otherwise competent to render services being rendered by junior 
employees.  The District determined that none of the certificated employees subject to layoff 
through the above-described process were able to “bump” junior employees. 
 
Individual Respondents 
 

14. 

Constance Carr.  Respondent Carr is a seventh grade science teacher.  She 

holds a Clear Pupil Personnel Services credential, with an authorized subject in school 
counseling.  Stacy Alvey is being retained as the District’s Intervention Coordinator.  She 
holds a Clear Pupil Personnel Services credential, with an authorized subject of school 
psychology.  Respondent Carr is senior to Ms. Alvey, so Respondent Carr contends she 
should be retained to perform the Intervention Coordinator position.  The District requires 
many responsibilities and qualifications for the Intervention Coordinator position, including 
the ability “to write assessment and behavior plans.”  Documents from the California 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing indicate that Ms. Alvey’s credential allows her to 
perform that function, but that Respondent Carr’s does not.  Respondent Carr’s testimony 
was not persuasive that she can write assessment and behavior plans.  Under these 
circumstances, it was not established that Respondent Carr is credentialed and competent to 
perform the District’s Intervention Coordinator position. 

3 

15. 

Steven Goodman and Lorrie Jones.  These two Respondents contend they are 

more senior than a teacher being retained to teach next year, Bruce Galler, because Mr. 
Galler worked outside the District during the 2001-2002 school year.  The District assigned 
Mr. Galler a seniority date of January 28, 1994, which would make him more senior than the 
two Respondents in question.  Although he worked out of the District during the 2001-2002 
school year, he did so pursuant to an agreement by the District’s then Superintendent that he 
would have no severance of service if he later returned to the District.  Mr. Galler did so.  
The District honored the Superintendent’s agreement and retained Mr. Galler’s original 
seniority date.  Under these circumstances, it was not established that a change in Mr. 
Galler’s seniority date is warranted.  Because Respondents Goodman and Jones are less 
senior than Mr. Galler, there is no basis for them to be retained by the District. 
 

16. 

Raymond Strasser-King.  Respondent Strasser-King was not persuasive in his 
testimony that his seniority date of January 21, 2004, should be adjusted to a date in August 
of 2003, and therefore, there is no basis for him to be retained by the District. 
 
Overall Findings 
 

17. 

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the above-described particular 

kinds of services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its 
discretion. 
 

18. 

The cause for reducing and/or eliminating the above-described particular kinds 

of services relates solely to the welfare of the schools in the District and its pupils.   
 

19.  No certificated employee with less seniority will be retained to render a 

service that Respondents are certificated and competent to render. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 

1. 

All jurisdictional requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 

were met.  (Factual Findings 1-5.) 
 

2. 

Respondents contend that the Board’s layoff decision is invalid, because part 
of the decision-making included an anticipated decline in enrollment but the District did not 
undertake the process for laying off certificated employees based on a reduction in average 
daily attendance (ADA) provided for in Education Code section 44955.  A school district has 
wide discretion in determining whether to employ a reduction in force based on a reduction 
of particular kinds of services (PKS) versus a reduction based on a decline in ADA.  (San 
Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627.)   Such decisions may be overruled 
only if proven to be arbitrary or capricious.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers Association, 
Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.)  In this case, the District proposes a PKS 
layoff and has determined that such is necessary.  In light of the current economic crisis, it is 
reasonable to assume that various financial problems were involved in the Board’s decision-
making process, including a projected decline in enrollment next school year.  Respondents 

4 

did not establish that the Board’s layoff decision was purely based on a reduction in ADA.  
There is nothing in Education Code section 44955 prohibiting an expected decline in student 
enrollment from being one factor in the overall decision to reduce or eliminate particular 
kinds of services.  Further, ADA refers to a decline in past enrollment, as opposed to a 
projected decline in future enrollment.  (Ed. Code § 44955, subd. (b).) 
 

3. 

The services identified in Resolution No. 2009-10-08 are particular kinds of 

services that can be reduced or discontinued pursuant to Education Code section 44955.  The 
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor 
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  It was not established that services 
will not be reduced below mandated levels.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of 
those particular services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils 
within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  (Factual Findings 1-18.) 
 

4. 

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due 
to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  (Factual Findings 1-18.) 
 

5. 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 
that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.  (Factual Findings 1-19.) 
   

ORDER 

 

 
 
The Accusations are sustained against the Respondents.  Notice may be given 
to those Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year, 
and such notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
Dated: April 20, 2010 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

________________________________ 
ERIC SAWYER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

5 

APPENDIX 1: WILSONA SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
List of Respondents
 
Constance Carr 
Steven Goodman 
Ruth Guess 
Joan Hammond 
Lorrie Jones  
Kyla Love 
Pat McGuire 
Deborah Poor  
David Price 
LaShone Scott 
Anne Stanley 
Raymond Strasser-King 

 

 

 

6 

