BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF  
LEMON GROVE SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
OAH No. 2010030132 

 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certificated Employees Listed on Exhibit A 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Jon Y. Vanderpool, Esq. and/or Georgiana D’Alessandro, Esq., Tosdal, Smith, Steiner 

William A. Diedrich, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loyo, Ruud & Romo, represented 

Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of 
 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Lemon Grove, California on April 13, 2010. 
 
 
the District. 
 
 
& Wax, represented Kristin Alianelli, Kevin Andreen, Jessica Barquenquast, Kathleen 
Carter, Pablo Chavarin, Esme Collier, Ellen Davis, Shari Erlendson, Susan Farnsworth, 
Michelle Fripp, Diane Gibson, Kaitlin Kremer, Kyle Griffith, Craig Kazaoka, Francisco 
Lacsamana, Kellie Lewis, Steven Nobel, William Otfinoski, Melvetta Owens, Cynthia 
Piligian, Brenda Reed, Silvia Sana, Michelle Silverio, Trish Stack and Adrienne Warren. 
 
 
 
 
 
Respondents Theresa Moudry, Robyn Lefkowitz, Veronica Johnson, Susan 
 
Farnsworth, Esme Collier, Susan Nunez and Erin Walker failed to file a timely Request for 
Hearing, and there is no jurisdiction over these Respondents.  
 
 
Johnson, Robyn Lefkowitz, Kristina Rhoades and Anna Schen. 
 
 
 
 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Lori Feiner, Thomas Higdon, Craig 

Respondent Edna Murrillo represented herself. 

Respondent Paul Brazzel represented himself. 

The matter was submitted on April 13, 2010. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers for budgetary reasons.  The 

The Board of Education of the Lemon Grove School District determined to reduce or 

 

1

decision was not related to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose services 
are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.   
 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 

review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” “skipping” and breaking ties between/among 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in accordance 
with the requirements of the Education Code.  
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
3. 

 
4. 

1. 

Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” (Respondents) are certificated employees 

of the Lemon Grove School District (District). 
 

2. 

On March 9, 2010, Ernest Anastos, the District’s Superintendent 
(Superintendent), notified the District’s Governing Board (Board) of his recommendation to 
reduce or discontinue services for the ensuing school year “due to budgetary limitations.” 

On March 9, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 09-10-16 reducing or 

eliminating particular kinds of services for the ensuing school year and establishing tie-
breaker criteria and “competency” criteria for purposes of displacement.  

5, 

6. 

On March 22, 2010, the Superintendent made and filed an Accusation Against 

Each Respondent submitted a timely Request for Hearing to determine if there 

On March 9, 2010, the Board adopted the Superintendent’s recommendation 
 
and thereby took action to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services, commencing the 
2010-2011 school year.  Further, the Board directed the Superintendent or his designated 
representative to send notices to all employees possibly affected by virtue of the reduction or 
elimination of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
was cause for not re-employing him or her for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
Certificated Employees.  He served each individual who submitted a Request for Hearing 
with an Accusation, Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing and related materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On March 9, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution number 09-10-17, ordering 
the release of temporary certificated employees from their temporary assignment at the end 
of the 2009 – 2010 school year in order to effectuate the reduction of particular kinds of 
services; further, the Board directed the Superintendent or his designated representative to 
notify the temporary employees of the foregoing.  The District complied and allowed the 
temporary employees to participate in the hearing.  There is no issue regarding the temporary 

In response, Respondents submitted a timely Notice of Defense. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied. 

8. 

7. 

 

 

2

 

 

 
10. 

status of any employee in this District.  As a result, there is no evidence that the District’s 
temporary employees had a right to participate in this proceeding.  Pursuant to Board 
Resolution number 09-10-17, the employment of all temporary certificated employees will 
be terminated at the conclusion of the 2009-2010 school year.1     
 
 
took action to reduce or eliminate the following particular kinds of certificated services 
commencing the 2010-2011 school year: 

On March 9, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 09-10-16 and thereby 

9. 

Particular Kinds of Service 

Full Time Equivalent 

Elementary (K-6) Self Contained Classroom Teaching 
Services 
Specialized Academic Instructor (Special Education 
Teacher) 
Middle School English/Language Arts Teaching 
Services 
Social Worker Services 
Teacher on Special Assignment Services 
Middle School Math Teaching Services 
Middle School Physical Education Teaching Services 
Middle School Music Teaching Services 
Principal Services 
Assistant Principal Services 
Academic Counselor Services 

14 

1.0 

1.0 

1.8 
1.0 
1.0 
.6 
.6 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0 

 
The proposed reductions totaled 25.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. 

 
actual number of final layoff notices to be delivered to its certificated employees. 

The District considered all positively assured attrition in determining the 

 
11.  Glenn Heath, the District’s Director of Human Resources and Professional 

Development (Director), was responsible for implementing the technical aspects of the 
layoff.  The District developed a seniority list for probationary or permanent certificated staff 
that included, among other matters, the name of the certificated employee, first date of paid 
service, assignment, position, credentials, graduate degree(s) area of emphasis, CLAD2, and 
application of tie-breaker criteria. 

                                                 
1  
The District requested an order affirming its Decision releasing temporary employees.  Pursuant to 
Resolution No. 09-10-17, the Board released all temporary employees at the conclusion of the 2009 – 2010 school 
year.  Given the facts in Finding 8, the issue is moot and outside the scope of the jurisdiction (Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955) of this hearing.  
 
 
2  

Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development. 

 

3

12. 

The Director used the seniority list to develop a proposed order of layoff list to 

determine the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being 
reduced.  Then, the District determined whether the least senior employees held credentials 
in another area that would entitle them to “bump” other junior employees.  In determining 
who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of 
reductions and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  Then, 
the District checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they could “bump” 
other employees, considering the District’s “competency” criteria established by the Board in 
its resolution, which states, in pertinent part: 
 
 

“…. 

WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a significant population of 
English  language  learners  with  specialized  educational  needs,  a  specific  and 
compelling  need  exists  to  retain  certificated  employees  who  have  Bilingual  Cross-
cultural  Language  Arts  Development  ("BCLAD")  authorization  to  teach  English 
language learners and the special training and experience that comes therewith; and 

WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a significant population of 
English  language  learners  with  specialized  educational  needs,  a  specific  and 
compelling  need  exists  to  retain  certificated  employees  who  teach  in  the  District's 
bilingual  dual  immersion  program  and  therefore  possess  the  special  training  and 
experience that comes therewith; and 

WHEREAS,  this  Board  has  determined  that  there  is  a  significant  and 
compelling  need  to  retain  teachers  who  have  attained  National  Board  Certification, 
and therefore possess the training and experience that comes therewith; and 

WHEREAS,  Education  Code  section  44955(d)  authorizes  this  Board  to 
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for the above 
reasons, if necessary. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Lemon 

Grove School District: 
 

 
….  

3. 

4. 

That the seniority and qualifications of some of the employees in the services 
being reduced or eliminated are such that they have displacement rights, and 
that no employee will be terminated while a less senior employee is retained 
to  render  a  service  which  the  more  senior  employee  is  both  certificated  and 
competent to render. 

That in observing the statutory rights of a more senior certificated employee 
performing  services  in  a  subject  matter  or  field  identified  by  the  District  for 
reduction  or  elimination  to  displace  a  less  senior  certificated  employee,  the 
more  senior  certificated  employee  may  displace  less  senior  certificated 
employee  if  it  is  established  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  District  that  the  more 

 

4

5. 

….” 

 
14. 

senior certificated employee is both competent and credentialed to render the 
services performed by a less senior certificated employee. 

 That  "competency"  as  described  in  Education  Code  section  44955(b)  and 
referenced  in  paragraph  8  above,  for  the  purposes  of  displacement,  shall 
necessarily include possession of: (1) a valid credential in the relevant subject 
matter area; (2) "highly qualified" status under the No Child Left Behind Act 
in the position to be assumed; (3) if displacing an employee who possesses a 
BCLAD  certification,  possession  of  a  BCLAD  certification;  (4)  special 
training and experience necessary to meet the job requirements of specialized 
positions  (such  as  AVID  teachers,  EDP  lead  teachers,  Dual  Immersion 
teachers);  (5)  if  displacing  an  employee  who  possesses  a  National  Board 
Certification, possession of a National Board Certification; (6) for elementary 
(K-5)  teaching  positions,  or  a  self  contained  6th  grade  classroom  teaching 
position, at least (1) year of experience in the past five (5) years teaching at 
the elementary level or in a sixth grade self contained classroom; and (7) for 
positions involving instruction to 6'n 7'h and/or 8'h grade students, other than a 
self  contained  6'h  grade  classroom,  at  least  one  (1)  year  of  experience  in  the 
position or assignment within the last five (5) years. 

 

 

13. 

Respondent Diane Gibson (Respondent Gibson) does not dispute her status as 

temporary teacher but challenged her seniority date, arguing that it should be August 24, 
2005, her first date of paid service in a probationary position with the District.   

 
She was tenured in 2007 but received a layoff notice, effective the conclusion of the 
2007 – 2008 school year, and thereby acquired recall rights.  During the 2008 – 2009 school 
year, the District offered Respondent a probationary teaching position, and she declined.  She 
returned to the District in a temporary position to replace a teacher on leave during the 
current school year.  Should she return to the District in a probationary position within the 
timeframe allowed by statute, Respondent Gibson will resume her prior seniority date of 
August 24, 2005.3     

Respondents Pablo Chavarin (Respondent Chavarin) and Melvetta Owens  

(Respondent Owens) assert that they were improperly identified for layoff, that they are more 
senior to Respondents Kyle Griffith (Respondent Griffith) and Shari Erlendson (Erlendson) and 
certificated and competent to bump into positions held by Respondents Griffith and Erlendson. 

 
Respondents Griffith’s seniority date is August 14, 2007, and Erlendson first date of paid 

 
service in a probationary position is August 26, 2006.  Each holds a multiple subject credential 
with a supplemental authorization in English (which authorizes teaching English through eighth 
grade) and teaches English Language Arts to middle school students.  Based on its competency 
criteria, the District seeks to retain the foregoing teachers but issued them a precautionary notice.   

                                                 
3  

Education Code section 44956 

5

Respondent Chavarin has a seniority date of August 25, 2004.  He holds the same 
credentials as Respondents Griffith and Erlendson.  He teaches fifth grade.  He received a layoff 
notice as a result of the District’s reduction of elementary teaching services.  He has not taught 
English Language Arts to middle school students one of the last five years.   
 

Respondent Owens has a seniority date of May 22, 2007.  She holds a multiple subject 
credential and administrative services credential.  During the current school year, she teaches 
fourth grade students.  She received a layoff notice as a result of the District’s reduction of 
elementary teaching services.  She has not taught English Language Arts to middle school 
students one of the last five years.     

 
The District established competency criteria for purposes of bumping or displacing more 
junior employees.  There is no evidence that the District’s competency criteria were arbitrary or 
capricious or otherwise invalid.  Neither Respondent Chavarin nor Respondent Owen established 
that he/she satisfied the District’s competency criteria to displace Respondent Chavarin or 
Respondent Erlendson. 

 
15. 

The District retained teachers who have attained National Board Certification 

(NBC) and who possess the training and experience associated therewith (Finding 12) and 
identified Respondent Ellen Davis (Respondent Davis) as the teacher who satisfies this 
competency. 
 
The Assistant Superintendent and Respondent Davis testified regarding NBC, the special 

skills and training acquired by the teacher and the benefits to the District and students thereof. 

 
NBC is acquired from the National Board of Professional Teaching Standards, a national 
organization (composed of 25 board members, most of whom are teachers).  The program’s goal 
is to identify accomplished teachers who are able to perform in an exemplary manner with 
rigorous standards.  The organization’s mission is to improve teaching and learning through the 
training of teachers.  The Assistant Superintendent testified that typically teachers who qualify 
for the certificate spend five years in preparation.  Davis testified that, for her, it was a two- year 
process; among other things, it included performance-based videotapes, taped studies, thesis 
papers and computerized tests in different subject areas for early childhood.  
 

Teachers who attain NBC are highly accomplished, have satisfied high, rigorous 

standards and are considered “the core of the profession.”  They learn effective 
methods/strategies “for raising achievement of at-risk students” different from those employed 
by teachers who do not hold the certificate.  NBC teachers are able to accelerate learning among 
students in low performing schools. 
 
 
issuance of additional credentials on the basis of NBC, including the CLAD, English to speakers 
of other languages, pupil personnel services and librarian services. 
 

Finally, the State of California Commission on Teacher Credentialing authorizes the 

 

6

Davis has a seniority date of August 25, 2004, holds a clear multiple subject credential 

and is assigned to teach first grade in a low performing school.  She obtained NBC in 2005.  She 
has 16 years of teaching experience, 10 years in Florida and most recently six years in California.   

 
The District established a need for teachers who have NBC and the experience associated 
therewith.  Davis holds NBC and five years teaching experience thereafter.  There is no evidence 
that any more senior teacher satisfies this competency.   

 
Given the facts in Finding 15, the District properly retained Respondent Davis. 
 
16. 

Between the employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the 

same date, the Board determined their order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the 
District and the students.  The Board adopted specific criteria and provided clear instructions 
for implementation of the criteria.  The order of termination was based on the needs of the 
District and its students.   
 

17. 

The services that the District proposed to reduce were “particular kinds of 

services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  

 
18. 

The District’s reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services 
 
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
of the District as determined by the Board.  

 
19.  No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform 

 
any services that any Respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  

2. 

1. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
 
Grove School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause for the 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the Lemon 

3. 

 

7

reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to the welfare of 
the schools and the pupils thereof.  
 

4. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he/she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior 
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Lacy vs. 
Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 469.)  
 

5. 

The District has the discretion to determine whether teachers are certificated 
and competent to hold the position for which said teachers have been skipped and retained.  
(King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016)  Junior teachers may 
be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or 
capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High 
School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 
v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831)  
 
 
perform a service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
the law and therefore rejected. 
 

All arguments not addressed herein are not supported by the evidence and/or 

No employee with less seniority than any Respondent is being retained to 

6. 

7. 

The Accusation served on Respondents listed on Amended Exhibit “A” is sustained.  

The Accusation against any Respondents not listed on Amended Exhbit “A” is dismissed. 
Notice shall be given to Respondents before May 15, 2010 that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services. 

 
ORDER 
 

 

8

 
 
DATED: _________________________ 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

_______________________________________ 
VALLERA J. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

LEMON GROVE SCHOOL DISTRICT 

RESPONDENTS 

EXHIBIT “A” 

LAST 
ALIANELLI 

ANDREEN 

FIRST 

KRISTIN 

KEVIN 

BARGENQUAST  JESSICA 

SENIORITY 
DATE 
8/22/2001 

N/A 

8/14/2007 

N/A (20%) 

10/3/2003 

8/21/2002 

8/25/2004 

8/25/2004 

8/16/2006 

8/21/2003 

N/A 

8/14/2007 

8/14/2008 

N/A 

8/25/2004 

8/14/2007 

8/1/2007 

N/A (20%) 

8/25/2004 

8/22/2001 

11/12/2001 

N/A 

8/22/2001 

8/16/2006 

8/14/2007 

8/25/2004 

BRAZZEL 

BRAZZEL 

CARTER 

CHAVARIN 

DAVIS 

ERLENDSON 

FRI PP 

GIBSON 

GRIFFITH 

KAZAOKA 

KREMER 

LEWIS 

MENIKOFF 

MOSS 

MURILLO 

MURILLO 

NOBLE 

OTFINOSKI 

OWENS 

PILIGIAN 

REED 

SANA 

SILVERIO 

STACK 

WARREN 

KATHLEEN 

PAUL 

PAUL 

PABLO 

ELLEN 

SHARI 

MICHELLE 

DIANE 

KYLE 

CRAIG 

KAITLIN 

KELLIE 

'STACY 

AMBLER 

EDNA 

EDNA 

STEVEN 

WILLIAM 

CYNTHIA 

BRENDA 

SILVIA 

MICHELLE 

9

MELVETTA 

8/25/2004 

RHOADES 

KRISTINA. 

TRISHA 

10/27/2004 

ADRIANNE 

8/14/2007 

LACSAMANA 

FRANCISCO 

8/14/2007 

 

 

LEMON GROVE SCHOOL DISTRICT 

Respondents 

AMENDED EXHIBIT “A” 

 

LAST 
ALIANELLI 

FIRST 

KRISTIN 

BARGENQUAST  JESSICA 

BRAZZEL 

CARTER 

PAUL 

KATHLEEN 

CHAVARIN 

PABLO 

FARNSWORTH 

SUSAN 

FEINER 

FRIPP 

KAZAOKA 

LEFKOWITZ 

LEWIS 

MENIKOFF 

MOUDRY 

MURILLO 

NOBLE 

OTFINOSKI 

OWENS 

RHOADES 

SCHEN 

SILVERIO 

STACK 

LORI 

MICHELLE 

CRAIG 

ROBYN 

KELLIE 

'STACY 

TERESA 

EDNA 

STEVEN 

WILLIAM 

MELVETTA 

KRISTINA. 

ANNA 

MICHELLE 

TRISHA 

10

 

 

 

