BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
HACIENDA LA PUENTE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In the Matter of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE HACIENDA  
LA PUENTE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
  
                                           Respondents. 

 
OAH No. 2010031158 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost, by James B. Fernow and Maggy M. Athanasious, 

Rothner, Segall, Greenstone & Leheny and Law Offices of Richard A. Love, by 

David B. Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 29 and May 3, 2010, at the district 
office of the Hacienda La Puente Unified School District, Hacienda Heights, California. 
 
 
Attorneys at Law, represented the Hacienda La Puente Unified School District (District). 
 
 
Kathleen M. Erskine, Attorney at Law, represented Respondent teachers except for Edward 
Monteilh.  Respondent Edward Monteilh was present and represented himself. 
 
 
Evidence was received by way of stipulation, testimony and documents.  When the 
hearing was not completed as of the end of April 29, 2010, the first and only day originally 
scheduled for hearing, all parties made a motion to continue the hearing with the 
understanding that, under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (e), various statutory 
dates and deadlines would be extended.  The motion was granted and the hearing was 
continued to May 3, 2010.  As a result, the statutory dates and deadlines are extended by four 
days. 
 
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the record was left open for briefs, which were 
received May 10, 2010, and marked for identification as follows:  District’s letter brief, 
Exhibit 15; Respondents’ letter brief, Exhibit O, and Respondent Monteilhs’ email, Exhibit 
P.  The record was closed and the matter was submitted on May 10, 2010. 
 
 
 
 

1 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
The Governing Board of the District determined to reduce or discontinue particular 
kinds of services provided by certificated teachers for budgetary reasons.  The decision was 
not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed 
to be reduced or eliminated.   
 
 
review of credentials and seniority.  The selection process was in accordance with the 
requirements of the Education Code, except as set forth below.  Therefore, some Accusations 
will be dismissed and the Board may proceed as indicated herein. 
 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 

3.  Before March 15, 2010, the District served on 118 teachers, including 

2.  William F. Roberts, IV (Roberts), is the Assistant Superintendent of Human 

Jurisdiction and Parties
 
 
1.  The District provides educational services for minors in schools including grades 
K-12 and for adults in two distinct areas: corrections and adult education.  This proceeding 
relates to the District’s approximately 155 certificated employees in permanent or 
probationary positions in corrections and adult education. 
 
 
Resources of the District.  Cynthia Parulan-Colfer (Parulan-Colfer) is the Associate 
Superintendent of Adult and Continuing Education.  Their actions were taken in those 
official capacities.  Parulan-Colfer was primarily responsible for implementation of the 
technical aspects of the layoff. 
 
 
Respondents, by personal service and/or certified mail, a written notice (notice) that it had 
been recommended that notice be given to them pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 
and 44955 that their services would not be required for the next school year.  Each notice set 
forth the reasons for the recommendation and noted that the Board had passed a Resolution 
reducing the certificated staff by 98.38 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.   
 
 
programs, referred to as Respondents, submitted timely written requests for a hearing to 
determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.   
 
 
24, 2010, the District served the Respondents by certified mail with an Accusation along 
with required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense.   
 
 
list of teachers who: were served with the notice; requested a hearing; were served with an 

5.  Roberts made and filed Accusations against each of the Respondents.  On March 

4.  Approximately 83 certificated employees in the corrections and adult education 

6.  Notices of Defense were served on the District by 73 Respondents.  Exhibit 10 is a 

2 

8.  Respondents in this proceeding are probationary and permanent certificated 

Accusation; and submitted a Notice of Defense.  Also listed is the amount of FTE affected 
for each teacher listed. 
 
7.  Attachment A is incorporated by reference.  The 83 names originally listed and 
 
numbered are teachers whom the District served with notices.  Those who did not return a 
Notice of Defense have the designation “NNOD.”  The District waived objection to inclusion 
in the proceedings of teachers who had filed a Request for Hearing but had not filed a Notice 
of Defense.  Finally, all Respondents and teachers whose names have the designation “*” 
appeared at the hearing, although not necessarily for the entire hearing. 
 
 
employees of the District. 
 
 
9.  The District objected to the inclusion on the proceeding of teachers who were 
present but had not submitted a Request for Hearing: Mel Kleven and Robert West.  The 
objection was sustained pursuant to the language of Education Code section 44949, 
subdivision (b), that a teacher who fails to submit a Request for Hearing has waived the right 
to a hearing.  Also listed on Attachment A are two teachers who were working in temporary 
positions: Jeffrey Johansen and Tarrie McBride.  The evidence established that they were 
employed in temporary positions and were sent notices that they were being released from 
those positions.  Although the District served them with notices “in an abundance of caution” 
if they claimed rights as a probationary or permanent employee; no such claims were raised.  
Temporary employees who are properly classified as such do not hold the right to participate 
in proceedings of this type under the Education Code. 
 
The Governing Board and the Lay Off Resolution
 
 
10.  On February 10, 2010, the Governing Board of the District (Board) was given 
notice of the Superintendent’s recommendation that 98.38 FTE employees be given notice 
that their services would not be required for the next school year and stating the reasons 
therefore.  Board Resolution number 2009/10-21 was adopted that day (Resolution) and 
proposed a layoff of 98.38 FTE certificated employees and provided for the reduction or 
elimination of the particular kinds of services set forth in Attachment B, incorporated herein 
by reference. 
 
 
seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.   
 
12.  The Resolution also indicated that certain employees would be retained 
 
regardless of seniority and it set forth three definitions of competency to be used if a more 
senior employee was to displace, or bump, a less senior employee from their position.  As 
stated in the Resolution, Exhibit 1: 
 

11.  The Resolution also established tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative 

3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

“To teach as an adult school teacher, an employee must have all 

“To teach as a K-12 classroom teacher, home teacher, or teacher in an 

“To teach as an adult school teacher, an employee must have teaching 

13.  The first phrase quoted above presents an issue, as it appears to supply 

“BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that it will be necessary to retain the services 

 
of certificated employees in the 2010-2011 school year regardless of seniority, who possess 
qualifications needed for the following programs: 
 
 
“As to any employee who seeks to move into a position requiring certification 
qualifications held by a less-senior certificated employee, the following criteria must be met 
to determine competency for the position: 
 
 
alternative or community day school, an employee must have teaching experience in the 
subject area and grade level for at least one (1) year within the last ten (10) years. 
 
 
experience in the subject area and with the targeted student population (i.e., adults with 
disabilities, parents together with infants/toddlers) for at least one (1) year within the last ten 
(10) years. 
 
 
appropriate certifications, as determined by the District and state law, to hold the position 
(e.g., ASE Certification (automotive), EL Certification, CLAD, registered nursing license).” 
 
 
justification for the District to skip over certain employees with less seniority to teach certain 
programs.  Although the phrase is written as if those programs will be listed in the 
Resolution itself (to follow the colon at the end of the phrase), no programs are listed.  
However, the District is not required to set forth its skipping scenarios in writing.  In 
testimony, the District indicated it wanted to skip Mark Gunzelman due to his knowledge 
and use of, and certification in American Sign Language which he uses to teach ABE (Adult 
Basic Education) and ASE (High School Diploma) to students who are hearing impaired.  
(See position number 34 in Exhibits 11 and 14.)  The District skipped Sharon Anderson due 
to her license as a Registered Nurse (RN) and its need, discussed more fully in Finding 34.   
 
 
competency criteria to be met by a more senior employee whose position is being eliminated 
and who seeks to displace, or bump into the position of, a less senior employee.  In Exhibits 
11, 12 and 14 the District sets out its understanding of the bumping that would take place, 
including identifying some of the instances wherein the competency criteria of the 
Resolution are implicated.  More specifically, the District claims the following Respondents, 
who may have the certifications necessary to bump a more-junior employee, do not meet the 
competency criteria1: Karla Ruano-Ramirez, Danny Masonovich and Joanna Belle Empeno.  
                                                 
1 Three other teachers were so listed: William Zeko, is not a Respondent in this 
 
matter; Dennis Mulkey, whose listing was modified after he put in for retirement; and Diane 
Hitchcock, whose listing was modified based on the evidence to remove the competency 
issue.   

14.  The second phrase and the three sentences following it, quoted above, establish 

4 

15.  Parulan-Colfer testified that the Resolution was required by the District’s fiscal 

As noted in more detail below (Findings 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 41 and 43), 
several additional Respondents claim that they are certificated and competent to bump 
others, or that others are not competent to bump them. 
 
 
crisis and need to reduce services to balance its budget for the welfare of the District and its  
students.  The District provides educational services through its corrections division in seven 
facilities supervised by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Office under an annual contract 
with Los Angeles County with a value of between $8.5 and $10 million per year.  It has done 
so for many years.  Based on a pending lawsuit, the District has determined that any future 
contract must include a provision that it be indemnified.  No such provision has been offered 
in the ongoing negotiations for a contract for next year.  The District cannot assure that it will 
have a contract to provide correctional education next year, and it decided that it must lay off 
all of its certificated employees in the corrections division (67 FTE).  The adult education 
program provides over 300 courses to over 22,000 students in 35 locations.  Due to 
anticipated budget cuts of $5 million in the adult education program for school year 2010-
2011, the District would experience a further budget shortfall and has laid off certificated 
employees in that program (31.38 FTE). 
 
 
16.  The decision to reduce or eliminate services was not related to the capabilities 
and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated. 
 
The Seniority List and the Lay Offs
 
 
(first date of paid service), current assignments and credentials.  There is one seniority list 
combining teachers in the adult education and corrections division. 
 
 
senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced.  The District 
claims that it was not necessary to apply the tie-breaker criteria of the Resolution because 
employees with the same seniority dates were being laid off. 
 

 
18.  The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the least 

17.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority dates 

19.  Parulan-Colfer testified to some of the details of implementing the lay off.  For 

example, she explained that in the adult education and corrections division, the District 
considers one FTE to be the equivalent of a teacher providing 30 hours of instruction per 
week.  A teacher gains permanency by working at least 60 percent of one FTE (or 18 hours 
per week) for at least 75 percent of a school year, for two years in a probationary status.  
Education Code section 44929.25 is the legal basis supporting this practice.  To determine 
the number of FTEs to be reduced or eliminated by the lay off, the number of hours of 
instruction for each particular kind of service affected was totaled and then divided by 30.  
She then examined the seniority list to determine which teachers held the positions being 
reduced or eliminated.  Further complicating the task is that many teachers in the adult 
education and corrections division have more than one assignment and there are fractional 

5 

22.  Her work was complicated and arduous.  Parulan-Colfer estimated she spent 

FTEs for each position.  Also, teachers may gain permanency at different times for their 
different positions. 
 
20.  The District then determined whether the least senior affected employees held 
 
credentials in another area and were entitled to displace, or “bump,” other employees.  In 
determining who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District counted the 
number of reductions not covered by the known vacancies, and determined the impact on 
incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  The District then checked the credentials of 
affected individuals and whether they could “bump” other employees, and also referred to 
the competency criteria in the Resolution.  In Exhibit 11, later modified in Exhibit 14, the 
District identified the teachers whose positions were affected by the layoff.  Exhibits 11 and 
14, as well as Exhibit 12, note when bumping would occur, including portions of an FTE 
affected. 
 
21.  In performing her analysis, Parulan-Colfer was also aware that the District had 
 
been notified by the Los Angeles County Office of Education that numerous teachers were 
considered to be “missassigned” due to their failure to have the proper authorization(s) to 
teach particular courses (see Exhibit 13).   
 
 
between 200 and 400 hours on this entire process. 
 
 
could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s 
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, 
and were a proper exercise of its discretion.  The decisions were based on the welfare of the 
District and its students.  
 
 
of services that the Board directed be reduced or discontinued.  No junior certificated 
employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services which a more senior employee is 
certificated and competent to render. 
 
Lay Off implementation, Individual Respondents, Respondents’ Contentions and Related 
Evidence
 
 
corrections program for the position/course described as “Family/Family Members 
Interaction/Personal Relationships.”2  Originally, the District laid off three more junior 
employees who totaled 2.13 FTE; identified Diane Hitchcock as the last 1.0 FTE affected; 
                                                 
2 During the hearing, the ALJ added to Exhibit 11 by placing numbers next to the 64 
 
positions listed.  This particular position is number 32.  Also during the hearing, the District 
modified its lay off implementation as to some of these positions (see Exhibit 14), including 
position number 32.   

24.  The District identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds 

23.  The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services that 

25.  One example of the complexity of the process is the reduction of 3.13 FTE in the 

6 

27.  Theresa MacAller:  Based on evidence supplied by MacAller that she was not 

determined she could not bump a more junior teacher (Edward Monteilh, who teaches 
Parenting Techniques in the adult education program) due to the competency criteria in the 
Resolution requiring one year of teaching the same student population within the last ten 
years (the potential for bumping was for 0.34 FTE); and issued a “precautionary notice” to 
Edward Monteilh to the extent of 0.34 FTE.  (Monteilh’s present assignment is 0.47 FTE for 
Parenting Techniques and 0.53 FTE for Job Readiness/Job Skills Training, both in the adult 
education program.)  Parulan-Colfer testified that Hitchcock, who also has a credential to 
teach the handicapped, could not bump into Howard Chudler’s position as a teacher on 
special assignment serving a program for adults with disabilities because of the student 
population-one year/ten years competency criterion in the Resolution.  During the hearing, 
Hitchcock’s testimony and documents (Exhibit N) established that she met another 
competency criterion of the Resolution based on experience teaching parenting techniques in 
the District as well as at another school district.  The District revised its bumping chart to 
indicate that she would bump 0.34 FTE of Monteilh’s Parenting Techniques position (see 
Exhibit 14, position number 32).   
 
 
26.  There were other examples of partial bumping, several bumps related to one 
position and precautionary notices because the District was unsure if it would be permitted to 
skip employees or if its competency criteria in the Resolution would be upheld.  Further, 
individual Respondents raised issues. 
 
 
able to be bumped by Nicholas Giglio, the District modified the bumping chart accordingly 
(Exhibits 11 and 14, position number 2).   
 
 
competent to bump Monteihl, and the District modified the bumping chart accordingly 
(Exhibits 11 and 14, positions number 32 and 56).  The evidence did not support Hitchcock’s 
contention that she was credentialed and competent to teach the course taught by Peggy 
Hawthorne. 
 
29.  Peter Sill:  Sill presently teaches ABE (Adult Basic Education) to adults with 
 
disabilities.  In Exhibits 11 and 14, he is bumped 0.7 FTE by Nicholas Giglio for position 
number 2 and bumped 0.3 FTE by Jerilynn Delmonico for position number 64.  However, 
Parulan-Colfer testified that she was “not aware” of any experience Giglio had teaching 
students with disabilities.  On this record, there was insufficient evidence to support the 
District’s position that Giglio meets the competency criterion in the Resolution that he taught 
this student population for one year within the last ten years and can bump Sill.  As the 
District is the proponent of both the bump and the competency criteria, it should bear the 
burden of producing sufficient supporting evidence.  As it has not, the Accusation as to 0.7 
FTE of Sill must be dismissed.   
 
 
Language) for her 1.0 FTE, yet contends she improperly appears on the lay off 
implementation lists under the designation ABE/ASE (Adult Secondary Education, also 

30.  Dixie Gleason:  Gleason is presently assigned to teach ESL (English as a Second 

28.  Diane Hitchcock:  The evidence supported Hitchcock’s contention that she was 

7 

31.  Karla Ruano-Ramirez:  The present assignments of Ruano-Ramirez fall into three 

referred to as High School Diploma)  (Exhibits 11 and 14, position number 4).  This 
placement is proper, as her layoff is due to her being bumped by Rodger Smith, who holds a 
present assignment in ABE/ASE in a position that is being eliminated, and because Smith is 
more senior than Gleason and is certificated and competent to teach her ESL assignment. 
 
 
positions on Exhibits 11 and 14.  There is no issue raised as to her lay off for the first two: 
position number 20 is her 0.4 FTE in Directory Assistance Operator, and position number 25 
is her 0.4 FTE in Job Skills Training.  However, in position number 24, her 0.2 FTE in 
Computer Operator-Introduction, the District considered that she may bump Sandip 
Sengupta, who teaches computer network and repair for 1.0 FTE, or Richard Manriquez, 
who teaches web design and computer graphics for 0.6 FTE.  However, the District raised 
the issue of whether Ruano-Ramirez meets the subject area and certification competency 
criteria in the Resolution.  The evidence established that Ruano-Ramirez is not competent to 
bump Sengupta.  Although a portion of the course she teaches includes computer 
networking, she does not have extensive subject area experience similar to Sengupta and 
does not possess an A+ Certification in computer network and repair.  Sengupta has the 
experience and the certification and is therefore able to offer the certification to successful 
students.  The A+ Certification is part of the course description and is an important factor to 
employment in the field of computer network and repair.  The evidence established that 
Ruano-Ramirez is not competent to bump Manriquez.  Although a portion of the course she 
teaches includes web design and computer graphics, she does not have extensive subject area 
experience similar to Manriquez.  Based on his years of commercial experience and teaching 
the subject, Manriquez is able to provide a level of expertise and instruction that is part of the 
course description and is an important factor to employment in the field of web design and 
computer graphics.  As a result, the District may retain Sengupta and Manriquez for this 
position.  (Note that the remainder of Manriquez assignment, 0.4 FTE in Introduction to 
Computers and Computer Applications, is eliminated also under position number 24 when he 
is bumped by Colleen Barela.) 
 
 
32.  Olga Lee:  Lee is listed under position number 24, Computer Operator-
Introduction (Exhibits 11 and 14) as being bumped for 0.6 FTE by Colleen Barela.  Lee 
teaches a student population of senior citizens, often in a senior center or other similar 
facility.  She contends that Barela has not taught to the same student population and is 
therefore not competent to bump her.  Barela may bump Lee, as there was sufficient 
evidence that Barela may teach to seniors, just not in a senior center environment.   
 
 
under position number 7 and as bumping Urszula Oleksyn for 0.34 FTE under position 
number 34.  Position number 7 is designated as ABE/ASE/ESL.  The precautionary notice 
given to Gomez under position number 7 must be modified from 0.4 FTE to 0.06 FTE, based 
on the testimony of Parulan-Colfer.  However, the precautionary notice is not necessary 
because the teacher who may bump Gomez, Roxana Carmicheal, does not possess the 
required EL certification and is therefore not certificated and competent for the ESL position 
under the Resolution’s competency criterion concerning proper certification.  Carmichael, 

33.  Brenda Gomez:  Gomez is listed as receiving a precautionary notice for 0.4 FTE 

8 

34.  Harry Nelson:  Nelson is identified as holding one of the 2.0 FTE reductions for 

however, does have the proper credential and certifications to teach ABE and ASE.  As to 
ABE and ASE, the bumping set forth in Exhibit 14 is correct and, as a result, Gomez is 
bumped to the extent of 0.43 FTE of her ABE/ASE position.  However, she in turn bumps 
0.33 FTE of Urszula Oleksyn.  Also, under position number 34, Gomez bumps Oleksyn for 
0.34 FTE.  
 
 
Psychiatric Technician 1 and 2.  The District proposes to skip Sharon Anderson, who is more 
junior to Nelson, due to her RN license.  Nelson does not have an RN license.  The District 
wants to maintain maximum flexibility by assuring that its remaining teachers in this position 
have an RN license, so that it may continue using those clinical facilities that require the 
teacher who is supervising students to be an RN.  More specifically, in District courses for 
students to become licensed vocational nurses and psychiatric technicians, certain health 
facilities, such as Kaiser Downey, in which students perform clinical duties, require students 
to be supervised by an RN.  Nelson testified that the clinical facilities with which he has had 
contact, such as Patton State Hospital and Lanterman Developmental Center, do not have 
such requirements.  Under these circumstances, the District may skip Anderson and lay off 
Nelson.  Nelson’s contention that he was also being bumped by Joanna Belle Empeno, 
Steven Vincent and Laurie Haight is not supported by the evidence.  To the contrary, the 
evidence suggested that, if the competency criteria were not upheld, he would bump 
Empeno.  Therefore, Nelson’s reasons why he should not be bumped by them are irrelevant. 
 
 
35.  Donna Owens:  Owens teaches 1.0 FTE of Animal Pet Groomer-Animal 
Caretaker in the adult education program (position number 37).  Of this, 0.53 FTE is to be 
reduced.  Debbie Icenogle teaches 1.0 FTE of Animal Attendant-Pet Groomer in the 
corrections program (position number 8), all of which is being laid off.  The District 
contends that Icenogle would bump the remaining 0.47 FTE of Owens.  Owens contends that 
the course as taught in the corrections program covers significantly fewer subjects and that 
the teacher, Icenogle, would not be competent in the more expanded and comprehensive 
subject areas included in the adult education course.  A comparison of the course outlines 
(Exhibit H) reveals that: while it is true that the adult education course includes more 
coverage of subjects such as health, hygiene, first aid and pet sitting, the remaining subjects 
are covered to some degree in both courses; and the most substantial course module in both 
courses is devoted to grooming.  The evidence did not support Owens’ contention that 
Icenogle was not competent to teach the adult education course. 
 
 
September 9, 1996.  The same seniority date is assigned to Dixie Gleason, who is number 69 
on the seniority list.  No one else has that seniority date.  Gates contends that she worked 
prior to that date and should have higher seniority.  The District replied that, as both Gates 
and Dixon are being laid off, there is no reason to apply tie-breaking criteria and the issue is 
essentially one for order of rehire.  As noted in Conclusion 14, below, the statute requires the 
District to break ties and does not allow the District to avoid it because all tied employees are 
being laid off anyway.  The District shall be ordered to apply the tie break criteria to Gates, 

36.  Ruth Gates:  Gates is number 68 on the seniority list, with a seniority date of 

9 

38.  K-12 Credentials:  Several Respondents possess the types of credentials that 

37.  Edward Monteilh:  Monteilh teaches in the adult education program as follows: 

Gleason and any other employees who share the same seniority date with any other 
employees. 
 
 
0.47 FTE in Effective Parenting Techniques and 0.53 FTE in Career Prep/Job Skills.  He 
testified to the significant skills and experience he brings to the District and its students and 
their families.  He was originally identified for layoff of his 0.53 FTE in Career Prep/Job 
Skills under position number 47 (Exhibit 11) and other positions, some involving bumping.  
After modification of the layoff implementation and bumping analysis in Exhibit 14, he is 
being laid off from his 0.47 FTE in Effective Parenting Techniques as follows: under 
position number 32, Personal Relationships, he is bumped for 0.34 FTE; and under position 
number 56, Effective Parenting Techniques, he is bumped for 0.13 FTE. 
 
 
would permit them to teach or serve in a K-12 program.  Among them are: Theresa 
MacAller; Brenda Gomez; Ruth Gates; Delinda Otto; Suzanne Moore; Lynn Grolsch; Dennis 
Lazar; and Darryl Ross.  In addition, Moore has a credential for K-12 administration.  They 
contend that they should be able to move into the District’s K-12 division. 
 
 
division.  There are different seniority lists; the salary scales are different; education for 
students in the K-12 division is compulsory while education services in the adult education 
and corrections division is funded by categorical funding and contracts and is based on the 
needs of the District and the community.  Students in the K-12 division are required to take 
state testing.  Some adult education and corrections division courses offer testing for certain 
certifications.3  Each division has a separate hiring process.  The procedures whereby FTEs 
are determined are different based upon the nature of the teaching services provided in each 
division.  According to the collective bargaining agreement, teachers who want to transfer 
from the adult education and corrections division into the K-12 division are entitled to be 
placed on a transfer list which is distributed to the principals of the schools in the K-12 
division, and when those principals have vacancies they are required to offer interviews to 
those on the transfer list.  (The transfer list also contains names of other K-12 teachers who 
want to transfer to another school.)  Although teachers on the transfer list must be 
interviewed if they express a desire to be considered for a vacancy, there is no guarantee that 
they will be hired for the vacancy, as such hiring is a competitive process.  In fact, one 
Respondent testified that she is on the transfer list and has been interviewed for six openings, 
but has not been made an offer for any.  Further, if a permanent teacher from one division is 
hired in another division, completes their probationary service and is about to become 
permanent in the second division, they are required to chose only one division in which to 

39.  The District’s K-12 division is separate from the adult education and corrections 

                                                 
3 Examples are an A+ Certification for computer networking and repair; an ASE 
 
certification for automobile mechanics; and a smog technician certification from the Bureau 
of Automotive Repair. 
 

10 

42.  For the reasons set forth in the Conclusions, the District’s competency criteria are 

40.  There was sufficient evidence to establish that the K-12 division is separate from 

remain a permanent teacher.  Teachers cannot be permanent in both divisions at the same 
time.  Education Code section 44929.26 is the legal basis supporting this practice.  
 
 
the adult education and corrections division, and that teachers facing lay off from the adult 
education and corrections division could not transfer to, or bump, teachers from the K-12 
division.  The contention that they can and should bump into positions in the District’s K-12 
program is not supported by the facts or the law. 
 
 
41.  Precautionary Notices Related to Competency Criteria and Skipping:  Several 
Respondents were provided with notices that the District characterizes as “precautionary,” 
due to its concern that, if the competency criteria in the Resolution are not upheld by the 
ALJ, several proposed bumps would be affected and those employees may therefore need to 
be laid off.  Among them are: Danny Masanovich; Karla Ruano-Ramirez; Suzanne Moore; 
Brenda Gomez; Paul Flor; Peter Sill; Richard Manriquez; Allen Rojas; Douglas Fore; Sandip 
Sengupta; and Joanna Belle Empeno (see Exhibits 11 and 12).  Some of these precautionary 
notices were not for full FTEs.  Precautionary notices were also issued to Mark Gunzelman 
and Sharon Anderson because, if the District’s justifications for skipping them were not 
upheld by the ALJ, these junior employees may need to be laid off.   
 
 
upheld, as well as the skipping of Gunzelman and Anderson. 
 
 
Respondents testified to their experience and special skills and contend that they should be 
retained, including: Brenda Gomez (regarding distance learning, parenting techniques and 
other experience and special skills); Paul Flor (regarding distance learning, ESL, High 
School Diploma and other experience and special skills); Olga Lee (regarding teaching 
computer courses to senior citizens); and Donna Owens (animal caretaker).  However, the 
applicable law does not provide that a teacher can force the District to skip them based on 
their special training and experience.  Other Respondents, such as Robert Marsh, Donna 
Owens, Jose Reyes and Olga Lee, argued that some of their colleagues lacked the 
competence to teach certain subject areas or student populations.  These contentions are not 
supported by the law and/or the facts and are rejected.  
 
44.  Evidence That Resulted in Modification of the Layoff and Bumping 
 
Implementation:  As noted more specifically on the record and above, based on evidence 
presented during the hearing the District reconsidered aspects of its layoff implementation 
and bumping analysis.  The testimony of Parulan-Colfer and Exhibit 14 address those 
modifications.  Based thereon, the Accusations against certain Respondents should be 
dismissed and, as to other Respondents should be modified as to the amount of FTE affected, 
including: Paul Flor, in an amount of FTE to be determined (based upon positions number 2, 
4 and 7 and because the competency criteria were upheld); Suzanne Moore, 1.0 FTE (based 
upon position number 7 and because the competency criteria were upheld); Theresa 
MacAller, now 0.4 FTE (based upon positions number 2 and 7); Brenda Gomez, in an 

43.  Claims of Special Skills, or Lack of Another Teacher’s Competence : Several 

11 

amount of FTE to be determined (based upon positions number 2, 5, 7 and 34 and because 
the competency criteria were upheld); Peter Sill, now 0.7 FTE (based upon positions number 
2 and 4); Sandip Sengupta (based upon position number 24 and because the competency 
criteria were upheld); Richard Manriquez, to the extent of 0.6 FTE (based upon position 
number 24 and because the competency criteria were upheld); Diane Hitchcock, in an 
amount of FTE to be determined (based upon positions number 32 and 56 and because the 
competency criteria were upheld); Douglas Fore, 1.0 FTE (based upon position number 21 
and because the competency criteria were upheld); Allen Rojas, 1.0 FTE (based upon 
position number 31 and because the competency criteria were upheld); Mark Gunzelman and 
Sharon Anderson due to skipping; and any others as supported by the evidence. 
 
 
including improper issuance of precautionary notices and failure to consider the K-12 
credentials of some Respondents and whether those Respondents met the competency 
criterion of the Resolution as entitling them to transfer into the K-12 program.  Except as 
specifically set forth herein, these contentions were not supported by sufficient evidence or 
the law and, therefore, are rejected.  
 
 

45.  Respondents raised several additional contentions in their brief (Exhibit O), 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing 

1.  Education Code4 section 44949, subdivision (a), states in pertinent part: 

 
2.  Section 44955 provides, in pertinent part:   

 
 
 
 
board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year for the reasons 
specified in Section 44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given written 
notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been 
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.”  
 
 
 
“(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes other 
 
than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, 
and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as 
specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
 
later than the beginning of the following school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the 
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these 
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing 
board may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the 
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the 
school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee 
                                                 
 

“(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not 

4 All citations are to the Education Code unless otherwise indicated. 

12 

 

“(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 

“As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 

“The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner 

“(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a 

may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or 
any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.  
  
 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of 
needs of the district and the students thereof. . . . 
  
 
“(c)  . . . [S]ervices of such employees shall be shall be terminated in the reverse order 
in which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with Sections 44844 
and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices 
and a right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed 
reemployed for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications 
entitle them to render. . . .  
 
 
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons:  
 
 
course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee has special training and 
experience necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which others with more 
seniority do not possess.” 
 
 
and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and 44945 were met.  (Factual 
Findings 1 through 8.) 
  
 
4.  A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, subdivision 
(b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, thereafter, be 
performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered 
services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to deal with 
the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (Rutherford) (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 
167, 178-179.)  
 
 
or discontinue particular kinds of services, which is not open to second-guessing in this 
proceeding.  (Rutherford, supra.)  Such policy-making decisions are not subject to arguments 
as to the wisdom of their enactment, their necessity, or the motivations for the decisions.  
(California Teachers; Assn. v. Huff (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.)  Such decisions and 
action must be reasonable under the circumstances, with the understanding that “such a 
standard may permit a difference of opinion.”  (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. 
Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831 (Santa Clara).)  

5.  Boards of education hold significant discretion in determining the need to reduce 

3.  Sections 44949 and 44955 establish jurisdiction for this proceeding.   The notice 

13 

7.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

  
 
6.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to 
the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  students 
within the meaning of section 44949. 
 
 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior teachers may be 
given retention priority over senior teachers, or “skipped,” if the junior teachers possess 
superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack, which are necessary 
to teach a specific course or course of study.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School 
District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing 
Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) 
 
 
8.  The language of the Resolution and the evidence of the District’s process in 
determining which teacher might bump another and which teachers it would skip sufficiently 
follows the statutory language concerning skipping and bumping rights.  The District skipped 
Gunzelman due to his special credential, training and experience in the use and teaching of 
American Sign Language.  The District skipped Anderson due to her licensure as a 
Registered Nurse (RN), which it stated was necessary for use in its courses for licensed 
vocational nurses and psychiatric technicians because certain health facilities, such as Kaiser 
Downey, in which students performed clinical duties, required students to be supervised by 
an RN.  (See position number 43 in Exhibit 11.)   
 
 
troublesome, is not fatal.  Numerous cases stand for the proposition that the process of 
implementing layoffs is a very flexible one and that school districts retain great flexibility in 
carrying out the process. (Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 
Cal.App.3d 796)  In fact, school districts have been permitted to present at hearing, for the 
first time, evidence of the type of tie-breaking that might apply.  (Zalac v. Governing Bd. of 
Ferndale Unified School Dist. (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838; Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School 
Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127.)  “Nonsubstantive procedural errors” under section 44949, 
subdivision (c), are not cause for dismissing the charges.  Further, Evidence Code section 
664 establishes the presumption that the action or official duties of a public entity, such as a 
school district or its governing board, have been regularly performed. 
 
10.  The contention of various Respondents that their special training, experience and 
 
skills should cause the Department to skip them in this proceeding is not supported by law.  
This “skipping” is a process, under section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), wherein a school 
district may choose to demonstrate a specific need and that an employee has the special 
training and experience to meet that need.  However, the statute does not require a school 
district to do so.  Rather, it is within the school district’s discretion to determine if it wishes 

9.  The incomplete language of the Resolution concerning skipping, although 

14 

“Hence, from these authorities we conclude that a board’s definition of competency is 

11.  The District’s use of bumping competency criteria for bumping is similar to Duax 

the lay off process to skip over an employee.  The District adequately described the special 
skills and training upon which it relied.   
 
 
v. Kern Community College Dist. (Duax) (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 559-560, wherein the 
board of trustees had adopted by resolution a standard of competency.  “That resolution 
provided that an employee must have rendered a service or taught in a specific subject area 
the equivalent of one year . . . (i.e., one year in the ten years preceding the adoption of the 
resolution) to be considered competent to render a service for purposes of ‘bumping’ a junior 
employee.”  The appellate court considered the question whether the criteria were reasonable 
and valid.  The court cited Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, at p. 299, 
and King v. Berkeley Unified School Dist. (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016, at p. 1023, in support 
of the conclusion that such determinations necessarily involve “discretionary decisions” by a 
school district’s responsible officials because they have a “special competence” to make 
them, with no indication in the applicable statutes that there is any intent to negate or limit 
this “special competence” and its “discretionary” exercise.  
 
 
reasonable when it considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with 
layoff.”  (Duax, supra at p. 565.) 
 
At the administrative hearing, Roberts and Parulan-Colfer provided ample testimony 
 
to support the reasons underlying the District’s implementation of the competency criteria.  
Duax found: the “one year of actual teaching within the last ten years” standard to “clearly” 
relate to skills and qualifications to teach; was not too narrow a standard, as might have been 
established if it were one year within the last two or three years; and rejected the contention 
that there were other factors of importance that should have been included within the 
competency standard.  “While we might agree it would have been better to have done so, [the 
challenger] has cited no statute or case that imposes any such requirement on the board.”  
(Duax, supra at 567.) 
 
12.  Once a teacher is found to be competent, the statutory directive is met, and a 
 
school district may not change the focus of the inquiry to determine the most competent 
teacher, nor may teachers force a school district to do so.  As stated in Martin v. Kentfield 
School Dist. (Martin) (1983) 35 Cal.3d. 294, 299:  “Among the employees who met this 
threshold limitation [of being ‘certificated and competent’], there is not room in the statutory 
scheme for comparative evaluation.  Thus, . . . which of the two employees under 
consideration  . . .  was ‘better’ qualified for the job is not the question here, nor was it 
properly the question before the board.”  Although Martin analyzed reinstatement rights after 
lay off, the court in Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 
334, 343-345, determined that the phrase “certificated and competent,” as used in the 
reinstatement context, had the same meaning as in the lay off context. 
 
 

15 

13.  With respect to Peter Sill (Finding 29), the District could not produce sufficient 

 
evidence that Nicholas Giglio, the teacher bumping 0.7 of the FTE, met the competency 
criterion of the Resolution regarding experience in teaching the student population of adults 
with disabilities.  Although bumping is considered a right of one teacher vis a vis another 
teacher, the District should bear the burden under the circumstances of this case, including: it 
has prepared the bumping analysis and offered it in evidence; it was suggesting that the 
bump could occur (see Evidence Code section 500); and it had within its power the ability to 
search its records to determine if there was evidence of such experience.  Under Evidence 
Code section 412, if the party with the power to produce “stronger and more satisfactory 
evidence” does not do so, the weaker and less satisfactory evidence it has offered “should be 
viewed with distrust.” 
 
 
of this case and, with Ruth Gates presents a specific instance in which it has not done so.  
See Findings 11, 18 and 36.  The statutory direction to school districts to break ties is 
mandatory: “As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 
same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination . . . .  (Ed. Code § 
44955, subd. (b); emphasis added.)  The discretion and flexibility granted to the Board under 
the applicable statutes and case law does not include the ability to avoid this statutory 
directive. 
 

14.  The District contends that it does not have to break ties under the circumstances 

ORDER 

2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.  Each respondent shall receive 

1.  The District may give notices to Respondents, except as set forth below, that their 

 
 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction of 
particular kinds of services.  Such notices may be given to the Respondents on Attachment 
A, except as set forth below. 
 
 
such a notice.  
 
 
or in part as determined in accordance with this Proposed Decision: Paul Flor; Suzanne 
Moore; Theresa MacAller; Brenda Gomez; Peter Sill; Sandip Sengupta; Richard Manriquez; 
Diane Hitchcock; Douglas Fore; Allen Rojas; Mark Gunzelman; and Sharon Anderson. 
 
 
DATED: May 13, 2010. 
 

3.  The Accusations against the following Respondents are dismissed, either in whole 

DAVID B. ROSENMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 

16 

* = present at the hearing; 

+ = represented by Katherine Erskine 

Ruben Acuna * +  
Sharon Anderson * + 
Martha Ayala * + 
Melvyn Balatbat * + 
Francine Ballard * + 
James Beard * + NNOD 
Imelda Beltran * + 
Michael Buckle  
David Burton 
Theresa Bush * + 
Gilbert Callendar * + 
Brent Canzano * + 
Daniel Ceballos * + 
Yesenia Ceballos * + 
John Cervantes + 
Darrel Charbaszcz * + 
Richard Conrad * + 
Elizabeth Curtis * + NNOD 
James Domenico * + 
Charles Drake * + 
Destiny Dupleasis * + 
Juan Duran * + NNOD 
Joanna Belle Empeno * + 
Ditas Esparza * + 
Laura Esparza-Marquez 
Christopher Figueroa * + 
Paul Flor * + 
Douglas Fore * + 
Arnold Gamboa * + 
Ruth Gates * + 
Dixie Gleason * + 
Brenda Gomez * + 

ATTACHMENT A: Hacienda La Puente Unified School District, OAH No. 2010031158 
 
Key:   NNOD = no Notice of Defense 
 
 
 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33.  Mariangela Grana + + 
34. 
35.  Mark Gunzelman * + 
36. 
Laurie Haight * + 
37. 
Amber Hao * + 
38. 
Diane Hitchcock * + 
39. 
Su Hsu * + 
40. 
Jasmine Ilano * + 
41. 
Jeffrey Johansen + 
42. 
Kevin Kaplan * + 
43.  Mark Kleven * + 
44. 

45. 
Dennis Lazar * + 
46. 
Olga Lee * + 
47. 
Theresa MacAller * + 
48. 
Richard Manriquez * + 
49. 
Robert Marsh * + 
50. 
Danny Masanovich * + 
51. 
Bruce McCoy  
52. 
Kevin McGuire * 
53. 
Tarrie McBride * + 
54.  Marilyn Mendieta + 
55. 
Edward Monteilh * 
56. 
Suzanne Moore * + 
57. 
Annie Mu  
58. 
Harry Nelson * + 
59. 
Karen Neville * + 
60. 
Urszula Oleksyn * + 
61. 
Delinda Otto * + NNOD 
62. 
Donna Owens * + 
63. 
Sylvia Peralta NNOD 
64. 
Cecil Polonio * + 
65. 
Jose Reyes * + 
66. 
Valentin Rodriguez * + 
67. 
Allen Rojas * + 
68. 
Daryl Ross * + 
69. 
Karla Ruano-Ramirez * + 
70. 
Carlos Sanchez * + 
71. 
Elaine Semo * + 
72. 
Sandip Sengupta * + 
73. 
Peter Sill * + 
74. 
Thomas Stockfish * + 
75. 
David Suderman * + 
76. 
Josephine Taylor * + NNOD 
77. 
Ronald Thomas NNOD 
78. 
Tedmund Thompson * + 
79. 
Roland Valencia  
80. 
Julian Vasquez + 
81. 
John Windsor NNOD 
82. 
Terry Wright + 
83.  William Zeko NNOD

Lynn Kaiser-Grosch * + 

Josh Kubarii + NNOD 

17 

 
ATTACHMENT B: Hacienda La Puente Unified School District, OAH No. 2010031158 
Reduction in 2010-2011 Programs/Services, Hacienda La Puente Unified School District 
 

CORRECTIONS DIVISION 

Particular Kinds of Services 

 

Academics 
ABEi
ASEii
ESLiii
ABE/ASE 
ABE/ESL 
ASE/Drawing 
ABE/ASE/ESL 

Number of Full Time 
Equivalent Positions 
 
1.0 FTE 
4.0 FTE 
4.0 FTE 
5.0 FTE 
2.0 FTE 
2.0 FTE 
8.0 FTE 

Career Technical Education (CTE)/Apprenticeships 

 

Agriculture and Natural Resources/Animal Science/Animal 
Attendant–Pet Groomer  
Agriculture and Natural Resources/Ornamental Horticulture/ 
Gardener–Groundskeeper  
Agriculture and Natural Resources/Ornamental Horticulture/ 
Landscape Gardener - Nursery Manager   
Arts, Media, and Entertainment Technology/Media and Design 
Arts/ Computer Aided Sign Making 
Building Trades and Construction/Cabinet Making and Wood 
Products/Woodworking 
Building Trades and Construction/Mechanical Construction/ 
Combination Welder 
Building Trades and Construction/Residential/Commercial 
Construction/ Cement Mason 
Building Trades and Construction/Residential/Commercial/ 
Construction/Construction Worker-Introduction to Building 
Trades 
Building Trades and Construction/Residential/Commercial 
Construction/Floor Layer-Floor Covering 
Building Trades and Construction/Residential/Commercial 
Construction/Laborer 
Building Trades and Construction/Residential/Commercial 
Construction/Painter-Basic/Painter–Intermediate 
Fashion and Interior Design/Fashion, Design, Manufacturing and 
Merchandising/Semi-automatic Sewing Machine Operator 
Finance and Business/Business Financial Management/ 
Directory Assistance Operator - Telecommunications 

                                                                          18 

 
1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

2.0 FTE 

2.0 FTE 

.4 FTE 

Particular Kinds of Services 

Hospitality, Tourism and Recreation/Food Service and 
Hospitality/Cook Apprentice 
Hospitality, Tourism and Recreation/Hospitality, Tourism and 
Recreation/Custodial Building Maintenance 
Hospitality, Tourism and Recreation/Hospitality, Tourism and 
Recreation/Laundry Operator 
Information Technology/Information Support and Services/ 
Computer Operator–Introduction 
Job Readiness/Career Preparation/Job Skills Training 
Manufacturing and Product Development/Manufacturing Systems 
and Processes/Graphic Communication Technology Systems and 
Processes/Offset Press Operator 
Transportation/Automotive Services/Automobile Detailer/Body 
Repairer 
Transportation/Automotive Services/Automobile Dismantler 
Technician 
Transportation/Automotive Services/Bicycle Repairer 

Parenting, Family and Consumer Awareness 

Consumer Awareness/Health, Fitness, Nutrition, and 
Safety/Substance Abuse Prevention 
Family/Family Members Interaction/Parent Education 
Family/Family Members Interaction/Personal Relationships 
Family/Family Members Interaction/Teaching and Loving Kids 
(TALK) Parenting for Family Reunification 

Total Corrections Full Time Equivalent 
 

ADULT EDUCATION DIVISION 

Particular Kinds of Services 

Academic 

ABE/ASE/ESL/Citizenship 

Adults with Disabilities 

Life Skills and Functional Academics/ 
Arts and Crafts-Leisure Time Skills  
Workplace Skills and Functional Academics/ Work Improvement 
Skills  

Number of Full Time 
Equivalent Positions 
2.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

5.7 FTE 

1.9 FTE 
3.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

 
3.67 FTE 

1.2 FTE 
3.13 FTE 
1.0 FTE 

67 FTE 

Number of Full Time 
Equivalent Positions 
 
8.53 

 
.6 FTE 

.5 FTE 

Career Technical Education (CTE)/Apprenticeships 

 

 

 

 

 
 

19

 

 

Number of Full Time 
Equivalent Positions 
.53 FTE 

Particular Kinds of Services 

 

 

 

Agricultural and Natural Resources/Animal Science/Animal Pet 
Groomer-Animal Caretaker  
Diversified Occupations/Cosmetology  
Finance and Business/Business Financial Management/Typist/ 
Computer Keyboarding (Basic/Advanced) 
Health, Science and Medical Technology/Health Informatics/ 
Basic Medical Billing and Coding  
Health, Science and Medical Technology/Health Informatics/ 
Computerized Billing  
Health, Science and Medical Technology/Medical Assistant/ 
Medical Terminology 
Health, Science and Medical Technology/Therapeutic Services/ 
Psychiatric Technician 1 and 2  
Hospitality, Tourism and Recreation/Hospitality, Tourism and 
Recreation/Custodial Building Maintenance 
Information Technology/Information Support and Services/ 
Computer Software Applications 
Information Technology/Information Support and Services/ 
Data Entry Clerk 
Job Readiness/Career Preparation/Job Skills Training  
Manufacturing and Product Development/Manufacturing Systems 
Processes/Basic Electronic Theory  
Manufacturing and Product Development/Manufacturing Systems 
Processes/Electronics Assembler  

Older Adult Programs 

Communication/English Speaking, Reading, and Writing 
Health Fitness Literacy/Exercise and Fitness  
The Arts/Chinese Brush Painting and Gift Making  
The Arts/Oil and Water Color Painting  

 

Parenting, Family and Consumer Awareness 

Consumer Awareness/Home Arts/Arts and Crafts  
Consumer Awareness/Home Arts/Ceramics  
Parenting/Effective Parenting Techniques 

 

 

 

Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA) 

TOSA – Assessment 
TOSA – Attendance Specialist 
TOSA – Counseling Department 
TOSA – EL Civics 
TOSA – Fee Based 
TOSA – Health Careers 

 

20

1.0 FTE 
.67 FTE 
 
.2 FTE 

.2 FTE 

.2 FTE 

2.0 FTE 

.53 FTE 

2.93 FTE 

.2 FTE 

.95 FTE 
1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

 
.5 FTE 
.13 FTE 
.4 FTE 
.1 FTE 

 
.33 FTE 
1.4 FTE 
.25 FTE 

 
.53 FTE 
.53 FTE 
1.0 FTE 
.2 FTE 
.67 FTE 
1.0 FTE 

Number of Full Time 
Equivalent Positions 
2.0 FTE 
1.3 FTE 

31.38 FTE 

98.38 FTE 

Particular Kinds of Services 

TOSA – Job Developer 
TOSA – Learning and Assessment Center 

 

Total Adult Education Full Time Equivalent 
 
TOTAL FULL TIME EQUIVALENT 
 
 
                                                 
i ABE = Adult Basic Education 
ii ASE= High School Diploma 
iii ESL= English as a Second Language 
 
 
 
 

 

21

