BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
BURBANK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES, STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
 

OAH No. 2010031170 

 

 

In the Matter of the Layoffs of: 
 
Cynthia Almeida, Annie Balian, Joan Becker, 
Joanna Bencze, Jim Bentley, Robert Berger, Todd 
Berry, Lucia Bowers, Holly Boyle, Matthew 
Chambers, Brianne Chandler, Gregory Clark, Kelli 
Clarke, Nancy Colman, Ellen Craig, Tarquinn 
Curry, S. Scott Davis, Jerry De Laurie, Michelle 
Dilgard, Gregory Everhart, Robert Feiner, Tamara 
Fiola, Joshua Fischbach, Colleen Flores, Kyle 
Fitzgerald, Jennifer Gallego, Amanda Ghezzi, Kirk 
Gorbach, Jr., Jamie Griffin, Robert Hammell, Moira 
Hanson, Kevin Hiatt, Kirsten Jackson, Armineh 
Kasparian, Deborah Kubeczka, Cathryn Lawhead, 
Jody Levy, Manuel Lopez, Amy Lucas, Amanda 
McMahon, Margo Miller, Ana Moen, Doug Nicol, 
Yvonne Oliver, Melissa Pamperin, Carlos Pelayo, 
Andrea Permenter, Jill Pomfret, Danielle Reynolds, 
Martha Rios, Charles Rodriguez, Michelle Romero, 
Sarah Rounds, Brent Schackmann, Jessica 
Schackne, Alexander Senar, Jason Shaughnessy, 
Dylan Simmer-Winfield, Janae Simmons, Kavita 
Sleight, Crystal Smiecinski, Amanda Spaugh, Lisa 
Stelmach, Jacklyn Strongin, Marisa Torres, Deanne 
Torvinen, Benjamin Vargas, Melissa Waters, Alexis 
Weiner, Selin Zadorian, and Dena Zelig, 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Mark E. Harman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 28, 2010, in Burbank, California. 
 
 
Jeff C. Marderosian, Attorney at Law, represented the Burbank Unified School 
District (District).  Lawrence B. Trygstad of Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad represented all of 
the above-captioned Respondents. 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received.  The record was closed, and the matter 

was submitted for decision on April 28, 2010. 

1 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
1.     Complainant, Kevin Jolly, Ed.D., filed the Accusation while acting in his 

official capacity as the Superintendent of the District.  Gabriel Soumakian, Ed.D., Assistant 
Superintendent, Human Resources Services, and his staff were responsible for 
implementation of the technical aspects of the layoff. 
 

2.     Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

 

3.     On March 4, 2010, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted 

resolution number 18 (the Resolution) to reduce and discontinue the following particular 
kinds of services provided by the District no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 
school year: 
 

Position

K-5  Elementary  Teacher 
6th Grade CORE 

Elementary PE 

Elementary Music 

TOSA: BTSA 

TOSA: Assessment 

Elementary Interventionist 

Counselors 

High School Math 

Middle School Math 

Spanish 

French 

High School English 

Middle School English 

Journalism 

Speech/Debate 

Web Page 

Video Production 

Art 

2 

FTE 

Reductions

18.0 

  6.0 

  4.0 

  2.0 

  1.0 

  1.0 

  1.0 

  5.0 

  3.2 

  3.0 

  3.0 

  1.0 

  8.2 

  1.0 

  0.2 

  0.2 

  0.2 

  1.0 

  2.0 

Computer Science 

Digital Applications 

Instrumental Music 

High School Physical Education 

Middle School Physical Education 

Business 

Auto Shop 

Health 9 

Middle School Science 

Marine Biology 

Physics 

Geo Science 

High School Social Studies 

AP U.S. History 

Psychology 

Sociology 

Librarian  

Title I Coordinator 

Middle School Special Education SDC 

Middle School Special Education DHH 

Adult ESL (5 positions-36 Adult School 

hours=2 FTE) 

Total FTE 

0.4 

0.2 

0.2 

5.2 

1.0 

1.0 

0.4 

2.0 

1.0 

0.6 

0.4 

1.0 

2.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.4 

1.0 

0.5 

3.0 

1.0 

2.0 

84.9 

 

 

 

4. 

The Board further determined that the reduction in services necessitated a 

decrease in the number of certificated employees at the close of the 2009-2010 school year 
by a corresponding number of full-time equivalent (FTE) positions, and directed the 
Superintendent to notify the appropriate employees to implement the Board’s determination. 

5. 

 
On or before March 15, 2010, the District gave notice to each of 
approximately 103 certificated employees of the potential elimination of his or her position 
for the 2010-2011 school year.  On March 30, 2010, the District served the Accusation on the 
72 employees, including Respondents, who had requested a hearing to determine whether 

3 

 
 

 
 

there was cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year.  On April 15, 2010, the 
District served the Accusation on Respondents’ counsel. 
 

 

6. 

All employees who received an Accusation, except Cynthia Almeida, Lucia 

Bowers, Matthew Chambers, Gregory Clark, Tarquinn Curry, S. Scott Davis, Michelle 
Dilgard, Gregory Everhart, Robert Hammell, Moira Hanson, Armineh Kasparian, Amanda 
McMahon, Yvonne Oliver, Carlos Pelayo, Michelle Romero, Brent Schackmann, Jason 
Shaughnessy, Dylan Simmer-Winfield, and Amanda Spaugh, filed Notices of Defense to 
determine if there was cause for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  
Normally, those employees who fail to file a Notice of Defense have waived their right to a 
hearing and cannot contest the recommendation of their nonreemployment by the District 
under Education Code section 44949, subdivision (b),1 unless an exception is made.  The 
District objected to these persons being afforded any hearing rights.  Jason Shaughnessy 
requested to be heard.  In his testimony, he provided a reasonable excuse for his failure to 
timely file a Notice of Defense and, thus, he was allowed to present his defense to the 
charges in the Accusation.  None of the other nine employees who failed to timely file their 
Notices of Defense and who were present during the hearing sought to be heard on this issue, 
and therefore, they have waived their rights to a hearing on the Accusations. 

7. 

Prior to the hearing, the District withdrew the Accusation against Joanna 

Bencze, Kelli Clarke, Jerry DeLaurie, Robert Feiner, Amanda Ghezzi, Kirk Gorbach, Jr., 
Jamie Griffin, Steven Hollis, Jodi Levy, Margo Miller, and Dena Zelig. 

8. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

9. 

11. 

10. 

The services set forth in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services was related 

 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  
The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified particular kinds of services was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  
 
 
solely to the needs and welfare of the District and its students.   
 
 
The Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements and 
requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees. 
 
 
probationary employees’ seniority dates, current assignments, permanency description, and 
credential and certificate information.  It periodically updates this list from information 
provided by many sources, including the certificated personnel the District employs. 
 
                                                 
 
  

The District maintains a Seniority List, which contains permanent and 

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

12. 

4 

13. 

Respondent Kyle Fitzgerald (Fitzgerald) challenged the seniority date assigned 

to him by the District.  Fitzgerald is a permanent teacher who teachers English, journalism, 
and history to high school students.  Fitzgerald first worked for the District on October 6, 
2006, as a long-term substitute, and continued to work as such in the spring of 2007.  He was 
rehired as a temporary employee for the 2007-2008 school year.  In August 2008, he was 
hired as a probationary 2 employee.  At the commencement of his probationary contract, the 
District credited him with an additional year of probationary service, based on his prior year 
of temporary teaching, and assigned him the seniority date of August 20, 2007.  Fitzgerald’s 
argument, that his seniority date should be the date he first worked for the District, was not 
persuasive.  The District correctly determined Fitzgerald’s seniority date. 

 
14. 

The District used its Seniority List to develop a proposed layoff list of the least 

senior employees currently assigned in the services being reduced.  The District determined 
that nobody less senior than Respondents was being retained to render services Respondents 
are certificated and competent to render.  In making its determination, the District followed 
strict seniority, and did not skip less senior employees who were teaching in the particular 
services identified for reduction; however, some employees were able to “bump”2 into other 
positions that were not being eliminated and that were held by less senior employees. 

 
15a.  Resolution No. 18 includes criteria for determining the order of seniority of 
those employees with the same first date of paid service (tie-breaking criteria).  These tie-
breaking criteria are based on the needs of the District and its students.  The District awarded 
points based on the employees’ prior employment within the District, credentials/certificates 
to teach English learners or special education; reading specialist certificate; national board 
certification; other teaching experience; degrees earned; and number of semester units 
subsequent to a Baccalaureate degree.  The District applied these criteria to determine the 
relative order of seniority among employees who had the same seniority date. 

 
15b.  After application of the tie-breaking criteria, Melissa Pamperin, Moira 
Hanson, and Joshua Fischbach, each having a seniority date of August 26, 2006, were still 
tied.  The District consulted the teachers’ union that represents Respondents, which 
recommended that the District use a coin flip.  All three employees were present at the 
District’s offices on April 13, 2010, when the coin flip was done, and the tie was broken.  
Respondents object that a coin flip was not authorized by Resolution 18, and is arbitrary and 
capricious.  Respondents offered no legal authority for this argument, and it is rejected. 
 
 
a part-time (.5) position as a middle school counselor since August 22, 2007.  Torvinen’s 
credentials also authorize her to be a school psychologist.  In fact, she has been performing 

Respondent Deanne Torvinen (Torvinen) has been employed by the District in 

16. 

                                                 
2 A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.   In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School Dist. (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.) 
 

5 

17. 

Respondents Jason Shaughnessy, Doug Nicol, Amy Lucas are permanent 

the duties of a school psychologist for 23 years, both in public and private schools, and 
currently works part time as a school psychologist for a charter school.  She also teaches 
students at a local university who are seeking to obtain their credentials as school 
psychologists.  In March 2009, Torvinen informed the District of her interest in working for 
the District in that capacity, particularly if the part-time counseling position was unable to be 
funded.  Torvinen received some positive feedback from the District, but no offer was made.  
Instead, the District hired another person, Diane Richmond (Richmond), to be a school 
psychologist in August 2009.  Torvinen’s position is being eliminated in this proceeding, but 
she argues that she should be allowed to bump Richmond.  The case law appears to settle the 
issue.  In Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343-
344, the court held that a part-time permanent employee with greater seniority was not 
entitled to bump full-time employees with lesser seniority, in part, because the District had 
determined that a part-time position was not the same “service” as a full-time position.  The 
District has the discretion to make the same determination in this proceeding. 
 
 
teachers who teach physical education and share the same seniority date of August 20, 2007.  
Kenneth Knoop is also a physical education teacher with a seniority date of August 20, 2007.  
The three Respondents received preliminary layoff notices, but Knoop did not.  The District 
applied the tie-breaking criteria between Shaughnessy and Knoop, and Knoop purportedly 
had more points; however, Knoop is a probationary 2 employee.  Section 44955, subdivision 
(b), states that:  “Except as otherwise provided by statue, the services of no permanent 
employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary 
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which 
said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.”  The District has not 
disputed that any of these three Respondents is certificated and competent to render the 
service that Knoop is providing.  Since Knoop did not receive notice and he is being retained, 
it is necessary under section 44955 that the District retains the Respondent who is the next 
most senior employee on the seniority list and who is credentialed and competent to serve in 
Knoop’s position.  Respondents have presented no authority for the proposition that all three 
Respondents should be retained.  Although Amy Lucas appears next on the Seniority List, 
before Shaughnessy and Nicol, the Governing Board should reapply the tie-breaker criteria 
to these three and identify one who is competent to render the services provided by Knoop. 
 
 
vocational education teaching credential that authorizes him to teach automotive mechanics.  
He teaches this subject for the District and has a seniority date of August 25, 2003.  The 
District is reducing .4 of the position currently taught by Lopez.  David Vezina (Vezina) 
holds a clear designated subjects vocational education teaching credential that authorizes him 
to teach airframe and powerplant mechanics.  His seniority date is August 30, 2004.  Lopez 
argues that he should be able to bump into .4 of Vezina’s assignment.  The District argues 
that these individuals’ authorizations are specific, and Lopez’s credential does not authorize 
him to teach Vezina’s subject.  Further, Lopez did not establish that he has ever taught 
airframe and powerplant mechanics, and thus, whether he could meet the District’s 
competency requirements in order to bump Vezina.  Thus, Lopez is subject to a .4 reduction. 

Respondent Manuel Lopez (Lopez) holds a clear designated subjects 

18. 

6 

19a.  The District has classified as temporary approximately 31 persons who have 

19b.  Respondents’ counsel offered nine contracts designated as “Notice of Offer of 

 
been employed in assignments requiring a credential during the 2009-2010 school year.  The 
District has sent notices to these individuals that they will not be retained for next year.  
These so-called releases are different from the notices that are required under section 44949. 
Respondents argue that these employees were misclassified by the District, and that the 
District failed to provide them with the notice rights afforded by the layoff procedure.  The 
law requires that probationary and permanent employees must receive proper notice in these 
layoff proceedings, and if these employees are probationary or permanent, rather than 
temporary, they must be retained for the ensuing year by virtue of not having received the 
required notices.  An extension of this argument is that any Respondents senior to these 
employees must be retained, as well. 
 
 
Employment - Certificated Employees,” for Caroline Sasorski, Cynthia Sagastume, Cheryl 
Rotunno, Jill Johnson, Susan Glenn, Barbara Fariss, Timothy Crawford, Lisa Carr and Jenna 
Stewart.  The contracts clearly state the employees were hired as temporaries.  The length of 
time for employment generally was for between four and six months.  Some of these 
contracts were signed after the period of employment had begun, e.g., Caroline Sasorski 
signed her contract on September 30, 2009, for service that, according to the contract, began 
on August 11, 2009.   Counsel argued that when these individuals began employment, they 
were not notified of their status, and thus, were probationary employees under the rule of 
Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High School Dist. (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911.  None 
of the employees who signed these contracts testified at the hearing. 
 
 
school year, before student enrollment numbers had stabilized.  Once it was certain how 
many teachers were needed for a longer term, the District offered temporary contracts to 
these employees that it needed to retain.  In those situations, the employees’ contracts gave 
them credit for their service as substitutes, which boosted these employees’ salaries and 
benefits.  The District maintained that there was never any confusion among these employees 
concerning their status before they signed their contracts.  The District’s evidence and 
analysis of these circumstances are persuasive.  It was not established that any of the nine 
individuals referred to in these contracts was a probationary or permanent employee of the 
District in 2009-2010, or entitled to notice of these layoff proceedings. 
 
 
services which any Respondent was certificated and competent to render.   
 

19c.  The District explained that it routinely hired substitutes at the beginning of the 

20.  No certified employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform any 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 

 
 
44949 and 44955 were met.  (Factual Findings 1 through 8.)   
 
 
of services within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  (Factual Findings 3 and 9.) 

2.     The services listed in Factual Finding 3 are determined to be particular kinds 

7 

4. 

3.   

No employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service which 

 
 
Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees in the District due 
to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils 
within the meaning of Education Code sections 44955.  (Factual Finding 10.) 
 
 
any more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.  
 
 
5.  With the exception of Respondents Jason Shaughnessy, Doug Nicol, or Amy 
Lucas, cause exists within the meaning of Education Code section 44955 for terminating or 
reducing Respondents’ employment for the 2010-2011 school year, as set forth in Factual 
Findings 1 through 20. 
 
 
Lucas, the Board should reexamine its seniority list, reapply their tie-breaking criteria, and 
determine which one of these Respondents is the next most senior employee credentialed and 
competent to serve in Knoop’s position.  This person may be retained, and the remaining two 
may be terminated 

6.  With respect to Respondents Jason Shaughnessy, Doug Nicol, and Amy 

 
ORDER 

1. 

The Accusations served on all Respondents, with the exception of Jason 

Shaughnessy, Doug Nicol, and Amy Lucas, are sustained.  Notice may be given to those 
Respondents before May 15, 2010, that their services will be reduced or terminated for the 
2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services as indicated. 

 
2.  With respect to Respondents Jason Shaughnessy, Doug Nicol, and Amy 
Lucas, the Governing Board should reexamine its seniority list and determine which one of 
these Respondents is the next most senior employee certificated and competent to serve in 
Knoop’s position.  This person shall be retained, and the remaining two may be terminated.     

 
Dated: May 6, 2010 

________________________________ 
MARK E. HARMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

 
   

 

8 

