 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Amy C. Lahr, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard this 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  2010030576 
 
 

BEFORE THE 
 BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE  
SANTA MONICA-MALIBU UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
 Carolina Barba-Ortiz, and Other  
  Certificated Employees of the  
  Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District,
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
matter on April 15, 2010, in Santa Monica, California. 
 
 
James Baca and Elizabeth Zamora-Meijia, of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 
P.C.,  represented  Tim  Cuneo  (Cuneo),  Superintendent  of  the  Santa  Monica-Malibu  School 
District (District). 
 
Lawrence  B.  Trygstad,  of  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trgystad,  Inc.,  represented  the  45 
 
certificated employees as set forth in the District’s Exhibit 10, which is incorporated by reference 
as  if  fully  set  forth  herein,  as  well  as  the  following  five  certificated  employees:    Kathryn 
Dehope, Tracy Kooy, Laura Meschel, Hong Le, and Henry Wadsworth (Respondents).   
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year. 
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying 
them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Pulido. 
 
 
for decision. 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing and the matter was submitted 

At the hearing, the District withdrew the Accusation against Laura Check and Maribel 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

 
 
 
 

1. 

2. 

Superintendent Cuneo filed the Accusation in his official capacity. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

 

 

 

 

3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nursing Services 

  3.0 
  4.0 
  3.0 
  2.0 

                      Service   

                    Full-Time-Equivalent Positions

   
 
 
 
10.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2.0 
 

 
 
On  February  18,  2010,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted 
Resolution  number  09-22,  reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the  2010-2011 
school year: 
 
 
 
 
 
1. 
 
2.   Middle School Counseling Services   
 
 
3.  
High School Counseling Services  
 
 
4.  
Student Support Advisor Services  
 
 
5.  
Elementary Music Instruction  
 
Elementary Teaching Services 
6.  
 
Secondary English Teaching Services  
7.  
 
Secondary Mathematics Teaching Services   
8.  
Secondary Physical Science Teaching Services 
9.  
Secondary Life Science Teaching Services 
10.  
 
Secondary Social Studies Teaching Services  
11. 
 
Secondary Humanities Teaching Services  
12. 
Secondary Art Teaching Services  
13. 
 
Secondary Physical Education Teaching Services  
14. 
 
Secondary Music Teaching Services  
15. 
Child Development Lead Teaching Services  
16. 
17. 
 
Child Development Teaching Services 
 
Total 
 
 
Superintendent  Cuneo  thereafter  notified  the  Board  that  he  recommended  that 
notice  be  provided  to  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011 
school year due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  
 
By  March  12,  2010,  Assistant  Superintendent  Michael  D.  Matthews  (Dr. 
 
Matthews) provided notice to Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  
 
7. 
 
on Respondents.  
 
 

On or about March 23, 2010, the District issued the Accusations, and served them 

Respondents  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 

42.0 
  4.0 
  5.0 
  2.0 
  1.0 
  4.0 
  3.0 
  1.0 
  2.0 
  0.2 

Respondents thereafter filed timely notices of defense.  

                               

                           

92.2 

  4.0 

6. 

4. 

5. 

8. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

2

9. 

11. 

12. 

10. 

13. 

14. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

The  Board  properly  considered  all  known  attrition  in  determining  the  actual 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

 
 
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.1
 
 
The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
finding number 3 primarily because of the uncertainty surrounding future funding.  The decision 
to reduce the particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper 
exercise of the District's discretion. 
           
 
The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated employees as determined by the Board. 
 
 
number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees. 
 
 
Resolution number 09-22, adopted at the Board’s meeting on February 18, 2010, 
established  that  the  “Board  is  authorized  by  Education  Code  section  44955  to  deviate  from 
terminating certificated employees in order of seniority where the district demonstrates a specific 
need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study.”    In  addition,  the  resolution 
provides  that  “the  Superintendent,  or  designee,  is  delegated  the  authority  to  take  all  actions 
necessary  and  proper  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of  this  Resolution.”    Contrary  to 
Respondents’ counsel’s argument, the resolution language provides the District with authority to 
retain, or “skip” employees with less seniority, provided the District demonstrates the requisite 
criteria. 
 
15.  Dr. Matthews has served as the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources at 
 
the District for six years.  Dr. Matthews stated that the District seeks to “skip” from the layoff 
order  the  following  certificated  employees:  Judith  Miller,  a  mental  health  counselor;  Michael 
Corrigan, a band director; and two elementary school teachers from the bilingual dual immersion 
school, Carlos Morales and Judith Rodriguez.  With regard to the mental health counselor, he 
explained that the District has a need for experienced personnel in the area of acute trauma and 
crises, and the need for therapeutic services to be provided to students and families.  Regarding 
the band director, Dr. Matthews proudly stated that the District is renown for its music programs; 
it has one of the best high school marching bands in the country, and that it requires a the band 
director  with  a  great  deal  of  experience,  especially  with  marching  bands,  to  maintain  its 
reputation.  As for the bilingual dual immersion school, Dr. Matthews explained that there are 
very few of these programs in the state or nation, and he emphasized that the teaching positions 

                    

 

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

 

 
 
 

3

16. 

require  a  BCLAD  certificate,  as  well  as  special  skills  and  training.    After  consulting  with  the 
respective  department  heads  to  gather  information,  the  District  determined  that  the  employees 
retained possessed the special skills and experience necessary to fill the corresponding need.   
       
 
The District has demonstrated its specific needs for personnel to teach specific courses.  
It  has  also  shown  that  employees  Judi  Miller,  Michael  Corrigan,  Carlos  Morales,  and  Judith 
Rodriguez have the special training and experience necessary to provide the needed services; and 
that no employees with higher seniority dates possess the same special training and experience.    
 
 
Resolution number 09-21, adopted at the Board’s meeting on February 18, 2010, 
established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees 
who first rendered paid service on the same date.  In the tie-breaking process, number four states 
that  an  employee  holding  a  currently  valid  and  properly  filed,  non-emergency  Bilingual, 
Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development (BCLAD) Certificate, or equivalent, wins 
the tie-breaker.   
 
 
Respondent  Joanna  Orozco  is  a  full-time  kindergarten  teacher  at  Edison 
Language  Academy  (Edison),  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  31,  2007.    She  shares  this  date 
with  another  teacher,  Carlos  Morales,  who  is  a  fifth  grade  teacher  at  Edison.    The  District 
retained Mr. Morales because he possesses a BCLAD certificate.  Ms. Orozco does not currently 
have  a  BCLAD  Certificate.    She  has  taken  the  necessary  examinations  and  is  awaiting  the 
results.  Ms. Orozco claims that she did not know that she had to take additional examinations in 
order  to  obtain  her  BCLAD  certificate  until  March  2010.    She  blames  the  District  for  not 
informing her of the requirements sooner.  Her argument is without merit.  Ms. Orozco agreed 
that  it  is  her  responsibility  to  know  the  requirements  of  obtaining  a  BCLAD.    Because  Ms. 
Orozco  does  not  yet  possess  her  BCLAD  certificate,  the  District  was  not  required  to  consider 
this  credential  when  determining  the  layoff  order.    (Degener v. Governing Bd. (1977) 67 Cal. 
App. 3d 689, 698; Campbell Elementary Teachers Ass’n v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal. App. 3d 796, 
814-15.)  The District appropriately applied its tie-break criteria.  The evidence did not establish 
that the criteria, or its application, were arbitrary or capricious, or in violation of the Education 
Code. 

17. 

 
18. 

 
Respondent  Monica  Micale  is  a  full-time  kindergarten  teacher  at  Franklin 
Elementary,  also  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  31,  2007.    Ms.  Micale  claims  that  she  has 
fulfilled all of the requirements necessary to obtain her BCLAD; however, she does not currently 
possess  the  certificate  because  it  is  being  processed  by  the  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing  (CTC).    Although  Ms.  Micale  successfully  passed  the  BCLAD  examination 
requirements  in  June  2007,  she  chose  to  wait  until  February  2010  to  file  for  her  certificate 
because she thought her present teaching position did not require it.  Ms. Micale chose to file for 
the certificate through the District, as opposed to filing directly with the CTC.  As of the hearing 
date, the CTC had not yet issued Ms. Micale’s credential.  Ms. Micale acknowledged that she 
does  not  know  if  having  the  BCLAD  certificate  would  have  saved  her  position.    Ms.  Micale 

 

 
 
 

4

19. 

cannot  blame  the  District  for  her  delay,  from  June  2007  through  February  2010,  in  filing  to 
obtain  her  BCLAD  certificate.    As  stated  above,  the  District  is  not  required  to  consider  a 
credential that an employee does not currently possess.  Thus, the District properly determined 
the layoff order with respect to Ms. Micale. 
 
 
Respondent Jennifer Matthews is a school counselor at Lincoln Middle School, 
and her seniority date is August 1, 2007.  She holds a Masters degree in Social Welfare and is a 
Licensed Clinical Social Worker.  Respondent Matthews testified that she can perform the duties 
of the mental health counselor that Judi Miller, a less senior employee, was retained to perform.  
Ms. Miller, whose seniority date is April 14, 2008, holds a certification in Peer Negotiation, and 
a certification from the Office of Criminal Justice Crisis Intervention.  Ms. Miller has had post-
graduate training in trauma and substance abuse, and school crisis management.  In addition, Ms. 
Miller  has  experience  supervising  therapists;  and  is  able  to  supervise  interns  who  can  provide 
free  counseling  services.    The  evidence  showed  that  these  special  skills  and  experience  are 
necessary to fill the District’s specific need.  Respondent Matthews does not hold certifications 
in Peer Negotiations or from the Office of Criminal Justice.  She has not had any formal training 
in  crisis  management,  and  no  post-masters  coursework.    Although  Respondent  Matthews  has 
supervised  interns,  she  has  not  had  any  experience  supervising  other  therapists.    Therefore, 
Respondent Matthews does not possess the special training and experience necessary to perform 
the duties of the mental health counselor.  (See Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 
170 Cal.App.4th 127, 142.)   
 
 
Respondent  Kevin  McKeown  is  an  elementary  music  school  teacher,  with  a 
seniority  date  of  May  22,  2006.    He  holds  a  Bachelor’s  degree  in  Music  Education,  and  a 
Master’s  degree  in  Music  Conducting.    He  has  served  as  the  Band  Director  at  Santa  Monica 
College  since  2002,  and  in  other  band  director  positions;  none  were  marching  bands.  
Respondent  McKeown  thinks  that  he  can  fulfill  the  band  director  position  requirements  that 
Michael  Corrigan,  a  less  senior  employee,  was  retained  to  execute.    Mr.  Corrigan,  whose 
seniority  date  is  September  4,  2009,  has  more  than  40  years  experience  as  a  band  director, 
including  many  years  working  with  marching  bands.    He  has  personally  received  numerous 
awards for his band direction, and he has also led marching bands to receive first place awards in 
various competitions.  Mr. Corrigan has taken the District’s marching band to new heights in the 
2009-2010 school year.  The evidence showed that that these special skills and experience are 
necessary to fill the District’s specific need.  Respondent McKeown acknowledged that he has 
not  ever  served  in  the  capacity  of  a  band  director  of  a  marching  band.    Thus,  Respondent 
McKeown does not possess the special training and experience necessary to perform the duties 
of the band director.   
 
Respondent Mara Chenik is a first grade teacher at Roosevelt Elementary School, 
 
with a seniority date of September 1, 2006.  She is currently a tenured employee and received 
proper notice of this proceeding.  Respondent Chenik questioned whether her seniority date was 
accurately calculated.  The relevant timeline of her work history with the District is as follows: 

21. 

20. 

 

 
 
 

5

  

 

 
 
 

2002-03 
2003-04 
2004-05 
2005-06 
2006-07 

Temporary second grade teacher 
Long-term substitute teacher 
Part-time reading teacher 
Temporary full-time first grade teacher 
Full-time teacher; status at issue 

 
Respondent Chenik is currently a tenured employee.  With regard to the 2006-07 school 
 
year, Respondent Chenik began teaching first grade on September 1, 2006.  She taught without a 
contract  until  September  19,  2006,  and  initially  received  a  probationary  contract  on that  date.  
Shortly  thereafter, the  District’s  human  resources  department informed  her  that  it  mistakenly 
gave her a probationary contract; she was to be under a temporary contract.  The District then 
issued  a  revised  contract  to  Respondent  Chenik  on  September  29,  2006,  which stated  that  the 
contract  was  temporary.    Respondent  Chenik  signed  the  temporary  contract;  and  the  District 
classified her as a temporary employee for that school year.       
 
 
22.  With the exception of Respondent Chenik, as explained below in legal conclusion 
number 4, no certificated employee junior to any  Respondent was retained to render a service 
which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.   
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

3. 

1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 9. 
 
 
The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 
and 10.   
 
 
Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers 1 through 22.  
 
The Education Code permits certificated employees to be classified in one of four 
 
ways:  permanent,  probationary,  substitute,  or  temporary.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County 
Union High School Dist. (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911, 916.)  A certificated employee is classified as 
permanent,  i.e.,  acquires  tenure,  if,  after  having  been  employed  for  two  complete  successive 
school  years  in  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications,  he  or  she  is  reelected  for  the 
following  year.  (§  44929.21,  subd.  (b);  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Bakersfield 
City School Dist. (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1278-1279.) Probationary employees are “those 
persons employed in positions requiring certification qualifications for the school year, who have 

4. 

6

not been classified as permanent employees or as substitute employees.” (§ 44915.) Substitutes 
are “those persons employed in positions requiring certification qualifications, to fill positions of 
regularly  employed  persons  absent  form  service.  .  .  .”  (§  44917.)    Temporary  employees  are 
those requiring certification qualifications, other than substitute employees, who are employed 
for  limited  assignments,  as  defined  in  the  Education  Code,  such  as  in  sections  44918,  44919, 
44920, and 44921. (California Teachers Assn. v. Vallejo City Unified School Dist. (2007) 149 
Cal.App.4th 135, 146.)  
 
 
when first hired. (§ 44916; Kavanaugh, supra, 29 Cal.4th at 911.) Section 44916 provides:   

Districts  are  required  to  provide  employees  with  written  notice  of  their  classification 

 
The classification [of a certificated employee] shall be made at the time of 
employment and thereafter in the month of July of each school year. At the 
time of initial employment during each academic year, each new certificated 
employee of the school district shall receive a written statement indicating his 
employment status and the salary that he is to be paid. If a school district hires 
a certificated person as a temporary employee, the written statement shall 
clearly indicate the temporary nature of the employment and the length of time 
for which the person is being employed. If a written statement does not 
indicate the temporary nature of the employment, the certificated employee 
shall be deemed to be a probationary employee of the school district, unless 
employed with permanent status. 

 
The Supreme Court of California has interpreted this to mean “that certificated teachers must be 
informed in writing, on or before their first date of paid service to their employing districts, of 
their  salary  and  employment  status.”  (Kavanaugh,  supra,  29  Cal.4th  at  p.  921.)    Failure  to 
provide  notice  of  temporary  employment  as  required  by  section  44916  results  in  probationary 
service as a matter of law. (Id., at p. 926.)   
 
 
Respondent  Chenik  began  teaching  on  September  1,  2006;  but  she  did  not  receive  a 
written statement indicating her temporary status until September 29, 2006.  Thus, because the 
District  failed  to  give  her  written  notice  of  the  temporary  contract  on  her  first  date  of  paid 
service,  Respondent’s  Chenik  became  a  probationary  employee  in  the  2006-07  school  year.  
According to Section 44920, Respondent Chenik’s proper seniority date is then one year earlier, 
September  2,  2005,  which  is  her  first  paid  date  of  service  in  the  year  when  she  served  as  a 
temporary employee.  Because Respondent Chenik was hired as a probationary employee for the 
following school year, her temporary status converted to probationary pursuant to section 44918, 
subdivision (a). 
 
 
Given that Respondent Chenik’s correct seniority date is September 2, 2005, her current 
position in the layoff order is incorrect.  To determine whether the District retained an employee 
junior to Respondent Chenik that she is certificated and competent to perform, a review of the 

 

 
 
 

7

seniority  chart  is  necessary.    The  evidence  showed  that  there  is  one  potential  position  that 
Respondent  Chenik  could  be  eligible  to  perform;  that  of  Jacqueline  Papale.    Ms.  Papale  was 
retained, and not subject to this proceeding.  Both Respondent Chenik and Ms. Papale hold clear, 
multiple subject credentials and Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development (CLAD) 
certifications,  and  are  highly  qualified  elementary  education  teachers  under  the  No  Child  Left 
Behind  Act.    Because  they  share  the  same  seniority  date,  the  District  should  have  applied 
Resolution No. 09-21, which set forth the tiebreaker criteria, to determine whether Respondent 
Chenik is eligible to hold the position that Ms. Papale has retained.  The District did not provide 
sufficient  information  for  the  undersigned  ALJ  to  apply  the  tiebreaker  criteria  and  make  that 
determination.    Thus,  the  District  has  not  established  that  it  is  not  retaining  a  certificated 
employee  junior  to  Respondent  Chenik  to  render  a  service  which  she  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render.    Accordingly,  the  Accusation  against  Respondent  Chenik  must  be 
dismissed.  
 
 
reason of factual finding number 21, and legal conclusion number 4. 
 
Cause exists to terminate the services of the 42 Respondents listed in Exhibit 10 
 
(excluding Laura Check, Maribel Pulido, and Mara Chenik); and Kathryn Dehope, Tracy Kooy, 
Laura  Meschel,  Hong  Le,  and  Henry  Wadsworth,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1 
through 19, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 3. 
 

Cause does not exist to terminate the service of Respondent Mara Chenik, by 

6. 

5. 

ORDER 

 
The  Accusations  are  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondents  listed  in  legal 
 
conclusion  number  six,  except  for  those  specifically  excluded,  that  their  services  will  not  be 
needed during the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. 
 
DATED: May 5, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 

 
 
Administrative Law Judge 
 

 
                                 
         
 

________________________________ 
AMY C. LAHR 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

8

