BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
HUENEME ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
OAH No. 2010030715 

 
In The Matter of the Layoff of: 
 
CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF 
THE HUENEME ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 

H. Stuart Waxman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

James R. Lynch and Erika D. Anderson, Attorneys at Law, represented the 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 21, 2010, at the Hueneme 
Elementary School District Office, Port Hueneme, California. 
 
 
Hueneme Elementary School District (District). 
 
 
 
 
 

Alexis Ridenour, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents.    

The matter was submitted on April 21, 2010. 

PRELIMINARY MATTERS 
 
1.  Prior to commencement of the hearing, the District withdrew the layoff 

 
notices of employees, Vickie Evans, Nicole Gardia, Carol Boerrigter, Maria Pilotzi, 
Cristina Rodriguez, Mariana Cabrera, and Leticia Perez-Garcia. 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

1

The reduction in force process is controlled by a series of complex, deadline-

2.  Teachers, Etelina Durazo and Susana Orozco, received preliminary notices 

 
of layoff.  Neither Ms. Durazo nor Ms. Orozco filed a Request for Hearing or a 
Notice of Defense.  However, both wanted to participate in the hearing.  Ms. Durazo 
testified that she failed to file a Request for Hearing and a Notice of Defense because 
she was not clear on the process to be followed.  Ms. Orozco testified that she 
believed the purpose of the Notice of Defense was solely to contest her seniority 
number.  Neither teacher was aware of any basis to contest her layoff.  The District 
objected to the participation of Ms. Durazo and Ms. Orozco in the hearing on grounds 
that they had failed to comply with the filing requirements in the Education Code1, 
and because they had not provided the District with any notice of their request to 
participate. 
 
 
driven rules set forth in the Code.  With very few exceptions (See, e.g., § 44949, 
subd. (c)(3).), both the districts and the affected teachers are bound by those rules.    
Timely submission of a certificated employee’s Request for Hearing and Notice of 
Defense is mandated in section 44949, subdivisions (b) and (c)(1), respectively.  
Although an administrative law judge may permit an employee to participate in a 
hearing despite the employee’s failure to file a Request for Hearing and/or Notice of 
Defense, the employee’s reason for his/her failure to file one or both of those 
documents must establish good cause to permit him/her to participate despite the 
procedural defect.  In this case, Ms. Durazo and Ms. Orozco failed to establish that 
good cause.  If they were not certain as to the meaning of the documents and/or the 
nature of the process, they were obligated to protect their rights by making inquiry, 
either via their own research, their labor union, private counsel, or other means.  Their 
failure to protect their own rights does not equate to a deprivation of due process.  Ms. 
Durazo and Ms. Orozco were not eligible to participate in the hearing.   
 
 
amended to reflect a supplementary authorization in Spanish for Graciela Garcia 
(#14h).  The parties also stipulated that the addition of that authorization does not 
change the order of seniority as reflected on the list. 
 
 

3.  During the hearing, the parties stipulated that the seniority list should be 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

The Governing Board of the Hueneme Elementary School District (Board) 

 
 
determined to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers 
and other certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related 
to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to 
be reduced or eliminated.   
 
/// 
                                                 
 

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code. 

 

2

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process 

 
involving review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in 
accordance with the requirements of the Education Code.  
  
  

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.  Jerry Dannenberg, Ed.D. is the Superintendent of the District. 

3.  Notice was served on all respondents by either personal service or certified 

 
 
 
2.  On or before March 15, 2010, the District served on each respondent a 
 
written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to respondents 
pursuant to Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be required 
for the next school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation and noted that 45.3 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions would be 
reduced and/or discontinued.   
 
 
mail.  Certificated employees timely requested, in writing, a hearing to determine if 
there is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.   
 
4.  The Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources made and filed 
 
Accusations against each of the certificated employees who requested a hearing.  The 
Accusations, with required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense, 
were timely served on those certificated employees.   
 
 
who desired a hearing.   
 
 
employees of the District. 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

5.  Timely Notices of Defense were filed by or on behalf of those respondents 

6.  Respondents in this proceeding are probationary or permanent certificated 

 

3

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 1.0 
 1.0 
 1.0 
 1.0 

NUMBER OF FULL-TIME
EQUIVALENT POSITIONS

7.  On February 22, 2010, in Resolution No. 09-10-08, the Board took action 
 
to reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 
school year: 
 
SERVICES 
 
 
Management:
 
Assistant Superintendent, Educational Services 
 
 
Assistant Principal 
Coordinator of NFL and Preschool Services 
Executive Secretary, Educational Services  
 
Certificated:
 
Literacy Coach 
 
SIOP Coach 
K-6 Teacher   
 
Total   
 
 
vacancies in School Year 2010-2011 due to retirements, release of temporary 
teachers, and resignations.   
 
 
9.  Exhibit “A” to Board Resolution No. 09-10-08 established tie-breaker 
criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who first 
rendered paid service on the same date.  It provided that the order of termination shall 
be based on the needs of the District. 
 
10.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 
 
dates (first date of paid service as a probationary employee), current assignments and 
locations, advanced degrees, credentials, and authorizations.  Credential and 
authorization data are obtained from the records of the County Office of Education, at 
which certificated employees must register such documents.   
 

8.  Subsequent to adoption of the Board’s Resolution, the District identified 

 1.0 
 
 1.3 
 
           39.0 

45.3 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11.  The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and 
“bumping” list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services 
being reduced.  In determining who would be laid off for each kind of service 
reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by the known 
vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  
The District then checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they 
could “bump” other less senior employees.   
 

 

4

12.  The District used information from its seniority list to apply the tie-

 
breaker criteria of Exhibit “A” to Board Resolution No. 09-10-08.   
 
13.  The District requires all new teachers, whether temporary or probationary, 
 
to attend a one-day new teacher orientation/training on their first day of paid service.  
New teachers are paid for their attendance as part of their regular salary.  In order to 
accommodate that orientation/training, new teachers are required by contract to work 
185 days in a school year, while returning teachers are required to work 184 days.   
 
 
14.  The failure of a new teacher to attend the new teacher orientation/training 
requires him/her to take a leave day (i.e., sick leave, etc.).  The orientation/training is 
not made up because it consists of a consolidation of the kinds of subjects and issues 
the teacher will otherwise learn on the job.  Therefore, if a teacher is hired as a 
probationary employee, his/her seniority date (first date of paid service) is the date of 
the new teacher orientation/training.  If a teacher works as a temporary employee for 
one year and is then hired as a probationary employee, his/her one year of temporary 
service converts to probationary status (§ 44918, subd. (a)), and his/her seniority date 
is the date of the new teacher orientation/training taken at the beginning of the year of 
temporary service.  However, if a teacher works for more than one year as a 
temporary employee before becoming a probationary employee, only the year of 
temporary service immediately before the probationary year converts to probationary 
status.  Because the new teacher orientation/training would have occurred at the 
beginning of the first year of temporary service, the teacher loses the benefit of that 
day for seniority purposes.  Because absence from the new teacher 
orientation/training affects only leave and not seniority, the first date of paid service 
remains the same whether or not the new teacher actually attends the new teacher 
orientation/training.  The teacher either “works” (i.e. takes the training) or is on paid 
leave for that day. 
 
 
greater than that of his/her peers could be junior to those peers on the seniority list.  
For example, a probationary teacher hired for the 2008-2009 school year, and a 
teacher hired as a temporary teacher for 2008-2009 and then as a probationary teacher 
for 2009-2010, would have the same seniority date because they would both have 
attended the new teacher orientation/training on the first day of the 2008-2009 school 
year.  However, a teacher who worked as a temporary employee for the 2007-2008 
and 2008-2009 school years before becoming a probationary employee for 2009-
2010, would have a seniority date one day later than the other two even though he/she 
has more experience teaching in the district, because he/she would have attended the 
new teacher orientation/training on the first day of the 2007-2008 school year, a 
school year that was not converted to probationary status. 
 
/// 
 
/// 

15.  Because of the above facts, a teacher with one or more years of experience 

 

5

16.  This scenario was the case for respondents Karen Aldridge, Anna Reed- 

 
Sanchez, and Rosalyn Tellez-Soto.  Although the concept of teachers with less 
experience in the District having higher seniority dates may seem anomalous at first 
blush, it does comport with the applicable law.  Code section 44918, subdivision (a) 
provides that a probationary teacher may “tack” his/her prior’s year’s service as a 
temporary teacher if he/she taught in that capacity for at least 75 percent of the school 
year, but probationary credit may not be given for any service as a temporary teacher 
in an earlier school year.  Because only time as a probationary or permanent  
employee counts toward seniority, time spent teaching in a temporary capacity other 
than the school year immediately preceding the one for which the teacher is hired as a 
probationary employee, cannot count for seniority purposes. 
 
 
17.  Respondent Jeannie Alvarez taught in the District in a temporary capacity 
for part of school year 2004-2005, and all of school years 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 
before becoming a probationary employee for school year 2007-2008.  She testified 
that she was never offered the new teacher orientation/training, and that all of her 
contracts reflected a 184-workday school year.  She argued that, because she was not 
given the opportunity to attend the new teacher orientation/training, her seniority date 
should be one day earlier than the August 28, 2006 date reflected on the District’s 
seniority list.  Ms. Alvarez is incorrect.  Only Ms. Alvarez’s 2006-2007 school year 
was converted to probationary status.  If she had attended the new teacher 
orientation/training, she would have done so on the first day of either the 2004-2005 
or the 2005-2006 school year, and she would not be entitled to probationary credit for 
that day.   
 
 
18.  In addition to the mandatory new teacher orientation/training, the District 
offers various training sessions for all teachers, both new and continuing, during the 
summer months.  Attendance at those sessions is voluntary and, if a teacher chooses 
to attend, he/she is paid a stipend exclusive from his/her regular salary.  At the 
hearing, a number of teachers who had attended such voluntary training sessions 
before the beginning of the first school year in which they were considered 
probationary employees argued that their seniority dates should be adjusted to reflect 
that attendance.  They are incorrect.  Seniority credit is given for training when it 
occurs during the first school year in which the employee serves in a probationary 
capacity.  In this case, the beginning of that school year was the start date reflected in 
the contract between the employee and the District. If the training was given during 
that school year, probationary credit should have been given if the training was 
mandatory and if the attendee was paid as part of his/her regular salary.  The 
District’s summer training does not satisfy those criteria.   
 
 
19.  The fact that some of the teachers who took the summer training believed 
the training was required by the District does not affect its status as voluntary.  Even 
if it did, the training did not occur during the school year, and it was not paid for 
through teachers’ regular salaries. 
 

 

6

20.  Respondent Robert Cooper offered into evidence re-employment lists for 
 
school years 2009-2010 and 2010-2011, showing conflicting hire dates of August 15, 
2006 and August 25, 2006.  He argued that the former date should be his seniority 
date.  The correct date for purposes of seniority is not the hire date, but the first date 
of paid service as a probationary employee.  That date, as reflected on Mr. Cooper’s 
contract for the 2006-2007 school year, is August 25, 2006.2
 
21.  Some of the respondents relied on a document entitled “Hueneme School 
 
District 2008-2009 Certificated Seniority List” (Respondents’ Exhibit “A”) to show 
that they were listed as senior to certain other teachers on that list, but are now listed 
as junior to those same teachers on the current seniority list.  Jennifer Tissler credibly 
testified that Exhibit “A” was used in the 2008-2009 school year for purposes of 
transferring teachers between schools and/or between grades.  The list was compiled 
without regard for the rules controlling seniority determinations to be made in 
connection with reduction in force proceedings.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955 were met. 
 
 
2.  All of the identified services are particular kinds of services that could be 
reduced or discontinued under Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce 
or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services 
relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of 
Code section 44949. 
 
 
3.  A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall 
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board 
of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)   
 
/// 

2 The District’s Director of Personnel, Jennifer Tissler, explained that, when 

                                                 
 
the 2009-2010 document was prepared last year, she was under the impression that all 
training a teacher attended during the summer before the beginning of the school year 
counted toward seniority.  She changed Mr. Cooper’s seniority date for the 2010-2011 
school year after the administrative law judge who heard the reduction in force case 
last year ruled that the training counted toward seniority only during contracted time. 

 

7

5.    No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

4.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 
 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the 
Board directed be reduced or discontinued.   
 
 
services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
6.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, 
the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 
position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)   
 
 

ORDER 

2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

 
 
1.  The Accusations against the respondents are sustained.  Notice may be 
given to the respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year because of reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
  
  
DATED:  April 26, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

_____________________________ 
H. STUART WAXMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

8

