BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
INGLEWOOD UNIFIED HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In the Matter of: 
 
The Reduction in Force of Full-Time Equivalent 
Positions of the Certificated Employees of the 
District, 
  
                                           Respondents. 

 
OAH No. 2010030605 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

David B. Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, by Sharon Ormond and Jabari Willis, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 23, 2010, at the Inglewood Unified School 
District, Inglewood, California. 
 
 
Attorneys at Law, represented the Inglewood Unified School District (District). 
 
Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, by Lawrence B. Trygstad, Attorney at Law, 
 
represented Respondent teachers.  A list of Respondents is attached as Attachment A.  An 
explanation of the notes on that list, including the Respondents who were present at the 
hearing, is found in Factual Finding 7, below.   
 
 
was closed and the matter was submitted on April 23, 2010. 

Evidence was received by way of stipulation, testimony and documents.  The record 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

 
The Governing Board of the District determined to reduce or discontinue particular 
 
kinds of services provided by certificated teachers for budgetary reasons.  The decision was 
not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed 
to be reduced or eliminated.   
 
 
review of credentials and seniority.  The selection process was in accordance with the 
requirements of the Education Code, except to the extent that the District failed to send a 
notice to one certificated employee.  Therefore, one Accusation will be dismissed.  
Otherwise, the Board may proceed as indicated herein. 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.  The District provides educational services for approximately 14,000 students in 

Jurisdiction and Parties
 
 
grades kindergarten through 12 at 21 schools.  The District employs approximately 723 
certificated staff in permanent or probationary positions. 
 
 
2.  Gary McHenry is the Superintendent of the District and Monalisa Hasson is the 
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources of the District.  Their actions were taken in 
those official capacities.  Ms. Hasson was responsible for implementation of the technical 
aspects of the layoff. 
 
 
3.  Before March 15, 2010, the District served on teachers, including Respondents, by 
personal service and/or certified mail, a written notice (notice) that it had been recommended 
that notice be given to them pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their 
services would not be required for the next school year.  Each notice set forth the reasons for 
the recommendation and noted that the Board had passed a Resolution reducing the 
certificated staff by full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.  The first notice (Exhibit 1) related 
to the reduction of 95 FTE positions.  Some changes were made and a second notice was 
served relating to the reduction of 83 FTE positions (Exhibit 2). 
 
 
4.  Approximately 70 certificated employees in the regular education program and 
management, and six certificated employees in the adult education program, referred to as 
Respondents, submitted timely written requests for a hearing to determine if there is cause 
for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.   
 
 
5.  The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each of the Respondents.  
On March 31, 2010, the District served the Respondents by certified mail with an Accusation 
along with required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense.  Several of the 
Respondents were also personally served. 
 
 
6.  Notices of Defense were served on the District in two ways.  Several Respondents 
filled out and returned the blank Notice of Defense that had been served with the Accusation 
packets.  Mr. Trygstad filed a Notice of Defense with respect to all of the Respondents.  
(Both of these formats are found in Exhibit 8.)   
 
 
numbered are teachers whom the District claimed had been served with Accusations.   Those 
who did not return a Notice of Defense have the designation “NNOD.”  The District 
stipulated that its notices and Accusations were withdrawn as to all names with the 
designation “W/D.”  Finally, all Respondents whose names have the designation “*” 
appeared at the hearing, although not necessarily for the entire hearing. 
 

7.  Attachment A is incorporated by reference.  The 76 names originally listed and 

 2

 

 
 

8.  Respondents in this proceeding are probationary and permanent certificated 

9.  There are three resolutions relating to this matter.  Copies of all three are attached 

 
employees of the District. 
 
The Governing Board and the Lay Off Resolution
 
 
to the Accusation in Exhibit 6.  The first was passed on February 10, 2010, when the 
Governing Board of the District (Board) was given notice of the Superintendent’s 
recommendation that 95 FTE employees be given notice that their services would not be 
required for the next school year and stating the reasons therefore.  Board Resolution number 
17/2009-2010 was adopted that day (First Resolution) and proposed a layoff of 95 FTE 
certificated employees and provided for the reduction or elimination of the following 
particular kinds of services: 
 
(1.1)  51   K-6   Classroom teaching positions 
(51  F.T.E.) 
(1.2)    1  7-8     Physical Education teaching position 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.3)    1  7-8    Classroom Language Arts teaching position 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.4)  2  7-8    Classroom Social Studies teaching position 
(  2  F.T.E.) 
(1.5)  1  7-8    Classroom Life Science teaching position  
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.6)  1  7-8    Classroom Physical Science teaching position 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.7)  1  7-8    Classroom Mathematics teaching position  
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
 
(1.8)  1  7-8    Classroom Computer teaching position 
(1.9)  1  9-12  Classroom Physical Education teaching position  (  1  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.10)  1  9-12  Classroom Language Arts teaching positions 
(  2  F.T.E.) 
(1.11)  2  9-12  Classroom Social Studies teaching positions 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.12)  1  9-12  Classroom Life Science teaching position  
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.13)  1  9-12  Classroom Physical Science teaching position 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.14)  1  9-12  Classroom Mathematics teaching position  
( 1  F.T.E.) 
 
(1.15)  1  9-12  Classroom Computer teaching position 
( 6  F.T.E.) 
 
(1.16)  6    
(10  F.T.E.) 
 
(1.17)  10   
(  2  F.T.E.) 
 
(1.18)  2   
(  1  F.T.E.) 
 
(1.19)  1   
(  2  F.T.E.) 
 
(1.20)  2   
(1.21)  7 
(  7  F.T.E.) 
 
 
 
 
10.  The First Resolution also established tie-breaker criteria for determining the 
 
relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  
It provided that the order of termination shall be based on the needs of the District and the 
students in accordance with the criteria stated therein.  More specifically, the tie-breaker 
criteria provide for a priority list of degrees, qualifications, authorizations, credentials, 
certifications, experience, undergraduate units and training.  In the event of a tie after 
reference to all listed criteria, a lottery would be held. 

 
  Intervention Specialist positions 
 
  Instructional Coaching positions 
 
  Counseling positions 
 
  School Psychologist position 
  Program Coordinator positions 
 
  Administrative Assistant positions  

Total:  95.0 FTEs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 3

11.  The First Resolution also included a definition of competency to be used if a 

12.  The second resolution was passed on March 10, 2010, when the Board was given 

 
more senior employee was to displace, or bump, a less senior employee from their position.  
The qualifications for such displacement included the status of “highly qualified” for the 
subject or field within the meaning of the federal No Child Left Behind Act, and appropriate 
certification qualifications (including English Language authorizations). 
 
 
notice of the Superintendent’s recommendation that 83 FTE employees be given notice that 
their services would not be required for the next school year and stating the reasons 
therefore.  Board Resolution number 31/2009-2010 was adopted that day (Second 
Resolution) and proposed that, as to the First Resolution, certain services should not be 
reduced and other additional services should be reduced, and proposed a layoff of 83 FTE 
certificated employees and provided for the reduction or elimination of the following 
particular kinds of services: 
 
(51  F.T.E.) 
(1.1)  51  K-6    Elementary Classroom teaching positions 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.2)     1  7-8     Physical Education teaching position        
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.3)     1  7-8    Classroom Language Arts teaching positions  
(  2  F.T.E.) 
(1.4)     2  7-8    Classroom Social Studies teaching positions  
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.5)     1  7-8    Classroom Life Science teaching position     
(1.6)     1  7-8    Classroom Physical Science teaching position 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.7)     1  7-8    Classroom Mathematics teaching position           (  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.8)     1  7-8    Classroom Computer teaching position              (  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.9)     1  9-12  Classroom Physical Education teaching position (  1  F.T.E.) 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.10)   1  9-12  Classroom Language Arts teaching positions  
(  2  F.T.E.) 
(1.11)   2  9-12  Classroom Social Studies teaching positions  
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.12)   1  9-12  Classroom Life Science teaching position     
(1.13)   1  9-12  Classroom Physical Science teaching position 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.14)   1  9-12  Classroom Mathematics teaching position           (  1  F.T.E.) 
(1.15)   1  9-12  Classroom Computer teaching position 
(  1   F.T.E.) 
   Intervention Specialist positions                            (  6  F.T.E.) 
(1.16)   6    
   Elementary School Psychologist Position              (  1  F.T.E.)
(1.17)    1   
(   1 F.T.E.) 
   School Psychologist Position 
(1.17)    1 
(  2  F.T.E.)  
   Elementary Program Coordinator Positions 
(1.18)    2 
   Administrative Assistant positions 
(1.19)    6 
(  6  F.T.E.) 
   Elementary Administrative Assistant Positions  (  6  F.T.E.) 
(1.19)    6 
 
   Assistant Principal, Adult Education 
 (1.20)   1 
(  1  F.T.E.) 
 
Total:  83.0 FTEs 
 
 
 
Instructional Coaching positions were removed; several descriptions of services were 
changed to add or drop that they were Elementary positions; Elementary Administrative 
Assistant Positions were reduced from 7 to 6 FTE; and 2 Counseling positions were 
removed.  As a result of the changes, the District identified additional employees for possible 
lay off. 

Some of the changes from the First Resolution to the Second Resolution are: ten 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 4

13.  The third resolution was passed on March 10, 2010, when the Board was given 

14.  Hasson testified that the Resolutions were required by the District’s fiscal crisis 

15.  The decision to reduce services was not related to the capabilities and dedication 

 
notice of the Superintendent’s recommendation that employees providing 88 hours per week 
of services in the Adult Education program be given notice that their services would not be 
required for the next school year and stating the reasons therefore.  Board Resolution number 
29/2009-2010 was adopted that day (Third Resolution) and proposed a layoff of certificated 
employees providing 88 hours per week of services in the Adult Education, Older Adults 
program, a particular kind of service.  At the Hearing, the District withdrew Accusations 
against all employees in the Adult Education program. 
 
 
and need to reduce services to balance its budget for the welfare of students.  Despite budget 
cuts of $7 million for the present school year, the Board must reduce its present budget by 
another $4 million.  The Board received information about the next state budget leading the 
Board to believe that, for school year 2010-2011, it would experience a further budget 
shortfall of $4 million.  Further, the District does not anticipate that it will be able to 
maintain required reserve funds and therefore has filed a qualified budget this year. 
 
 
of the individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated. 
 
The Seniority List and the Lay Offs
 
 
(first date of paid service), current assignments and credentials.  
 
 
senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced.  The District used 
information from the seniority list and personnel files to apply the tie-breaker criteria of the 
First Resolution.   
 
 
in another area and were entitled to displace, or “bump,” other employees.  In determining 
who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of 
reductions not covered by the known vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent 
staff in inverse order of seniority.  The District then checked the credentials of affected 
individuals and whether they could “bump” other employees. 
 
 
exemption from the layoff for certain employees “because of the special training and 
experience . . . which others with more seniority do not possess.”  (Exhibit B to the 
Accusation in Exhibit 6.)  Although this language would entitle the Board to seek to skip an 
employee with less seniority rendering a specific service, there was no evidence of skipping 
in this layoff.   
 

 
17.  The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the least 

18.  The District then determined whether the least senior employees held credentials 

16.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority dates 

19.  The First Resolution also included a determination that the District would seek 

 5

20.  The services identified in the First and Second Resolutions are particular kinds of 

21.  The District identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds 

22.  Sandra Oliveira has a first date of paid service to the District of April 16, 2007.  

 
services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The 
Board’s decisions to reduce or discontinue the identified services were neither arbitrary nor 
capricious, and were a proper exercise of its discretion.  The decisions were based on the 
welfare of the District and its students.  
 
 
of services that the Board directed be reduced or discontinued.  No junior certificated 
employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services which a more senior employee is 
certificated and competent to render, with the exception of Sandra Oliveira, as set forth more 
specifically below. 
 
Failure to Serve a Notice 
 
 
She is a permanent employee with a clear multi subject credential and CLAD, who presently 
serves as the Program Coordinator at Hudnall Elementary School.  She was one of the two 
Elementary Program Coordinators identified for layoff.  The District failed to provide notice 
of layoff to her.   
 
 
first date of paid service to the District of September 28, 2004.1   
 
Individual Respondents, Respondents’ Contentions and Related Evidence
 
 
24.  Respondents contend that all Respondents with greater seniority than Oliviera 
(approximately 23 Respondents) must be retained.  Further, several Respondents contend 
that they are qualified to fulfill the duties of the position of Elementary Program Coordinator 
and were not contacted by the District to determine if they would apply for or take the 
position.  Many Respondents from this group testified and established their capabilities and 
experience, and that they would be eligible to apply for the position of Elementary Program 
Coordinator. 
 
 
25.  Hiring for the position of Elementary Program Coordinator is a competitive 
process and a recent announcement of vacancy (Exhibit C) includes numerous qualifications 
and desired characteristics for a successful applicant.  The process is flexible and program 
coordinators have been appointed in the past who do not satisfy every qualification and 
characteristic listed in the announcement, but who nevertheless established that they were 
capable.  Many of the skills of a successful program coordinator are learned on-the-job. 
 

23.  The most senior certificated employee identified for layoff is Gina Lutcher with a 

                                                 
1 The evidence explained that, in the Seniority Report (Exhibit 10), employees 
 
proposed for lay off have their seniority number highlighted in purple.  Lutcher is the most 
senior certificated employee with a seniority number highlighted in purple. 

 6

28.  Although Devereaux had an excused absence from her school on March 12, 

26.  Heather Devereaux has a seniority date of January 3, 2005, number 523 on the 
 
seniority list.  She changed her address in January 2009 and submitted a change of address 
card (Exhibit B) to her school site at the beginning of the next school year in September 
2009.  The notice and Accusation were sent to Devereaux at her prior address of record with 
the District. 
 
 
27.  According to District policy (Exhibit 14), employees must notify the District’s 
human resources department of all address changes within 15 days.  The clerk in charge of 
entering this information into the records does not receive change of address cards from the 
school sites. 
 
 
2009, she signed in and attended a meeting with Hasson relating to the layoffs and learned 
she was on the layoff list.  Despite her claim that she did not receive a notice, she submitted a 
Request for Hearing.  Despite her claim that she did not receive an Accusation, she submitted 
a Notice of Defense.  Under all of the circumstances, it was established that the District 
served Devereaux at her address of record on file with the District human resources 
department and that such service was sufficient. 
 
 
29.  John Schubert, seniority number 677, received his CLAD certification effective 
April 10, 2010 (Exhibit D).  The District agreed to add this to his seniority information for 
future use. 
 
 
number 682, to change it from September 10, 2008, to September 22, 2006.  Ruiz would still 
be subject to lay off under this new seniority date. 
 
 
number 643, to change it from April 16, 2007, to a date no earlier than January 2006.  
Additional research is necessary to determine the exact date.  Brown’s status as a 
probationary employee would not change, and she would still be subject to lay off under this 
new seniority date. 
 
 
including, but not limited to: improper classification as temporary or substitute employees; 
violation of the rights of probationary employees to notice and an opportunity to be heard; 
improper reduction in teaching in general; improper skipping by the District; failure to 
permit employees to bump into another position; and failure to assign correct seniority dates.  
Except as specifically set forth herein, these contentions were not supported by sufficient 
evidence or the law and, therefore, are rejected.   
 
 
 
 
 

30.  The District stipulated to amend the seniority date of Marisela Ruiz, seniority 

31.  The District stipulated to amend the seniority date of Tracy Brown, seniority 

32.  Respondents raised several additional contentions in their brief (Exhibit A), 

 7

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing 

“(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not 

1.  Education Code2 section 44949, subdivision (a), states in pertinent part: 

 
2.  Section 44955 provides, in pertinent part:   

 
 
 
 
board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year for the reasons 
specified in Section 44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given written 
notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been 
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.”  
 
 
 
 
“(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes other 
than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, 
and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as 
specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
 
later than the beginning of the following school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the 
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these 
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing 
board may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the 
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the 
school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee 
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or 
any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.  
  
 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of 
needs of the district and the students thereof.  Upon the request of any employee whose order 
of termination is so determined, the governing board shall furnish in writing no later than 
five days prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance with Section 44949, a 
statement of the specific criteria used in determining the order of termination and the 
application of the criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other employees in the 
group.  This requirement that the governing board provide, on request, a written statement of 
reasons for determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to give affected 
employees any legal right or interest that would not exist without such a requirement. . . . 
  
 
“(c)  . . . [S]ervices of such employees shall be shall be terminated in the reverse order 
in which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with Sections 44844 
and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices 

“As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 

                                                 
 

2 All citations are to the Education Code. 

 8

 

“(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 

“The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner 

3.  Sections 44949 and 44955 establish jurisdiction for this proceeding.   The notice 

“(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a 

and a right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed 
reemployed for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications 
entitle them to render. . . .  
 
 
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons:  
 
 
course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential with a 
specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the 
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or 
course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not 
possess.” 
 
 
and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and 44945 were met.  (Factual 
Findings 1 through 8.) 
  
4.  A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, subdivision 
 
(b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, thereafter, be 
performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered 
services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to deal with 
the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)  
  
 
5.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to 
the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  students 
within the meaning of section 44949. 
 
 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior teachers may be 
given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or 
capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High 
School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. 
Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) 
 
 
the District agreed to reconfigure the seniority list.  See Factual Findings 20, 21 and 22.  This 
will not have an affect on the order of layoff.  It may affect possible rehiring rights, which 

7.  Stipulations were reached in instances where the seniority list was incorrect, and 

6.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

 9

8.  None of the errors in the seniority list are prejudicial to Respondents in the context 

are not subject to the jurisdiction of this hearing and are covered in other statutory provisions 
such as sections 44956 and 44957.   
 
 
of this proceeding.  Therefore, they are deemed “nonsubstantive procedural errors” under 
section 44949, subdivision (c), and are not cause for dismissing the charges. 
 
9.  As a result of the District’s failure to send a notice to Oliviera and her lack of 
 
inclusion in these proceedings, Respondents contend that the Accusations must be dismissed 
as to all Respondents with greater seniority in the District, based on the language in section 
44955, subdivision (b), that “the services of no permanent employee may be terminated 
under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or any other employee 
with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent employee is 
certificated and competent to render.”  The District contends that any prejudice resulting 
from its failure to include Oliviera is limited to the one most senior employee receiving a 
notice, Lutcher, and that, if the Accusation against Lutcher is dismissed and she is retained as 
an employee, there is no further prejudice to Respondents.  See Factual Findings 22 through 
25. 
 
 
known as “the domino effect”; that is, because of the error as to one employee, several more 
senior Respondents must be retained.  However, it is determined that there is insufficient 
justification for invalidating the entire layoff or imposing a “domino effect.”  Section 44949, 
subdivision (c)(3), specifically provides:  “Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by 
the school district or governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for 
dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.”  

10.  Respondents’ argument is frequently made in these kinds of proceedings and is 

 
Further, Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, adopted a 
“corresponding number” approach in not applying the over-inclusive remedy of ordering the 
school district to retain all employees who were senior to the junior employees who were not 
served with a layoff notice.  The remedy was tailored to correct the mistake to identify only 
those employees who were directly prejudiced by the error.  The Court held:  

 
“Because at least some of the persons skipped should have received the notices, a 

corresponding number of the most senior of the employees who were not reemployed must 
have been improperly given notices.  The trial court must determine which of the Teachers 
suffered prejudicial error in this case.”  (Id. at p. 576.)  

 
Thus, the adjustment to be made in this case is limited to reinstatement of only the 
most senior teacher who received a preliminary layoff notice, the only employee who was 
actually prejudiced by the mistake.  This approach is more in keeping with the entire 
statutory scheme for teacher layoffs 
 
 
 

 10

 

ORDER 

 
1.  Notice may be given to employees occupying full-time equivalent certificated 
 
positions that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the 
reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  Such notices may be given to 
the Respondents listed in Attachment A who are not designated with “W/D.”  No such notice 
may be given to Gina Lutcher. 

  2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.  Each Respondent may receive 

3.  The Accusations are dismissed as to the Respondents listed in Attachment A who 

 
such a notice.  
 
 
are designated with “W/D” and Gina Lutcher, and no final layoff notices may be sent to 
them.   
 
 
 DATED: April 27, 2010. 

DAVID B. ROSENMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 11

Section 1: Respondents in Regular Education Program and Management: 

ATTACHMENT “A” 

 
 

46.  MARIA NAJERA * 
47.  MELODY POGUE NNOD 
48.  NICHOLAS RASCHILLA 
49.  TERRENCE RICE 
50.  REGINA RIEUX-HARVEY * NNOD; W/D
51.  STEPHEN ROWE W/D 
52.  JENNIFER I RUBEN * 
53.  MARISELA RUIZ * 
54.  NELLIE SALDANA DE GUZMAN * 
55.  JOHN SCHUBERT * 
56.  KENNETH SRESHTA W/D 
57.  SHAWN STANTON * 
58.  NATALIE STECKEN 
59.  EDITH STONE-JACKSON * 
60.  SAMANTHA TAHAJIAN * 
61.  CARNITA THOMAS NNOD; W/D 
62.  YOLANDA VALDIVIA-GARCIA * 
63.  CLAUDIA VALENZUELA * 
64.  SOFIA VELARDE  NNOD 
65.  BASILISA VILLAVICENCIO * 
66.  MAYRA VILLAVICENCIO * 
67.  OPAL L WILKERSON * 
68.  NAKIA WILSON * 
69.  CHANTELLE WINSLOW NNOD 
70.  DARCIE WOLFE * 

 

Section 2: Respondents in Adult 
Education Program: 
 

1.  CELESTINE COLLINS W/D 
2.  RUBEN JAIME GONZALEZ W/D 
3.  TREVOR A GRAHAM W/D 
4.  DEIDRE HARRIS W/D 
5.  MILLARD JOHNSON W/D 
6.  CARMEN RICHARDSON W/D 

1.  ROBERT ALANIZ * 
2.  CHERYL ALEXANDER  * 
3.  AARON ALLEN  * 
4.  MOI ALLUMS  * 
5.  TARA L ARMSTRONG-BOOTH*  
6.  RAVINDER ATHWAL * 
7.  NANCY AVILA * 
8.  MIGUEL BARAHONA 
9.  LETICIA BARBA * 
10.  JONATHAN BARBEE * 
11.  SHARON BELL * NNOD 
12.  JIMANESE BENTLEY * 
13.  TRACEY BROWN * 
14.  TIFFNEY L. CAMBRIDGE W/D 
15.  TRICIA CAPWELL W/D 
16.  FRANCES CARDENAS W/D 
17.  FRANCESA D CHASE 
18.  DEBORAH CHERRY * 
19.  BECKY J CHOI 
20.  CYNTHIA F CLARK * 
21.  CRYSTAL A CRAWFORD * 
22.  JORGE CRUZ W/D 
23.  HEATHER DEVEREAUX * 
24.  RIJALI DURHAM * 
25.  LISA FEARS   NNOD 
26.  ALLEN FOWLER * 
27.  SALLY FRIEDMAN W/D 
28.  SHERRI GREER *  
29.  IRA HARDEN NNOD; W/D 
30.  CHERELLE HARTLEY-BONAR W/D 
31.  BRIAN HARVEY * 
32.  JO ANN L HERNDON W/D 
33.  ELISE C JERNIGAN * 
34.  MICHAEL KLINGLER W/D 
35.  ALLISON LEGGETT * 
36.  LETICIA LEYVA * 
37.  JAYE LIEBERMAN * 
38.  EARLENE LORD W/D 
39.  YI PING LU * NNOD 
40.  ALLISON LUND* 
41.  GINA LUTCHER * 
42.  JAMES MANNING W/D 
43.  CAROLYN MCDONALD W/D 
44.  AMA MUNDI W/D 
45.  ANGELA NADOZIE * 

 12

 

2 

