BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF  
THE ROSEMEAD SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certain Certificated Employees of the  
Rosemead School District, 
 
                                                   Respondent.
 
 

 
 
  

 

  OAH No. L2010010958 

PROPOSED DECISION

Guy A. Bryant, Attorney at Law, represented Rosemead School District (District). 

Richard J. Schwab, Attorney at Law, represented Anne Agnant (Agnant), Albert 

 
Jennifer M. Russell, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 21, 2010, in Rosemead, 
California. 
 
 
 
 
Aguilar, Estela Gonzalez, Haelim Han, Jason Huett (Huett), Scott Levin, Respect Ly 
(Ly), Dana Martin, Evonne Medrano, Deborah Pettus, Bernadette Polich, Conner Ryan, 
Terri Totten, Elsa Tsan (Tsan), and Sonia Valencia (respondents), who were present at 
the hearing. 
 
 
was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 21, 2010. 
 

The evidence was received by stipulation, testimony and documents.  The record 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. 

Amy Enomoto-Perez is the Superintendent of the District.  Armida 

 
 
Carreon is the Senior Director of Human Resources and Operations for the District.  
Their actions were taken in their official capacity. Ms. Enomoto-Perez made and filed the 
Accusation. 
 
 
 

Respondents in this proceeding are certificated employees of the District. 

2. 

3. 

Between March 9, 2010 and March 12, 2010, the District provided written 

notice to respondents pursuant to Education Code1 sections 44949 and 44955 that their 
services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Each written notice set 
forth the reasons for the District’s decision and noted that 15 full time equivalent (FTE) 
positions would be reduced or discontinued.  

                                                 

1 

otherwise. 

All statutory citations are to the Education Code, unless indicated 

On March 30, 2010, the District filed and thereafter served the Accusation 

and related documents on respondents.  Each respondent appearing in this matter filed a 
timely Notice of Defense requesting a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists 
for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  All prehearing jurisdictional 
requirements were met. 

On March 4, 2010, the Board of Trustees (Board) of the District adopted 
Personnel Resolution No. 09-10 #2 (Resolution) reducing or discontinuing the following 
particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2010-2011 school year: 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 

Services 

 

 

 

 

FTE 

 

Elementary Instruction at Grades K-6 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.00 

2.00 

3.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

Second grade Teacher  
 
Fourth grade Teacher   
 
Fifth grade Teachers   
 
Sixth grade Teachers   
 
Itinerant Teacher-Assigned to  
Remediation with Language Arts 
 
English Language Development Teacher 
 
Total Reduction of Elementary Instruction and Support Programs 9 
 
 
 
Social Science/U.S. History Teacher   
 
CORE-Language Arts/Social Science Teacher 
 
Itinerant Teachers-Assigned to  
Remediation with Language Arts/Math 
 
Itinerant Teacher-Assigned to  
English Language Development/Remediation  
with Language Arts/Math 
 
Counselor 
 
Total Reduction of Middle School Instruction and Support Programs 6 

Middle School Instruction at Grades 7-8 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

2.00 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

 
Total Reduction of District Programs and Services   15 
 
The Resolution exempted from layoff the services of certificated 

6. 

 
employees, regardless of seniority, who possess credentials which authorize services as 
Special Education Teachers, Speech and Language Specialists, Math Teachers and 
Science Teachers. 
 
 
seniority of certified employees with the same date of first paid service.  The criteria, 
which are set forth in Exhibit A to the Resolution, provide that the order of layoff shall be 
determined according to the following criteria: 
 

The Resolution established tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative 

7. 

1. Greatest number of years of teaching with a credential issued with in the 
United States. 
 
2. Breadth of credential authorization. 
 
3. Advanced degrees in assignment or credential-related subject areas. 
 
4.  Greatest  number  of  post-BA  accredited  college  unites  on  file  with  the 
District in assignment or credential-related subject areas. 
 
5. Date and time employee signed first employment contract. 

9. 

 
8. 

The services set forth in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of services 

 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955. 
 
 
The Board took action to reduce the services set forth in Factual Finding 5 
because of uncertainty surrounding future State funding.  The decision to reduce services 
was not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals whose services are 
proposed to be reduced or eliminated.  The decision to reduce the particular kinds of 
services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s 
discretion. 

 

 
 
10.  Ms.Carreon was responsible for implementation of the technical aspects of 
Board’s Resolution.  She reviewed information in multiple personnel files as well as data 
from the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing to compile a tentative 
seniority list containing seniority dates, current assignments, and credential and 
certifications.  She distributed the list to certificated employees within the District for 
them to verify, update or correct pertinent information.   

 
11. 

At hearing, respondent Ly disputed her seniority date of September 4, 

2007.  She contended that she was entitled to a hire date of September 1, 2006 based on 
her assignment as a long-term substitute teacher for at least 75% of the school days 
during the 2006/2007 school year. Under section 44918, long-term substitute teachers are 

 

3

entitled to “tack on” to their seniority if they worked at least 75% of the school days of 
the preceding school year.  Ly established she worked 135 days during the 2006/2007 
school year.  The District stipulated that Ly is entitled to a seniority date of September 1, 
2006, and that the seniority list would be revised accordingly. 

There was no challenge to the order of relative seniority on the seniority 

13. 

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations, 

retirements and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of layoff notices to 
be delivered to employees by March 15, 2010. 

At the hearing, the District rescinded the layoff notices as to respondents 

 
12. 

list. 
 

 
14. 

 
Agnant, Huett and Tsan. 
 
 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
 

1. 

Section 44949 provides in pertinent part as follows: 

the  employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by 

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the 
governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing 
board  and 
the 
superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee  .  .  .  that  it  has  been 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the 
reasons therefore. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 

2. 

Section 44955 provides in pertinent part as follows: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for 
causes  other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and 
Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee  shall 
be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  cause  other  than  as  specified  in 
Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
(b) Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all of the 
schools district for the first six months in which school is in session shall 
have declined . . . , whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced 
or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year, . 
. . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall 
have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease 
the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board 
may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of 

4

 
 

 
 
 

 

the  district,  permanent  as  well  as 
the  certificated  employees  of 
probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.    Except  as  otherwise 
provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be 
terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary 
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render 
a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certified  and  competent  to 
render. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
 
As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on 
the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of 
termination  solely  on  the  basis  on  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students 
thereof.  Upon the request of any employee whose order of termination is 
so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  .  .  .  a  statement  of  the 
specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the 
application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other 
employees in the group . . . . 
 
(c) . . . [S]ervices of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of 
the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in 
accordance with Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a permanent 
or probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing 
as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed 
for the ensuing school year. 
 
The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a 
manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which their 
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. . . .  
 
(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the 
following reasons: 
 
(1)  The  district  demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee 
has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or 
course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more 
seniority do not possess. 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 

 
 
3. 
44955 were met. 
 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and 

 

5

5. 

4. 

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 

The services set fort in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of services 

 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.  The 
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor 
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and 
pupils within the meaning of section 44949. 
 
 
44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students 
shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce service’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees 
are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees 
91976) 64 Cal.app.3d 167, 178-179.) 
 
 
of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or discontinuation of the 
particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 5.  The District properly identified 
the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board 
directed be reduced or discontinued. 
 
 
services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

Cause exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44945 to reduce the number 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 

7. 

6. 

 

ORDER 

 
 
The District may give notice to respondents Albert Aguilar, Estela Gonzalez, 
Haelim Han, Scott Levin, Dana Martin, Evonne Medrano, Debra Pettus, Bernadette 
Polich, Conner Ryan, Terri Totten, and Sonia Valencia that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

 
 

Dated: May 6, 2010 

 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
JENNIFER M. RUSSELL 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

6

