BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
BUCKEYE UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF EL DORADO 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 
 
ASHLEY BLACK, JENELLE CARVER, 
AMY DeOLIVIERA, HEATHER McINTYRE, 
KERRY McFARLAND, and MELODY 
ROOT, 
 
                                                        Respondents.
 
 

 

 
 
 
    OAH No. 2010030052 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Dian M. Vorters, Office of 

 
 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 15, 2010, in Shingle Springs, 
California. 
 

Heather M. Edwards, Attorney at Law,1 represented complainant, Teresa M. Wenig, 

Superintendent, Buckeye Union School District. 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 15, 2010. 

A. Eugene Huguenin, Jr., Attorney at Law,2 represented respondents.  (See Exhibit A) 

 
 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
General Findings Concerning Statutory Requirements 
 
 
 

Respondents are certificated district employees. 

1. 

                                                

1 Heather M. Edwards, Attorney at Law, Girard Edwards & Hance, 1121 L Street, Suite 510, Sacramento, 

California  95814. 
 
2 A. Eugene Huguenin, Jr., Attorney at Law, Huguenin Law Office, 9297 Office Park Circle, Suite 110, Elk 

Grove, California  95758. 

 

1

2. 

On March 3, 2010, the governing board of the district resolved to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services.  To that end, the board adopted Resolution 10-04 
(Layoff Resolution).  Within the meaning of Code section 44955, the services are “particular 
kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce or discontinue 
these services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 

3. 

Not later than March 15, 2009, the superintendent of the district caused the 

governing board of the district and respondents to be notified in writing of her 
recommendation that preliminary notice be given respondents, pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955,3 that the district would not require their services for the 2010-
2011 school year.  The notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.  In recommending 
reductions in certificated staff, the superintendent considered the qualified condition of the 
district’s budget.  The recommendation was not related to respondents’ performance as 
certificated employees. 
 

4. 

5. 

A Preliminary Notice of Layoff was delivered to each respondent, by personal 

Superintendent Teresa Wenig testified that her recommendation to the board 
was based on a $1million budget shortfall for the 2010-2011 school year.  The deficit was 
caused by a loss in state and federal funds.  The shortfall would have been greater but for the 
board’s use of $1.3 million in reserves. 
 
 
delivery.  Superintendent Wenig or Colleen Johnson, Director of Human Resources, hand 
delivered the preliminary notice of layoff package to each teacher at her place of 
employment. 
 
 
hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, she had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to 
the person sending the notice.  The request had to be delivered by a specified date, which 
was a date that was not less than seven days after the notice of termination was served.4  And 
the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 
Respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to determine whether 
 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  An accusation was timely 
served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice that, if they were going to request a 
hearing, they were required to file a Notice of Defense within five days after being served 

The notice advised each respondent of the following:  She had a right to a 

7. 

6. 

                                                

3 All references to the Code are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 
 
4 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

 

2

8. 

The Board must allow for positively assured attrition such as voluntary 

with the accusation.5  Respondents filed timely notices of defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
Positively Assured Attrition 
 
 
resignations and retirements which occur during the “computation period.”  (Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School Dist. (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831, 847.)  The district must “consider evidence of positively assured attrition, 
involuntary retirements for the [upcoming] school year which were known to the board when 
it made its preliminary determination on 15 March … and when it made its final 
determination on 15 May.”  (Lewin v. Bd. of Trustees of Pasadena Unified School Dist. 
(1976) 62 Cal.App.3d 977, 983.) 
 
As set forth in the Layoff Resolution, the governing board considered all 
 
positively assured attrition which has occurred to date, that is, all deaths, resignations, 
retirements, and additional attrition which may occur before the start of the 2010/2011 school 
year in reducing these services and but for the attrition already assured and the attrition 
anticipated would have found it necessary to reduce additional kinds of service.  
 
Services the District Intends to Reduce or Discontinue 
 

9. 

10. 

The governing board of the district determined, in the Layoff Resolution, that  

because particular kinds of services were to be reduced or eliminated, it was necessary to 
decrease the number of permanent employees in the district by 13.30 full-time equivalents 
(FTE).  The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to reduce 
or discontinue are: 
 

Administrative Positions
Director of Human Resources 

1.0  FTE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Certificated Positions 
Elementary Music                                                                         1.0 FTE 
  4.0  FTE 
Elementary Physical Education Program 
K-8 Counseling Program 
   .8  FTE 
               3.0  FTE 
K-5 Self-contained classrooms 
          1.0  FTE 
      
7th/8th grade Math 
 
          1.0  FTE 
7th grade Life Science 
 
          1.0  FTE 
7th/8th grade Language Arts  
 .5  FTE 
 
 
Special Education 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

                                                

5 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a Notice 
of Defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
reduction in force cases, the Notice of Defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

3

Total Certificated Reductions 

 

 

         13.3 FTE 

11. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), the governing 

 
Use of Tie-Breaking Criteria Based on the Current Needs of the District and Students 
 
 
board of the district established, in Resolution 10-02 (Tie-Breaker Resolution), criteria for 
determining the order of termination as among employees who first rendered paid service on 
the same date.  The district employed tie-breaking to achieve a proper list of employees to 
receive layoff notices.  Points were granted to each affected employee based upon all the 
following criteria.  Employees with the fewest points were to be terminated before 
employees with more points.   
 

Multiple number of current credentials held K-8; 4 points (total) 

a. 

b. 

 
 

c. 

d. 

Total years teaching in a California public school: 

Five (5) years or more;  2 points 
One to four (1 to 4) years; 1 point 

Professional Clear Credential;  1 point 

If two or more certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the 
same date still have the same number of points after application of points 
provided above, the ranking of such employees shall be determined by a 
lottery conducted by the Superintendent or her designee. 

The lottery was conducted by drawing names out of a bowl. 

 
 
 
 
applied tie-breaking criteria and conducted a lottery to break continuing ties.  The final order 
of seniority was deemed to be: 
 

Seven teachers shared a seniority date of August 11, 2008.  The district 

12. 

Name 
Kerry McFarland 
Susanna Fong 
Karinne Ziegler 
Kristin Cheatham 
Amy DeOliviera 
Darcey Little 
Melody Root 

Points 
7 
7 
6 
6 
5 
5 
2 

Seniority After Lottery 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

13. 

Seven teachers shared a seniority date of August 7, 2007.  The district applied 

 
tie-breaking criteria and conducted a lottery to break continuing ties.  The final order of 
seniority was deemed to be: 6
 

Name 
Nancy Savage 
Melinda Spooner 
Jinny Klein 
Kori Carey 
Kevin Cadden 
Heather McIntyre 
Jenelle Carver 

Points 
7 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 

Seniority After Lottery 
1 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
6 
7 

14. 

Skipping describes the process by which the district may deviate from the 

 
Skipping/Bumping/Seniority 
 
 
order of seniority when there is an identified need for a particular type of service, there is a 
junior employee who is uniquely qualified to provide that service or teach a subject, and 
there is no senior employee who is certificated and competent to provide the service.  (Ed. 
Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).)  The district employed skipping to achieve a proper list of 
employees to receive layoff notices. 
 
 
employees who are more senior and who are competent to perform a particular kind of 
service or teach a particular subject.  The district employed bumping to achieve a proper list 
of employees to receive layoff notices. 
 
 
Among the teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority in the district 
gives a greater legal entitlement to a position.  Seniority is defined as the date upon which an 
employee first rendered paid services in a probationary position.  (Ed. Code, § 44845.) 
 

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school district.  

Bumping describes the process by which the district identifies those 

15. 

16. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides that no senior employee may 

be terminated while any less senior employee is retained to render a service which the more 
senior permanent employee is “certificated and competent” to render.  “It [is] the district’s 
obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine whether any permanent 
employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic layoff possess[es] the 
seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned to another position.”   
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 137.) 

 
 

                                                
 
was held to rank the two least senior employees, Heather McIntyre and Jenelle Carver. 

6 There was no evidence that a lottery was held to rank the four employees receiving three points.  A lottery 

 

5

17. 

Superintendent Wenig testified that the district maintains a seniority list of all 

18. 

certificated employees.  The seniority list is posted at each school site and employees are 
advised to review and update the list.  The seniority list is verified and maintained by Human 
Resources Director, Coleen Johnson.  Ms. Johnson testified that information is gathered from 
personnel files and verified through the California Teaching Commission.  Forms are mailed 
each year to all certificated employees for updates and identification of errors.  The last 
verification was mailed to employees on January 21, 2010.  No errors were reported, 
however, some teachers had earned a clear credential.  All verified information was 
incorporated into the final seniority list. 
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping at Administrative Level 
 
 
The governing board determined to lay off the Director of Human Resources 
to effect a reduction of 1.0 FTE in Administration.  No bumping, skipping, or tie-breaking 
was employed.   
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping at the Elementary School Level 
 
 
necessary to reduce 3.0 FTE K-5 Self-Contained Classroom Teaching positions, 4.0 FTE 
Elementary Physical Education (PE) positions, and 1.0 FTE Elementary Music position for a 
total of 8.0 FTE.  (Factual Finding 10.)  The district implemented the reduction by first 
looking at the seniority chart and identifying which employees held relevant credentials.  
Tie-breaking procedures were implemented as necessary between those employees who first 
rendered paid service on the same date.  Bumping was employed to ensure that the more 
senior teachers, certificated and competent to render a particular kind of service, were 
retained over those with less seniority. 
 
 
with the least seniority were identified as Karinne Ziegler, Melody Root, and Amy 
DeOliviera.  All three share a seniority date of August 11, 2008.  None possessed the 
seniority or qualifications to bump into another classroom assignment.  These employees 
were the proper recipients of layoff notices. 
 
 

19.  At the elementary school level, the governing board determined it was 

To reduce 3.0 FTE K-5 Classroom instruction, teachers in this assignment 

Karinne Ziegler has an August 11, 2008 seniority date.  She teaches second 
grade at William Brooks Elementary School.  She holds a clear multiple 
subject credential, a supplemental authorization in Music, and an EL (English 
Learner) authorization. 

20. 

a. 

b. 

Amy DeOliviera has an August 11, 2008 seniority date.  She teaches fifth 
grade at Oak Meadow Elementary School.  She holds a prelimary multiple 
subject credential and an EL authorization. 

 
 

 
 
 

 

6

 

c. 

Melody Root has an August 11, 2008 seniority date.  She teaches language arts 
at Rolling Hills Middle School.  She holds a clear single subject English 
credential and an EL authorization. She is qualified to teach English and 
English Learners at the K-12 level.   

22. 

21. 

To reduce 1.0 FTE Elementary Music instruction, the teacher in this 

Anne Diers bumped Amanda Burstiner.  Ms. Burstiner has a seniority date of August 

 
 
To reduce 4.0 FTE Elementary PE instruction, teachers in this assignment with 
the least seniority were identified as Amanda Burstiner, Ashley Black, Jennie Friedrichs (0.5 
FTE), Shelley Bishop, and Matt Kimura (0.5 FTE).  These employees were the proper 
recipients of layoff notices. 
 
 
12, 2009.  She teaches special education at Rolling Hills Middle School.  She holds a 
preliminary multiple subject credential, a preliminary Education Specialist Instruction 
credential, and an EL authorization.  Ms. Diers has a seniority date of August 28, 1987.  She 
teaches Elementary PE at Blue Oak Elementary.  She has a clear single subject PE credential, 
a clear specialist instruction credential in special education (L.H.), and a clear certificate of 
completion in staff development.  Ms. Diers is more senior and qualified to teach special 
education. 
 
 
assignment with the least seniority was identified Tim Dirkes.  Tim Dirkes bumped Jenelle 
Carver.  Ms. Carver has a seniority date of August 7, 2007.  She teaches second grade at 
Buckeye Elementary.  Mr. Dirkes has a seniority date of August 7, 1998.  He teaches music 
at William Brooks Elementary.  He holds a clear multiple subject credential and a CLAD 
certificate.  Mr. Dirkes was more senior and qualified to teach at the elementary level.  Ms. 
Carver was the proper recipient of a layoff notice. 
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping at the Middle School (7/8) Level 
 
 
reduce 1.0 FTE 7/8 Mathematics position, 1.0 FTE 7/8 Life Science position, and 1.0 FTE 
Language Arts/History Core position for a total of 3.0 FTE.  (Factual Finding 10.)  The 
district implemented the reduction by first looking at the seniority chart and identifying 
which employees held relevant credentials.  Tie-breaking procedures were implemented as 
necessary between those employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  
Bumping was employed to ensure that the more senior teachers, certificated and competent 
to render this particular kind of service, were retained over those with less seniority. 
 
 
with the least seniority was identified as Kerry McFarland.  This employee was the proper 
recipient of a layoff notice.7

23.  At the middle school level, the governing board determined it was necessary to 

To reduce 1.0 FTE 7/8 Mathematics instruction, the teacher in this assignment 

24. 

                                                
 
senior employee qualified to teach K-8 mathematics. 
 

7 Even adjusting Ms. McFarland’s seniority date to July 29, 2008 from August 11, 2008, she is the least 

 

7

25. 

To reduce 1.0 FTE 7/8 Life Science instruction, the district identified those 
 
employees with the least seniority who were qualified to teach Life Science.  Darcey Little 
was identified to receive a layoff notice. 
 
 

a. 

Darcey Little has a seniority date of August 11, 2008.  She teaches eighth 
grade American Studies/Language Arts/Exploration.  She possesses a multiple 
subject credential, a supplemental mathematics authorization, and an EL 
authorization.  She is qualified to teach Life Science and Language Arts.  Ms. 
Little properly received a layoff notice for the 7th Grade Life Science as this 
was a particular kind of service being eliminated.   

b. 

c. 

Darcey Little was qualified to bumped Melody Root to teach 7/8 Language 
Arts.  Both share a seniority date of August 11, 2008.  After tie-breaking 
criteria were applied, Ms. Root was found to be the least senior.  Ms. Root is 
qualified to teach K-12 English.  Hence, she was qualified to bump into K-5 
Classroom instruction but was eliminated as this was also a particular kind of 
service being reduced.  (Factual Finding 20.) 

Trisha Sanchez teaches seventh grade Life Science/Exploration.  She has a 
seniority date of July 3, 2001.  She holds a clear multiple subject credential 
with a CLAD emphasis, a supplemental science authorization, and a certificate 
of eligibility in administrative services, and NCLB (History, English, Science, 
and multiple subject).  She is more senior and qualified to bump Ms. 
Cheatham in a secondary language arts/history core teaching position.  As 
such, Ms. Sanchez was properly retained to teach 7/8 Language Arts/History 
(Core). 

26. 

 
 
To reduce 1.0 FTE 7/8 Language Arts/History Core instruction, the district 
identified those employees with the least seniority who were qualified to teach Language 
Arts/History Core.  Heather McIntyre was identified to receive a layoff notice. 
 
 

a. 

Heather McIntyre has a seniority date of August 7, 2007.  She teaches second 
grade at Buckeye Elementary School.  She holds a clear multiple subject 
credential and an EL authorization.  Ms. McIntyre is qualified to teach a 
language arts/history core assignment.  Ms. McIntyre bumped Darcey Little, 
with a seniority date of August 11, 2008) for the 7th/8th Language 
Arts/History (Core) assignment.  However, this is a particular kind of service 
being eliminated.  Hence, Ms. McIntyre properly received a layoff notice for 
1.0 FTE 7/8 Language Arts/History (Core).  

b. 

Ms. Cheatham teaches seventh grade Language Arts and World Studies.  She 
has a seniority date of August 11, 2008.  She possesses a multiple subject 
credential, a single subject English credential, and an EL authorization.  Ms. 
Cheatham bumped Darcey Little and Melody Root, after the district applied 

 
 

 
 

  
 

 

8

tie-breaking criteria to teachers with an August 11, 2008 seniority date.  Ms. 
Cheatham was properly retained to teach single subject English. 

27. 

28. 

The governing board determined it was necessary to reduce 0.8 FTE K-8 

 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping of K-8 Counseling Services 
 
 
Counseling Services.  (Factual Finding 10.)  The district implemented the reduction by first 
looking at the seniority chart and identifying which employees held relevant credentials.  
Tie-breaking procedures were implemented as necessary between those employees who first 
rendered paid service on the same date.  Bumping was employed to ensure that the more 
senior teachers, certificated and competent to render this particular kind of service, were 
retained over those with less seniority. 
 
 
To reduce 0.8 FTE K-8 Counseling Services, the counselor in this assignment 
with the least seniority was identified as Christine Falconer.  This employee was the proper 
recipient of a layoff notice. 
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping of Special Education Services 
 
 
The governing board determined it was necessary to reduce 0.5 FTE Special 
Education Services.  (Factual Finding 10.)  The district implemented the reduction by first 
looking at the seniority chart and identifying which employees held relevant credentials.   
 
 
assignment with the least seniority was identified as Jennifer Smith.  This employee resigned 
on February 19, 2010. 
 
Issues Related to Seniority Dates 
 

To reduce 0.5 FTE K-8 Special Education Services, the teacher in this 

30. 

29. 

31. 

The district adjusted the seniority date of three teachers who began their 

32.  Kerry McFarland contested her reported seniority date of August 11, 2008.  

service in August 2008.  Amy DeOliviera, Kerry McFarland, and Melody Root, initially 
shared a seniority date of August 13, 2008.  It was determined that all three had attended an 
earlier paid teacher orientation.  As such, their seniority date was appropriately changed to 
August 11, 2008, the date they first rendered paid service to the district.  (Ed. Code, § 
44845.) 
 
 
She asserted that her true seniority date is July 29, 2008.  She provided evidence that this was 
the date that she first rendered paid service to the district. 
 
 
school year.  She holds a clear multiple subject credential and a supplemental authorization 
in mathematics.  During the summer of 2008, Ms. McFarland was contacted by Gigi 
Marchini’s secretary and asked to attend an algebra teacher workshop.  Ms. Marchini is the 
Assistant Superintendent in charge of curriculum, instruction, and professional development.  

33.  Ms. McFarland began teaching in the district at the start of the 2008-2009 

 

9

34. 

Ms. McFarland testified that she considered her attendance at the meeting to be mandatory.  
She was the only new mathematics teacher in attendance.  Not all mathematics teachers were 
present due to summer break.  As for her own attendance, Ms. McFarland did not recall if the 
word “mandatory” was used or if any consequence was conveyed for failure to attend.  
However, as a new employee of the district, she did not feel at liberty to ignore the 
superintendent’s request for her attendance.  
 
There were two math workshops held before the start of classes.  The first on 
 
July 29, 2008 and the second on August 11, 2008.  A separate “teacher in-service” meeting 
also occurred on August 11, 2008.  Ms. McFarland could not attend the teacher in-service 
since the second algebra workshop was held at the same time.  The district compensated Ms. 
McFarland and the other mathematics teachers for their attendance at both algebra 
workshops at a rate of $25 per hour.  Ms. McFarland referred to the payment as “extra duty 
pay” whereas the district referred to it as a “stipend.” 
 
 
35.  Ms. Marchini testified that she convened the algebra meeting to discuss new 
State of California mandates affecting middle school mathematics instruction.  All seventh 
and eighth grade teachers were contacted by phone and “invited” to attend.  According to 
Ms. Marchini, the meeting was not mandatory because it was summertime and she knew that 
not all teachers would be available.  After the July 29, 2008, meeting Ms. Marchini sent an 
electronic mail message to attendants.  In it she thanked them for their presence and further 
stated, “I think that it was a much calmer setting than it would have been on August 13, 14, 
or 15th!  You got a lot done and I know that it’s just the beginning.  So I looked at the 
Benchmark Assessments tab in Edusoft and the Holt Assessments for math are all there!!!!  
You might want to look at these.  There are forms A, B, and C…it looks to be very thorough.  
I look forward to seeing you all on the 13th!” 
 
 
and December 2008, that listed her hire dates as August 13 and 11, 2008, respectively.  On 
January 11, 2010, the district sent Ms. McFarland a “Seniority Date and Credentials 
Verification” form which continued to list her seniority date as August 11, 2008.  When she 
received her verification letter, she questioned Sharon B., in personnel.  According to Ms. 
McFarland, she was told that the hire date “related to the school year.”  Ms. McFarland made 
no corrections and signed the form on January 13, 2010.  She testified that she believed that 
the August 11, 2008 date reflected her attendance at the second math meeting and she does 
not understand why the first algebra meeting was not credited. 
 
 
The district adjusted Ms. McFarland’s hire date to reflect an August 11, 2008 
teacher in-service that she did not attend.  The district does not argue that Ms. McFarland’s  
hire date should be returned to August 13, 2008, to reflect this fact.  However, the district 
opposes adjusting her seniority date to reflect the July 29, 2008 algebra meeting, because 
attendance was not mandated.   
 
 

36.  Ms. McFarland signed two subsequent Notices of Employment, in October 

37. 

 

10

38. 

The content of the July 29th meeting was relevant to mathematics instruction.  

 
The district benefited from the presence of the algebra teachers and as such, paid them for 
their service.  It is understandable that given the time of year, the July 2008 math meeting 
was not mandatory.  However, it is just as reasonable that as a new teacher for the district, 
Ms. McFarland would not have treated her own attendance as optional.  Seniority is 
determined solely by the date upon which a probationary or permanent employee first 
rendered paid service in a probationary position.  (Ed. Code, § 44845; California Teachers 
Assoc. v. Vallejo City Unified School District (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135, 156.)  Ms. 
McFarland first rendered paid service to the district on July 29, 2008.  As such, her seniority 
date must be adjusted accordingly. 
 
 
above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 
 

39.  Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 

and 44955.  All notices and jurisdictional prerequisites required by those sections were 
satisfied. 
 

2. 

The services the district seeks to eliminate in this matter, as set forth in the 
Layoff Resolution, are the particular kinds of service that may be reduced or discontinued 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted 
a proper exercise of the board’s discretion.  Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, legal cause exists for the district to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of 
services set forth in the Layoff Resolution.  The reduction or discontinuance of these 
identified particular kinds of services relates solely to the welfare of the district and its 
pupils. 
 

3. 

No certificated employee with less seniority than any respondent is being 
retained to render a service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
Legal cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to give respondents 
final notice that their services will not be required for 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

The Buckeye Union School District’s action to reduce or eliminate the 

particular kinds of services identified in Layoff Resolution 10-04, for the 2010-2011 school 
year is AFFIRMED. 

 

 

 

11

2. 

The Accusation against respondents is SUSTAINED.  The Buckeye Union 

School District may give final notices to respondents that their services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year.  Notices shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 

3. 

The seniority date of Kerry McFarland is adjusted to July 29, 2008, to reflect 

the date upon which she first rendered paid service to the district. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 30, 2010 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
DIAN M. VORTERS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

12

APPENDIX A  
2010 Buckeye Union School District – List of Respondents 
 
 
 
Last Name 
1 
Black 
2 
Carver 
3 
DeOliviera 
4  McFarland 
5  McIntyre 
6 
Root 
 

First Name 
Ashley 
Janelle 
Amy 
Kerry 
Heather 
Melody 

 

13

