 

 

 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  2010030738 
 
 

BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
NEWPORT-MESA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
  Certificated Employees of the  
  Newport-Mesa Unified School District, 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
matter on April 26, 2010, and May 6, 2010, in Costa Mesa, California. 
 
 
Anthony  P.  De  Marco  and  Cathie  L.  Fields,  of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  & 
Romo,  P.C.,  represented  Bill  Cline  (Cline),  Director  of  Certificated  Personnel,  and  Elizabeth 
Novack (Novack), Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, of the Newport-Mesa Unified 
School District (District). 
 
 
which is incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.  
 
 
 

Jeffrey R. Boxer, Attorney at Law, represented the Respondents listed in Exhibit ZZ, 

Amy C. Lahr, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard this 

Randall S. Henderson, Attorney at Law, represented Respondent Gloria Henderson. 

PROPOSED DECISION

The District received requests for hearing from 173 certificated employees, as 
enumerated in Exhibit 4C, which is incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein, and 
it indicates the 173 Respondents at issue (Respondents). 
 
 
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year. 
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying 
them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
The  parties  submitted  written  post-hearing  briefs.    The  District’s  brief  was  marked  for 
 
identification as Exhibit 20; the brief for Respondents represented by Jeffrey Boxer was marked 
for identification as Exhibit LLL; and the brief for Respondent Gloria Henderson was marked 
for  identification  as  Exhibit  MMM.    To  the  extent  that  Mr.  Boxer’s  brief  included  new 
information about Respondents who did not testify at the hearing, it will not be considered. 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing and the matter was submitted 

 
for decision on May 6, 2010. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

2. 

1. 

3. 

  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

                      Service   

               Full-Teacher-Equivalent Positions

    5.80 
  10.90 
  72.00 
  10.97 
    8.00 
    4.00 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

Assistant Superintendent Novack filed the Accusation in her official capacity. 

Administrative Services 
Adult Education  
Elementary Classroom Instruction (K-6) 
High School Counseling  
Secondary Education   
Close Middle College  
Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA) 
Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment  
 
TOSA – Educational Technology 
 
TOSA – English Language 
 
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
On  February  23,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted 
Resolution  number  27-02-10,  reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the  2010-
2011 school year: 
 
 
 
1. 
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
7.  
 
8.  
9.  
10.   TOSA – GATE/Program Improvement 
11. 
12. 
13. 
 
Total 
 
 
Superintendent  Jeffrey  C.  Hubbard,  Ed.D.,  thereafter  notified  the  Board  that  he 
recommended that notice be provided to Respondents that their services will not be required for 
the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
By  March  15,  2010,  the  District  provided  notice  to  Respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year.  

TOSA – Reading Coach 
 
TOSA – Tobacco Prevention    
  
 
Pre-School  

Respondents  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 

    0.40 
   
 
 
 
    1.00 
 

    1.00 
    2.50 
    4.00 
    1.00 

                               

                           

 124.57 

    3.00

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5. 

6. 

4. 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

2

8. 

9. 

12. 

11. 

10. 

Respondents thereafter filed timely notices of defense.  

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

On or about March 23, 2010, the District issued the Accusations, and served them 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

 
 
7. 
on Respondents.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.1
 
 
The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
finding number 3 primarily because it is faced with a 13.5 million dollar shortfall in its budget.  
The decision to reduce the particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is 
rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion. 
           
 
The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated employees as determined by the Board. 
 
 
number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.    
 
 
 The  District  established  that  it  did  not  violate  the  Education  Code  by  its 
classification  of  employees  with  temporary  status.    The  District  may  classify  as  temporary 
employees those persons who occupy positions that the Education Code defines or describes as 
temporary.  The District demonstrated that it evaluated every employee classified as temporary, 
prior to the hearing, and it corrected those who were not lawfully classified as such.  Further, the 
District established that it had more leave of absences available than employees with temporary 
status; that is, it could have even more employees classified as temporary than it currently did. 
 
Respondents  Christine  Lund,  Elizabeth  Snelgrave,  Deborah  Benson,  Melinda 
 
Savage,  Mindy  Lynn  Tayet,  Joanne  Nicholson,  Abigail  Haselton,  Kimberly  Pyle,  Kristen 
Whitney,  Camy  Boehling,  Kelly  Mitchell,  Sarah  Miller  and  Dana  Kahawai  testified  at  the 
hearing.    These  employees  were  told  by  the  District  that  all  new  employees  were  hired  as 
temporary employees, and that they were hired into “tenure track” positions, or were otherwise 
led  to  believe  that  they  would  be  moved  to  probationary  and  permanent  status  in  subsequent 
years.  Their testimony is credited.  The fact that some Respondents were told that they would 
become probationary employees by their principals, or others who did not possess authority to 
confer  such  status,  was  misleading.    Some  Respondents  introduced  evaluations  which 

The  Board  properly  considered  all  known  attrition  in  determining  the  actual 

13. 

14. 

15. 

                    

 

1  All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

 

 
 
 

3

16. 

The evidence established that the positions that Respondents hold are lawfully defined as 

erroneously  noted  that  they  were  probationary  employees.    This  was  also  misleading.    The 
District acknowledged that its practices were not ideal, and that it needed better communication 
with its employees.  Those facts do not, however, establish that Respondents’ classification as 
temporary employees violated the Education Code.  The evaluations were not created by persons 
with  authority  to  determine  status.    Further,  the  Respondents  had  notice  that  the  probationary 
status indicated on their evaluations did not correspond with the temporary status contracts that 
they  signed  at  the  beginning  of  the  school  year.    All  Respondents  were  given  timely  proper 
notice of their temporary status.  In addition, the evidence did not conclusively establish that the 
District in fact had a policy of hiring all new employees as temporary.  Moreover, no such policy 
currently  exists:  the  evidence  showed  that  the  District  had  hired  employees  directly  into 
probationary  status  for  the  2009-10  school  year.    Finally,  the  District  demonstrated  that  all 
employees in temporary positions were afforded the same rights as probationary employees in 
this proceeding; i.e., they received proper notice and opportunity to be heard.    
 
 
temporary under the Education Code.     
 
Respondent Gloria Henderson is a full-time employee at Corona Del Mar High 
 
School,  teaching  advanced  placement  English  Language  and  Psychology.    She  holds  a  single 
subject teaching credential in English, with an authorization in Psychology; clear multi-subject 
and professional administrative services credentials, and a Crosscultural, Language & Academic 
Development credential.  Respondent Henderson also holds Masters Degrees in Education and 
Psychology, and she is in the process of obtaining a doctoral degree.  Prior to working for the 
District,  she  taught  for  15  years,  at  all  levels;  and  she  held  an  administrative  position.  
Respondent Henderson was in a tenured position at her previous employment.  She was offered 
and accepted her teaching position with the District in January 2008, to begin teaching on March 
14, 2008.  She did not know that her position with the District would be temporary before she 
resigned.    On  March  3,  2008,  the  District  provided  Respondent  Henderson  with  an  “Initial 
Salary  Placement  and  Contract  Status  Notification”  which  indicated  that  her  contract  status 
would  be  temporary.    Respondent  Henderson  did  not  want  to  sign  the  contract  given  its 
temporary  nature,  however,  the  principal  assured  her  that  all  teachers  start  that  way  and  she 
would  eventually  move  into  a  tenured  position.    Respondent  Henderson  ultimately  signed  the 
contract.  The District included two additional forms in Respondent Henderson’s personnel file: 
a “Position Control for Temp Contracts,” which indicated that her position was a “Temporary 
Leave  Replacement”;  and  a  “Certificated  Salary  Placement  Worksheet”  which  stated  that  her 
position  was  a  “Short  term  Temporary/Semester  Contract.”    This  document  was  altered  to 
indicate  that  Respondent  Henderson  was  in  fact  a  temporary  leave  replacement.    Respondent 
Henderson stated that she did not know that she was considered a short-term replacement; rather, 
the principal told her that her position would continue.  Respondent Henderson was hired under 
a temporary contract in the 2008-09 school year, and was laid off.  She was rehired for the 2009-
10  school  year  under  a  temporary  contract.    Respondent  Henderson  received  timely  proper 
notice of her temporary status for each contract. 

 

 
 
 

4

 
18. 

 
19. 

 
17.  Domini  Possemato  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  with  a  seniority  date  of 
August  29,  2008.    She  contends  that  her  correct  seniority  date  should  be  August  27,  2008, 
because her principal instructed her to attend two staff development days on August 27 and 28, 
2008.  The District contended that Respondent Possemato’s attendance on those days was not 
mandatory, and thus, should not count toward her seniority date.  To support this argument, the 
District introduced the collective bargaining agreement, which indicates that mandatory trainings 
are paid on a per diem rate.  Respondent Possemato received hourly payment for her service on 
those days.   

Summer Keller is a sixth grade teacher at Davis Elementary, with a seniority date 
of August 29, 2007.  She contends that her seniority date is incorrect.  Respondent Keller began 
working  for  the  District  in  August  2006,  as  a  temporary  employee.    She  continued  as  a 
temporary  employee  for  the  2007-08  school  year.    In  the  2008-09  school  year,  Respondent 
Keller became a probationary employee.  The Education Code permits the District to credit one 
previous year for purposes of acquiring permanent status.  (Sections 44917, 44920).  Thus, the 
District’s calculation of Respondent Keller’s seniority date as August 29, 2007, is accurate. 

Sara DeGrave is an elementary school teacher with a seniority date of August 30, 
2006.    Respondent  DeGrave  contends  that  her  seniority  date  should  be  her  first  paid  date  of 
service in 2004; however, she resigned at the end of that school year, and was rehired in 2006.  
When a certificated employee resigns and is thereafter rehired, the employee’s seniority date is 
the date of re-employment.  (Section 44848; see  San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal. App.3d 627, 641.)  Thus, the District’s calculation of Respondent DeGrave’s seniority date 
as August 30, 2006 is correct. 

 
Respondent DeGrave also contended that she can perform the duties of the “Teacher on 
Special  Assignment  (TOSA)  –  Technology”  that  Jacob  Topete,  a  less  senior  employee,  was 
retained to perform.  The District articulated that it has a specific need for a TOSA-Technology 
who  possesses  the  training  and  experience  necessary  to  perform  the  job  duties.    Respondent 
DeGrave  holds  a  Master’s  degree  in  Education  with  an  emphasis  in  technology.    Respondent 
DeGrave  has  never  worked  as  a  TOSA-Technology.    She  has  served  as  the  site  technology 
coordinator for four years; however, the position does not require the same level of knowledge as 
a  TOSA-Technology.    When  questioned  about  the  requirements  of  the  TOSA-Technology 
position, Respondent DeGrave acknowledged that there were several programs that she had not 
used,  nor  had  she  trained  others  to  use.    Mr.  Topete  has  served  in  the  TOSA-Technology 
position for one year.  He has familiarity with all of the required programs, and has trained others 
in all of the programs.  In addition, Mr. Topete has received extensive training to perform the 
TOSA-Technology position.  The evidence showed that these special skills and experience are 
necessary to fill the District’s specific need.  Therefore, Respondent DeGrave does not possess 
the  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  perform  the  duties  of  the  TOSA-Technology.  
(See Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 142.)   

 

 
 
 

5

 
20. 

 
21. 

Jessica Aitken testified at the hearing.2  Ms. Aitken is a second grade teacher at 
Mariner’s Elementary School.  She is not on the seniority list.  Ms. Aitken has been employed by 
the District since 2005.  Ms. Aitken was told that after her first year of teaching, she would be 
moved  into  a  probationary,  then  permanent  position.    In  all  years  prior  to  the  2009-10  school 
year, Ms. Aitken held temporary status positions.  She is currently a long-term substitute.  Ms. 
Aitken  does  not  dispute  her  current  status  as  a  long  term  substitute.    The  evidence  did  not 
demonstrate that Ms. Aitken’s current classification is incorrect.      

Trisha Jenssen is an elementary science teacher with a seniority date of August 
29,  2007.    Respondent  Jenssen  testified  on  behalf  of  herself  and  other  similarly  situated 
elementary  science  teachers.    Respondent  Jenssen  holds  a  professional  clear  multi-subject 
credential  with  a  Crosscultural,  Language  &  Academic  Development  Emphasis,  and  a 
supplement in life science.  The teachers in question argue that they possess special training and 
experience, and should be skipped from the layoff order.  They assert that the positions they hold 
require additional credentials beyond a multiple subject credential, which they possess, and other 
more senior employees, who desire to bump them from the layoff order, do not.  They expressed 
frustration because they think the District required higher qualifications from them, that it does 
not seek from other senior employees who may bump them from their positions.   
 

The District is not reducing services in the elementary science area; and it does not seek 
to  deviate  from  the  layoff  order  to  retain  Ms.  Jenssen  and  other  similarly  situated  elementary 
science teachers.  The District maintains that other more senior employees, with either multiple 
subject or single subject science credentials could render the same services.  The District is not 
required  to  skip  employees  from  the  layoff  order,  even  if  the  junior  employees  have  more 
training  and  experience  than  senior  employees.    Provided  that  the  senior  employees  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  services  of  the  junior  elementary  science  teachers, 
Respondent Jenssen and other similarly situated science teachers may be “bumped” by the more 
senior employees.     

 
22.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

 
service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.   
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 9. 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

                     

2 Ms. Aitken’s name does not appear on the list of Respondents, as agreed upon by 

counsel, at Exhibit 4C.  Nor does her name appear on Mr. Boxer’s “Notice of 
Representation,” at Exhibit ZZ.  Mr. Boxer did, however, represent Ms. Aitken at the 
hearing, and she testified without the District’s objection. 

 

 
 
 

6

4. 

3. 

2. 

 
 
The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 
and 10.   
 
 
Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers 1 through 22.  
 
The seniority date of a certificated employee is defined as the date the employee 
 
“first rendered paid service in a probationary capacity.” (§ 44845.)  These words must be given 
their  plain  and  commonsense  meaning  in  order  to  effectuate  the  legislative  intent.  (Hughes  v. 
Board of Architectural Examiners (1998) 17 Cal.4th 763, 775; California Teachers Assn. v. 
Governing Bd. of Rialto Unified School District (1997) 14 Cal.4th 627, 632-633; Steketee v. 
Lintz,  Williams  &  Rothberg  (1985)  38  Cal.3d  46,  51-52.)  The  statute  requires  crediting  a 
certificated  employee  with  the  seniority  date  on  which  he  or  she  was  first  paid  to  render 
service  in  a  probationary  capacity.    The statute does not expressly require a particular salary 
rate  or  schedule,  or  that  the  service  be  “mandatory.”    If  the  date  on  which  the  employee  first 
rendered paid service in a probationary capacity is incorrect, the employee’s seniority date must 
be  adjusted  to  reflect  the  earlier  first  date  of  probationary  service.  (Bakersfield  Elementary 
Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City School District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1273.) 
 
 
Respondent Possemato performed service in a probationary capacity for the District by 
attending staff development days, at the instruction of her principal, and she was paid for such 
service.  Accordingly, the seniority dates of Respondent Possemato shall be adjusted to reflect 
her earlier first date of paid service in a probationary capacity; i.e., August 27, 2008. 
 
The  District  points  out  that  other  administrative  law  judges  with  the  Office  of 
 
Administrative Hearings have arrived at a different result in layoff proceedings.  (See Exhibit 20 
at pp. 6-7.)  Those cases are not binding on the Administrative Law Judge, and it is noted that 
other administrative law judges have also arrived at the same result as this decision in their layoff 
proceedings.  
 
The Education Code permits certificated employees to be classified in one of four 
 
ways:  permanent,  probationary,  substitute,  or  temporary.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County 
Union High School Dist. (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911, 916.)  A certificated employee is classified as 
permanent,  i.e.,  acquires  tenure,  if,  after  having  been  employed  for  two  complete  successive 
school  years  in  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications,  he  or  she  is  reelected  for  the 
following  year.  (§  44929.21,  subd.  (b);  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Bakersfield 
City School Dist. (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1278-1279.) Probationary employees are “those 
persons employed in positions requiring certification qualifications for the school year, who have 

5. 

 

 
 
 

7

not been classified as permanent employees or as substitute employees.” (§ 44915.) Substitutes 
are “those persons employed in positions requiring certification qualifications, to fill positions of 
regularly  employed  persons  absent  form  service.  .  .  .”  (§  44917.)    Temporary  employees  are 
those requiring certification qualifications, other than substitute employees, who are employed 
for  limited  assignments,  as  defined  in  the  Education  Code,  such  as  in  sections  44918,  44919, 
44920, and 44921. (California Teachers Assn. v. Vallejo City Unified School Dist. (2007) 149 
Cal.App.4th 135, 146.)  
 
 
Districts  are  required  to  provide  employees  with  written  notice  of  their  classification 
when first hired. (§ 44916; Kavanaugh, supra, 29 Cal.4th at 911.)  Section 44916 provides: “The 
classification [of a certificated employee] shall be made at the time of employment and thereafter 
in  the  month  of  July  of  each  school  year.    At  the  time  of  initial  employment  during  each 
academic  year,  each  new  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district  shall  receive  a  written 
statement  indicating  his  employment  status  and  the  salary  that  he  is  to  be  paid.    If  a  school 
district hires a certificated person as a temporary employee, the written statement shall clearly 
indicate the temporary nature of the employment and the length of time for which the person is 
being  employed.  If  a  written  statement  does  not  indicate  the  temporary  nature  of  the 
employment,  the  certificated  employee  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  probationary  employee  of  the 
school district, unless employed with permanent status.”  Failure to provide notice of temporary 
employment  as  required  by  section  44916  results  in  probationary  service  as  a  matter  of  law. 
(Kavanaugh, supra, 29 Cal.4th at p. 926.)  Section 44916 does not require the District to specify 
which provision of the Education Code permits the teacher to be classified as temporary. 
 
 
Respondent  Henderson  argued  that  the  District  misclassified  her  as  a  temporary 
employee.  First, she argues that she could not have been classified as a “leave of absence (LOA) 
replacement”  because  the  District  was  already  overstaffed  with  temporary  LOA  replacements.  
Respondent  Henderson  based  this  theory  on  Board  meeting  minutes,  which  show  that  the 
District  converted  a  number  of  employees  from  temporary  to  probationary  status  in  order  to 
comply with Section 44920.  Section 44920 requires that the number of temporary employees 
not  exceed  the  number  of  employees  who  are  on  a  leave  of  absence.    The  evidence  does  not 
support Respondent Henderson’s theory; rather it showed that the District had approved multiple 
leave  of  absences  prior  to  the  time  period  that  Respondent  Henderson  commenced  her 
employment;  thus,  the  District  had  not  exceeded  Section  44920’s  requirements  by  hiring 
Respondent Henderson as a temporary LOA.  The evidence showed that the current position that 
Respondent Henderson holds is lawfully defined as temporary under the Education Code.   
 
 
Respondent Henderson also argued that the District should be estopped from classifying 
her as a temporary employee, that she should be given at least probationary status.  The doctrine 
of  equitable  estoppel  is  available  in  certain  circumstances  to  those  who  detrimentally  rely  on 
representations  made  by  another.  In  order  for  equitable  estoppel  to  apply,  the  following 
requirements  must  be  met:  “(1)  the  party  to  be  estopped  must  be  apprised  of  the  facts;  (2)  he 
must  intend  that  his  conduct  shall  be  acted  upon,  or  must  so  act  that  the  party  asserting  the 

 

 
 
 

8

estoppel had a right to believe it was so intended; (3) the other party must be ignorant of the true 
facts; and (4) he must rely upon the conduct to his injury.” (Lentz v. McMahon (1989) 49 Cal.3d 
393,  399,  quoting  City  of  Long  Beach  v.  Mansell  (1970)  3  Cal.3d  462,  489.)    Although  the 
doctrine should be applied against the government “where justice and right require it,” it cannot 
be  applied  against  the  government  where  to  do  so  would  effectively  nullify  a  “strong  rule  of 
policy,  adopted  for  the  benefit  of  the  public  .  .  .  .”    (City of Long Beach v. Mansell, supra, 3 
Cal.3d at p. 493.)   
 
 
Respondent  Henderson  has  not  established  the  elements  of  equitable  estoppel.  
Respondent Henderson signed temporary contracts each year of her employment.  She was not 
ignorant of the fact that her contracts would be temporary prior to entering into them.  Although 
she may have been led to believe that after her first year, she would achieve probationary status, 
this notion was dispelled by her signing a temporary contract each subsequent year. 
 
Cause exists to terminate the services of the 173 Respondents listed  in  Exhibit 
 
4C, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 22, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 
5. 
 

6. 

ORDER 

 
 
The  Accusations  are  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondents  listed  in  legal 
conclusion number six that their services will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school year 
due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. 
 
DATED: May 17, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 

 
 
Administrative Law Judge 
 

 
                                 
         
 

________________________________ 
AMY C. LAHR 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

9

