BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
MADERA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Employment Status of: 
 
TRACEY ALEMAN, et al., 
 
                                                   Respondents. 
 
 

 
 
 
    OAH No. 2010040213 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Robert Walker, Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of 

 
 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Madera, California, on May 12 and 13, 2010. 
 

Kevin R. Dale, Attorney at law,1 represented the complainant, John R. Stafford, 

Superintendent, Madera Unified School District. 
 

Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law,2 represented the respondents who are not in 

administrative positions.  There are 76 respondents who are not in administrative positions, 
and they are listed in exhibit A. 
 
 
are in administrative positions.  There are three respondents who are in administrative 
positions, and they are listed in exhibit B. 
 

John H. Hamilton, Owner of Kelley & Associates,3 represented the respondents who 

The record was held open to permit the parties to file briefs.  Mr. Dale’s brief was 
received and marked as C 18 for identification.  Mr. Dale also submitted a Declaration of 
Jerry Stehman, which was marked as C 19 for identification.  Mr. Richtel’s brief was 
received and marked as R 7 for identification.  Mr. Hamilton’s brief was received and 
marked as R 8 for identification.   
 

This matter originally was set to be heard on May 12 and 13, 2010.  By an order dated 
April 15, 2010, a continuance was granted pursuant to Government Code section 11524.  The 
continuance was for a period of 23 days.  Pursuant to Education Code section 44949, 

                                                

1 Kevin R. Dale, Attorney at Law, 555 West Shaw Avenue, Suite C-1, Fresno, California 93704. 

2 Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, 750 East Bullard Avenue, Suite 101, Fresno, California 93710. 
 
3 John H. Hamilton, Owner, Kelley & Associates, 510 8th Street, Sacramento, California 95814. 
 

 

 

1

subdivision (e),4 the dates prescribed in Code section 44949, subdivision (c), and in Code 
section 44955, subdivision (c), shall be extended.  The time for submitting the proposed 
decision to the governing board and the employees is extended to May 30, 2010.  The date 
before which notices of termination must be given is extended.  Those notices must be given 
before the 7th of June, 2010. 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
IN MARCH, WITH REGARD TO NINE EMPLOYEES, THE SUPERINTENDENT FAILED TO FOLLOW THE 
USUAL PROCEDURE FOR RECOMMENDING TO THE GOVERNING BOARD THAT THE EMPLOYEES BE 
SENT TERMINATION NOTICES IN MAY. 
 

1. 

Code sections 44949 and 44955, provide for two notices to be given in 

connection with terminating an employee.  The first notice is given by the superintendent and 
must be given by March 15.  In the March notice, the superintendent makes a 
recommendation that certain employees be sent termination notices in May.  The 
superintendent gives notice of that recommendation to those employees and to the governing 
board.  That notice will be referred to as the Superintendent’s Layoff Recommendation.  
There is no requirement that a governing board take any action in March.  But while it is 
unnecessary, governing boards usually adopt a resolution ratifying the superintendent’s 
recommendation.   
 

2. 

The second notice is a notice of a governing board’s decision to terminate an 
employee.  That notice is provided for in Code section 44955 and must be given before May 
15. 
 

3. 

By a letter dated March 9, 2010, the Superintendent of the Madera Unified 

School District recommended to the governing board that termination notices be sent in May 
to 115 certificated employees who provide services in 114 positions.  The recommendation 
concerned 113 full-time employees and two part-time employees.  The recommendation 
identified the 115 employees by name and stated the reason for the recommendation.   
 

4.  While it was unnecessary for the board to take any action in March, the board, 

on March 9, 2010, adopted a resolution ratifying the superintendent’s recommendation. 
 

5. 

On March 15, 2010, Jerry Stehman, Director of Human Resources and Labor 

Relations for the Madera Unified School District, drafted a letter for the superintendent to 
send to the board.  The letter was an amendment to the superintendent’s March 9, 2010, 
recommendation.  The March 15, 2010, letter recommended to the governing board that 
termination notices be sent in May to an additional nine certificated employees.  The 

                                                

4 All references to the Code are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 
 

 

2

recommendation identified the nine additional employees by name and stated the reason for 
the recommendation. 
 

6. 

The superintendent, however, did not, as is required by Code section 44949, 

subdivision (a), actually give that amended recommendation to the board. 
 

7. 

Complainant contends that the superintendent, in effect, did give the amended 

recommendation to the board.  The superintendent is the secretary of the board.  Mr. 
Stehman gave the amended recommendation to the superintendent on March 15, 2010.  
Complainant contends that Mr. Stehman acted as the superintendent’s designee and delivered 
the March 15, 2010, recommendation to the board by delivering it to the board’s secretary – 
the superintendent. 
 

8. 

No later than March 15, 2010, the superintendent sent the Superintendent’s 
Layoff Recommendation to all 124 of the certificated employees – the 115 in the original 
recommendation and the nine additional employees in the amended recommendation.  (There 
is an issue as to whether two of those notices were addressed correctly.)  
 

9. 

The superintendent acted in two capacities and, in effect, gave the amended 

recommendation to himself.  That certainly was a curious way to proceed.  Nevertheless, it is 
found that the nine additional employees did not suffer any prejudice as a result of the 
superintendent’s proceeding that way. 
 
A BOARD IS REQUIRED TO ARRIVE AT AN OPINION REGARDING A NEED TO REDUCE SERVICES.  BUT A 
BOARD IS REQUIRED TO ARRIVE AT SUCH AN OPINION ONLY IN CONNECTION WITH SENDING 
TERMINATION NOTICES BEFORE MAY 15.  THERE IS NO REQUIREMENT THAT A BOARD TAKE ANY 
ACTION IN MARCH. 
 

10.  A governing board may terminate the services of certificated employees 

pursuant to Code section 44955 only in the very limited circumstances that are specified in 
subdivision (b) of that section.  One circumstance is “whenever a particular kind of service is 
to be reduced or discontinued . . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the 
district it shall have become necessary by reason of [that condition] to decrease the number 
of permanent employees in the district . . . .”  [Italics added.]  But it is not necessary for the 
governing board to have any opinion abut these matters in March.  A governing board is not 
required to take any action in March.  The superintendent is to make a recommendation in 
March.  The governing board must deal with the matter before May 15. 
 

11.  While it is unnecessary for a governing board to deal with these matters before 

mid-May, governing boards usually adopt a resolution in March resolving to reduced or 
discontinue services and identifying the particular kinds of services to be reduced or 
discontinued. 
 
 

 

3

12. 

In a resolution of March 9, 2010, the governing board of the Madera Unified 
School District resolved to reduce or discontinue services provided by the equivalent of 114 
full-time permanent or probationary employees (FTE).  The board identified the services as 
follows: 
 

Classroom Instructional Services 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Multiple Subject Teaching Services (Grades K-8)           69  

Physical Education Specialist (Grades 4-8)  

Elementary Music Teaching Services 

 

9TH Grade Class Size Reduction – Mathematics                 4  

Work Experience/Occupation Ed Teacher (Grades 9-12)  1  

Business Teaching Services (Grades 9-12)  

Industrial Technology 

 (Grades 9-12) 

Alternative Education Instructional Services 

Adult Education Teachers 

 

          12  

Counselor Positions 

School Counselor (Grades 7-12) 

  

Non-Classroom Positions 

Nurse   

 

Middle School Librarian 

 

 

 

 

Psychologist   

Administrators 

Principal 

 

Vice Principals 

Coordinator Teacher Support 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2  

1  

2  

2  

6  

2  

1  

1  

8  

1  

            1 

Attendance Officer 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

13. 

The superintendent subsequently concluded that additional services should be 
reduced or discontinued.  Nothing precludes the superintendent’s making a recommendation 
that additional services should be reduced or discontinued.  As explained above, there is no 
requirement that a board arrive at an opinion regarding the need to reduce services until 
sometime in May.  A board must arrive at that opinion before it decides, pursuant to Code 
section 44955, to send notices of termination.  But a board may do that so long as it acts 
before the 15th of May.  In the present case, because of the extension, the board must act 
before the 7th of June, 2010. 
 
STIPULATION TO RESCIND 
 

14. 

The district stipulates to rescind the Superintendent’s Layoff Recommendation 

as to the following 25 non-administrative employees: 
 

 

 
 

 

 

  
MS.  ALEMAN 
MS.  BRATCHER 
MS.  CANO 
MS.   CERVANTES 
MS.  CHILDERS 
MR.  CODY 
MS.  DOMOTO 
MS.  DORADO 
MS.  HAGIHARA 
MR.  HERNANDEZ 
MS.  HOWARD 
MS.  JAQUITH 
MS.  JEFFERSON  
MS.  KEENAN 
MS.  KUHN 
MS.  LINDSAY 
MS.  LOPEZ  
MS.  MATTHEWS 
MS.  NIEVES 
MS.  RUIZ 
MS.  STANFORD 
MR.  STOCKTON 
MR.  VALDIVIA 
MR.  VALMONTE 
MS.  ZENDEJAS 

 
TRACEY 
MARISA 
MARILU 
MIRNA 
DORA Z 
QUINN 
JAMIE AKEMI 
MARIA A 
LORETTA 
JACOB 
MARISSA 
LORA LEE 
RHONDA KAYE 
ELIZABETH M 
KATHIE MAY 
ANGELA L 
ELIDA 
ELIZABETH 
SANDRA   
ALICIA 
MARICELA 
RICHARD   
JUAN JOSE 
VERNON 
GLORIA VIOLETA 

5

GENERAL FINDINGS CONCERNING STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS 
 

15. 

Respondents are certificated employees. 

16.  Not later than March 15, 2010, in accordance with Code sections 44949 and 
44955, the superintendent of the school district caused the respondents – other than Sarah 
White and Thom Holt – to be notified in writing that it was recommended that respondents 
be notified that the district would not require their services for the ensuing school year.  The 
notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.  The recommendation was not related to 
respondents’ competency. 
 

17.  A notice was delivered to each respondent – other than Sarah White and Thom 

Holt – either by personal delivery or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, 
registered, postage prepaid, and addressed to respondent’s last known address. 
 

18. 

The notice advised each respondent – other than Sarah White and Thom Holt – 

of the following: He or she had a right to a hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, he or she 
had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person sending the notice.  The request 
had to be delivered by a specified date, which was a date that was not less than seven days 
after the notice of termination was served.5  And the failure to request a hearing would 
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 

19. 

Respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to determine whether 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  An accusation was timely 
served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice that, if they were going to request a 
hearing, they were required to file a notice of defense within five days after being served 
with the accusation.6  Respondents filed timely notices of defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 

20. 

The governing board of the district resolved to reduce or discontinue particular 

kinds of services.  Within the meaning of Code section 44955, the services are “particular 
kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce or discontinue 
these services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                

5 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

6 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a notice 
of defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
termination cases, the notice of defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

 

 

6

DISTRICT’S INTENTION TO DEVIATE FROM SENIORITY (SKIPPING) 
 

21. 

Pursuant to Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the governing board of the 

district resolved to deviate from terminating employees in the order of seniority.  The board 
established skipping criteria as follows: 
 

WHEREAS,  Education  Code  section  44955  authorizes  the 
District  to  deviate  from  terminating  certificated  employees  in 
order  of  seniority  where  the  District  demonstrates  a  specific 
need for personnel to teach a specific course or courses of study, 
or to provide services authorized by a services credential with a 
specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special 
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course 
of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more 
seniority do not possess; and, 

WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a significant 
population of English language learner students with specialized 
educational  needs,  a  specific  and  compelling  need  exists  to 
employ 
employees  who  have 
authorization  to  teach  English  Learner  (“EL”)  students,  as 
determined  by 
the  California  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing,  and  the  special  training  and  experience  that 
comes therewith; and, 

certificated 

retain 

and 

WHEREAS,  Education  Code  section  44955(d)  authorizes  this 
Board  to  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in 
order of seniority for the above reason, if necessary; and, 

WHEREAS,  State  law  mandates  that  each  failure  to  staff  a 
classroom  containing  one  or  more  EL  students  with  a 
certificated 
appropriate  EL 
possessing 
authorization  is  a  “misassignment”  subject  to  sanction  by  the 
County Superintendent of Schools; and, 

employee 

an 

WHEREAS,  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the  No  Child 
Left Behind Act (“NCLB”) and the Williams Settlement require 
that  EL  students  be  served  by  certificated  employees  with 
appropriate EL authorizations; and, 

WHEREAS, during the 2009-2010 school year the District was 
the  Annual  Measurable 
notified 
Achievement  Objectives  (“AMAO’s”)  for  EL  Students  for  two 
consecutive years, therefore, the District was required to inform 

it  did  not  meet 

that 

7

 

 

 

 

 

 

the  parents  of  all  EL  Students  that  the  AMAO’s  had  not  been 
met;  if  the  District  fails  to  meet  the  AMAO’s  for  two 
consecutive  years  it  must  develop  an  improvement  plan 
addendum (IPA) that will ensure that the AMAO’s are met; the 
IPA  will  address  the  factors  that  prevented  the  District  from 
achieving  the  AMAO’s;  and  further  sanctions  may  include 
California  Department  of  Education  notification,  modification 
of  curriculum,  program,  and  method  of  instruction,  and  state 
reconsideration  of  whether  the  District  will  continue  to  receive 
related funding; and, 

WHEREAS,  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof 
should not and cannot be adequately served by concentrating EL 
students  in  particular  classrooms  in  such  a  manner  as  to  lessen 
the need for certificated employees with EL authorizations; and, 

WHEREAS,  in  order  for  an  employee  to  be  eligible  for 
reassignment  to  a  position  held  by  an  employee  with  less 
seniority,  the  senior  employee  must  be  both  credentialed  and 
competent  to  render  the  service  currently  being  performed  by 
the junior employee pursuant to Education Code sections 44955, 
44956, and 44957 and the competency criteria set forth herein. 

That due to the need of the District to hire and retain only 
teachers who possess necessary authorization to teach English 
Learner students, the Superintendent and/or designee is 
authorized to deviate from terminating certificated employees in 
order of seniority (“skipping”) where the less senior employee 
possesses a properly filed CLAD, BCLAD, SDAIE, or regular 
(non-emergency) EL authorization valid for the 2010-2011 
school year which authorizes instruction to EL students, and the 
more senior employee does not possess such authorization. 

That due to the need of the District to hire and retain only highly 
qualified teachers, the Superintendent and/or designee is 
authorized to deviate from terminating certificated employees in 
order of seniority (“skipping”) where the less senior employee 
possesses Highly Qualified status under NCLB in the relevant 
subject matter, and the more senior employee does not possess 
such status. 

8

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

USE OF TIE-BREAKING CRITERIA BASED ON THE CURRENT NEEDS OF THE DISTRICT AND STUDENTS 
 

22. 

Pursuant to Code section 44955, subdivision (b), the governing board of the 
district established criteria for determining the order of termination as between employees 
who first rendered paid service on the same day.  These criteria are listed in priority order, 
and each criterion shall be used only if the preceding criteria do not determine the order of 
termination.  The tie-breaking criteria are as follows: 
 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

f. 
g. 

h. 

Possession of a currently valid and properly filed regular 
credential (clear, professional clear, or preliminary) 
The certificated employee is “Highly Qualified” within the 
meaning of the No Child Left Behind Act. 
Possession of a currently valid and properly filed BCLAD 
certificate. 
Possession of a currently valid and properly filed CLAD, 
SDAIE, or regular (non-emergency) EL authorization valid for 
the 2010-2011 school year which authorizes instruction to EL 
students. 
The certificated employee whose currently valid and properly 
filed credentials authorize a broader scope of service.  (This tie-
breaker is to be repeated as applicable.) 
Possession of a Master’s Degree  
The certificated employee holding the highest current placement 
on the salary schedule. (This tie-breaker is to be repeated as 
applicable.) 
If a tie still exists after application of criteria a. to g., the tie shall 
be broken by lot.  Numbers shall be drawn with the lowest 
number drawn winning the tie and continuing until all remaining 
tied individuals are ranked in order. 

 

 

23.  Application of the tie-breaking criteria resulted in determining the order of 

termination solely on the basis of the needs of the district and the students thereof. 
 
RIGHT TO BE RETAINED ACCORDING TO SENIORITY AND QUALIFICATIONS – BUMPING 
 

24. 

The second paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), does not add to 

teachers’ seniority rights.  It does, however, make it clear that governing boards must make 
assignments in such a way as to protect seniority rights.  Employees must be retained to 
render any service their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.   
 

25. 

Thus, if a senior teacher whose regular assignment is being eliminated is 

certificated and competent to teach a junior teacher’s courses, the district must retain the 
senior teacher to render that service.  This is commonly referred to as bumping.  The district 
must either reassign or terminate the junior employee. 
 

9

26. 

The board adopted competency criteria for bumping as follows: 

For purposes of implementing this Resolution, a more senior 
employee is defined as competent for reassignment into a 
position currently held by a more junior employee if he or she 
currently possesses a clear or preliminary credential and Highly 
Qualified status under NCLB in the relevant subject matter, and 
possesses a properly filed CLAD, BCLAD, SDAIE, or regular 
(non-emergency) EL authorization valid for the 2010-2011 
school year which authorizes instruction to EL students. 

 
MR. MILLER, AN ADMINISTRATOR 
 

27.  Darren Miller is a middle school principal.  Employees serve in administrative 

positions at the pleasure of the governing board.  The district, as it has a right to do, is 
releasing Mr. Miller from his administrative position; the district gave him a notice pursuant 
to Code section 44951.  Mr. Miller is classified as a permanent, classroom teacher.  He is 
certificated to be a school counselor.  He has a right to be transferred into a counselor 
position. 
 

The superintendent also gave Mr. Miller a Superintendent’s Layoff 

28. 
Recommendation.   
 

29. 

The board adopted a special competency criterion concerning counselors.  It 

provides that, in order to be eligible for reassignment to a counselor’s position held by a less 
senior employee one must have had at least one year of experience as a counselor within the 
past three years.  The resolution is as follows: 
 

In order for an employee to be eligible for reassignment to a 
Counselor . . . position held by an employee with less seniority, 
the senior employee must be . . . competent to render the service 
currently being performed by the junior employee.  For 
purposes of implementing this Resolution, a more senior 
employee is defined as competent for reassignment into a 
Counselor . . . position currently held by a more junior 
employee, if he or she . . . has at least one (1) year of experience 
within the preceding three (3) years serving in the assignment.  
[Italics added.] 

30. 

The district may not apply this criterion so as to deny Mr. Miller his right to be 

transferred to a teaching position.   
 

transfer, but there are a few relevant provisions.   
 

31. 

The Code is not comprehensive concerning an administrator’s right to a 

10

 

 

 

32. 

Code section 44896 provides that, when a district transfers an administrator to 
a teaching position, he or she may request a written statement of reasons, and the governing 
board is required to provide a statement.  There is an additional requirement if the reasons 
include incompetence. 
 

33. 

Code section 44897 provides that, generally, an administrator who completes a 

probationary period shall become a permanent employee classified as a classroom teacher.  
Thus, generally, a person released from his or her administrative position after two years as 
an administrator would have a right to be transferred to a classroom teacher position. 
 

34. 

Code section 44898 concerns the circumstances under which an administrator 

with a four-year term has a right to be classified as permanent and as a classroom teacher. 
 

35. 

Code section 44899 concerns administrators who are employed by more than 

one district. 
 

36. 

Code section 44951 requires a district to continue an administrator in his or 

her administrative position unless, no later than March 15, the district gives a notice that he 
or she may be released from the position.  There is a reference to Code section 44955.  If an 
administrative position is being discontinued, notice is to be given pursuant to section 44949. 
 

37. 

Code section 44956.5 applies to anyone initially employed in an 

administrative position on or after July 1, 1983, and who subsequently is transferred to a 
teaching position.  The time one spent in the administrative position does not count toward 
seniority for purposes of layoff pursuant to Code section 44955 or reappointment pursuant to 
Code section 44956.  There is an exception for site administrators, who can earn a maximum 
of three years of seniority. 
 

38. 

Thus, while the Code is not comprehensive concerning an administrator’s right 

to a transfer, it is clear that administrators have rights.   
 

39. 

There are two reasons the district may not apply the board’s criterion so as to 

deny Mr. Miller his right to be transferred.  The first reason has to do with appropriate 
standards for judging competency.  There is no doubt that an administrator has no right to be 
transferred to a position for which he or she is not competent.  But what standards are 
appropriate for judging competency with regard to such a transfer?  The Code does not 
provide for a competency test regarding the transfer of an administrator.  The Code expressly 
requires a demonstration of competency regarding other matters.  For example, Code section 
44955, subdivision (b), provides that senior teachers have a right to be retained to render 
services they are certificated and competent to render.  Code section 44955, subdivision (c), 
second paragraph, provides for bumping with regard to services one’s seniority and 
qualifications entitle one to render.  And Code section 44956, subdivision (a)(1), provides for 
reappointment rights regarding services one is certificated and competent to render.  But the 
Code does not address competency with regard to a transfer from an administrative position 
to a teaching position.   

 

11

40. 

The board’s competency criterion has an unacceptable consequence for anyone 

who serves three years as an administrator.  It deprives him or her of the benefit of having 
earned a permanent classification as a classroom teacher, and it does that without any inquiry 
into his or her actual competency.  The district could have inquired into Mr. Miller’s 
competency from various perspectives and on various levels.  It may not, however, refuse to 
transfer him just because he has been an administrator for three years. 
 

41. 

The right to be transferred to a classroom position and the matter of how much 

seniority one can earn as an administrator are discrete.  Nevertheless, Code section 44956.5 
tends to support a determination that the board’s competency criterion has an unacceptable 
consequence.  It is unlikely that the Legislature intended that someone who has earned 
seniority through serving three years as an administrator can be deprived of an opportunity to 
benefit from it merely because of having served three years as an administrator. 
 

42. 

The second reason the district may not apply the board’s criterion so as to 
deny Mr. Miller his right to be transferred has to do with the narrow scope of the board’s 
resolution.  The resolution has a very limited reach.  It concerns bumping into a “position 
held by an employee with less seniority.”  But Mr. Miller’s right to a transfer does not 
involve bumping.  If as is occurring in this case, there are also Code section 44949 
recommendations for workforce reduction, bumping might come into play in a subsequent 
step in the process.  But the transfer from the administrative position to a classroom position 
is just that – a transfer.  If the district has a vacancy, it can transfer the administrator into the 
vacancy.  If there is no vacancy, the district may create a position or transfer the 
administrator into an existing position and reassign the teacher who held it.  Teachers do not 
have a right to a particular assignment. 
 

43. 

Bumping is derived from Code section 44955, subdivision (c), second 

paragraph, and is available in certain circumstances in a workforce reduction.  The Code 
sections concerning an administrator’s right to be transferred make no provision for 
bumping.  Consider the following: A district gives an administrator a release notice pursuant 
to Code section 44951 but does not give anyone a Superintendent’s Layoff Recommendation 
pursuant to Code sections 44949 and 44955.  The district must transfer the administrator to a 
classroom position.  In doing that, the district may make some reassignments; teachers have 
no right to a particular assignment.  But the district cannot terminate some other teacher.  
There is no bumping involved. 
 

44. 

The district must transfer Mr. Miller to a counselor position.  He is a site 

administrator and has a seniority date of July 23, 2007.  Because of Code section 44956.5, he 
cannot earn more than three years of seniority as an administrator.  Therefore, he will earn no 
seniority between July 23, 2010, and the beginning of his service in the 2010 – 2011 school 
year.  During that period, his effective seniority date must be adjusted day to day. 
 
THE DISTRICT PLANS TO DISCONTINUE SIX COUNSELOR POSITIONS 
 

 

12

45. 

In the Board’s March 9, 2010, resolution, the board resolved to discontinue six 

FTE counselor positions.  The six most junior counselors are: 
 

Melissa Cato 
Julia Lomas 
Jenifer Heck 
Sara Bonilla 
Veronica Garcia 
Sylvia Prado 

Melissa Cato 
Julia Lomas 
Jenifer Heck 
Sara Bonilla 

 

 

 

 

 

46. 

The district may send a May notice of termination to those six counselors.  

47.  According to the district’s seniority list, Veronica Garcia and Sylvia Prado 

share a date of hire of July 28, 2008.  The district did not apply tie-breaking criteria to rank 
them for relative rights regarding the order of termination and reinstatement. 
 

48.  According to the district’s seniority list, the other four share a date of hire of 
July 30, 2007.  The district applied tie-breaking criteria and ranked them for relative rights 
regarding the order of termination and reinstatement.  After applying tie-breaking criteria, the 
district ranked them, with Ms. Cato being deemed the most senior, as follows: 
 

49. 

Each of those six counselors contends that the district has an incorrect date of 
hire for her and, therefore, an incorrect determination regarding her seniority.  Even if they 
are correct, the errors can have no effect on the district’s right to terminate them because the 
changes they say should be made would not cause any of them to be more senior than Mr. 
Miller and Sarah White, counselors who are senior to the six.   
 

50. 

The relative seniority of the six, among themselves, may affect rights to 

reinstatement, but that is beyond the scope of this proceeding. 
 

51. 

The superintendent gave a Superintendent’s Layoff Recommendation to the 

more senior counselors, Mr. Miller and Ms. White.  Those notices must be rescinded. 
 
ADMINISTRATORS GROW AND FOWLER 
 

52. 

Jay Fowler resigned. 

53. 

The district stipulates that it will rescind the Superintendent’s Layoff 

Recommendation regarding John Grow and transfer him to a special education teaching 
position.  Mr. Grow agrees to accept that position. 

13

THE SUPERINTENDENT FAILED TO PROVIDE NOTICE TO WHITE AND HOLT 
 

54. 

Both Sarah White and Thom Holt filed notices of change of address with the 

district on the form the district provided.  The superintendent, however, sent 
Superintendent’s Layoff Recommendations to them at their former addresses.  Ms. White 
testified that she did not receive the notice by March 15, 2010, and Mr. Holt testified that he 
did not receive it by that date.  The notices that were not properly given to them must be 
rescinded.  (In Mr. Dale’s brief, he, on behalf of the complainant, acknowledged that the 
notice was not properly given to Ms. White or Mr. Holt and that those notices must be 
rescinded.) 
 
CORRECTIONS IN SENIORITY DATES BECAUSE OF REQUIRED TRAINING FOR WHICH TEACHERS WERE 
PAID 
 

55.  Miriam Singleton and Amy Cary-Park Smith were required to attend High 

Points training regarding the curricula they were hired to teach.  The training began on July 
10, 2006, and continued for five days.  They were paid to attend.  It is found that their first 
day of paid service as probationary employees was July 10, 2006.  That is their date of hire 
for purposes of seniority. 
 

56. 

Four teachers were required to attend three days of staff development training 
in connection with the opening of Cesar Chavez Elementary School.  The training began on 
August 7, 2006.  They were paid to attend.  It is found that their first day of paid service as 
probationary employees was August 7, 2006.  That is their date of hire for purposes of 
seniority.  The four are: 
 

Sarah Barr 
Emily Jones Catron 
Jacob Hernandez 
Stephen Jaquith 

 
FINDINGS REGARDING OTHER MATTERS 
 

57. 

Shannon Lancaster was sent a Superintendent’s Layoff Recommendation.  She 

did not request a hearing and is not a respondent.  She is senior to Ryan Philip and 
certificated and competent to render the service Mr. Philip renders.  Ms. Lancaster may 
bump into Mr. Philip’s position, and the district may send a May notice of termination to Mr. 
Philip. 
 

58.  Kathie Kuhn was sent a Superintendent’s Layoff Recommendation, and she is 

a respondent.  She is senior to Theresa MacEacheron and certificated and competent to 
render the service Ms. MacEacheron renders.  Ms. Kuhn may bump into Ms. MacEacheron’s 
position, and the district may send a May notice of termination to Ms. MacEacheron. 
 

 

14

59.  Angela Lindsay was sent a Superintendent’s Layoff Recommendation, and she 

is a respondent.  She is senior to Thom Holt and certificated and competent to render the 
service Mr. Holt renders.  Ms. Lindsay may bump into Mr. Holt’s position.  The district, 
however, may not send a May notice of termination to Mr. Holt because, as noted above, the 
superintendent failed to give Mr. Holt a Superintendent’s Layoff Recommendation.  There 
was no evidence that Mr. Holt will be rendering a service that a more senior employee who is 
being terminated is certificated and competent to render.  If that is the case, however, the 
most senior employee who is certificated and competent to render the service must also be 
retained. 
 

60. 

Blanca Bishop is senior to a number of teachers who are being retained to 

teach subjects she is credentialed to teach.  All of those teachers, however, possess “highly 
qualified” status under No Child Left Behind, but Ms. Bishop does not.  The district 
demonstrated a specific need for personnel to teach that course of study; demonstrated that 
teachers junior to Ms. Bishop have special training and experience necessary to teach that 
course of study; and demonstrated that Ms. Bishop, in spite of being more senior, does not 
possess that special training and experience.  The district may skip the junior teachers and, 
unless Ms. Bishop has a right to bump into a position held by a junior teacher, send a May 
termination notice to Ms. Bishop.  
 

61.  Heidi Rochin is an academic coach.  Ms. Bishop is senior to Ms. Rochin, has 
worked as an academic coach, and contends that she has a right to bump into Ms. Rochin’s 
position.  Ms. Rochin possesses “highly qualified” status in the relevant subject matter under 
No Child Left Behind.  Ms. Bishop does not.  It is found that Ms. Bishop does not meet the 
district’s competency criteria for bumping into Ms. Rochin’s position. 
 

62. 

Cynthia Grimaldo is senior to a number of teachers who are being retained to 

teach subjects she is credentialed to teach.  All of those teachers, however, possess 
authorizations to teach students who are English language learners, but Ms. Grimaldo does 
not.  Ms. Grimaldo teaches at Sierra Vista Elementary School.  In the current year, 18 of her 
students are English language learners.  The district demonstrated a specific need for 
personnel to teach English language learners; demonstrated that teachers junior to Ms. 
Grimaldo have special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of 
study; and demonstrated that Ms. Grimaldo, in spite of being more senior, does not possess 
that special training and experience.  The district may skip the junior teachers and, unless 
Ms. Grimaldo has a right to bump into a position held by a junior teacher, send a May 
termination notice to Ms. Grimaldo.  
 

63. 

In the Board’s March 9, 2010, resolution, the board resolved to discontinue 

one FTE elementary music teaching position.  Sarah Ausley is junior to Sheldon Horn.  Ms. 
Ausley holds an authorization to teach English language learners.  Mr. Horn does not.  The 
district will continue to have one FTE elementary music teaching position and proposes to 
skip Ms. Ausley and terminate Mr. Horn.  The remaining position involves classes at Alpha 
Elementary School and Cesar Chavez Elementary School.  There are numerous English 
language learners at both schools in each class.  The district demonstrated a specific need for 

 

15

personnel to teach English language learners; demonstrated that Ms. Ausley has special 
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study; and demonstrated 
that Mr. Horn, in spite of being more senior, does not possess that special training and 
experience.  The district may skip Ms. Ausley and send a May termination notice to Mr. 
Horn.   
 

64. 

The district may send a May notice of termination to Jennifer Showalter, a 

65. 

The district may send a May notice of termination to Jeffery Vogt, a librarian. 

nurse. 
 

 
MULTIPLE SUBJECT TEACHING SERVICES K-8 
 

66. 

The board resolved to discontinue 69 FTE of positions for employees with 

multiple subject K through 8 credentials.  After the stipulation to rescind, the district 
continues to seek to terminate 37 respondents who hold multiple subject credentials.  Those 
teachers are identified in exhibit C1 under the heading “Employees District is Seeking to Lay 
Off.”  On that list, the district did not include employees who did not request a hearing and 
are not respondents.  There are ten teachers with multiple subject credentials who did not 
request a hearing, who have no right to bump into another position, and who are junior to 
some or all of the 37 respondents.  Those ten teachers are: 
 

Stephanie Slenders 
Monique Atherton 
Brynn Burger 
Jene Shipman 
Amy Mercer 
Elena Montano 
Marissa Dunlap 
Elizabeth Sanchez 
Patrick Johnson 
Stacy Waldren 

 

 

67. 

The district may send May notices of termination to the 37 respondents on the 
list of “Employees District is Seeking to Lay Off.”  However, the district may not terminate 
any of the 37 while retaining an employee with less seniority to render a service the more 
senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS REGARDING RETENTION OF EMPLOYEES 
 

68.  With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district is not 

retaining any probationary employee to render a service that such a respondent is certificated 
and competent to render. 
 

16

69.  With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district is not 

retaining any employee with less seniority than such a respondent has to render a service that 
the respondent is certificated and competent to render.7 
 

70.  With regard to respondents who are either permanent or probationary 
employees, the district is not retaining any employee with less seniority than such a 
respondent has to render a service that the respondent’s qualifications entitle him or her to 
render. 8 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Code sections 44949 and 44955.  

 
 
Except as to Sarah White and Thom Holt, all notice and jurisdictional requirements 
contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services and, as determined in the above findings, to 
give notices to certain respondents that their services will not be required for the ensuing 
school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils. 
 
 

2.  Within the terms of Code sections 44949 and 44955, the district has cause to 

ORDER 

1. 

Pursuant to stipulation, the district shall rescind the Superintendent’s Layoff 

2. 

Pursuant to stipulation, the district shall rescind the Superintendent’s Layoff 

Recommendation as to John Grow. 
 

Recommendation as to the following 25 employees: 
 

 

  
MS.  ALEMAN 
MS.  BRATCHER 
MS.  CANO 
MS.   CERVANTES 
MS.  CHILDERS 
MR.  CODY 
MS.  DOMOTO 
MS.  DORADO 
                                                

 
TRACEY 
MARISA 
MARILU 
MIRNA 
DORA Z 
QUINN 
JAMIE AKEMI 
MARIA A 

7 Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides seniority protection for a permanent employee in terms of 

the services the employee is “certificated and competent to render.”   

 
8 Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides seniority protection for both permanent and probationary 

employees in terms of the services an employee’s “qualifications entitle [him or her] to render.”  
 

17

 

 

MS.  HAGIHARA 
MR.  HERNANDEZ 
MS.  HOWARD 
MS.  JAQUITH 
MS.  JEFFERSON  
MS.  KEENAN 
MS.  KUHN 
MS.  LINDSAY 
MS.  LOPEZ  
MS.  MATTHEWS 
MS.  NIEVES 
MS.  RUIZ 
MS.  STANFORD 
MR.  STOCKTON 
MR.  VALDIVIA 
MR.  VALMONTE 
MS.  ZENDEJAS 

LORETTA 
JACOB 
MARISSA 
LORA LEE 
RHONDA KAYE 
ELIZABETH M 
KATHIE MAY 
ANGELA L 
ELIDA 
ELIZABETH 
SANDRA   
ALICIA 
MARICELA 
RICHARD   
JUAN JOSE 
VERNON 
GLORIA VIOLETA 

the following employees: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Darren Miller 
Sarah White 
Thom Holt 
Kathie Kuhn 
Angela Lindsay 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

3. 

The district shall rescind the Superintendent’s Layoff Recommendation as to 

4. 

The district shall correct its records to show that July 10, 2006, is the date of 
hire for purposes of calculating seniority for Miriam Singleton and Amy Cary-Park Smith. 
 

5. 

The district shall correct its records to show that August 7, 2006, is the date of 

hire for purposes of calculating seniority for the following employees: 
 

Sarah Barr 
Emily Jones Catron 
Jacob Hernandez 
Stephen Jaquith 

6. 

The district may send May notices of termination to the 37 respondents with 

multiple subject credentials who are on the list of “Employees District is Seeking to Lay 
Off.”  However, the district may not terminate any of the 37 while retaining an employee 
with less seniority to render a service that the more senior employee is certificated and 
competent to render. 
 

18

7. 

The district may give notice to the remaining respondents that the district will 

_________________________________ 
ROBERT WALKER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

not require their services for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
 
Dated:  May 28, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

19

EXHIBIT A 

 
RESPONDENTS WHO ARE NOT IN ADMINISTRATIVE POSITIONS 
 

 
  
 
MS.  ALEMAN 
MS.  ALVARADO 
MS.  APODACA-GONZALES 
MS.  ASHLEY 
MS.  BARR 
MS.  BENNETT 
MS.  BISHOP 
MS.  BONILLA 
MS.  BOWMAN 
MS.  BRATCHER 
MS.  CAMPBELL 
MS.  CANO 
MS.  CASEY  
MS.  CATO 
MS.  CATRON 
MS.   CERVANTES 
MS.  CHILDERS 
MR.  CODY 
MS.  DOMOTO 
MS.  DORADO 
MS.  EVANGELISTA 
MS.  GARCIA 
MS.  GATES 
MS.  GEE 
MS.  GOMEZ 
MS.  GONZALES 
MS.  GRIMALDO 
MS.  HAGIHARA 
MS.  HECK 
MR.  HERNANDEZ 
MR.  HOLT 
MR.  HORN 
MS.  HOWARD 
JAQUITH 
MS. 
JAQUITH 
MR. 
MS. 
JEFFERSON  
MS.  KEENAN 
MS.  KUHN 
MS. 
MS. 
MS. 
MS. 
MS. 
MS.   MAC EACHERON 
MS.  MACIEL 

LA SPADA 
LAZAR  
LINDSAY 
LOMAS 
LOPEZ  

 

 
TRACEY 
MARIA A 
ELINORA 
CHRISTINA 
SARA 
LISA 
BLANCA 
SARA 
ALISON 
MARISA 
HILARY 
MARILU 
TIFFANY 
MELISSA 
EMILY 
MIRNA 
DORA Z 
QUINN 
JAMIE AKEMI 
MARIA A 
GLORIA   
VERONICA 
CASEY ANN 
AMANDA 
JULIA 
APRIL 
CYNTHIA 
LORETTA 
JENIFER 
JACOB 
THOM 
SHELDON 
MARISSA 
LORA LEE 
STEPHEN 
RHONDA KAYE 
ELIZABETH M 
KATHIE MAY 
SANDRA A 
DEBORA LYNN 
ANGELA L 
JULIA 
ELIDA 
THERESA 
GUADALUPE 

20

MR.  MARINO 
MS.  MATTHEWS 
MR.  MONTOYA  
MS.   MURPHY 
MS.  NIEVES 
MS.  NISHIOKA 
MS.  PARKINSON 
MS.  PINEDA 
MS.  PRADO 
MS.  RAMIREZ 
MS.  REEVES 
MS.  RICHARDSON 
MS.  RUIZ 
MS.  SARDEN 
MS.  SCHOETTLER 
MS.  SHOWALTER 
MS.  SINGLETON  
MS.  SMITH 
MS.  STANFORD 
MR.  STOCKTON 
MS.  TATRO 
MR.  VALDIVIA 
MR.  VALMONTE 
MS.  VAN ZANT 
MR.  VOGT 
MS.  WASHKO 
MS.  YRIGOLLEN 
MS.  ZENDEJAS 

  
MS.  MONTANO 
MR.   PHILP 
MS.  WHITE 

PRECAUTIONARY 

ANTHONY ROBERT 
ELIZABETH 
RICK 
ERIN 
SANDRA   
OLIVIA 
GAYTHA LYNETTE 
FANELIA 
SYLVIA 
NORMA 
KELLI RENE 
ELIZABETH   
ALICIA 
JENNIFER 
STEFANI 
JENNIFER 
MIRIAM 
AMY CARY-PARK 
MARICELA 
RICHARD   
CHRISTINE 
JUAN JOSE 
VERNON 
KATHY A 
JEFFREY 
AMY 
JENNIFER 
GLORIA VIOLETA 

  
ELENA 
RYAN 
SARAH 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

21

EXHIBIT B 

RESPONDENTS WHO ARE ADMINISTRATORS 

 
 

 
 
MR.  FOWLER 
MR.  GROW 
MR.  MILLER 

 
 
JAY 
JOHN 
DARREN 

 

 

 

22

