BEFORE THE GOVERNNING BOARD OF THE 
ALPINE UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 

OAH No. 2010020591 

 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Respondents Listed on Exhibit “A”  
 
 
 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Cathie L. Fields, Esq. and Heather A. Dozier, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud 

 
Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Alpine, California on April 20, 2010. 
 
 
and Romo represented the District. 
 
 
Tosdal Smith Steiner & Wax, represented Respondents.   
 

With the exception of Respondent Robert Monfort, Georgiana D’Alessandro, Esq., 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Respondent Robert Monfort. 

The matter was submitted on April 20, 2010. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 
 

The Board of Education of the Alpine Union School District determined to reduce or 

 
discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers for budgetary reasons.  The 
decision was not related to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose services 
are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.   

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 
review of credentials and seniority, “skipping” and breaking ties between/among employees 
with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in accordance with the 
requirements of the Education Code.  
 

 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” (Respondents) are probationary or 

permanent certificated employees of the Alpine Union School District (District). 
 
 

 

1 

 
 
 
 

 

 

2. 

On March 10, 2010, the Board considered the recommendation of Greg Ryan, 

 
the District’s Superintendent (Superintendent) to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of 
services and thereby took action to do so. 
 

3. 

The Board directed the Superintendent or his designee to determine which 

employees’ services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of the 
reduction of these particular kinds of services.  The Board further directed the Superintendent 
or his designee to send the appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the District 
who would be laid off as a result of the reduction or discontinuance of the particular kinds of 
services. 
 

4. 

On March 11, 2010, Bill Cudog, the District’s Assistant Superintendent of 

Curriculum and Human Resources (Assistant Superintendent) served Respondents with 
written notice that he recommended not to re-employ them in the 2010-2011 school year and 
stated the following reasons “…. financial constraints resulting from revenue being 
insufficient to maintain the current levels of programs, the uncertainty of funding, and 
necessary program changes resulting therefrom….”.  In addition, the notice advised 
Respondents of the right to hearing, that a Request for Hearing must be delivered to the 
District’s office no later than March 19, 2010 and that the failure to request a hearing would 
constitute waiver of the right to a hearing.  

 
5. 

6. 

Respondents submitted a timely Request for Hearing to determine if there was 

On March 10, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution number 3-10-10/01, 

 
ordering release of temporary certificated employees from their assignments.  
 
 
cause for not re-employing them for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
off of certificated employees.  He served each individual who submitted a Request for 
Hearing with an Accusation, Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing and related materials. 
 
 

In response, Respondents submitted a timely Notice of Defense. 

On March 23, 2010, the Superintendent made and filed an Accusation for lay-

7. 

 

8. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied. 

9. 

By letter, dated March 11, 2010, the Assistant Superintendent notified each 
 
temporary certificated employees that his/her service as temporary certificated employee 
would not be required for the ensuing school year and provided the limited right to request a 
hearing to challenge his/her status as a temporary employee.  No temporary employee filed a 
Request for Hearing.   
 
 
conclusion of the 2009-2010 school year.   

The employment of temporary certificated employees will be terminated at the 

 

 

 

2 

 

10.  On March 10, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution number 3-10-10/02 and 

 
took action to reduce or eliminate the following particular kinds of services (PKS) 
commencing the 2010-2011 school year as follows: 
 
TYPE OF PROGRAM 
 
K-5 Instruction 

  9.50 

FTE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6-8 Instruction  

 

 

 

 

 

 

  7.00 

 

 

 

 

 

 

District-Wide Music 
 
The proposed reductions totaled 17.50 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.   
 
 
retirements, in determining the actual number of final layoff notices to be delivered to its 
certificated employees. 
 

The District considered all known attrition, including resignations and 

11. 

  1.00 

12. 

The Assistant Superintendent was responsible for implementing the technical 
aspects of the layoff.  The District developed a seniority list for probationary or permanent 
certificated staff that included, among other matters, the name of the certificated employee, 
status, site, assignment, credentials, English Language Certification (if any) and seniority 
date. 
 

The seniority date was based on the first date of paid service rendered in a 
probationary position.1  To assure the accuracy of the District’s information, in December 
2009, the Assistant Superintendent notified certificated employees of seniority date, 
credentials and other data on file with the District and provided this staff an opportunity to 
verify, challenge or update this information.  If the District substantiated the employee’s 
proposed changes, the District changed its records.  The date of the District’s seniority list 
for certificated personnel (Exhibit 8) is April 16, 2010.  During the hearing, the District 
changed the seniority date of some Respondents.  None of the changes impacted the order of 
layoff in this proceeding.             

13. 

In reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services, the Board provided 

direction to the District regarding the order of termination.  In Resolutions No. 03-10-10/02, 
the Board stated, in pertinent part: 
 

“ …. 
 
4. 
services being reduced or eliminated are such that they have displacement 
rights by virtue of seniority, and that no employee will be terminated while a 

That the seniority and qualifications of some of the employees in the 

                                                 
1  
 

Education Code section 44845. 

 

 

3 

That the criteria to be used in determining the order of termination of 

less senior employee is being retained to render a service which the more 
senior employee is both certificated and competent to render. 
 
That in selecting those probationary and permanent certificated 
5. 
employees who shall receive notice of termination pursuant to this Resolution, 
Education Code section 44955 requires the Board of Trustees to state specific 
criteria to be used in determining the order of termination of certificated 
employees who first rendered paid service to the Board of Trustees in a 
probationary position on the same date. 
 
6. 
certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the Board of Trustees 
in a probationary position on the same date, listed and described in Exhibit B, 
which is attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
 
…. 
 
That in selecting those probationary and permanent certificated 
8. 
employees who shall receive notice of termination pursuant to this Resolution, 
Education Code section 44955 allows the Board of Trustees to deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority by virtue of their 
competence, credential (s), assignment and the specific need of the District 
and its students. 
 
That the criteria that will be applied to deviate from terminating 
9. 
certificated employees who may otherwise be terminated by order of seniority, 
are based on the needs of the students of the District, and will ensure that no 
employee will be terminated while a less senior employee is retained to render 
service which the more senior employee is both certificated and competent to 
render. 
 
10. 
employees performing services in a subject matter or field identified by the 
District for reduction or elimination to displace a less senior certificated 
employee, those more senior certificated employees may displace less senior 
certificated employee if it is established to the satisfaction of the District that 
the more senior certificated employee is both competent and credentialed to 
render the services performed by a less senior certificated employee. 

That in observing the statutory rights of more senior certificated 

….” 

 

 
14. 

The Assistant Superintendent testified that the District has a need for a 

physical education (PE) teacher and therefore seeks to skip the most senior teacher 
certificated, competent and willing to teach PE.  The District identified Respondent Jill 

 

4 

Anderson (Respondent Anderson) as the certificated employee who meets the foregoing 
competency but nevertheless issued a layoff notice to her. 
 

Respondent Anderson’s seniority date is September 14, 2007, and she holds a clear 

multiple subject credential.  During the current school year, she is assigned to Joan 
MacQueen Middle School and teaches physical education (PE).   

 
In 2009 Respondent Anderson was part of the District’s reduction in force and laid off 

at the conclusion of the 2008-2009 school year.  At the same time, one of two of the 
District’s credentialed PE teachers retired.  The position was offered to the remaining PE 
teacher, who declined.  In order to fill this position, the District considered employees on its 
reemployment list and inquired whether any of them was interested in pursing a single-
subject PE credential.  Respondent Anderson expressed an interest.  The Assistant 
Superintendent testified that the District obtained a waiver for Respondent Anderson to teach 
PE.  Presumably he meant that the District obtained the limited assignment single subject 
teaching permit on her behalf.  To renew this permit, the holder must maintain a valid non-
emergency teaching credential and must complete a minimum of six semester hours of work 
applicable toward the credential that authorizes the service (5 C.C.R. §80027(b)(3)(C).). 

 
Respondent Anderson completed the coursework towards the PE credential, and the 

District is satisfied with her performance as a PE teacher.  No evidence was offered to 
establish that a more senior teacher in the District is certificated and competent to teach PE. 

 
The District has a need for a PE teacher.  Respondent Anderson has the special 
training and experience necessary to teach this class.  There is no more senior teacher in the 
District who does.  Given the facts in Finding 14, it is proper for the District to skip and 
retain Respondent Anderson. 
 

15. 

The Assistant Superintendent testified that the District needs a certificated 

teacher who is qualified to teach Algebra in the District’s Community Day School (CDS), 
also known as a “special setting.”.”  The District noticed Respondent Robert Monfort 
(Respondent Monfort) but seeks to retain him, asserting that he is the District’s most senior 
certificated teacher who satisfies this competency. 
 

Respondent Monfort has a seniority date of August 23, 2005 and holds a clear 
multiple subject credential.  He is assigned to the District’s CDS, his assignment for the past 
four years.  The Assistant Superintendent testified that the CDS program focuses on students 
in grades six through eight “who have had some problems at the mainstream middle school”.   

 
The Assistant Superintendent testified that during the 2005 – 2006 school year, all 
teachers in the District, including Respondent Monfort, were certified as highly qualified 
under NCLB.   
 
During the current school year, in accordance with a requirement of the California 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing, as the teacher assigned to the District’s CDS, in 

 

5 

addition, Respondent Monfort was qualified to teach Algebra through the verification 
process for “special settings” (VPSS).2  The Assistant Superintendent testified that 
Respondent Monfort did not have sufficient college credits to qualify.  Therefore, he was 
deemed highly qualified pursuant to the “HOUSSE” (High Objective Uniform State Standard 
of Evaluation) method using lesson observations3 to teach Algebra in the District’s CDS, and 
the Assistant Superintendent described the process. 

 
Respondent Stephanie Jacques (Respondent Jacques), Karen Hohimer (Respondent 

Hohimer) and Respondent Robert Bordelon (Respondent Bordelon) are more senior to 
Respondent Monfort.4  Each holds a multiple subject credential, teaches at Joan MacQueen 
Middle School and contends that she/he has sufficient qualifications to be certified as highly 
qualified under NCLB to teach Algebra.  Each testified regarding their specific 
qualifications.  Among other things, Respondent Jacques has been deemed highly qualified 
under NCLB in Algebra; Respondent Bordelon has taught in the District’s CDS; and 
Respondent Hohimer has taught Algebra previously.  Respondents Jacques, Hohimer and/or 
Bordelon are not assigned to teach in the CDS during the current school year and did not 
establish that she/he is highly qualified to teach Algebra in a “special setting” through the 
VPSS. 
 
The District established a need for a certificated teacher qualified under VPSS to 

 
teach Algebra in the District’s CDS.  There is no evidence that any employee more senior to 
Respondent Monfort satisfies the District’s competency.  As such, the District properly 
skipped and retained Respondent Monfort. 

 
17. 

 
18. 

The services that the District proposed to reduce were “particular kinds of 

services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  

 
The District’s reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services 
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
of the District as determined by the Board.  

 
19.  No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform 

 
any services that any Respondent was certificated and competent to render. 

The following are the seniority dates of the following certificated employees: 

                                                 
2  
5 C.C.R. §6105 
 
3  
 
4  
 

5 C.C.R. §6104 

•  Respondent Jacques – August 23, 2000 
•  Respondent Hohimer – August 22, 2001 
•  Respondent Bordelon -  August 21, 2002  

6 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
 
Union School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause for the 
reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to the welfare of 
the schools and the pupils thereof.  
 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the Alpine 

3. 

4. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he/she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior 
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Lacy vs. 
Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 469.)  
 

5. 

The District has the discretion to determine whether teachers are certificated 
and competent to hold the position for which said teachers have been skipped and retained.  
(King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016)  Junior teachers may 
be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or 
capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High 
School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 
v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831)  
 
 
perform a service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
the law and therefore rejected. 
 
 

All arguments not addressed herein are not supported by the evidence and/or 

No employee with less seniority than any Respondent is being retained to 

6. 

7. 

ORDER 
 
The Accusation served on Respondent Jill Anderson is dismissed. 

The Accusation served on Respondent Robert Monfort is dismissed. 

The Accusation served on Respondents listed on Exhibit A and Amended 

Exhibit A, is sustained.  Notice shall be given to Respondents before May 15, 2010 that their 

7 

1. 
 
2. 

3. 

 

 

services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
 
DATED: _________________________ 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
VALLERA J. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

8 

ALPINE UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Certificated Layoff 2009 – 2010 
RESPONDENTS 
Exhibit “A” 
 
 

 
Jill Anderson 
Staci Arnold 
Robert Bordelon 
Michelle Brown 
Donna Burton 
Aleta Greer 
Mary Hoffman 
Karen Hohimer 
Stephanie Jacques 
Lea Ann Jones 
Tina Krawczyk 
Yvette Maier 
Robert Monfort 
Shannon McRae 
Jennifer Pekar 
Tamara Ripke 
Louise Sager 
Bridget Wetton 

 

9 

ALPINE UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Certificated Layoff 2009 – 2010 
RESPONDENTS 
Amended Exhibit “A” 
 

 
 
Staci Arnold 
Robert Bordelon 
Michelle Brown 
Donna Burton 
Aleta Greer 
Mary Hoffman 
Karen Hohimer 
Stephanie Jacques 
Lea Ann Jones 
Tina Krawczyk 
Yvette Maier 
Shannon McRae 
Jennifer Pekar 
Tamara Ripke 
Louise Sager 
Bridget Wetton 
 
 
 
 
 

 

10 

