BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF EDUCATION  
OF THE 
RIM OF THE WORLD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
Respondents listed in Appendix A. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

    OAH No. 2010030265 
 

Sherry G. Gordon, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, APLC, represented the 

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
of California, heard this matter in Blue Jay, California on April 14, 2010. 
 
 
Rim of the World Unified School District.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 14, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Ronald G. Skipper, Esq., represented the respondents listed in Appendix A.  

1. 

Donna Kellogg, Director, Personnel, Rim of the World Unified School 

 
 
District, made and filed the accusation dated March 12, 2009, in her official capacity as the 
designee of Ronald Peavy, District Superintendent.  
 
 
 

Respondents1 are certificated District employees. 

2. 

3. 

On March 11, 2010, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, the superintendent notified the Board of Education of the Rim of the World Unified 
School District in writing of his recommendation to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
                                                
1  
Horton) who was designated to receive a “precautionary” layoff notice.  By the date of the hearing that number had 
been reduced to the 19 respondents identified in Appendix A.  The term “respondents” as hereafter used in this 
Proposed Decision refers collectively to these 19 remaining individuals.  
   

The District initially identified 21 certificated employees as respondents, including one individual (Rebecca 

 

1

services for the upcoming school year.  The recommendation that respondents be terminated 
from employment was not related to their competency as teachers.   

On March 11, 2010, the board adopted Resolution No. 09/10-17, determining 
that it would be necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of 
the current school year.  The board determined that the particular kinds of services that must 
be reduced for the 2010-2011 school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE) 
positions: 

Full-Time Equivalent

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
Particular Kind of Service 
 
Elementary Classroom Teachers 
Secondary Title I Intervention 
Elementary Title I Intervention 
Special Education SDC/Mild Moderate 
Special Education SDC/Moderate Severe 
Special Education ROP 
High School Science  
Secondary Physical Education 
 
 
High School Math 
 
Junior High Math 
 
 
High School English  
High School Drama   
 
Junior High Language Arts   
High School Band 
 
 
Junior High Computers 
Junior High Social Science   
ROP Desktop Publishing, Web Design 
 
The proposed reductions totaled 21.8 FTE positions.  
 
5. 

5 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
.80 
.80 
.80 
.20 
.20 
.60 
.40 
.40 
1.6 
1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

The board directed the superintendent or his designee to determine which 

employees’ services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year as a result of the 
reduction of the foregoing particular kinds of services.  The board further directed the 
superintendent or his designee to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the 
district who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services.   

The board further determined in Resolution No. 09/10-07 that “competency,” 
as described in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for the purposes of bumping, 
“shall necessarily include possession of a valid preliminary or clear credential and Highly 
Qualified status under NCLB in the relevant subject matter area, and an appropriate El 
Authorization.”   
 
7. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the district timely served on respondents a 
written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services would not be 
required for the upcoming school year.  The notice set forth the reasons for the 

2

 
4. 

 
6. 

 

 

recommendation.  The notice advised respondents of their right to a hearing, that each 
respondent had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person sending the notice 
by the date specified in the notice, a date which in each case was more than seven days after 
the notice was served, and that the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of 
the right to a hearing.  Along with the written notice, the district timely served on 
respondents the accusation and required accompanying documents.  

 
The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment was not 

related to their competency as teachers.  

 
8. 

Certain respondents timely filed written requests for hearing and notices of 
defense to determine if there was cause for not reemploying them for the upcoming school 
year.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.2

10. 

11. 

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of the 

The services the board addressed in Amended Resolution No. 09-10-012 were 

 
9. 
district.  
 
 
“particular kinds of services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these 
particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious and constituted a proper exercise 
of discretion.  
 
 
The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
welfare of the district and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as 
determined by the board.  
 
 
retirements and requests for transfer, that were known to the board at the time the accusations 
were served on respondents, in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to 
be delivered to its employees.  Since that time, the board has become aware of additional 
expected attrition (e.g., via a number of intent to retire letters).  The board has not yet 
decided to what extent to take this additionally expected attrition into account, as it is waiting 
for the district’s financial condition to become clearer in the months ahead as a result of the 
May revise of the Governor’s proposed budget for fiscal year 2010-2011.  The board intends 
to reconsider the issue of attrition after issuance of the May revise.  In light of the 
unprecedented financial uncertainty the district, and every other California school district, 
faces at this time, the board’s decision to wait is neither arbitrary nor capricious, and 
constitutes a proper exercise of its discretion.  Further, in a particular kinds of service 
reduction, the district need not take into account attrition that occurs after issuance of 
preliminary layoff notices.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 
627, 634-635.) 

The board considered all positively assured attrition, including resignations, 

12. 

                                                
2  
district waived any jurisdictional defects resulting from such failures. 

Certain respondents failed to file timely requests for hearing and/or notices of defense.  At the hearing, the 

 

3

13.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any 

 
 
services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.  
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
accusation.  Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the district to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the welfare of the schools and 
the pupils thereof.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the district 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The district 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the board 
directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is recommended that the Board give respondents 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services are no longer required by the district. 
 
 

ADVISORY DETERMINATION 
 

The following advisory determination is made: 

 
 
The accusations served on respondents are sustained.3  Notice shall be given to 
 
respondents before May 15, 2010, that their services will not be required because of the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated. 
 
 
DATED:  ________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
DONALD P. COLE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

                                                
3  
full-time equivalent position is indicated in parentheses opposite the individual’s name. 

Where the lay off of a respondent is less than a full-time-equivalent position, the applicable fraction of a 

 

4

Jack Allen 

Melissa Astle 

Eugene Ballantyne 

David Bealer 

Tracy Cairns 

Elizabeth Caro 

Laura Delgrosso (0.8) 

Shawna Gray 

Robert Harshberger 

Rebecca Horton (0.2) 

Jeannine Jones 

Jerry Lees (0.4) 

Caris Leidner 

Brent Lumsden 

Tiffany Minor 

Jeffrey Moss (0.2) 

Tracy Olsen 

Sheila Palmer 

Steven Wallace 

 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
7. 
 
8. 
 
9. 
 
10. 
 
11. 
 
12. 
 
13. 
 
14. 
 
15. 
 
16. 
 
17. 
 
18. 
 
19. 

 

Appendix A 

5

