BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ANAHEIM UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In the Matter of the Accusations Re: 
 
The Reduction in Force of 71 Full-Time 
Equivalent Positions,  
                                           Respondents. 

 
OAH No. 2010030731 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Stutz Artiano Shinoff & Holtz, by Jack M. Sleeth, Jr. and Jeanne Blumenfield, 

The District objected to the inclusion of Diane Kuramoto and Seddigheh Lenjavi as 

David B. Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 14, 2010, in Anaheim, California. 
 
 
Attorneys at Law, represented the Anaheim Union High School District (District). 
 
 
Schwartz, Steinsapir, Dohrmann & Sommers, by Henry M. Willis and Lucas H.  
Openheim, Attorneys at Law, represented the Respondent teachers on the list attached as 
Attachment A and marked “+”, incorporated by reference and more specifically described in 
Factual Finding 7.  Attachment A also sets forth the Respondents who appeared at the 
hearing, marked “*,” as well as a group of Respondents who were not represented by Mr. 
Willis, marked “C.”  (These Respondents hold positions as Counselors with the District.)   
 
 
Respondents because, although they submitted Requests for Hearing after they received 
notices of termination, they did not submit Notices of Defense after the District served them 
with Accusations.  The District did not object to their participation in the hearing if they 
wanted to offer evidence relating to their failure to file Notices of Defense.  No evidence was 
submitted on that subject.  The District’s objection is sustained, and the defaults of Diane 
Kuramoto and Seddigheh Lenjavi are hereby noted. 
 
 
 
 
14; Respondents’ letter brief by Mr. Willis, marked for identification as Exhibit E; email 
brief from Kuramoto, marked for identification as Exhibit F; email brief from Read-Bottorff, 
marked for identification as Exhibit G; email brief from Michea, marked for identification as 
Exhibit H; email brief from Chavez, marked for identification as Exhibit I; and email brief 
from Lenjavi, marked for identification as Exhibit J. 

Received on April 19, 2010: District’s letter brief, marked for identification as Exhibit 

The record remained open for the submission of briefs, as follows:   

1 

Several parties indicated they would submit replies, which were received on April 21 

 
or 22, 2010, and marked for identification as follows:  District’s reply brief, marked for 
identification as Exhibit 15; Respondents’ reply brief by Mr. Willis, marked for identification 
as Exhibit K; email reply from Michea, marked for identification as Exhibit L; email reply 
from Lenjavi, marked for identification as Exhibit M; and email reply from Read, marked for 
identification as Exhibit N. 
 
 

The record was closed and the matter was submitted on April 22, 2010. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

The Governing Board (Board) of the District determined to reduce particular kinds of 

 
 
services provided by teachers and other certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  The 
Board also determined to layoff teachers due to a decline in average daily attendance.  The 
decision was not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals whose services 
are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.   
 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 
review of seniority.  The selection process was in accordance with the requirements of the 
Education Code, except as to the decline in average daily attendance and the decision to skip 
two counselors.  
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 

Jurisdictional Facts
 
 
1.  Joseph M. Farley, Ed.D., is the Superintendent of the District and his actions were 
taken in that official capacity.  Russell Lee-Sung is the Assistant Superintendent for Human 
Resources of the District and his actions were taken in that official capacity.  Lee-Sung is the 
primary person responsible for implementing the layoff. 
 
2.  Before March 15, 2010, the District personally served on each Respondent a 
 
written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to Respondents pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be required for the 
next school year (notice).  Each notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation and 
noted that, due the “the state budgetary crisis,” the Board had passed a resolution “to 
eliminate or reduce particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year, pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955” based on the Board’s determination that “it is necessary to 
lay off certain certificated employees due to the fiscal realities of the shortfall of state 
funding.”  (See notices in Exhibit 11.)  Although a reference was made to the date of the 
resolution, no copy of the resolution was included with the notices. 
 
 
employees each timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 

3.  The notices were properly served on Respondents.  Twenty-eight certificated 

2 

6.  No Notices of Defense were served by some Respondents, including Diane 

4.  Lee-Sung made and filed Accusations against each of the Respondents.  The 

5.  Twenty-three employees who filed written Requests for a Hearing also filed a 

reemploying them for the ensuing school year.  (See list in Exhibit 11 and documents 
provided in Exhibit 11 for each person served.) 
 
 
Accusations with required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense were 
timely served on the responding employees.  Each Accusation (see Exhibit 11) recited that 
the reasons for termination were set forth in a copy of the Board Resolution that was 
attached.  However, the Accusations submitted in Exhibit 11 do not include this attachment. 
 
 
Notice of Defense.  (See list in Exhibit 11 and documents provided in Exhibit 11 for each 
person served.) 
 
 
Kuramoto and Seddigheh Lenjavi.  Nor was there any evidence offered by them of any 
attempts to serve Notices of Defense or reasons for not serving Notices of Defense. 
 
7.  Attachment A is incorporated by reference.  The names listed are certificated 
 
employees on whom the District served notices and who returned a Request for Hearing, and 
are Respondents in this matter.  Those who did not return a Notice of Defense have the 
designation “NNOD.”  Finally, all names with the designation “*” appeared at the hearing, 
although not necessarily for the entire hearing. 
 
Facts Relating to Reduction in Services
 
 
high schools, eight high schools, a continuation school, a special education school and an 
adult education school.   
 
 
employees of the District employed as school teachers and counselors.   
 
 
Superintendent’s recommendation that 71 FTE certificated employees be given notice that 
their services would not be required for the next school year and stating the reasons 
therefore.1
 
 
proposed a layoff of 71 FTE certificated employees due to the reduction or elimination of the 
following, which were described as “particular kinds of services” (Resolution, Exhibit 1): 
three management positions, 41 classroom teachers, 25 counselors, one librarian and one 
regional nurse (GASELPA). 
                                                 
1 The Superintendent’s recommendation, and the Board resolution, also included 
 
other FTE positions that are not at issue in this matter, such as in management positions. 

8.  The District provides educational services for over 30,000 students in eight junior 

11.  Board Resolution No. 2009/10-HR-04, adopted on March 3, 2010 (Resolution), 

9.  Respondents in this proceeding are probationary or permanent certificated 

10.  On March 3, 2010, the Board of the District was given notice of the 

3 

12.  Tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated 

14.  The Board decided to reduce teaching services in general by increasing the 

13.  Lee-Sung established that the Resolution was required by the District’s fiscal 

 
 
employees who first rendered paid service on the same date are established by the following:  
the teachers’ Collective Bargaining Agreement, Article 9.12 (Exhibit 3); and the 
Memorandum of Understanding between the District and the Anaheim Personnel Guidance 
Association (Exhibit 3).  In total, these documents provide that the order of termination shall 
be based on the needs of the District and its students in accordance with the criteria stated 
therein. 
 
 
crisis and a decline in average daily attendance and the need to reduce services to balance its 
budget for the welfare of students.  More specifically, the District presented evidence that, 
due to expected reductions in the next state budget, it was possible that its revenues would be 
reduced by approximately $8 million, following several years of larger reductions that are 
ongoing.   
 
 
student to teacher ratios in its schools.  In junior high schools, where the ratio had been 1 
teacher to 31.5 students, the ratio would now be 1 to 32.5.  In high schools, where the ratio 
had been 1 teacher to 32 students, the ratio would now be 1 to 33.  As a result of the added 
students in each class, the District would need fewer teachers in general.  The District 
determined that 34 FTEs would be reduced as a result.  Lee-Sung’s allocation of these FTE 
reductions to specific subject areas of teaching is found in Exhibit A, in the row titled “class 
size increase (based on increase by 1).” 
 
 
services under AB 1802 to its general fund.  As a result, the District sent notices to 25 
counselors. 
 
 
16.  The Resolution also refers to the decline in average daily attendance (ADA) as a 
basis for layoffs.  At the time of the recommendation made to the Board, Lee-Sung used an 
estimate of 650 fewer students expected for the next school year (2010-2011) than for the 
present school year (2009-2010).  As a result, 34 FTEs would be reduced.  (See Exhibits A 
and C.)  At the time of hearing, the District presented evidence that the actual decline in 
ADA from the 2008-2009 school year to the 2009-2010 school year was 349.45 (Exhibits 8 
and 9).  Based on this lower figure, Lee-Sung testified that 16 FTEs would be reduced as a 
result of decline in ADA. 
 
17.  Lee-Sung testified to the methodology by which he identified the 34 FTEs 
 
initially related to the decline in ADA.  In summary, he calculated the decline in future 
enrollment as a percentage of current students (approximately 2.13 percent), and then applied 
the same percent reduction to most of the teaching subject areas he identified in Exhibit B.  
In some instances, there were so few employees teaching a subject that he could not reduce 
it, as a practical matter.  In some instances he used numbers that were rounded off.  Lee-Sung 
also considered attrition known to the time of hearing and testified that future attrition would 

15.  The District decided to redirect categorical funding provided for counseling 

4 

18.  Lee-Sung also testified that it was impossible to determine the actual decline in 

be monitored and considered.  His conclusions are found in Exhibit A, in the row titled 
“enrollment decline (based on 650).”  For example, there were six FTEs each allocated to 
English, Reading and Math, and five each allocated to Social Science and Science. 
 
 
ADA, as defined by the statute2, because the first six months of the present school year 
would not be completed until early march, and he had begun his computations, and the 
recommendation to the Board took place long before then.  As noted in factual Finding 16, 
once the actual ADA figures were calculated, a lower number of FTEs, 16, was attributed to 
the decline in ADA.  However, there was no evidence of how the 16 FTEs were to be 
allocated, although it is assumed that the District would undertake a similar process to 
spread, or allocate, these reductions across the various subject areas of teaching. 
 
 
of the individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated. 
 
 
20.  The District maintains seniority lists which contains employees’ seniority dates 
(first date of paid service) (Exhibit 2 for teachers; Exhibit 13 for counselors).  The District 
also maintains records of its teachers’ and counselors’ current assignments and credentials.  
 

19.  The decision to reduce services was not related to the capabilities and dedication 

21.  The District used the seniority lists to develop a proposed layoff list of the least 

 

 

b.  Kelly Grove has a seniority date of September 2, 2008 (#1338).  She 

a.  Kerri Fenton has a seniority date of September 6, 2005 (#1070).  She 

22.  The District determined it would skip over certain less senior employees who 

senior employees currently assigned in the teaching and counseling positions being reduced.   
 
 
possess skills found necessary by the District.  As set forth in more detail in Exhibits 4, 5 and 
6 and the testimony, the District skipped the following employees for the following reasons: 
 
 
teaches physical education and has extensive education, experience and training in dance.  
She teaches a special dance curriculum at a high school. 
 
 
teaches a special education class comprised of students who are blind or otherwise visually 
impaired.  She teaches and utilizes Braille in her curriculum. 
 
 
have been trained to perform the specialized assessments and other tasks required for special 
education students, such as participation in the formation of Individualized Education Plans 
required by law.  These are services mandated by law.  They are employed under contract as 
temporary teachers, and the District intends to re-employ them for the next school year based 
on their special skills and training.  Although the positions were offered to existing District 
                                                 
2 Education Code section 44955 requires a comparison of the average daily 
 
attendance for the first six months of the present school year as compared to the average 
daily attendance for the first six months of either of the prior two school years. 

c.  Tom Faranda and Julie Ornelas-Smith are credentialed counselors who 

 

5 

23.  The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services that 

24.  Except as permitted by law, no junior certificated employee is scheduled to be 

25.  Corey Hague, seniority date February 5, 2005 (#1047), and Rhonda Lee, seniority 

employees when they were created, there were no applications from existing District 
employees. 
 
 
could be reduced under Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce the 
identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its 
discretion, except as set forth below.  The decision was based on the welfare of the District 
and its students.  
 
 
retained to perform services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to 
render. 
 
Individual Respondents and Respondents’ Contentions
 
 
date September 7, 2004 (#986), are both credentialed to teach physical education and have 
taught dance as a component of the full physical education curriculum.  Both have permanent 
status, have more seniority than Fenton and contend that they should be retained to teach the 
specialized dance classes taught by Fenton. 
 
26.  Dale Miller contended that Fenton was unsuccessful in making the argument last 
 
year that she should not be subject to layoff.  Fenton responded that she had not been laid off 
last year. 
 
 
under Government Code section 11505, Office of Administrative Hearings case number 
2009031200, in which Fenton was noticed for layoff, and not proposed to be skipped, as she 
is this year.  In that Proposed Decision, it was determined that Fenton could be laid off.  If, as 
she testified, she was not laid off, it is inferred that the District ultimately determined that she 
could be retained. 
 
 
claims that the date should be September 4, 2007.  He began work on September 4, 2007, 
under an emergency teaching credential in a position set forth in his personnel file as a long 
term substitute teacher.  By reference to last year’s Proposed Decision (see official notice set 
forth in Factual Finding 27, above), it is found that,  after a credentialing issue was resolved, 
Miller signed a contract with the District to begin as a temporary teacher effective November 
13, 2007.  When he accepted a probationary position the following year, he was given credit 
for his prior service as a temporary teacher.  There was further information that could be 
offered to explain his circumstances (for example, Miller was shown a document from his 
personnel file relating to the terms of his employment as of September 4, 2007, which was 
neither marked for identification nor received in evidence), such as the terms of his 
employment in November 2007 as well as at the outset of the 2008-2009 school year. 
 

28.  Dale E. Miller was assigned a seniority date of November 13, 2007 (#1293), and 

27.  Official notice is taken of the Proposed Decision in last year’s layoff proceeding 

6 

32.  Several counselors contend that the District has improperly implemented their 

30.  Counselor Tisa Read-Bottorff was working as a teacher in a classroom when she 

29.  Teresa Shimogawa has a seniority date of October 23, 2006 (#1232).  An offer of 

 
proof was accepted that she taught in the same classroom as of October 10, 2006, and she 
contends that this should be her seniority date.  There was sufficient evidence to establish 
that Shimogawa worked as a day-to-day substitute before October 23, 2006. 
 
 
was slated to begin her new assignment as a counselor in 2006.  She remained in her teaching 
assignment for ten extra days until a replacement was found. She claims she should receive 
credit to her new seniority date as a counselor for this extra service to the District as a 
teacher. 
 
 
31.  Counselor Marcela Michea was hired by the District in August 2000, resigned on 
June 30, 2006, and was rehired on August 27, 2007.  Her seniority date is August 27, 2007.  
When she was rehired, she was told her seniority date would be August 2000, and that date 
has been on the seniority list until a recent revision in March 2010.  She contends that the 
prior date is proper. 
 
 
layoffs because, among other things: their salaries differ; there are names on the list of 
counselors who are paid by use of funds from AB 1802 who were not initially hired with 
such funds; it was a bad decision to layoff counselors; and there has been attrition of one 
counselor.  The evidence established that: the District hired several new counselors when AB 
1802 funds were first made available; as funds were increased, the District added counselors 
to the list of those paid with AB 1802 funds so as to exhaust those funds; there has been 
attrition of one counselor, as well as one counselor on leave who retains rehire rights; the 
District presently pays more for salary and benefits for counselors on the AB 1802 list than it 
receives in funds under AB 1802; and that the state is permitting the District the flexibility to 
move AB 1802 funding into its general fund for next year.  Under these circumstances, the 
District established an appropriate basis for the counselors to be laid off. 
 
 
33.  Respondents raised the following contentions, among others: that the District 
cannot describe “classroom teachers” as a particular kind of service under the Code; that 
several teachers should have seniority dates earlier than the dates assigned to them on the 
District’s seniority list; that the District did not comply with the law when it skipped less 
senior teachers; that the District improperly determined that counselors should be given 
notices; and that the layoffs attributed to decline in ADA did not comply with the statute.  
The facts relating to these contentions are set forth above. 
 
 
rejected as not supported by the law and/or the facts. 
 
 
 
// 
 

34.  To the extent that a contention of any Respondent is not mentioned herein, it is 

7 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing 

“(b) Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all of the schools of 

1.  Education Code3 section 44949, subdivision (a), states in pertinent part: 

 
2.  Section 44955 provides, in pertinent part:   

 
 
 
 
board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year for the reasons 
specified in Section 44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given written 
notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been 
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.”  
 
 
 
 
“(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes other 
than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, 
and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as 
specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 
 
 
a district for the first six months in which school is in session shall have declined below the 
corresponding period of either of the previous two school years, . . . whenever a particular 
kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following 
school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have 
become necessary by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of permanent 
employees in the district, the governing board may terminate the services of not more than a 
corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as 
probationary, at the close of the school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the 
services of no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section 
while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to 
render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.  
  
 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of 
needs of the district and the students thereof.  Upon the request of any employee whose order 
of termination is so determined, the governing board shall furnish in writing no later than 
five days prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance with Section 44949, a 
statement of the specific criteria used in determining the order of termination and the 
application of the criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other employees in the 
group. . . . 
  
 
“(c)  . . . [S]ervices of such employees shall be shall be terminated in the reverse order 
in which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with Sections 44844 
and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices 

“As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 

                                                 
 

3 All citations are to the Education Code, except where indicated. 

8 

 

“(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 

3.  All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and 44945 

“The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner 

“(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a 

4.  The District must be solvent to provide educational services, and cost savings are 

and a right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed 
reemployed for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications 
entitle them to render. . . .  
 
 
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons:  
 
 
course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential with a 
specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the 
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or 
course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not 
possess.” 
 
 
were met, except as set forth below. 
  
 
necessary to resolve its financial crisis.  The Board’s decision was a proper exercise of its 
discretion for reducing particular kinds of services.  The anticipation of receiving less money 
from the state for the next school year is an appropriate basis for a reduction in particular 
kinds of services under section 44955.  As stated in San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen 
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of particular kinds of services on the 
basis of financial considerations is authorized under that section, and, “in fact, when adverse 
financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section 44955 is the only 
statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.”   
 
 
subdivision (b) “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179 (Rutherford).)  In other words, teaching in general can be reduced.  (California 
Teachers Assn. v. Board of Trustees (Goleta) (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32 (Goleta).) 
 
6.  Respondents’ contention that no particular kind of service has been properly 
 
identified by the Board is rejected.  Respondents cite to numerous cases wherein courts have 
approved the practice of identifying particular types of services to be reduced or eliminated 
at the junior and senior high school level by the nature of the subject taught (e.g., English, 
math, science).  (See, e.g., Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Abbott (1978) 76 
Cal.App.3d 796 (Campbell); Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689 

5.  A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

9 

7.  Because elementary school teachers do not require the same types of teaching 

“Appellants argue that, even if elementary classes are a particular kind of service, 

(Degener).)  In these instances, specific curricular offerings were identified as the particular 
kinds of services identified in the statute as providing a basis for layoffs. 
 
 
credentials as do teachers at secondary schools and, more importantly, because they usually 
teach all curricular subjects to their students, case law developed that allowed school districts 
to identify elementary classroom teachers as a particular kind of service that satisfies the 
statutory requirements.  Although the initial case of Burgess v. Board of Education (1974) 41 
Cal.App.3d 571 initially found that this was not permitted, in later cases the same court that 
decided Burgess, and other courts, declined to follow Burgess and approved the practice of 
using the general description for elementary school teachers subject to layoff.  (See, e.g., 
Degener, supra; Campbell, supra.) 
 
 
8.  Neither the statutory language nor the cases approving the use of specific 
curricular descriptions requires such specificity.  The cases relating to elementary school 
teacher layoffs make it clear that a reduction in particular kinds of services takes place in an 
elementary school setting when increasing the student teacher ratio results in the need for 
fewer teachers.  As stated in Goleta, supra, quoting from Rutherford, supra, at 178-179: 
 
 
reducing the number of classes in order to maintain the same level of service is not the 
‘reduction’ of services required by Education Code section 44955.  This contention has been 
rejected.  ‘A board may ‘reduce services’ . . . by determining that proffered services shall be 
reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to deal with pupils involved.  
[This] determination falls within the statutory language.’” 
 
 
Ferndale Unified School Dist. (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838 (Zalac); Gallup v. Board of 
Trustees (1996) 41 CalApp.4th 1571.)  Specific positions to be eliminated do not need to be 
identified.  As long as there is a change in the method of teaching, the layoff can proceed.  
(San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627 (San Jose).)  The different 
systems of credentialing of teachers at the two different levels do not justify any different 
result. 
 
 
or discontinue particular kinds of services, which is not open to second-guessing in this 
proceeding.  (Rutherford, supra.)  Such policy-making decisions are not subject to arguments 
as to the wisdom of their enactment, their necessity, or the motivations for the decisions.  
(California Teachers; Assn. v. Huff (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.)  Such decisions and 
action must be reasonable under the circumstances, with the understanding that “such a 
standard may permit a difference of opinion.”  (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. 
Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831 (Santa Clara).)  Section 44955 relates to the 
conditions that must be met by a school district to lay off teachers, and there is nothing in the 
statute to suggest that an increased ratio of students to teachers would be a reduction in a 
particular kind of service only at the elementary school level.  As the case law approves of 

10.  Boards of education hold significant discretion in determining the need to reduce 

9.  Other cases have come to the same conclusion.  (Zalac v. Governing Board of 

10 

11.  The contention of Respondents Hague and Lee that their special training, 

12.  Alternatively, Hague and Lee may argue that they have greater seniority than 

such a particular kind of service at the elementary school level, it is also permissible at the 
secondary school level. 
 
 
experience and skills should cause the Department to skip them in this proceeding is not 
supported by law.  Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the 
junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts 
lack.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa 
Clara, supra.)  This “skipping” is a process, under section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), wherein 
a school district may choose to demonstrate a specific need and that an employee has the 
special training and experience to meet that need.  However, the statute does not require a 
school district to do so.  Rather, it is within the school district’s discretion to determine if it 
wishes the layoff process to skip over an employee.  The District adequately described the 
special skills and training upon which it relied.  As applied here, Hague and Lee cannot force 
the District to skip them.  Further, they have not established that the District improperly 
skipped Fenton.  See Factual Findings 22 and 25. 
 
 
Fenton and are “certificated and competent” to render the same service.  If so, they could not 
be laid off under the language of section 44955, subdivision (b), that no permanent employee 
may be terminated while any other employee with less seniority “is retained to render a 
service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.”  This is 
often referred to as bumping.  However, this bumping language would not apply to Hague 
and Lee because it is preceded by the phrase “Except as otherwise provided by statute . . . .”  
Further, the skipping provision in section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), is preceded by the 
language “Notwithstanding subdivision (b).”  Therefore, the language in different portions of 
the statute provides generally for bumping rights for teachers, with the exception that the 
District may skip a teacher if the skipping requirements are met.  Here, the District has met 
the skipping requirements as to Fenton, and bumping rights do no apply. 
 
 
Finding 22) must be disallowed because they are temporary employees.  Temporary 
employees do not gain seniority because they do not perform services to the District in a 
probationary capacity.  Under section 44955, the layoff process, and the ability to skip 
employees under subdivision (d)(1), is based upon seniority and the requirement that, before 
probationary and permanent certificated employees are implicated, the District will have 
notified all temporary employees that they will not be retained for the following year.  As 
there is no statutory authority to skip temporary employees, no matter what special skills 
they may possess, the District may not do so. 
 
 
school year is not entitled to the same rights as a full time teacher hired as a probationary 
employee, and that no credit toward status as a permanent teacher accrues for work as a day-
to-day substitute.  There was insufficient evidence that Respondents Miller or Shimogawa 
had sufficient service under their contracts as substitute teachers to qualify for an earlier 

14.  Under section 44918, a substitute teacher who serves less than 75 percent of the 

13.  The District’s proposed skip of Tom Faranda and Julie Ornelas-Smith (Factual 

11 

seniority date.  Further, the evidence established that their service prior to their seniority 
dates was as day-to-day substitutes.  Neither of these Respondents submitted sufficient 
evidence to affect a change in the seniority dates assigned to them by the District.  See 
Factual Findings 27, 28 and 29.  Further, as to Miller, service under his emergency credential 
is not included in computing the service required for him to attain permanent status.  (Smith 
v. Governing Board (2004) 120 Cal.App.4th 563.) 
 
15.  Under the statutory language and the applicable case law, the District does not 
 
need to consider attrition when the layoff is based upon a reduction in a particular kind of 
service, but must do so when the layoff is caused by a reduction in ADA.  The evidence 
established that the District considered attrition appropriately and will continue to do so to 
the conclusion of the layoff process. 
 
 
16.  Under Government Code section 11506, subdivision (c), the failure to file a 
notice of defense “shall constitute a waiver of respondent’s right to a hearing . . . .”   There is 
some potential for confusion in a layoff proceeding such as this one under the Education 
Code where an affected teacher has to first file a Request for Hearing and then also file a 
notice of defense.  Nevertheless, the hearing, under section 44949, subdivision (c), is 
governed by the Government Code, and there is specific mention of the requirement to file a 
notice of defense.  There was no evidence offered by Kuramoto and Lenjavi concerning their 
failures to file a notice of defense.  The District’s objection to their participation in this 
matter is therefore sustained. 
 
 
under section 44955, seniority is based upon her actual first date of paid service.  Her claim 
to an earlier date is rejected. 
 
 
her seniority date would remain as the date of her original hire by the District.  Under section 
44848, her circumstances require her to be assigned a new seniority date upon her return 
after resignation.  Her claim to an earlier date is rejected. 
 
  
19.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to 
the reduction of particular kinds of services.  The District’s decision to reduce the identified 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and relates solely to the welfare of the District’s 
schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.  See Factual Findings 1 through 24. 
 
The Layoffs Attributable to Decline in ADA Must be Disallowed 
 
 
20.  A key requirement of administrative hearings in general, and teacher layoff 
proceedings in particular, is proper notice.  As set forth in Conclusion 1, above, section 
44949 requires the preliminary notice given to each employee included in the layoff must 
include “the reasons” therefore. 
 

18.  Michea was given incorrect information when she was rehired to the effect that 

17.  Although Read-Bottorff is to be commended for her extra service as a teacher, 

12 

22.  As set forth in more detail in Factual Finding 2, the notices the District sent to the 

21.  The purpose of the initial termination notice provision is to notify an employee of 

 
the probability that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year so that he or 
she may consider looking elsewhere for employment.  Nothing in the statute relating to the 
termination of teachers due to a decline in daily average attendance or, in the alternative, a 
reduction of services (section 44955) prohibits the statement of more than one ground in 
putting employees on notice that their jobs are in jeopardy.  (Moreland Teachers Association 
v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 653.)  However, where the preliminary notices to 
teachers only specify one ground for layoff, the school district has no power to terminate 
teachers for any other reason not specified in the notice.  (Karbach v. Board of Education 
(1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 355, interpreting the precursor to section 44955.)  Conversely, if both 
statutory grounds are cited in the notice, the school district may proceed on both grounds, 
and the notice does not need to set forth any more specific information (such as the precise 
number of teachers to be terminated or the specific positions to be eliminated) other than the 
statutory reasons.  (Santa Clara, supra; San Jose, supra, at 632.)  The notice provision of 
section 44955 is jurisdictional.  (Campbel, supra, at 807, citing Rutherford, supra.)   
 
 
employees made no reference to a decline in ADA as a basis for termination.  This is 
dispositive.  It is also of concern that: the Resolution did not attribute any identified FTEs to 
the decline in ADA; the notices did not attach a copy of the Resolution; the Accusations did 
not refer to either the decline in ADA or the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of 
services but, rather, referred to the attached Resolution; and the Accusations placed in 
evidence did not include the Resolution that was referenced as being attached.   Under the 
totality of the evidence, the District did not properly notify Respondents of the terminations 
based upon a decline in ADA. 
 
 
anticipated decline in enrollment (650) that was greater than the actual decline in ADA 
(349.45) in determining the number of FTEs attributable to the ADA terminations is rejected.  
Numerous cases stand for the proposition that the process of implementing layoffs is a very 
flexible one and that school districts retain great flexibility in carrying out the process. 
(Campbell, supra.)  In fact, school districts have been permitted to present at hearing, for the 
first time, evidence of the type of tie-breaking that might apply.  (Zalac, supra; Bledsoe v. 
Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127.)  It is true that future enrollment is 
not the basis of the statutory authority for layoffs premised upon a decline in ADA.  
However, as argued by the District, the timing of the first six months of a school year 
beginning in September is such that it is virtually impossible to know the present year ADA 
in time to serve preliminary notices, let alone present such information to a governing board 
to consider for purposes of passing a resolution.  While it may have been more accurate to 
use other estimates (such as taking the first five month’s decline in ADA and extrapolating to 
six months), there was no abuse of the Board’s broad discretion in the manner in which it 
determined that a decline in ADA was a proper basis for layoffs.  It was not established that 
the District’s actions were either arbitrary or capricious. 
 
 

23.  Respondent’s contention that the District improperly used a number from 

13 

25.  At the hearing, the District was able to attribute 16 FTEs for layoff due to decline 

The Appropriate Remedy
 
 
24.  The issue is how, if at all, to accommodate the reduction in FTEs of particular 
kinds of services, which were accomplished correctly, with the improper terminations for 
decline in ADA due to lack of notice.  The District did not indicate which particular 
employees were noticed for layoff specifically due to decline in ADA, or specifically due to 
reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services, except for the counselors.  However, 
it did identify the number and types of FTEs related to each alleged cause for layoff.  
 
 
in ADA.  This was a reduction from the original number of 34 FTEs, due to the use at the 
hearing of the proper, and lower, figure of actual decline in ADA.  (See Factual Findings 16, 
17 and 18.)  Although there was specific evidence of the subject areas of teaching from 
which the original 34 FTEs were attributed, there was no similar evidence relating the 
reduced number of 16 FTEs to specific subject areas of teaching.  Therefore, there was 
insufficient evidence from which to fashion an order that is directed to particular employees 
by name, or even by subject area of teaching. 
 
 
26.  As noted above, the layoff process is a flexible one, and the District should be 
permitted to proceed with those layoffs that are supported by the law and the facts.  In the 
same way that proposed decisions in these matters often order a school district to adjust the 
final layoff notices to accommodate further attrition that occurs after the administrative 
hearing, an order can be fashioned herein that requires the District to comply with the law.  
Here, there is insufficient notice relating to the 16 FTEs attributable to the alleged decline in 
ADA.  Therefore, the District will be ordered to eliminate 16 FTEs from the original 41 
classroom teachers positions identified for reduction in the Resolution, as part of its 
determination of which employees should receive final layoff notices. 
 
27.  Although the argument can be made that the 34 FTEs originally attributed to the 
 
decline in ADA should be ordered to be retained, the evidence does not support that result.  
The 34 FTEs were determined based upon use of a projected decline in future enrollment, an 
improper measure in a layoff based on decline in ADA.  See Conclusions 20, 21 and 22 .  
Rather, 16 FTEs is the proper amount attributable to the decline in ADA. 
 
 
permits the District to correct the process at this point and determine, based on the 
information available to it at the time, those employees to whom final notices should be sent. 
 
29.  The District may provide final notices to the counselors.  They were specifically 
 
identified for layoff as a result of reduced funding and the lack of notice for declines in ADA 
does not affect them.  Their challenges to the layoff have been rejected.  Further, as the 
proposed skipping of two temporary counselors was unrelated to the reasons for the layoff of 
the counselors (that is, the placement of AB 1802 funds into the general fund), the 
disallowance of that skipping also does not affect the basis for their layoff. 
 

28.  The flexibility inherent in the layoff process, referenced in Conclusion 20, 

14 

ORDER 

2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.  Each respondent shall receive 

 
 
1.  The District may give notices to employees occupying the following full-time 
equivalent certificated positions: three management positions, 25 classroom teachers, 25 
counselors, one librarian and one regional nurse (GASELPA), that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction of particular kinds of 
services.  Such notices may be given to the employees on Attachment A. 
 
 
such a notice.  
 
 
upon a decline in average daily attendance are dismissed. 
  
 
 DATED: April 30, 2010. 
 
 

3.  The Accusations against all Respondents identified by the District for layoff based 

DAVID B. ROSENMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

15 

+ = Represented by Henry M. Willis, Attorney at law. 
C = Employed by the District as a Counselor; not Represented by Mr. Willis. 
NNOD = No Notice of Defense filed. 

Attachment A 
 
Anaheim Union High School District 
OAH Case No.: 2010030731 
 
Key:   * = Present at hearing. 
 
 
 
 
 
Banda-Junior, Martin + 
Cendejas, Arthur NNOD + 
Chavez, Sylvia C * 
Cortes, Brian * + 
Fenton, Kerri * + 
Frembling, Jennifer NNOD C 
Hauge, Corey * + 
Keledjian, Jamie * + 
Kelii, Veronica * + 
Kuramoto, Diane NNOD C * 
Lee, Rhonda * + 
Lee, Pei * + 
Lenjavi, Seddigheh NNOD C * 
Long, Garrett  * + 
Magcalas, Jose * + 
 

McEvoy, Michael NNOD + 
Michea, Marcela C * 
Miller, Dale * + 
Nagel, Erin * + 
Parent, Wendy * + 
Read-Bottorff, Tisa C * 
Reiter, Michael * + 
Reyes, Christine * + 
Rigsby, David * + 
Shimogawa, Teresa + 
Shoup, Jr., Bryan * + 
Widger, Annel C * 
Worthington, Tracy * + 
 

16 

