 
BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD 
SCOTTS VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
TONI DUNN, 
 
                                                Respondent. 
 
 
 

 
OAH No. 2010030653 
 
 

Richard M. Noack, Attorney at Law, Hopkins & Carley, represented the Scotts Valley 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 
Mary-Margaret Anderson, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Scotts Valley, California, on April 22, 
2010. 
 
 
Unified School District (District). 
 
 
Respondent Toni Dunn. 
 
 
 

Michelle A. Welsh, Attorney at Law, Stoner, Welsh & Schmidt, represented 

The record closed on April 22, 2010. 

SUMMARY 
 

 
The Governing Board of the Scotts Valley Unified School District decided to reduce 
or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by certificated employees for the 2010-
2011 school year for financial reasons.  The decision was not related to the competency and 
dedication of the employees whose services were proposed to be reduced or eliminated. 
The selection process complied with Education Code requirements. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Susan Silver, Ed.D., filed the Accusation in her official capacity as  

 
           1. 
Superintendent of the District. 
 
 
 
On March 9, 2010,  the Governing Board of the District adopted Resolution 
 
No. 10-017, in which the Board resolved to reduce or discontinue the following particular 

Respondent Toni Dunn is a certificated employee of the District. 

2. 

3. 

 

1

kinds of services (PKS) for the 2010-2011 school year and directed the Superintendent or her 
designee to send notice to certificated employees that their services would be terminated at 
the end of the 2009-2010 school year, as follows: 
 

•  Grades Kindergarten through 6 Classroom Teachers   
      by 6.00 FTE 
•  Grades 7 through 12 English Classroom Teachers 
      by 0.60 FTE 
 
•  Grades 7 through 12 Social Studies Classroom Teachers 
      by 0.60 FTE 
•  Grades 7 through 12 Mathematics Classroom Teachers                by 0.80 FTE 
•  Grades 7 through 12 Science Classroom Teachers 
      by 0.40 FTE 
•  Grades 7 through 12 Physical Education Teachers 
      by 0.20 FTE 
•  Grades 7 through 12 Spanish Classroom Teachers 
      by 0.20 FTE 
•  Grades 7 through 12 Performing Arts (Drama) Teachers              by 0.20 FTE 
•  Grades 7 through 12 English Language Development Teacher     by 0.20 FTE 

 
 
 

4. 

5. 

On March 12, 2010, the Superintendent gave written notice to certificated 

 
The total is 20 FTE positions. 
 
 
Resolution No. 10-017 states that the Board’s action is the “result of the fiscal 
emergency in the State of California and declining revenues from multiple sources.”  It was 
not demonstrated that the decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 
arbitrary or capricious.    
 
 
employees in 20 FTE positions that it had been recommended that notice be given them that 
their services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  Many of the noticed 
employees, including Respondent, filed timely requests for hearing, and an Accusation was 
filed and served.  Many of the employees, including Respondent, filed timely notices of 
defense.   
 
 
noticed employees except Respondent.  This hearing followed. 
 
Skipping issue 
 
 
The District seeks to reduce Respondent’s position as a math teacher by .04  
FTE.  Respondent’s seniority date is August 25, 2008, and she has taught math (Algebra 1 
and 2) at Scotts Valley High School for almost two school years.  She majored in math in 
college and holds a clear single subject math credential.  Respondent is senior to another 
math teacher, John Postovit, whom the District has not noticed for layoff.  The District plans 
to retain Postovit, despite his lack of seniority.  
 
 
8. 
follows:  
 

The District’s intention in this regard is set forth in Resolution No. 10-017, as 

Prior to the hearing, the District rescinded the Accusations against all of the 

6. 

7. 

As provided by Education Code Sections 44955(d), 44956, and 
44957, it will be necessary to retain the services of certain 

 

2

certificated employees, regardless of seniority, who possess 
qualifications and competencies needed in the projected 
educational program for the 2010-2011 school year which are 
not possessed by more senior employees thereby subject to 
layoff.  The Governing Board has determined that with respect 
to this resolution, competency shall mean, at a minimum, 
possession of a preliminary, clear, professional clear, lifetime, 
or other full credential, and at least one year’s actual teaching 
experience within the past five (5) school years for the subject 
matter, educational program (an example includes IB HL 
Mathematics l and IB HL Mathematics 2), or grade level to 
which the employee may bump a less senior employee or will be 
assigned. 
 
Inasmuch as the District needs to retain an individual teacher in 
the specific course or course of study identified below due to the 
teacher’s specialized training and experience related to those 
courses which more senior employees do not possess, the 
Superintendent and/or her designee is authorized to deviate from 
terminating that certificated employee in order of seniority in 
instances where the teacher is currently assigned to teach those 
courses and will be assigned to teach those courses again for the 
next school year and more senior employees do not possess the 
same specialized training and experience related to such courses 
or courses of study: 
 
IB Math, including the experience, training, and ability to teach 
IB HL Mathematics l and IB HL Mathematics 2, must hold a 
valid, clear Single Subject Math credential, [have] successfully 
completed the IB training, and have at least one year’s actual 
teaching experience in IB Math within the past five (5) school 
years; . . . . 

9. 

The District recruited Postovit to teach advanced math classes following the 

 
 
Although Postovit is not identified by name in the Resolution, District staff 
acknowledged that the competency definition and skipping criteria are intended to and do 
describe the advanced math classes Postovit teaches and his qualifications to teach them. 
 
 
retirement of a very experienced teacher.  Postovit has many years of teaching experience in 
other districts, including advanced placement (AP) math classes.  The District does not offer 
the AP program; instead, it offers a similar program, International Baccalaureate (IB).  IB 
HL (higher level) Math 1 and 2 are similar to AP Calculus A and B.  In order to teach IB 
math, a teacher must have completed an IB training course.  The District arranged for 
Postovit to take this course prior to beginning to teach for the District in August 2009.  
Postovit therefore meets the qualifications set forth in the resolution:  he holds the credential, 

 

 

3

10. 

Respondent asserts that she is competent to teach the advanced math classes in 

has completed the IB training, and by the end of this school year will have one year of 
experience teaching IB math.  
 
 
that she could take the IB training course this summer in the same fashion that Postovit did 
last year, and be ready to teach in the fall.  Respondent holds the same credential as Postovit, 
and points out that she took many calculus classes as a math major in college.  Respondent 
also contends that the requirement of one year’s teaching of IB math is unfair, in that it can 
apply only to Postovit. 
 

11.  When a district seeks to disregard seniority order in a layoff proceeding, it 

bears the burden to prove that it has a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course, 
that the less senior employee has special training or experience that is necessary to teach the 
course, and that any more senior employees do not have the necessary training or experience.  
(Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d).)  The burden of proof in this respect is on the District.  (Davis 
v. Gray (1938) 29 Cal.App.2d 403, 408; Duax v. Kern Community College Dist. (1987) 196 
Cal.App.3rd 555, 566-567.)   

 
12. 

The District has established the specific need to teach IB math and that 

Postovit has special training to teach it.  It has also been shown that Respondent does not 
have the necessary training, in that she has not taken the IB training course.  It is 
acknowledged that Respondent asserts she would be willing to take the course, but it remains 
that if she did not, the District could be left without a suitable instructor.  Given that the 
District has met its burden, the experience criterion issue is not addressed. 
 
Tie-breaking issues 
 
 
forth the criteria to be used to determine the order of layoff of certificated employees with 
the same first date of paid service.  It provides: 

13.  On February 9, 2010, the Board passed Resolution No. 10-016, which sets 

 
For certificated employees to be laid off, the Superintendent or 
his designee shall determine the order of termination or 
reappointment solely based on the needs of the District and its 
students considering the following criteria, which are not listed 
in any particular order of importance: 
 
A. 
Credentials and experience to teach or serve in a 
particular program or provide a particular service of need for the 
District (Examples include, but are not limited to, bilingual, 
special education, mathematics, science, independent study) 
 
B. 
 

Satisfactory evaluations 

 

4

Number and types of supplemental authorizations 

Professional growth activities, training sessions, and 

Need for language skills or certification in designated 

Years of experience as a full-time, credentialed teacher 

C. 
Rating preference shall be given to credentials in the 
following order: Clear Credentials, Preliminary Credentials, 
Intern Credentials, Emergency Credentials 
 
D. 
 
E. 
in a probationary/permanent, K-12 teaching position in a public 
school, prior to beginning current employment with the Scotts 
Valley Unified School District   
 
Bilingual language competency and training for teaching 
F. 
bilingual students relevant to District need, including B-CLAD 
and CLAD authorizations 
 
G. 
languages 
 
H. 
presentations relevant to District need 
 
I.        Academic preparation, including undergraduate major 
and minor courses of study 
 
J.       Service to school: extra-curricular activities, co-curricular 
activities, school committees or adjunct duties 
 
K.      Management of professional responsibilities 
 
L.      Summer school and/or intervention programs 
 
Breaking Remaining Ties 
 
 
employees who have common hire dates are equally qualified in 
the sole determination of the Superintendent, or her designee, 
based on application of the above criteria, the District will then 
break ties by utilizing a lottery. 
 

In the event that permanent or probationary certificated 

14.  District staff created a chart containing the names of teachers tied with others 

 
and information concerning the different tie-breaking criteria.  The information was obtained 
from District records and information supplied by the employees. 
 
 
District staff applied the tie-breaking criteria, and Respondent ended up in the last position.  

Respondent was tied with three other teachers who share her seniority date.  

15. 

 

5

 
16. 

 
Respondent presented information that she contends should be considered in various 
of the tie-breaking categories, but it was not demonstrated that even with these additions the 
result would be different.  Respondent also argues that the criteria are too vague. 
 
In breaking ties, districts have broad discretion to determine the criteria used 
 
and to apply the criteria to individuals.  The only legal requirement is that they “determine 
the order of termination solely on the basis of the needs of the district and the students 
thereof.”  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)   It was not established that the District applied its 
tie-breaking criteria in an arbitrary or capricious manner.  Accordingly, there is no basis to 
require the District to re-evaluate Respondent’s position on the seniority list. 
 
 
the Board to perform services that Respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
 

17.  No certificated employee junior in seniority to Respondent is being retained by 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 

2. 

44955 have been provided as required.  The District has therefore established jurisdiction for 
this proceeding as to Respondent. 
 
 
Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to reduce 
the number of certificated employees in 20 full-time equivalent positions due to the reduction 
or discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The decisions made relate solely to the 
welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 
44949. 
 
 
found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 

All contentions made by Respondent not specifically addressed above are 

3. 

ORDER 

 
 
Notice may be given to Respondent Toni Dunn that her services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds 
of services. 
 
 
DATED: _________________________ 
 
 
                                                  

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

_____________________________ 
MARY-MARGARET ANDERSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 
 
 
 

 

6

