BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
SIMI VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
OAH No. 2010030104 

 
In The Matter of the Layoff of: 
 
CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF 
THE SIMI VALLEY UNIFIED 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Jacqueline S. McHaney, Attorney at Law, represented the Simi Valley Unified 

Tareq M. Hishmeh, Attorney at Law, represented all of the respondents except 

 
 
H. Stuart Waxman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 23, 2010, at the Simi Valley 
Unified School District Office, Simi Valley, California. 
 
 
School District (District). 
 
 
for Ann Cannata.  Ms. Cannata did not file a Notice of Defense, and she did not 
appear at the hearing.    
 
 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

The matter was submitted on April 23, 2010. 

1

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

RESCISSION OF PRELIMINARY NOTICES AND DISMISSAL OF 
ACCUSATION 
 

Prior to commencement of the hearing, the District withdrew the layoff notices 

 
of employees, Kenna R. Acquarelli, Nicole A. Barr, Carol Carlson-Smith, Loren A. 
Dacanay, Lawrence E. De Laittre, Karen Griffin, Laura J. Hofmann, Heidi J. 
Hubbard, Jeri S. Kerney, Susan D. Lee, Patricia Murphy, Valerie R. Peterson, 
Stephen J. Pultorak, Randy L. Rogers, Deborah C. Soukup, Alisa A. Speidel, Nicole 
M. Sullivan, Amy E. Sumpter, Janice E. Tamoto, Terry P. Teague, and Nicole R. 
Ward.  At the hearing, Respondents moved to dismiss the Accusations against those 
respondents.  The motion was unopposed and was granted. 
 
 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

The Governing Board of the Simi Valley Unified School District (Board) 

 
 
determined to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers 
and other certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related 
to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to 
be reduced or eliminated.   
 
 
involving review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in 
accordance with the requirements of the Education Code.  
  
  

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.  Kathryn Scroggin, Ed.D. is the Superintendent of the District. 

 
 
 
2.  On or before March 15, 2010, the District served on each respondent a 
 
written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to respondents 
pursuant to Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be required 
for the next school year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation and noted that 95.95 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions would be 
reduced and/or discontinued.   
 
 
mail.  Certificated employees timely requested, in writing, a hearing to determine if 
there is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.   
 
/// 
 
/// 

3.  Notice was served on all respondents by either personal service or certified 

 

2

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

NUMBER OF FULL-TIME
EQUIVALENT POSITIONS

4.  The Superintendent of the District made and filed Accusations against each 

5.  A timely Notice of Defense was filed on behalf of those respondents who 

6.  Respondents in this proceeding are probationary or permanent certificated 

 
of the certificated employees who requested a hearing.  The Accusations, with 
required accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense, were timely served 
on those certificated employees.   
 
 
desired a hearing.   
 
 
employees of the District. 
 
 
7.  On March 9, 2010, in Resolution No. 53-09/10, the Board took action to 
reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 
school year: 
 
SERVICES 
 
 
District Coordinator   
Program Coordinator  
 
Program Specialist 
 
Psychologist   
Counselor 
 
 
Elementary Assistant Principal 
Elementary, Multiple Subject 
Categorically Funded Special Title 1 Instructor 
Special Education, Deaf and Hard of Hearing 
Special Education, Preschool 
 
 
 
School Nurse  
Secondary, English/Language Arts   
Secondary, History/Social Sciences  
 
Secondary, Mathematics 
 
Secondary, Physical Education 
 
 
Secondary, Science 
 
Secondary, Health 
 
 
Secondary, Librarian  
Adult Education Instructors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total   

 
Chinese 
 
Contractor License 
Home Economics 
 
Independent Study, Diploma 
Licensed Vocational Nurse Programs 
Parent Education, Birth to 2 Years   
 
Upholstery 
 

 2.0 
 1.0 
 2.0 
 4.0 
 5.25 
 1.0 
50.0 
 4.0 
 1.5 
 3.0 
 2.0 
 2.0 
 1.0 
 2.0 
 2.0 
 3.0 
 1.0 
 1.0 

 0.2 
 0.4 
 1.0 
 0.6 
 4.0 
 1.0 
 1.0 
95.95 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

3

8.  Subsequent to adoption of the Board’s Resolution, the District identified 

 
vacancies in School Year 2010-2011 due to retirements, release of temporary 
teachers, and resignations.   
 
 
9.  Board Resolution No. 54-09/10 established tie-breaker criteria for 
determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid 
service on the same date.  It provided that the order of termination shall be based on 
the needs of the District. 
 
 
10.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 
dates (first date of paid service as a probationary employee), current assignments and 
locations, advanced degrees, credentials, and authorizations.  Credential and 
authorization data are obtained from the records of the County Office of Education, at 
which certificated employees must register such documents.   
 

11.  The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and 
“bumping” list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services 
being reduced.  In determining who would be laid off for each kind of service 
reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by the known 
vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  
The District then checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they 
could “bump” other less senior employees.   
 
 
breaker criteria of Board Resolution No. 54-09/10. 
 
 

12.  The District used information from its seniority list to apply the tie-

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 

 
 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 
 
 
2.  All of the identified services are particular kinds of services that could be 
reduced or discontinued under Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce 
or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services 
relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of 
Code section 44949. 
 
 
3.  A District may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to 
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce 
services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because 
fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. 
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)   

 

4

5.    No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

4.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 
 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the 
Board directed be reduced or discontinued.   
 
 
services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
6.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, 
the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 
position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)   
 
 

ORDER 

2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

1.  Except for those that were dismissed following rescission of the 

 
 
preliminary notices of reduction in force, the Accusations against the respondents are 
sustained.  Notice may be given to the respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year because of reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services. 
 
 
  
  
DATED:  April 26, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
H. STUART WAXMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

5

