BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
TAFT CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF KERN, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
RICHARD OWENS, 
 
 

Respondent. 

 

 

     
OAH No.  2010031552 
     
    
     
 
 

 
PROPOSED DECISION 

Peter C. Carton, Attorney at Law, represented the Taft City School District 

This matter came on regularly for hearing on April 7, 2010, in Bakersfield, 

 
 
California, before H. Stuart Waxman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, State of California. 
 
 
(District). 
 
 
(Respondent). 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 7, 2010. 

Paul A. Welchans, Attorney at Law, represented Respondent, Richard Owens 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

The Governing Board of the Taft City School District (Board) determined to 

 
 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers and other 
certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the 
competency and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be 
reduced or eliminated.   

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process 

involving review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in 
accordance with the requirements of the Education Code.  

 
 

 
/// 
 

 

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 
1.  Ron Bryant made and filed the Accusation in his official capacity as 

2.  Respondent is a permanent certificated District employee. 

5.  The Superintendent made and filed an Accusation against Respondent as 

4.  Respondent timely submitted a written request for a hearing to determine if 

 
Superintendent of the Taft City School District (District). 
 
 
 
3.  On or before March 15, 2010, the District personally served on each 
 
respondent a written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to each 
respondent, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that his/her 
services would not be required for the next school year (Notice of Recommendation 
Not to Reemploy).  Each written notice set forth a reason for the recommendation and 
noted that the Board had passed a Resolution (Board Resolution Number 8-2009-10) 
reducing the certificated staff. 
 
 
there is cause for not reemploying him for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
the sole certificated employee who requested a hearing.  The Accusation, with 
required accompanying documents and a blank Notice of Defense, were timely served 
on Respondent. 
 
 
section 11506, was timely filed on Respondent’s behalf.   
 
 
7.  Board Resolution Number 7-2009-2010, adopted on February 24, 2010, 
established tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated 
employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  It provided that the 
order of termination shall be based on the needs of the District and its students. 
 
 
dates (first date of paid service), current assignments and locations, advanced degrees, 
credentials, and authorizations.  Credential and authorization data are obtained from 
the records of the County Office of Education, at which certificated employees must 
register such documents. 
 
 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

8.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

6.  On March 25, 2010, a Notice of Defense, pursuant to Government Code 

9.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 

 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

8 

0.5 

 
1 

0.17 

1.33 

Full-Time Equivalent

10.  On March 9, 2010, the Board took action to reduce or discontinue the 

 
following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year: 
 
Particular Kind of Service 
 
Self-Contained Classroom 
Instruction, Grades K-6 
 
Self-Contained Sheltered  
English, Grades 6-8   
 
Departmentalized Instruction, 
Junior High: 
 
Spanish 
 
Counseling 
 
Sports Officiating 
 
Band/Choir 
 
Physical Education 
 
Computers 
 
RSP and/or SDC 
Teaching Services: 
 
Nurse   
 
Total   
 
 
any services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
12.  The eliminated services were “particular kinds of services” that could be 
reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The 
Superintendent’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services 
was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  
 
 
the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees of the District as determined by the Board.   

13.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to 

           16 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform 

 

3

14.  Respondent’s first date of paid service is August 27, 1999.  He holds a 
  
clear single subject business credential with a supplemental authorization in social 
studies.  He holds a bachelor’s degree awarded to him in 1978.  His present 
assignment is as a computer teacher. 
 
 
15.  Respondent argued that he should be permitted to “bump” teacher Shawn 
Sutherland, the only teacher assigned to teach the District’s Community Day School.  
Mr. Sutherland’s first date of paid service is August 19, 2003.  He holds a clear 
multiple subject credential.  Because Respondent’s first date of paid service pre-dates 
that of Mr. Suthlerland, he may “bump” Mr. Sutherland from his position if he is 
certificated and competent to render the service being provided by Mr. Sutherland.  
(Ed. Code1, § 44955, subd. (b).)  However, he is not permitted to do so if “[t]he 
district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course 
of study . . . and that the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which others with more seniority 
do not possess.”   (§ 44955, subd. (d)(1).) 
 
16.  Respondent claimed that he is competent and willing to teach the 
 
Community Day School class because he is properly certificated pursuant to section 
44865, and because he taught the Opportunity Class, a 4th through 8th grade self-
contained class, when he was first hired by the District in 1999.  He did not indicate 
how long he taught that class or the circumstances under which he stopped teaching 
it.   
 
 
self-contained class for which the District requires a multiple subject credential.   
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
                                                
 

17.  The Community Day School consists of an all-day 1st through 8th grade 

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise indicated. 

 

4

 
 

 

18. Section 44865 states in relevant part: 

A valid teaching credential issued by the State Board or the 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing, based on a bachelor’s degree, 
student teaching, and special fitness to perform, shall be deemed 
qualifying for assignment as a teacher in the following assignments, 
provided that the assignment of a teacher to a position for which 
qualifications are prescribed by this section shall be made only with the 
consent of the teacher: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(a) Home teacher. 
(b) Classes organized primarily for adults. 
(c) Hospital classes. 
(d) Necessary small high schools. 
(e) Continuation schools. 
(f) Alternative schools. 
(g) Opportunity schools. 
(h) Juvenile court schools. 
(i) County community schools. 
(j) District community day schools. 
(k) Independent study. 

19.  In a manner similar to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), which permits a 

 
 
junior teacher to be retained over a more senior teacher if the junior teacher has 
“special training and experience necessary” to teach a certain course or course of 
study, Section 44865 requires a teacher to possess “special fitness to perform,” in 
addition to a credential based on a bachelor’s degree, in order to teach in the kinds of 
programs listed in the statute.  Those types of programs are disparate, and therefore, 
the “special fitness to teach” one of them may be quite different from that for another 
(i.e., a home teacher, as opposed to an adult school teacher, as opposed to a necessary 
small high school teacher, as opposed to an independent study teacher).  Because 
district community day schools and opportunity schools are separately listed in 
section 44865, it may reasonably be inferred that the “special fitness to teach” for one 
is not the same as for the other.2
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
                                                
 
alike.  In his closing argument, Respondent’s counsel simply referred to them as 
“very similar.” 

2 No evidence was offered to indicate that the two programs are in any way 

5

20.  The evidence did not establish that Respondent has maintained the skills 
 
that once provided him with the special fitness to teach the Opportunity Class for the 
District, or that those skills would properly translate into a special fitness to teach the 
Community Day School.  On the other hand, the District established that Mr. 
Sutherland has the “special training and experience necessary” to teach that program 
and thus satisfy the District’s “specific need” for his services, by virtue of his multiple 
subject credential and his experience in teaching the program.  (§ 44955, subd. 
(d)(1).)  Therefore, Mr. Sutherland was properly retained over Respondent.3
 
 
21.  Section 44955, subdivision (c) states in pertinent part:  “The governing 
board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that employees 
shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle 
them to render.”  That obligation was met in this case.  (See also, Bledsoe v. Biggs, 
supra.) 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 

 
 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 
 
2.  The services identified in Board Resolution Number 8-2009-10 are 
 
particular kinds of services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education 
Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified 
services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its 
discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the 
welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44949. 
 

3 In describing the “specific need” and Mr. Sutherland’s special training and 

3.  A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall 
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board 
of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)  
                                                
 
experience necessary to meet that need, the District did not go into the detail that was 
reflected in Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127. 
However, “[s]ubdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 expressly allows a district to 
demonstrate its specific ‘needs’ and there is nothing in the statute that requires such 
needs to be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job descriptions, or 
program requirements.”  (Id. at 138.)  The District adequately established the 
“specific need” regarding the Community Day School and sustained its burden of 
proof by a preponderance of the evidence. 

 

6

5.    No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

  
 
4.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the 
Board directed be reduced or discontinued.   
 
 
services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
  
 
6.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, 
the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 
position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) 
 
 

ORDER 

2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

 
1.  The Accusations against the respondents are sustained.  Notice may be 
 
given to the respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 
school year because of reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
  
  
DATED:  April 12, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
H. STUART WAXMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

7

