BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
SYLVAN UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF STANISLAUS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 

STACEY CAMPBELL, et al., 

 

 

                                                        Respondents.

 
 
 
    OAH No. 2010030578 
 
 

 
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Dian M. Vorters, Office of 

 
 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on May 6, 2010, in Modesto, California. 
 

John R. Yeh, Attorney at Law,1 represented complainant, David Holtz, Assistant 

Superintendent, Sylvan Union School District. 
 
 
Appendix A. 
 

Eric D. Rouen, Attorney at Law,2 represented respondents who are identified in 

The matter was submitted on May 6, 2010.  The parties previously stipulated to waive 

time for the filing of a proposed decision until May 20, 2010. 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
General Findings Concerning Statutory Requirements 
 
 
 

Respondents are certificated district employees. 

1. 

2. 

On February 9, 2010, the governing board of the district resolved to reduce or 

discontinue particular kinds of services.  To that end, the board adopted Resolution 13 
(Layoff Resolution).  Within the meaning of Education Code section 44955, the services are 
                                                

1 John R. Yeh, Attorney at Law, Dannis Woliver Kelley, 71 Stevenson Street, 19th Floor, San Francisco, 

California  94105. 
 
2Eric D. Rouen, Attorney at Law, 801 South Ham Lane, Suite H, Lodi, California  95242. 
 

1

“particular kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce or 
discontinue these services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise of 
discretion. 
 

3. 

Not later than March 15, 2009, the superintendent of the district caused the 

governing board of the district and respondents to be notified in writing of his 
recommendation that preliminary notice be given to respondents, pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, that the district would not require their services for the 2010-2011 
school year.  The notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.  In recommending 
reductions in certificated staff, the superintendent considered the qualified condition of the 
district’s budget.  The recommendation was not related to respondents’ performance as 
certificated employees. 
 

4. 

A Notice of Recommendation That Services Shall Not be Required was 

5. 

6. 

The notice advised each respondent of the following: He/she had a right to a 

delivered to each respondent, either by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt 
requested and addressed to respondents’ last known address.  
 
 
hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, he/she had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing 
to the person sending the notice.  The request had to be delivered by a specified date, which 
was a date that was not less than seven days after the notice of termination was served.3  And 
the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 
 
Respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to determine whether 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  An accusation was timely 
served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice that, if they were going to request a 
hearing, they were required to file a Notice of Defense within five days after being served 
with the accusation.4  Respondents filed timely notices of defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
Positively Assured Attrition 
 
 
resignations and retirements which occur during the “computation period.”  (Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School Dist. (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831, 847.)   The district must “consider evidence of positively assured attrition, 
involuntary retirements for the [upcoming] school year which were known to the board when 
it made its preliminary determination on 15 March … and when it made its final 
                                                

The board must allow for positively assured attrition such as voluntary 

7. 

3 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

4 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a Notice 
of Defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
termination cases, the Notice of Defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

 

2

8. 

The governing board considered all positively assured attrition which has 

determination on 15 May.”  (Lewin v. Bd. of Trustees of Pasadena Unified School Dist. 
(1976) 62 Cal.App.3d 977, 983.) 
 
 
occurred to date, that is, all deaths, resignations, retirements, and additional attrition which 
may occur before the start of the 2010/2011 school year in reducing these services and but 
for the attrition already assured and the attrition anticipated would have found it necessary to 
reduce additional kinds of service.  
 
 
FTE Special Education) had been rescinded. 
 
Services the District Intends to Reduce or Discontinue 
 

Prior to hearing, the district gave notice to Willora Jordan that her notice (1.0 

9. 

10. 

The governing board of the district determined, in the Layoff Resolution, that 

because particular kinds of services were to be reduced or eliminated, it was necessary to 
decrease the number of permanent employees in the district by 36.0 full-time equivalents 
(FTE).  The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to reduce 
or discontinue are multiple subject teaching positions.  As a result of the reduction, 14 FTE 
were bumped or displaced as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Positions Bumped or Displaced 
Music 
Art 
Librarian 
Counselor 
K-5 Assistant Principal 
K-5 Instructional Facilitators 
 
Resource Specialist 

2.0  FTE 
  2.0  FTE 
  1.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
               1.0  FTE 
          4.0  FTE 
          2.0  FTE 

 
         

 
 

 
 

 

11. 

 
Use of Tie-Breaking Criteria Based on the Current Needs of the District and Students 
 
 
Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), the governing 
board of the district established, in Resolution 14 (Tie-Breaking Resolution), criteria for 
determining the order of termination as among employees who first rendered paid service on 
the same day.  The board authorized that in the event of a tie in seniority dates, the order of 
termination will be based solely on the needs of the District and its students.  To that end, the 
district determined to break ties as follows: 
 

1. 

Breadth of credential(s) – 5 points per current valid California 
credential which includes appropriate and applicable NCLB 
“highly qualified” authorization. 

2. 

Random order selection (when all other factors are equal). 

 

 

 

3

Skipping/Bumping/Seniority 
 

12. 

Skipping describes the process by which the district may deviate from the 

order of seniority when there is an identified need for a particular type of service, there is a 
junior employee who is uniquely qualified to provide that service or teach a subject, and 
there is no senior employee who is certificated and competent to provide the service.  (Ed. 
Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).) Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior 
teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior 
counterparts lack.  (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of 
Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)  The district 
employed skipping to achieve a proper list of employees to receive layoff notices.   
 
 
The district determined in the Layoff Resolution that it would be necessary to retain 
the services of certificated employees in the 2010-2011 school year regardless of seniority, 
who possess the qualifications needed for the following programs: 
 

1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 

 
5. 

 
6. 

 
7. 

School Psychologist 

School Principal 

Middle School Assistant Principal 

All Middle School Single Subject Teachers in the following 
areas:  Math, Science, English, Social Science 

All certificated employees holding and teaching under a single 
subject credential 

All teachers highly qualified to teach in a middle school 
assignment under the No Child Left Behind Act as of March 15, 
2010 

Personnel providing special education services (excluding 
Resource Specialists), including but not limited to the following:  
Director of Special Education, Speech, Language, and Hearing 
Pathologist, Learning Handicapped Teacher 

13. 

 
 
Bumping  describes  the  process  by  which  the  district  identifies  those 
employees  who  are  more  senior  and  who  are  competent  to  perform  a  particular  kind  of 
service or teach a particular subject.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the 
right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  
In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling 
that position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  The district 
employed bumping to achieve a proper list of employees to receive layoff notices. 
 

 

4

14. 

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school district.  

 
Among the teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority in the district 
gives a greater legal entitlement to a position.  Seniority is defined as the date upon which an 
employee first rendered paid services in a probationary position.  (Ed. Code, § 44845.) 
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides that no senior employee may 

be terminated while any less senior employee is retained to render a service which the more 
senior permanent employee is “certificated and competent” to render.  “It [is] the district’s 
obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine whether any permanent 
employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic layoff possess[es] the 
seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned to another position.”   
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 137.) 
 

16. 

The district determined to reduce multiple subject credentialed employees by 

15.  David Holtz is Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources.  He testified 
that the district maintains a seniority list of all certificated employees.  In December 2009, 
the district mailed “Intent Forms” to all employees asking them to state their wishes for the 
next school year and verify their seniority date and credentials.  Employees can also access 
the district’s web site which contains seniority dates and credential information.  All valid 
corrections and updates were incorporated into the final seniority listed that was used to 
identify teachers for layoff.  The final seniority list was adopted by the board on or about 
March 12, 2010. 
 
Skipping Middle School, Single Subject, and NCLB Qualified Teachers 
 
 
36.0 FTE.  (Factual Finding 10.)  Within the district, elementary grades are Kindergarten 
through sixth.  Middles school grades are sixth, seventh, and eighth.  According to Mr. Holtz, 
the district typically assigns multiple subject credentialed teachers to elementary schools and 
single subject credentialed teachers to middle schools.   
 
 
of seniority,” all employees who possess the qualifications needed for several programs 
including “all middle school single subject teachers in the areas of math, science, English, 
and social science; all certificated employees holding a single subject credential; and all 
teachers highly qualified to teach in a middle school under the NCLB Act as of March 15, 
2010.”  (Factual Finding 12.) 
 
 
The No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act of 2002 is a federal act requiring that 
all teachers be “highly qualified” to teach their assigned subject(s).  According to Mr. Holtz, 
to meet highly qualified status, teachers must either 1) pass a competency test approved by 
the State of California, 2) have at least 32 units in their single subject area of college study, 
3) have a graduate degree in their single subject area, or 4) establish by virtue of their “not 
new teacher status” having successfully taught in a particular single subject area. 
 

The Layoff Resolution outlines broad skipping criteria to protect, “regardless 

17. 

18. 

 

5

19. 

The district became motivated to “protect single subject core teachers at the 

 
middle school” from layoff, after the 2009 layoff hearings.  According to Mr. Holtz, a 
finding was made in the proposed decision that “a multiple subject teacher with an 
authorization … could bump into a single subject position regardless of their NCLB status.”  
Mr. Holtz stated that the district was “ordered to place that person in a single subject position 
even though we did not feel we could because NCLB was not met.” 
 
 
the district had not articulated NCLB compliance as a requirement to teach at the middle 
school level.  The proposed decision adopted by the board for the 2009-2010 school year 
stated: 
 

In fact, the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) in the 2009 Layoff hearing found that 

The PKS Resolution does not include any provisions that define the 
term “competent” or establish competency criteria.  It also does not 
explicitly state that, in order to be retained to teach seventh and eighth 
grade subjects, certificated employee[s] must not only have appropriate 
credentials, they must also be NCLB-compliant…. According to Mr. 
Holtz, if parents notify the District that they do not want their child 
taught by a non-compliant teacher, the District must transfer their child 
to a teacher who is NCLB-compliant. … While Mr. Holtz’s explanation 
for the District’s NCLB compliance requirement shows that it may be 
inconvenient for the District to have a non-compliant teacher, it does 
not demonstrate that NCLB compliance is necessary for an otherwise 
certificated and competent teacher to teach seventh and eighth grade 
English in the District. 

20. 

Respondents challenge the district’s skipping criteria as legally impermissible 

 
 
Hence, the ruling was based on insufficient evidence in support of NCLB as a 
requirement.  Mr. Holtz testified that the district has reached 100 percent compliance with 
NCLB as of March 2010.   
 
Reduction of Teachers Possessing Multiple Subject Credentials 
 
 
pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).  Johanna Dickson, Sherry 
Chapman, and Susan Harrison currently teach seventh and eighth grades at district middle 
schools.  Richard Smith teaches third grade at a district elementary school but holds a 
Mathematics authorization that qualifies him to teach at the middle school level.  Mr. Holtz 
stated that all four respondents meet the “highly qualified” requirements of NCLB as of 
March 15, 2010. 
 
 
Cyndi Jordan bumped Johanna Dickson.  Ms. Jordan has a seniority date of 
August 4, 2005.  She holds a multiple subject credential and a history authorization.  She 
currently teaches second grade (1.0 FTE).  She will be assigned to teach single subject Social 
Studies at a district middle school in the 2010-2011 school year.  As a result of this bump, 
the district rescinded Ms. Jordan’s notice of layoff. 

21. 

 

6

22. 

Ms. Jordan is more senior than Ms. Dickson and is certificated and competent to teach 

Jennifer Roberts has a seniority date of August 6, 2007.  She holds a multiple subject 

Lisa Bosio bumped Sherry Chapman.  Ms. Bosio has a seniority date of 

Ms. Dickson has a seniority date of August 24, 2006.  She holds a single subject 
 
credential and a Social Science authorization.  She currently teaches seventh and eighth 
grade Social Science (1.0 FTE). 
 
 
middle school Social Science.  No more junior teacher was retained to teach at the middle 
school in a subject area for which Ms. Dickson is competent to teach. 
 
 
August 4, 2006.  She holds a multiple subject credential and an English authorization. She 
currently teaches fourth grade English (1.0 FTE).  She will be assigned to teach single 
subject English at a district middle school in the 2010-2011 school year.  As a result of this 
bump, the district rescinded Ms. Bosio’s notice of layoff. 
 
Ms. Chapman has a seniority date of August 24, 2007.  She holds a single subject 
 
credential and an English authorization.  She currently teaches seventh and eighth grade 
English (1.0 FTE).  Ms. Bosio is more senior than Ms. Chapman and is certificated and 
competent to teach middle school English.   
 
 
credential and an English authorization.  She currently teaches fourth grade.  She did not 
receive a layoff notice.  She is assigned to teach single subject English as a district middle 
school in the 2010-2011 school year.  Ms. Roberts is more senior than Ms. Chapman and is 
certificated and competent to teach middle school English. 
 
 
seniority date of August 6, 2007.  She holds a multiple subject credential, and Science and 
Physical Education (PE) authorizations.  She currently teaches fourth grade (1.0 FTE).  She 
will be assigned to teach single subject Science at a district middle school in the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 
 
credential and a Science authorization.  She currently teaches seventh and eighth grade 
Social Science (1.0 FTE).  Ms. Dennis-Brughelli is more senior than Ms. Harrison and is 
competent and to teach middle school Science. 
 
 
multiple subject credential and authorizations in Mathematics and Introduction to Science.  
She currently teaches seventh and eight grade Science.  She did not receive a layoff notice 
and will remain in her current assignment for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Richard Smith received a layoff notice as part of the reduction of multiple 
subject credentialed employees.  He has a seniority date of August 24, 2007.  He holds a 
multiple subject credential and a Mathematics authorization.  He currently teaches third 
grade (1.0 FTE).  He is highly qualified to teach Mathematics at the middle school level.  

Ms. Harrison has a seniority date of August 22, 2008.  She holds a multiple subject 

Rebecca Martino has a seniority date of September 24, 2007.  She holds a 

23.  Koree Dennis-Brughelli bumped Susan Harrison.  Ms. Dennis-Brughelli has a 

24. 

25. 

 

7

26. 

Respondents argue that they meet one or more of the skipping criteria outlined 

According to Mr. Holtz, the district is not retaining any employee junior to Mr. Smith to 
teach elementary mathematics. 
 
Application of Skipping Criteria to Respondent Teachers 
 
 
in the Layoff Resolution.  Respondents Johanna Dickson, Sherry Chapman, and Susan 
Harrison, fall into two to three categories of employees to be skipped.  Richard Smith falls 
into one category of employees to be skipped.  As such, respondents contend that they should 
be “skipped” over for purposes of layoff. 
 
 
deviate from terminating a certificated employee on order of seniority when: 
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), authorizes a district to 

27. 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 
specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by 
a services credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel 
services or health for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee 
has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or 
course of study or to provide those services, which others with more 
seniority do not possess. 

28. 

 
 
“Junior employees may be given retention priority over senior employees only 
if they possess special skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.”  (Max 
Poppers v. Tamlpais Union High School Dist. (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399, 405.)  “[A] 
district may move up-ward from the bottom of the seniority list, ‘skipping’ over and 
retaining junior employees who are certified and competent to render services which more 
senior employees are not.”  (Alexander v. Delano Joint Union High School Dist. (1983) 139 
Cal.App.3d 567, 571.) 
 
 
29.  Ms. Harrison has a seniority date of August 22, 2008, is NCLB compliant and 
“highly qualified” in Science instruction.  There are no more junior teachers being retained to 
teach Science at the middle school level.  As such, she was a proper recipient of a layoff 
notice. 
 
 
“highly qualified” in Mathematics instruction.  There are no more junior teaches being 
retained to teach Mathematics at the middle school level.  As such, he was a proper recipient 
of a layoff notice. 
 
 
“highly qualified” in Social Science instruction.  There are no more junior teachers being 
retained to teach Social Science at the middle school level.  As such, she was a proper 
recipient of a layoff notice. 
 

31.  Ms. Dickson has a seniority date of August 24, 2006, is NCLB compliant and 

30.  Mr. Smith  has a seniority date of August 24, 2007, is NCLB compliant and 

 

8

33. 

32.  Ms. Chapman has a seniority date of August 24, 2007, is NCLB compliant, 

 
and “highly qualified” in English instruction.  There are no more junior teachers being 
retained to teach English at the middle school level.  As such, she was a proper recipient of a 
layoff notice. 
 
 
The language of the district’s skipping criteria is expansive.  It was broadly 
drafted to protect employees at the middle school level who meet NCLB highly qualified 
status.  Skipping does not mean that all employees who match the criteria must be retained.  
It means they will be retained in lieu of more senior teachers who do not meet the skipping 
criteria during the selection process.  The board has discretion to layoff up to 36.0 FTE and 
until that number is reached, teachers with the lowest seniority, even within the class of those 
meeting skipping criteria, are proper recipients of layoff notices. 
 
 
above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 
 

34.  Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 

and 44955.  All notices and jurisdictional prerequisites required by those sections were 
satisfied. 

2. 

The services the district seeks to eliminate in this matter, as set forth in the 

Layoff Resolution, are particular kinds of service that may be reduced or discontinued within 
the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted 
a proper exercise of the board’s discretion.  Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, legal cause exists for the district to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of 
services set forth in the Layoff Resolution.  The reduction or discontinuance of these 
identified particular kinds of services relates solely to the welfare of the district and its 
pupils. 

3. 

No certificated employee with less seniority than any respondent is being 
retained to render a service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
Legal cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to give respondents 
final notice that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

The Sylvan Unified School District’s action to reduce or eliminate the 

particular kinds of services identified in Layoff Resolution 13, for the 2010-2011 school year 
is AFFIRMED. 

 

 

 

9

2. 

The Accusation against respondents is SUSTAINED.  The Sylvan Unified 

School District may give final notices to respondents that their services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year.  Notices shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
 
 
DATED:  May 17, 2010 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
DIAN M. VORTERS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

10

Appendix A 
 
2010 Sylvan Union School District – List of Respondents 
 
Last Name 
 
1 
Campbell 
2 
Chapman 
3 
Collins 
4 
Dickson 
5 
Ellerson 
6 
Engel 
7 
Hake 
8 
Harrison 
9 
Jordan 
10  Kirkpatrick 
11  Naravage 
12  Ousley-Swank 
13  Quilici 
14 
Semple 
15 
Smith 
16  Yang 

First Name  Status 
Stacey 
Sherry 
Erin 
Johanna 
Anna 
Mindy 
Sonya 
Susan 
Willora 
Christina 
Nicole 
Renee 
Michael 
Karen 
Richard 
Chong 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notice Rescinded 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 

 

11

