BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE 
REDONDO BEACH UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Rutan  &  Tucker,  LLP,  by  David  C.  Larsen,  represented  the  Redondo  Beach  Unified 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Erlinda  G.  Shrenger,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  2010030302 
 
 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against 
 
STEPHANIE BENAS, et al., 
 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
Administrative Hearings, on April 8, 2010, in Redondo Beach, California. 
 
 
School District (District). 
 
 
Reich, Adell & Cvitan, by Kent Morizawa, represented Stephanie Benas, Emily Butler, 
Eileen  Chapman,  Kristen  Ely,  Tanaz  Farzad,  Rebeca  Fuehrer,  Michele  Garcia,  Stephanie 
Graverson, Kari Hammerschmitt, Trava Herra, Christopher Nelson, Joni Pearl, Ambra Silva, and 
Luis  Urquidi  (collectively,  Respondents).    All  Respondents,  except  for  Rebeca  Fuehrer,  were 
present at the hearing. 
 
 
At the start of the hearing, the District and Respondents, by and through their respective 
counsel, stipulated as follows:  (1) the factual allegations contained in paragraphs 1 through 4 of 
the Accusation are established; and (2) the Accusation is dismissed against respondents Trava 
Herra and Rebeca Fuehrer.  
 
 
for decision on April 8, 2010. 
  
 
 

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing and the matter was submitted 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. 

Nancy  Billinger,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  filed 

the 

Accusation in her official capacity as designee of the Superintendent of the District. 
 

2. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

3. 

 
 
 
 
 

Service 

               FTE1 Reduction

Administration
 
Principal 
Assistant Principal 

On  March  9,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District,  by  adoption  of 
Resolution  R:09:10:24  (Resolution),  determined  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 
certificated services for the 2010-2011 school year, as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Course Offering
Secondary - Industrial Arts & Technology 
 
 
Secondary - English 
Secondary - Math 
 
 
Teacher on Special Assignment - EL  
 
K-6 including K-3 (CSR) 

Student Services
School Counselor (High School) 

 
 
 
1.0 
          24.0 

2.0 
1.4 
  .8 

1.0 
1.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 

1.0 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

4. 

The  Governing  Board,  in  the  Resolution,  directed  the  Superintendent  or  his 
designee to give written notice, prior to March 15, 2010, to the certificated employees who may 
be laid off in order to reduce the number of certificated positions as proposed in the Resolution. 
 

5. 

The  Governing  Board,  in  the  Resolution,  also  adopted  a  Tiebreaker  Criteria 
and Point System to determine the order of termination of employees who first rendered paid 
service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date,  based  solely  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its 
students.  Certificated employees who receive a preliminary notice of layoff and who share 
the same seniority date are ranked by total points, which are assigned as follows: 
 

Criterion (a).  One point if compliant with the requirements of NCLB Highly 
Qualified Teacher. 
 
Criterion (b).  Two points for a BCLAD or BCC, or one point for an English 
Language (EL) or equivalent certificate. 
 
Criterion  (c).    One  point  for  each  credential  authorization  for  service  in  a 
subject (mulitple subject credential shall be considered a single credential) not 
being taught. 

                     

1 FTE stands for full-time equivalent position. 
 

 

 
 
 

2

Criterion (d).  One point for an earned Master's degree. 
 
Criterion (e).  One point for an earned Doctoral degree. 
 
Criterion (f).  One point for each service in a co-curricular assignment in the 
2008-2009  and  2009-2010  school  year  for  which  a  contractual  stipend  is 
provided. 

 
If two or more employees share the same point total, then the employee with the most years 
of  teaching  experience  recognized  by  the  District  for  salary  schedule  placement  and 
advancement shall control.  If criterion (a) through (f), and years of teaching experience do 
not break a tie, then the District shall hold a lottery to break the tie. 
 

6. 

Respondents are elementary school teachers affected by the Governing Board's 
determination  to  reduce  or  discontinue  24.0  FTE  positions  in  kindergarten  through  sixth 
grade,  including  the  elimination  of  the  class  size  reduction  (CSR)  program  in  kindergarten 
through third grade. 
 

7. 

Pursuant to the Resolution, the Superintendent's designee, by March 15, 2010, 
provided  written  notice  to  Respondents  that it was the Superintendent's recommendation that 
they  be  notified  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011  school  year.    The 
notice stated the reasons for the recommendation, and informed Respondents of their right to a 
hearing. 
 

8. 

Respondents  timely  requested  a  hearing,  in  writing,  to  determine  if  there  is 
cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.  On March 17, 2010, the District 
issued the Accusation and thereafter served it on Respondents. 
 

9. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

10. 

By  stipulation,  the  Accusation  is  dismissed  against  respondents  Trava  Herra 
and Rebeca Fuehrer.  Their respective employment status with the District is not at issue in 
this layoff proceeding. 
 

11. 

The services set forth in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services which 

may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.2   
 
 
 
 

                    
 

 

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

 

 

 
 
 

3

12. 

The Governing Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth in 
Factual  Finding  3  because  of  the  State  budget  crisis  and  the  District's  need  to  reduce  or 
discontinue services in order to maintain a balanced budget and provide essential services.  The 
decision to reduce the particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather 
a proper exercise of the District's discretion.  Respondents contend that the District might save 
jobs by reducing its budget reserves.  This contention is not persuasive, as the determination of 
the  amount  of  reserves  is  a  matter  committed  to  the  discretion  of  the  Governing  Board.  
(California School Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified School District (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 
318,  322.)    There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Governing  Board  acted  in  an  arbitrary  manner  or 
abused its discretion in matters related to its reserves. 
 

13. 

The reduction of services set forth in Factual Finding 3 is related to the welfare of 
the District and its students, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees as determined by the Governing Board. 
 

14. 

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations, and retirements 
in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees 
prior to March 15, 2010.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 636.) 
 

15. 

The District properly created its seniority list by determining the first day of paid 
service of each certificated employee and properly utilized reasonable tiebreaker criteria when 
necessary. 
 

16. 

Respondents  were  identified  as  employees  subject  to  layoff  without  the 
District having to utilize the tiebreaker criteria and point system discussed in Factual Finding 
5.    Consequently,  Respondents'  disagreement  with  the  criteria  or  their  contention  that  the 
criteria  are  unfair  do  not  affect  their  status  in  this  layoff  proceeding.  In  any  event,  it  was 
established  the  tiebreaker  criteria  and  point  system  were  properly  developed  based  on  the 
needs of the District and its students.  The District did use the tiebreaker criteria and point 
system to develop a rehire list of Respondents sharing a seniority date of September 2, 2008 
(Exhibit 7A), which the District would use in the event it is able to rehire elementary school 
teachers. 
 

17.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 

18.  All  other  arguments  presented  by  Respondents  were  not  persuasive  and/or  not 
established by the evidence.  The District followed the required procedures and did not act in an 
arbitrary or capricious manner.   
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

4

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

3. 

2. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

 
 
44955, by reason of Factual Findings 1-9. 
 
 
The District must be solvent to provide educational services, and cost savings 
are necessary to resolve its budget shortfall.  The Governing Board’s decision was a proper 
exercise of its discretion.  Financial considerations are an appropriate basis for a reduction in 
services  under  section  44955.    As  stated  in  San  Jose  Teachers  Association,  supra,  144 
Cal.App.3d at 638-639, the reduction of particular kinds of services on the basis of financial 
considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section,  and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial 
circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff,  section  44955  is  the  only  statutory 
authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.” 
 
The services set forth in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services within 
 
the meaning of section 44955, by reason of Factual Findings 3 and 11.  Specifically, elementary 
school classroom teaching is a particular kind of service under section 44955.  (Calif. Teachers 
Assn. v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32, 36; San Jose 
Teachers Assn., supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at 637.) 
 
 
Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set forth in Factual Finding 3, which cause relates 
solely to the welfare of the District's schools and students, by reason of Factual Findings  1-18. 
 
Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to 
 
the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services, by reason of Factual Findings 
1-18 and Legal Conclusions 1-4.  The District may give notice to Respondents, except for Trava 
Herra and Rebeca Fuehrer, that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 The Accusation shall be dismissed as to Respondents Herra and Fuehrer. 
 

4. 

5. 

ORDER 

1. 

 
 
required for the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services: 
 

The District may notify the following Respondents that their services will not be 

(1)   Stephanie Benas 
(2)   Emily Butler 
(3)   Eileen Chapman 
(4)   Kristen Ely 
(5)   Tanaz Farzad 
(6)   Michele Garcia 
(7)   Stephanie Graverson 

5

 

 
 
 

(8)   Kari Hammerschmitt 
(9)   Christopher Nelson 
(10)  Joni Pearl 
(11)  Ambra Silva 
(12)  Luis Urquidi 

 
 
2. 
Fuehrer. 
 
 
DATED:  April ___, 2010                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

The Accusation is dismissed against respondents Trava Herra and Rebeca 

 

_____________________________ 
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER   
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

 

 
 
 

6

