 
 
 
BEFORE THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
CLOVERDALE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
         OAH No. 2010031630 
            

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  
 
GRANT AZEVEDO, et al. 
 
              
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Nancy L. Rasmussen, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter on April 21, 2010.  The hearing was conducted by 
telephone conference. 
 

Margaret M. Merchat, of School and College Legal Services of California, 

represented the Cloverdale Unified School District.  
 

James F. DeMartini, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Grant Azevedo, 

Suzanne Charles-Engelke and Rebecca Voelkel, who were present, and respondents Janel 
Morris and Gina Roman, who were not present. 
 
 

The matter was submitted for decision on April 21, 2010. 

 
FACTUAL FINDINGS  

 
          1. 
Superintendent of the Cloverdale Unified School District. 
 

Claudia Rosatti made and filed the accusation in her official capacity as 

2. 

Respondents Grant Azevedo, Suzanne Charles-Engelke, Janel Morris, Gina 

3. 

On March 3, 2010, the district’s Board of Trustees adopted Resolution No.  

Roman and Rebecca Voelkel are permanent certificated employees of the district. 
 
 
210-08 reducing or discontinuing the following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 
school year and directing the superintendent to initiate and pursue procedures necessary to 
not reemploy certificated employees in 18 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions:   
 
 
 
 

Services 
Teacher/Student Support Services 
Elementary Grades K-6 Instructional Services 

FTE
3.0 
9.0 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
      

-1- 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

   

 
 
 

 
 
 

5. 

4. 

 
 
 
 
 

Before March 15, 2010, Superintendent Rosatti gave written notice to 

Respondents and six other certificated employees filed timely requests for 

1.0 
  .6 
1.0 
  .4 
  .4 
  .4 
  .4 
  .2 
1.0 
  .2 
  .4
                     18.0 

Title 1 Instructional Support Services (K-8) 
 
Academic Counselor  
Physical Education for 4-6 prep. 
 
High School Social Studies Instructional Services (2 periods) 
High School AVID Instructional Services (2 periods) 
Physical Education Instructional Services, gr. 7-12 (2 periods) 
Math Instructional Services, grades 7-12 (2 periods) 
Music  Instructional Services, grades 5-6 (1 period) 
Teacher on Special Assignment 
 
English Instructional Services, grades 9-12 (1 period) 
Sciences Instructional Services, grades 7-12 (2 periods) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
respondents and other certificated employees of the recommendation that their services will 
not be required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The reasons for the recommendation were set 
forth in these preliminary layoff notices. 
 
 
hearing to determine if there is cause for terminating their services for the 2010-2011 school 
year.  An accusation was served on each respondent, and each of them filed a timely notice of 
defense.  Prior to the hearing, the six other certificated employees withdrew their requests for 
hearing. 
 
 
order of seniority, from highest to lowest, is as follows: Grant Azevedo, Gina Roman, 
Rebecca Voelkel, Suzanne Charles-Engelke and Janel Morris.  
 
 
grade teacher Marcia Ashlee-Collins, so she will be retained for the 2010-2011 school year.  
Ashlee-Collins is a permanent employee with less seniority than the five respondents, all of 
whom are credentialed and competent to perform the services which she is being retained to 
perform. 
 
 
notices by 1.0 FTE, the FTE corresponding to Ashlee-Collins’s position.  The district 
rescinded the .4 FTE layoff notice to Dan Dersham, an employee senior to respondents, and 
it rescinded the layoff notice to respondent Grant Azevedo by .6 FTE (leaving .4 FTE of his 
position subject to layoff).  This remedial action placed respondents in the same position with 
respect to layoff that they would have been in had the district given a layoff notice to  
Ashlee-Collins.  
 
 
Respondents contend that the district is precluded from laying any of them off 
because Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides that “. . . the services of no 

Respondents each hold a multiple subject teaching credential.  Their relative 

After the district discovered its mistake, it took action to rescind the layoff 

The district inadvertently failed to give a preliminary layoff notice to third 

 
8. 

9. 

6. 

7. 

 
      

-2- 

 
 
 

permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a 
service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.”  However, it 
would be unreasonable to interpret this language to preclude the layoff of all respondents (the 
domino effect) when only one junior employee is being retained to render services that 
respondents are certificated and competent to render.  The district’s position that the 
improper retention of a junior employee saves only a corresponding number (FTE) of senior 
employees from layoff finds support in Alexander v. Board of Trustees of the Delano Joint 
Union High School District (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567.  After noting that its opinion “in 
effect nullifies the Board’s decision to skip the junior teachers who possessed Spanish 
language skills but were not employed to teach classes in the formal bilingual program,” the 
court stated: “Because at least some of the persons skipped should have received the [layoff] 
notices, a corresponding number of the most senior of the employees who were not 
reemployed must have been improperly given notices.”  (Id. at p. 576; emphasis added.)   
 
 
school district could defeat the seniority protections of the layoff statute to retain a preferred 
junior teacher by deliberately not noticing that teacher for layoff and noticing one additional 
senior teacher.  Later, the district would be required to rescind the layoff notice of only that 
one senior teacher as “penance” for improperly skipping the junior teacher and could keep 
intact its layoff of other senior teachers.  In such a case, where a school district acts in bad 
faith, the district should of course be precluded from laying off any senior teachers, whether 
by application of the domino theory or on the basis of the layoff being arbitrary and 
capricious.  Here, there is no evidence that the district’s failure to give Ashlee-Collins a 
layoff notice was other than a mistake.  Under these circumstances, the district is required to 
correct its mistake by rescinding the layoffs by 1.0 FTE of the most senior “certificated and 
competent” employees.  The district has already taken this remedial action.  
 

Respondents point out that under the district’s “corresponding number” theory, a 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, 

 
            1. 
and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required. 
 
 
Although one certificated employee junior in seniority to respondents is being 
retained by the district to perform services that respondents are certificated and competent to 
render, the district has remedied its mistake by rescinding the layoffs by 1.0 FTE. 
 

2. 

2. 

Cause exists because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services pursuant to section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools 
and the pupils thereof within the meaning of section 44949. 
 

 
      

-3- 

 
 
 
ORDER 

 

 

Notice may be given to respondents that their services will not be required for the 
2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services. 

DATED: ______________________ 
 
                               
                               
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

________________________________ 
NANCY L. RASMUSSEN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings          

 
      

-4- 

