 BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
POMONA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

OAH No. 2010030087  
 
 

 
 
In the Matter of  the Accusation 
Against:   
 
CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE 
POMONA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
                                    Respondents. 
 
 

 
 
29 and 30, 2010, in Pomona, California. 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard by Humberto Flores, Administrative Law Judge, on April 28, 

Complainant Pomona Unified School District was represented by Howard A. 

Friedman and L. Carlos Villegas, Attorneys at Law.  Respondents, who are listed in an 
attachment to Respondents’ closing brief, were represented by Joshua B. Adams and Emma 
Leheny, Attorneys at Law.   
 
 
Oral and documentary evidence was introduced and the record was left open to allow 
the parties to submit written closing argument and briefs by May 4, 2010.  On the morning of 
May 4, 2010, Respondents’ counsel requested an extension of time to file their written brief.  
Counsel for the District agreed to the extension.  The parties also stipulated to extend and 
continue the submission date of this matter to May 5, 2010, and to extend the time for 
issuance of the proposed decision to May 13, 2010.  On May 4, 2010, the undersigned issued 
an order extending the deadline for issuance of the proposed decision to May 13, 2010, and 
extending the time for the District to issue Notices of Termination pursuant to Education 
Code section 44955, subdivision (c).  The parties submitted their closing arguments and 
briefs on May 5, 2010.  The District’s closing brief was marked exhibit 11 for identification 
only.  Respondents’ closing brief was marked exhibit H for identification only. The matter 
was submitted for decision on May 5, 2010.  The Administrative Law Judge makes the 
following Factual Findings, Legal Conclusions and Order.  
 

1.  The Accusation was made and filed by Richard Martinez in his official capacity as 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
 
Superintendent of the Pomona Unified School District (District).   
 
 

2.  Respondents are certificated employees of the District.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

         FTE 

SERVICES 

      
 
 
 

3.  On February 24, 2010, pursuant to the recommendation of the Superintendent, the 

                       12.0  
  7.0 
              
  2.0 
              
  7.0 
  
 

 
 
Governing Board of the Pomona Unified School District adopted Resolution No. 10 (2009-
10) in which it determined that particular kinds of services may be reduced or discontinued at 
the close of the 2009-2010 school year.  The Governing Board resolved to reduce or 
eliminate 321.7 full-time equivalent positions (FTE) in certain services or programs 
performed by probationary or permanent certificated employees specifically delineated as 
follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Intervention Counselor-Secondary   
 
Intervention Specialist 
 
School Nurse   
 
 
School Psychologist   
Teacher-Adult School-Adults with Disabilities 
(13 positions, 12 months reduced to 10 month assignments  
   2.3 
Teacher-Adult School-Adults with Disabilities (10 month assignment)     7.2 
   2.0 
Teacher-Adult School-English as Second Language and Citizenship 
   1.0 
 
Teacher-Adult School-Vocational Education (Cosmetology) 
   2.0 
Teacher-Adult School-Older Adults  
 
   3.0 
Teacher-Adult School-Parent, Family and Consumer Awareness  
   3.0 
 
Teacher-Child Development  
 
 
Teacher on Assignment 
 42.0 
           110.0 
 
Teacher-Elementary   
 
Teacher-Secondary-Art 
 
 
Teacher-Secondary-English   
 
Teacher-Secondary-Foreign Language-French 
 
Teacher-Secondary-Foreign language-Spanish 
 
Teacher-Secondary-Discovering Industrial Technology 
 
Teacher-Secondary-Technology Proficiency 
 
 
Teacher-Secondary-Math 
 
 
Teacher-Secondary-Music 
 
 
Teacher-Secondary-Physical Education 
 
 
Teacher-Secondary-Science-Earth   
 
 
 
Teacher-Secondary-Science-Life 
 
 
Teacher-Secondary-Science-Physical 
     
 
Teacher-Secondary-Social Science   
 
 
 
Teacher-Special Education   
 
 
Teacher-Specialist 
 
 
 
 
Teacher Specialists—Special Education 
Teacher Specialists—Technology 
  
 
 
TOTAL FTE Reduced or Discontinued 

    6.4               
  19.0 
    1.2 
    5.0 
    1.0 
    6.4 
  19.0 
    6.4 
  10.6 
    0.8 
    6.6 
    7.0 
  19.0 
     5.0 
     5.0 
     2.0 
     1.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  321.7  

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

5.  The Governing Board also adopted criteria to be used in determining the order of 

4.  In its resolution, the Governing Board directed the Superintendent or his designee 

 
to serve notices of termination in accordance with and in the manner prescribed by Education 
Code Sections 44949 and 44955.   
 
 
termination of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the District in a 
probationary position on the same date.  The Governing Board resolved that the order of 
termination of said employees shall be determined by reference to certain tiebreaker criteria 
and to points assigned to each category of tiebreaker criteria.  The Governing Board further 
resolved that such criteria are determined to best serve the needs of the District and its 
students and would be applied in the layoff hearing in which the issue may arise.   
 
 
6.  On or about March 5, 2010, pursuant to the resolution of the Governing Board and 
the provisions of Education Code Sections 44949 and 44955, Superintendent Martinez gave 
written notice to Respondents that the Superintendent had recommended to the Governing 
Board that notice be given to respondents that their services may not be required for the 
ensuing 2010-2011 school year.  Respondents requested a hearing to determine if there is 
cause for not employing them for the ensuing school year. 
 

7.  On or about March 30, 2010, the District filed and timely served an Accusation, 

8.  At the hearing, the District rescinded the layoff notices issued to Respondents Lisa 

Resolution No. 10 (2009-10), a Statement to Respondent, a blank Notice of Defense, Reqeust 
for Discovery, pertinent sections of the Government and Education Codes, and Notice of 
Hearing upon 259 certificated employees.  Respondents (176 certificated employees) filed 
timely Notices of Defense.  All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.   
 
 
Andrews, Maria Angelica Azurin, Rebecca Bulsombut, Victor Calagna, Alejandrina 
Cendejas, Amparo Lopez Chacon, Euna Chae-Montez, Trian Soai Chan, Arturo Chavez, Jose 
Chavez, Imelda Clark, Norma Contreras-Guillen, Cynthia Corona, Nathan Crozier, Prudence 
Dacillo, Kirk Daffron, Melissa D. De Nova, Ivette Decasas, Elizabeth Dimauro, Erika 
Cristina Duran, Alicia Edwards, Claudia Escobedo-Perea, Arturo Farin, Bridgette Gardea, 
Ashley Hedrick, Lupe Kanouse, Natalie Kirkbride-Escobedo, Namiko Kobayashi, Islene 
Leon, Isreal Lim, Hemali Long, Christina Longstaff, Judith Leandra Macias, Leila McFarlin, 
Rosa Miranda-Zimmer, Cheryl Moore, Maria Esther Mora, Lydia Moreno, Abigail Ramirez, 
Laura Romero, Michael Seelig, Sanita Shropshire, Tina Solorzano, Cesar Torres, Esmiralda 
Vargas and Mark Wiseman.  The District also rescinded the layoff notice issued to 
certificated employee Douglas Perez. 
 
 
not receive layoff notices contained in exhibit 6.  As a result, these respondents contend that 
their layoff notices should be rescinded.  However, respondents Castillo, Reaza and Porter 
conceded that the District had their correct addresses on record.  Further, Darren Knowles, 
Director of Personnel Services for the District, testified that all respondents, including 
Castillo, Reaza and Porter, were served with layoff notices by certified mail with return 
receipt requested.   

9.  Respondents Kathy Castillo, Yvonne Reaza, and Katie Porter testified that they did 

 

3

10.  The services or programs set forth in Finding 3 are particular kinds of services 

11.  The District has considered personnel changes due to attrition, retirements, and 

 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code Section 44955.  
The determination of the Governing Board of the District to reduce or discontinue these 
services or programs is within the sound discretion of the District and is not arbitrary or 
capricious.   The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 
District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certifcated 
employees as determined by the Governing Board. 
 
 
the releases of temporary employees in making its determination to issue layoff notices.  
 
 
current assignments and locations, credentials, and authorizations.  The District then 
identified the most junior employees working in a particular kind of service being reduced or 
discontinued and determined which employees would receive layoff notices.   
  
 
that had been assigned to certain certificated employees set forth in exhibits 2 and 3.  As a 
result, the District made the following changes to the seniority list:  
 
 
 

12.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority dates, 

13.  During the hearing, the parties presented evidence of errors in the seniority dates 

Certificated Employee 

Listed Seniority Date  

New Seniority Date

 

October 19, 2007 
 
Marie Anderson                    January 7, 2008 
October 10, 2006 
 
August 21, 2007 
 
Jasmine Aburas 
September 23, 2005 
 
October 12, 2005 
 
Elvira Baeza   
September 8, 2005 
 
October 12, 2005 
 
Jamie Beckel   
August 12, 2002 
 
August 21, 2002 
 
Tonya Brookhart 
March 5, 2007              
 
August 27, 2007 
 
Antonio Caballero 
November 6, 2006 
 
August 31, 2007 
 
Elsa Cabral 
November 13, 2007 
 
August 27, 2008 
 
Javier Cayetano 
August 29, 2007 
 
January 7, 2008 
 
Cecilia Gonzales 
September 26, 2006              March 30 2006 
Jennifer Larea  
 
 
September 6, 2006 
Monica Medina-Jimenez 
 
October 10, 2007 
Yolanda Marinez 
 
August 21, 2007 
Donavon MacLeod 
 
August 22, 2006 
Thelma Newsome-Cox 
 
August 22, 2006 
Mark Orozco   
 
September 5, 2006 
Karena Owen  
 
August 22, 2006 
Laura Patricia Ramirez 
 
Paula Rafael   
October 12, 2005 
 
 
Maria Del Carmen Sanchez  January 7, 2008 
 
Monica Whisenhunt   
 
 

September 20, 2005 
August 27, 2007 
January 19, 2007 
March 22, 2006 
September 6, 2005 
October 5, 2005 
January 25, 2006 
December 12, 2003 
September 17, 2007 
August 21, 2002  

September 3, 2002 

 
 

 
 

 

4

14.  Some of the above mentioned Respondents who were assigned new seniority 

dates in Factual Finding 13, contest their new seniority dates.  These include Respondents 
Jamie Beckel, Antonio Caballero, Donovan MacLeod and Mark Orozco.  In its closing brief, 
the District noted that it rescinded Respondent Mark Orozco’s layoff notice.  Respondents 
Caballero’s, Macleod’s and Beckel’s contention that their newly assigned seniority dates are 
in error, even if true, would not affect their layoff status.  Therefore, the undersigned does 
not make a determination or finding regarding the disputed seniority dates for Respondents 
Orozco, Caballero, MacLeod and Beckel. 

 
15.  The District rescinded Respondent Arturo Farin’s layoff notice.  He nevertheless 
disputes his seniority status.  Since he is not being laid off the undersigned does not make a 
determination or finding regarding his disputed seniority date. 

 
16.  Respondent Puga disputes her assigned seniority date of December 1, 2005.  She 

 
testified that she worked as a long term substitute from September to December 2005, however, 
she did not present any documentary evidence to support her contention.  Further, in her 
testimony, Respondent Puga did not specify an exact first date of paid service to the District.  In 
any event, her proposed change in her seniority date would not affect her layoff status.  
Therefore, the undersigned will not disturb the District’s determination of her seniority date.   

 
17.  Respondent Vanessa Saenz disputes her assigned seniority date of August 19, 

2008, and claims that her employment status should be changed from probationary II to 
permanent.  She worked a substitute from October 2, 2007 through December 13, 2007.  She 
then worked under a temporary contract from January 16, 2008, to the end of the 2007/2008 
school year.  It was not established that she worked at least 75 percent of the 2007/2009 
school year.  Her proposed changes in seniority would not affect her notice of layoff.  
Therefore, the undersigned will not make a determination or finding regarding her disputed 
seniority date and will not change her employment status.   

 
 
18.  Respondent Marilyn Mendieta disputes her assigned seniority date of September 
4, 2007.  She claims that she should have earned seniority at the beginning of the 2002/2003 
school year.  Her testimony did not establish that she should be assigned seniority as of the 
2002/2003 school year. 

 
19.  Certain Respondents (19) dispute their seniority dates based on claimed 

attendance at mandatory training.  The sign-in sheets for the training do not support the 
assertions of these respondents that they attended the training in question.  In any event, the 
proposed changes in seniority would not affect the layoff status of these Respondents. 

 
 
20. The Seniority List also contained certain errors in the employment status of some 
of the respondents and other certificated employees.  As a result, the District made changes 
to the employment status of the following certificated employees: Cecilia Gonzalez’s 
employee status was changed to permanent as of the 2009/2010 school year ; Maria Del 
Carmen Sanchez’s employee status was changed to permanent as of the 2009/2010 school 
year; Yvonne Reaza’s employee status was changed to permanent as of the 2009/2010 school 

 

5

21.  At the hearing, the District assigned a new seniority date of October 19, 2007, for 

year;  Brenda Vasquez’s employee status was changed to permanent as of the 2009/2010 
school year; Christina Galit’s employee status was changed to probationary II as of the 
2009/2010 school year; and Jeanette Goss’s employee status was changed to permanent as of 
the 2009/2010 school year.  
 
 
Respondent Maria Anderson.  She started working for the District in November 1994 and 
worked consecutive years until June 2005.  She requested a leave of absence for the 2005-
2006 school year, which was denied by the District.  Respondent Anderson chose to resign.  
She returned to the District in October 2007 as a long term substitute.  In January 2008 she 
was given permanent status.  The District properly determined that Respondent Anderson’s 
new seniority date was the date of her rehire.  (Section 44848; San Jose Teachers Assn. v. 
Allen (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 631 “When a permanent certificated employee resigns 
and is reemployed within 39 months, the reemployment restores all individual rights, benefits 
and burdens of a permanent employee; however, for seniority purposes, the employee does 
not regain his or her original hiring date.”)  Accordingly, the District’s calculation of Ms. 
Anderson’s seniority date is correct. 
 
 
22.  Respondent Bridget Bushong disputes her assigned seniority date of February 9, 
2005.  She testified that she filled a vacant position as a long term substitute during the first 
part of the 2004/2005 school year although she was not specific as to the date she filled this 
vacant position.  She was offered and accepted a temporary contract in February 2005, and 
was rehired for the 2007/2008 school year under another temporary contract.  In September 
2008 she was given probationary II status.  While it did not address Ms. Bushong’s 
contention at hearing, in its written closing brief, the District noted that a check of Ms. 
Bushong’s records indicated that she was first hired to fill a vacant position on September 22, 
2004.  The District has offered to change her seniority date to September 22, 2004.  The 
undersigned will not making a finding as to Ms. Bushong’s seniority date because neither 
side presented specific evidence at the hearing of an exact first date of paid service to the 
District.  In any event, there is no evidence that changing her seniority date would have an 
effect on her layoff status. 
 
 
to teach a history classes currently being taught by Darryl Hutchinson, who did not receive a 
layoff notice.  Respondents Orozco and Rene Natividad are both qualified to teach social 
science classes. However, there is only one position at issue, and Respondent Orozco has 
more seniority that Respondent Natividad.  Therefore, Respondent Orozco’s contention that 
he should bump into Mr. Hutchinson’s position is correct as he is qualified to teach Mr. 
Hutchinson’s class and had more seniority than both Respondent Natividad and Mr. 
Hutchinson.  In its closing brief, the District stated that it had rescinded Mr. Orozco’s layoff 
notice.    
 
24.  Respondent Jose Sanchez teaches at the adult school and contends that he has 
 
greater seniority and is qualified to teach the adult ESL (English as a Second Language) 
classes currently taught by Clotilde Rodriguez and Esther Johnson.  In its closing brief, the 

23.  Respondent Mark Orozco contends that he has greater seniority and is qualified 

 

6

25. (a) Respondent Marilyn Prehn disputes her assigned seniority of December 9, 

District conceded that respondent Jose Sanchez is authorized to teach ESL at the adult 
school, and noted that it would rescind his layoff notice. 
 
 
1999.  Ms. Prehn was hired by the District as an independent contractor from June 1999 to 
December 1999, and contends that she should be given seniority credit for this prior service 
to the District.  Ms. Prehn’s contention is not persuasive as she did not cite legal authority to 
support her contention. 
 
                  (b) Respondent Prehn testified that she is credentialed to teach “any business 
class” and claims that she has bumping rights over Dave Rosenthal, Patrick Trejo, Willie 
Harris, and Joanne Leone.  Dave Rosenthal teaches high school physical education and also 
teaches a class entitled Gateway to Technology: Level I.  Patrick Trejo teaches classes 
entitled “Advisory 8, Educ Media, Intro Micro, and Study Skills.”  Respondent Prehn 
contends that she is credentialed and competent to teach the classes currently taught by Mr. 
Trejo and the Gateway to Technology class currently taught by Mr. Rosenthal.  However, the 
record is unclear as to whether the above referenced classes are considered “business 
classes.”  In fact, the exact content of the above referenced classes was not clearly developed 
during the hearing.  Therefore, the undersigned cannot make a finding that Respondent Prehn 
is credentialed and competent to teach the courses currently being taught by Messrs. Trejo 
and Rosenthal.  In any event, the District determined that Douglas Perez and Respondent 
Roberta Roell, who are credentialed to teach Secondary – Technology Proficiency, have 
more seniority than Respondent Prehn and have bumping rights into the approximate 1.4 
FTE that was available in secondary business classes.  
 
 
seniority list (exhibit 2), Willie Harris and Joanne Leone have not been assigned to teach 
classes this school year.  The District argues that a K-12 teacher should not be able to bump a 
less senior teacher who teaches adult education.  The District argues that Education Code 
sections 44929.25 and 44929.26 provide a separate mechanism for an adult education teacher 
to acquire permanency.  These statutes prohibit concurrent tenure for day school and adult 
education.  As such, service in a regular day school does not count towards permanency in 
adult school, and visa versa.  Therefore, respondent Prehn’s contention that she should bump 
Willie Harris and Joanne Leone is rejected.  
 
26. (a) Respondent Pauline Espinosa de Los Monteros claims bumping rights over 
 
teachers Chester Tadeja, Dave Rosenthal, Patrick Trejo, Bonnie Pless, Lupe Marin, Willie 
Harris, and Joanne Leone.  Willie Harris, Joanne Leone, Bonnie Pless and Lupe Marin teach 
in the adult school.  Respondent Espinosa de Los Monteros testified at the hearing that she 
received her credential to teach adult education on April 1, 2010.  Respondent Espinosa de 
Los Monteros has never taught in adult school.  Therefore, she cannot bump Willie Harris, 
Joanne Leone, Bonnie Pless or Lupe Marin based on Education Code sections 44929.25 and 
44929.26, and for the reasons set forth in Factual Finding 25(c).  Finally, it is noted that the 
District was not made aware of Respondent Espinosa’s adult school credential prior to March 
15, 2010. 

       (c) Willie Harris and Joanne Leone teach in the adult school.  According to the 

 

7

27.  Respondent Rafael Duran has been assigned a seniority date of September 9, 

       (b) Respondent Espinosa also contends that she has bumping rights over Chester 

 
 
Tajeda, Dave Rosenthal and Patrick Trejo because she is credentialed to teach classes in 
technology.  Respondent Espinosa’s contention is not persuasive because the District 
determined that Douglas Perez and Respondent Roberta Roell, who are credentialed to teach 
Secondary – Technology Proficiency, have more seniority than Respondent Espinosa and 
have bumping rights into the approximate 1.4 FTE that was available in secondary business 
classes.  
 
 
2004.  He claims that he has bumping rights over Israel Lim, Alicia Edwards, and Jose 
Chavez, all of whom have less seniority than Mr. Duran.  Mr. Lim teaches special education 
classes in Biology and Introduction to Physical Science.  Ms. Edwards teaches special 
education courses in English and Reading.  Mr. Chavez has not been assigned to teach a class 
this school year.   Respondent Duran testified that he is pursuing a special education 
credential and is currently authorized to teach special education classes because of his 
internship through Cal Poly Pomona, however, he admitted that he could only teach special 
education courses under the supervision of a teacher credentialed in special education.  
Respondent Duran did not provide documentation at the hearing which supported his 
contention that he has an internship credential.  Even if he has such a credential, he did not 
present proof to the District prior to March 15, 2010.  Therefore, respondent Duran’s 
contention is rejected.   
 
 
Dave Rosenthal, Patrick Trejo, Willie Harris, and Joanne Leone.  In its Closing Brief, the 
District noted that it will rescind Ms. Roell’s layoff notice because she is credentialed and 
competent to teach a Secondary Technology Proficiency class that is now being taught by a 
less senior teacher who did not receive a layoff notice.  

28.  Respondent Roberta Roell claims bumping rights over teachers Chester Tadeja, 

 
29.  Angelina Orozco is a math teacher who was not served with a layoff notice.  The 
evidence established that Respondents Maria Elena Garcia, Henry Aguinaga, Carlos Aguirre 
Jr., Ramona Dinger, and Richard Tran have more seniority than Ms. Orozco and are 
credentialed to teach the classes that she teaches.  These Respondents assert that the District 
should rescind all of their layoff notices.  However, there is only one position or FTE at issue 
here and only the most senior of the above named respondents (Respondent Maria Elena 
Garcia) bumps into the position held by Ms. Orozco.1  Therefore, Respondent Maria Elena 
Garcia should be retained for the 2010/2011school year.   

 
 

                                                 

1 Respondents’ counsel, in his closing brief, named three other teachers who are 

credentialed to teach math and who have more seniority than Ms. Orozco.  However, these 
employees were not named respondents and the undersigned will not make a finding 
regarding these employees. 

 

8

30.  Respondents’ counsel submitted a credential for Respondent Darshelle Lapworth 

indicating that she is authorized to teach English and is therefore entitled to bump into the 
position currently held by Rebecca Molinar, who has less seniority.  However, Respondent 
Lapworth did not testify and it is unclear whether she submitted this credential to the District 
prior to March 15, 2010.  Therefore, the undersigned does not find that Respondent 
Lapworth is entitled to bump into the position held by Rebecca Molinar.  

 
31.  The reduction or discontinuation of the particular kinds of services set forth in 

32.  As noted in Factual Finding 23, Respondent Renee Natividad remains subject to 

 
Factual Finding 3, related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  
 
 
layoff because Respondent Mark Orozco, who has greater seniority than Respondent 
Natividad, bumps into the position currently held by Darryl Hutchinson.  As noted in Factual 
Finding 29, Respondents Henry Aguinaga, Carlos Aguirre Jr., Ramona Dinger, and Richard 
Tran, remain subject to layoff because Respondent Maria Elena Garcia, who has greater 
seniority than Respondents Aguinaga, Aguirre, Dinger and Tran, bumps into the position 
currently held by Angelina Orozco.  All remaining Respondents, whose layoff notices have 
not been rescinded or who have not bumped into a position of a less senior certificated 
employee, are not certificated and competent to render a service being performed by any 
employee with less seniority who is being retained. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction exists for the subject proceedings pursuant to Education Code Section 
44949 and 44955; and all notices, accusations, and other related papers and reports required 
by said sections have been provided in timely manner and, as such, the District has complied 
with the requirements of said sections.   
 
 
Respondents Kathy Castillo, Katie Porter and Yvonne Reaza by mailing all jurisdictional 
documents by certified mail, return receipt requested.  All three of these Respondents 
testified and otherwise participated in the hearing. 
 

 
2.  The District complied with Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 in serving 

3.  Cause was established under Education Code section 44955 to reduce the number 

of certificated employees due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services.  The Board’s decisions to reduce or eliminate the identified services were neither 
arbitrary nor capricious.  The decisions relate solely to the welfare of the District’s schools 
and the pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.   

 
 
4.  Cause exists to dismiss the Accusation issued against Respondents Lisa Andrews, 
Maria Angelica Azurin, Rebecca Bulsombut, Victor Calagna, Alejandrina Cendejas, Amparo 
Lopez Chacon, Euna Chae-Montez, Trian Soai Chan, Arturo Chavez, Jose Chavez, Imelda 
Clark, Norma Contreras-Guillen, Cynthia Corona, Nathan Crozier, Prudence Dacillo, Kirk 
Daffron, Melissa De Nova, Ivette Decasas, Elizabeth Dimauro, Erika Cristina Duran, Alicia 
Edwards, Claudia Escobedo-Perea, Arturo Farin, Maria Elena Garcia, Bridgette Gardea, 

 

 

9

Ashley Hedrick, Lupe Kanouse, Natalie Kirkbride-Escobedo, Namiko Kobayashi, Islene 
Leon, Isreal Lim, Hemali Long, Christina Longstaff, Judith Leandra Macias, Leila McFarlin, 
Rosa Miranda-Zimmer, Cheryl Moore, Maria Esther Mora, Lydia Moreno, Mark Orozco, 
Douglas Perez, Abigail Ramirez, Roberta Roell, Laura Romero, Jose Sanchez, Michael 
Seelig, Sanita Shropshire, Tina Solorzano, Cesar Torres, Esmiralda Vargas and Mark 
Wiseman, based on Factual Findings 8, 23, 24, 28 and 29. 
 
 
pursuant to Education Code Section 44955, to give notice to the remaining respondents in 
this matter whose layoff notices have not been rescinded.  No junior certificated employee is 
being retained to perform services which a more senior employee subject to layoff is 
certificated and competent to render. 
 

5.  Cause exists, due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services 

ORDER 

 
 
1.  The Accusation issued against Respondents Lisa Andrews, Maria Angelica 
Azurin, Rebecca Bulsombut, Victor Calagna, Alejandrina Cendejas, Amparo Lopez Chacon, 
Euna Chae-Montez, Trian Soai Chan, Arturo Chavez, Jose Chavez, Imelda Clark, Norma 
Contreras-Guillen, Cynthia Corona, Nathan Crozier, Prudence Dacillo, Kirk Daffron, 
Melissa De Nova, Ivette Decasas, Elizabeth Dimauro, Erika Cristina Duran, Alicia Edwards, 
Claudia Escobedo-Perea, Arturo Farin, Maria Elena Garcia, Bridgette Gardea, Ashley 
Hedrick, Lupe Kanouse, Natalie Kirkbride-Escobedo, Namiko Kobayashi, Islene Leon, Isreal 
Lim, Hemali Long, Christina Longstaff, Judith Leandra Macias, Leila McFarlin, Rosa 
Miranda-Zimmer, Cheryl Moore, Maria Esther Mora, Lydia Moreno, Mark Orozco, Abigail 
Ramirez, Roberta Roell, Laura Romero, Jose Sanchez, Michael Seelig, Sanita Shropshire, 
Tina Solorzano, Cesar Torres, Esmiralda Vargas and Mark Wiseman, is dismissed. 
 
 
2.  The District may give notice to the remaining respondents and the certificated 
employees who did not request a hearing, that their services will not be required for the 
2010-2011 school year. 
  
Dated: May 12, 2010    
 
 
 
  

Humberto Flores 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

10

