BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
LOS NIETOS SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 
 
      
 
OAH Case No. 2010030763 
 
 

In the Matter of the Accusations Against: 
 
Dulce Alvarado and Other Certificated 
Employees of the Los Nietos School District, 
 

                                                Respondents. 
 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Aaron V. O’Donnell, Esq. represented Jonathan Vasquez (Vasquez), the 

Kent Morizawa, Esq. represented 26 certificated employees of the District.  Two 

Administrative Law Judge, Sophie C. Agopian, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
heard this matter on April 14, 2010, in Whittier, California. 
 
 
Superintendent of the Los Nietos School District (District). 
 
 
other certificated employees, Teri Applebaum and Rita Morales, did not appear at the 
hearing and were not represented by counsel.  The hearing proceeded in their absence.  All 
28 employees are respondents in this matter (Respondents).1
 
The parties stipulated to the following:  (1) the factual allegations contained in 
 
paragraphs 1 through 6 of the Accusation are true and correct; and (2) the Accusations against 
Respondents, Gabriela Garcia, Rosa Mercado, Monica Quiroz, Flormirella Trujillo, Olivia 
Vinas, and Charlyn Fijan are dismissed.  
 
 
decision on April 14, 2010. 

Testimonial and documentary evidence was received and the matter was submitted for 

 
 

 
 
 

                                                

1 Dulce Alvarado, Anne Anderson, Teri Applebaum, Cynthia Avena, Elsa Avina, 

Christina Ayala, Hanh Bui, Christine Cuellar, Charlyn Fijan, Don Fulton, Gabriela Garcia, 
Monica Goco, Jennifer Gomez, Kelly Kidwell-Collazo, Marion Lam, Julie Little, Rosa 
Mercado, Richard Mireles, Rita Morales, Stacey Moody, Carlee Ann Moyer, Renee Pacheco, 
Monica Quiroz, Steven Risser, Jessica Sullivan, Flormirella Trujillo, Olivia Vinas, and Stacy 
Wolf.  

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Superintendent Vasquez filed the Accusation in his official capacity. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 

On February 24, 2010, the Governing Board of the District (Board) adopted 

Resolution No. 9/09-10 (Resolution) and determined to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
certificated services for the 2010-2011 school year, as follows: 
 

Services 

Certificated Services 

Total Services Reduced 

Full-Time Equivalent Positions 
 
17.0 FTE 
1.0 FTE 
 
1.0 FTE 
 
2.0 FTE 
1.0 FTE 
1.0 FTE 
3.0 FTE 
 
1.0 FTE 
 
27.0 FTE

 
     K-6 Elementary Teaching Services 
     Middle School Self-Contained/History-
Language Arts Teaching Services 
 
     Middle School Self-Contained/Math-
 
Science Teaching Services 
     Elementary P.E. Teaching Services 
     School Nurse Services 
     Middle School Counselor Services 
     Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA) 
 
     Middle School Vice Principal Services 
 
 
 
 
 
necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District by a 
corresponding number of full-time equivalent (FTE) positions prior to the ensuing school 
year.  The Board directed the Superintendent to implement the procedures required for a 
reduction in force. 
 
 
Superintendent Vasquez timely provided written notice to the Board and to 
Respondents of his recommendation to notify Respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year, and stating the reasons therefor.  The notice 
recommending Respondents’ nonreemployment is hereinafter referred to as a “lay-off” 
notice. 
 
 
response to the Accusation. 2
 
                                                

The Board further determined that the reduction of such services made it 

Respondents timely requested a hearing and filed a notice of defense in 

6. 

5. 

4. 

2  Factual Findings 1 through 6 are established by reason of the parties’ stipulation to 

paragraphs 1 through 6 in the Accusation.  

 

 

 

2

9. 

7. 

8. 

10. 

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

Some certificated employees who received notice pursuant to Factual Finding 

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services set forth in Factual 

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue such services was related to the 

 
5 did not request a hearing and waived their right to contest the District’s recommendation 
for their non-reemployment.3  
 
 
 
 
Finding 3 was not arbitrary or capricious and constitutes a proper exercise of the Board’s 
discretion.  The certificated services identified in Factual Finding 3 are “particular kinds of 
services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.4
 
 
needs and welfare of the District and its pupils, including the need of the District to remain 
solvent in view of a budget deficit of $1.6 million.  The reductions set forth in Factual 
Finding 3 are necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by 
the Board.  The proposed teacher lay-offs are expected to result in a cost-savings of 
approximately $1 million to the District.   
 
 
certificated employees by implementing the procedures set forth in sections 44949 and 
44955. 
 
 
considered all assured and/or known attrition, including resignations and retirements. 
 
 
seniority list by determining the first date of paid service of each certificated employee and 
applying “tie-breaking” criteria when necessary. 
 
 
Certificated employees’ “first date of paid service” was based upon information 
obtained from the employees, on file with the county office of education, contained in 
personnel files, and verified with the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. 
 
 
If more than one employee shared a “first date of paid service,” the District applied 
the tie-breaking criteria adopted by the Board.  The tie-breaking criteria were based on the 
needs of the District and its students, and were correctly applied to determine the order of 
lay-off.   
                                                

11.  District personnel complied with the Board’s directive to reduce the number of 

In determining the number of lay-off notices to issue, the District properly 

To determine the order of termination or lay-off, the District properly created a 

12. 

13. 

3 The employees who did not request a hearing and waived their right to contest the 

Accusation are John Bustamante, Christopher Flores, Araceli Flanagan, Laurie Hidy-Watkins 
and George Martinez. 

 
4 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 
 

 

3

14. 

15. 

The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to Respondents to 
 
render a service which Respondents are certificated and competent to render.  In determining 
the order of lay-off, the District permitted senior employees, whose positions are subject to 
lay-off, to “bump” into positions held by junior employees as long as the senior employee is 
certificated and competent to render such service. 
 
 
The parties stipulated to the following amendments to the seniority list:  
Respondent Richard Mireles’ correct “first date of paid service” is September 6, 2006, 
establishing that he has less seniority than Respondent Monica Goco, whose first date of paid 
service is October 24, 2005.  Respondent Renee Pacheco has a Clear Multiple Subject 
credential, plus “supplemental authorization in English and Social Science.”  These 
amendments do not affect the lay-offs of Richard Mireles, Monica Goco and Renee Pacheco.  
Respondents offered no other evidence to challenge the seniority list developed by the 
District. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

 
1. 

2. 

Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 to reduce the number of 

Jurisdiction for this matter was established pursuant to sections 44949 and 

 
44955, by reason of Finding Findings 1 through 8. 
 
 
certificated employees in the District due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular 
kinds of services, by reason of Factual Findings 9 and 10. 
 
 
 

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part: 

3. 

[T]he services of no permanent employee may be terminated… while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained 
to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and 
competent to render. 
 
[¶]…[¶] 
 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 
same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely 
on the basis of needs of the district and the students thereof. 

 

4. 

By reason of Factual Findings 11 through 15, and Legal Conclusions 1 

 
 
through 3, cause exists to terminate the services of 22 Respondents Dulce Alvarado, Anne 
Anderson, Teri Applebaum, Cynthia Avena, Elsa Avina, Christina Ayala, Hanh Bui, 
Christine Cuellar, Don Fulton, Monica Goco, Jennifer Gomez, Kelly Kidwell-Collazo, 
Marion Lam, Julie Little, Richard Mireles, Rita Morales, Stacey Moody, Carlee Ann Moyer, 
Renee Pacheco, Steven Risser, Jessica Sullivan, and Stacy Wolf. 
 

 

4

ORDER 
 

Notice may be given to the 22 Respondents identified in Legal Conclusion 4 that their 

The Accusations against Respondents Gabriela Garcia, Rosa Mercado, Monica Quiroz, 

 
services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Flormirella Trujillo, Olivia Vinas, and Charlyn Fijan are dismissed pursuant to the parties’ 
stipulation.  
 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

__________________________________ 
 
 
 

SOPHIE C. AGOPIAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

April 21, 2010 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

5

