BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE 
DRY CREEK JOINT ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL    
EMPLOYED BY THE DRY CREEK JOINT 
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
 
 
 
                                                            Respondents.

 

 
 

 

OAH No. 2010021036 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Ann Elizabeth Sarli, Administrative Law Judge, 

Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, in Roseville, California, on 
April 28, 2010. 
 

Robert E. Thurbon, Attorney at Law, represented the Dry Creek Joint 

Elementary School District (District). 
 

Michael N. McCallum, Attorney at Law, represented respondents, who are 

listed on Attachment A and incorporated herein by reference. 
 

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted 

for decision on April 28, 2010. 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Mark Geyer is the Superintendent of the Dry Creek High School 

District (District).  His actions, and those of the District’s governing body, the Board 
of Trustees (Board), were taken solely in their official capacities.  
 

2. 

The District currently expects a significant budget shortfall for the 

2010-2011 school year. 
 

 

1

3. 

On February 25, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No.2010-01 

(Resolution), reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of services (PKS), affecting  
36.2 Full Time Equivalent of certificated positions (FTE). 
 

4. 

The Resolution was based on the Superintendent’s February 25, 2010, 

written recommendation that it was necessary to reduce or discontinue particular 
kinds of services no later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

5. 

The Resolution states that it is necessary to reduce the PKS of the 

■ Assistant Principal-Elementary       

■ Administrators-Reduce work year of all positions by three (3) days 

District not later than the beginning of the 2010-2011 school year.  The Resolution 
identified the PKS reduction as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

■   Teacher- Special Education                                  2.0 FTE 
 
■   Teacher- Reading Resource/ 
English Language Learner     

■   School Counselor                                                 2.0 FTE 

■   Assistant Principal-Middle School  

              1.0 FTE 

              1.0 FTE 

    7.0 FTE 

 

 

■   Teacher-4/5 Science                                                 .2 FTE 

■   Teacher- Elementary                                            19.0 FTE 

■   Teacher-Middle School:   

 

 

     4.0 FTE  

Reduce total middle school teaching services due to class size increases by 
reducing the equivalent of four (4) full-time employees in middle school 
service areas including but not limited to one or more of the following 
services: Language Arts, Social Sciences, Math, Science, Exploratory and 
Physical Education 

6. 

As a result of the above PKS reductions and discontinuances, the Board 

 
 
determined that it was necessary to decrease a corresponding number of certificated 
positions, 36.2 FTE, in the District at the close of the 2009-2010 school year, in 
accordance with Education Code section 44955.1   

                                                 

 

1 

All statutory references are to the California Code of Education unless otherwise stated. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2

7. 

The Resolution further stated that: 

It may also be necessary to retain certificated employees who possess special 
certifications, service credentials, training or experience, which other 
certificated employees with more seniority do not possess to teach a specific 
course or course of study, or provide services authorized by the special 
credential and these needs may include but are not limited to 

1. 
Special Education: special day class teachers, 
resource specialists, speech therapists, psychologists, 
adaptive P.E. teachers; 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

Speech and language pathologists;  
Health Educators (Nurses); 
Physical education and music teachers; 
Counselors. 

8. 

On March 2, 2010, the Superintendent timely served a letter 
(Preliminary Notice) on at least 59 certificated employees, including the 37 
respondents.  The Preliminary Notice advised that the Superintendent had 
recommended to the Board that the recipient be given preliminary written notice that 
his/her services would not be required for the 2010-2011 school year, due to 
reductions in PKS.  The Preliminary Notice identified the PKS to be reduced and 
notified the recipient that “… the District intends to retain, regardless of seniority (i.e. 
“skip” in the layoff process) certificated employees who possess credentials and 
qualifications needed for Special Education, Special Day Class Teachers, Resource 
Specialists, Speech Therapists, Psychologist, Adaptive P.E.  Teachers, Speech and 
Language Pathologists, Health Educators (Nurse), Physical Education, Music 
Teacher, Counselors, and Cross-Cultural Language and Academic Development 
(CLAD) or equivalent, to meet the needs of its diverse and scattered student 
population.” 
 

9. 

Respondents timely filed a Request for Hearing to determine whether 

there was cause for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

10.  On April 6, 2010, the Deputy Superintendent executed an Accusation, 

and caused it to be served on respondents.  Respondents timely filed Notices of 
Defense. 2
 
 
 
 

                                                 

2  

The parties entered into a written stipulation (Exhibit 1) that layoff notices were timely 
served on respondents, requests for hearing were timely served on the District, accusations and notices of 
hearing were timely served on respondents and notices of defense were timely served on the District. 

3

 

 

 

 

Implementation of Lay-Off Process 
 

11. 

The Board adopted a seniority list on February 25, 2010.  The seniority 

list contains the following information: name of the employee; school and position 
assignment for the 2009-2010 school year; seniority date and credentials.  Prior to the 
Board’s adoption of the seniority list, the list was circulated among all worksites and 
employees were given an opportunity to request changes.  The list was updated and 
corrected where appropriate. 
 

12.  District employees used the seniority list to identify the least senior 
certificated employees occupying the positions affected by the PKS reduction.  In 
respect to the 4.0 FTE middle school reduction, District employees selected the four 
least senior employees teaching at middle schools.  They are Linda Smith, Nicole 
Brackett, Kristie Edmondson and Kara Cunningham.  There were no certificated 
employees teaching in the middle schools, junior to these four, who were skipped, 
except Heather McMurray, who is discussed in Finding 27.   
 

13.  District employees then turned to the seniority list to identify the 

certificated employees who were teaching in the elementary schools.  They applied 
the Board’s “skipping criteria” by skipping any employee teaching special education, 
speech pathology and physical education.  They also skipped for “science” Mark 
Brown (seniority date July 26, 2006) and Natalie Paiva (seniority date August 5, 
2005).  They skipped Joshua OGeen for reasons that are unclear; he is a teacher in 
middle school and has a multiple subject with CLAD.    
 

14.  District employees then identified the least senior teacher teaching 4/5 
FTE in science.  The teacher was issued a Preliminary Notice, which was ultimately 
rescinded. 
 

15.  District employees then identified certificated employees occupying the 
7.0 FTE Teacher- Reading Resource/English Language Learner PKS.  These affected 
employees were able to bump junior classroom teachers.  At hearing, the District 
Director of Personnel Services, Colleen Slattery, acknowledged that there are two 
junior reading resource teachers being retained to teach reading resources, Kelly Hall 
(seniority date July 25, 2002) and Kellie Welty (seniority date July 10, 2000), while 
more senior reading resource teachers were bumping into classroom positions.  Ms. 
Slattery acknowledged that she did not know why senior resource teachers did not 
bump into these junior reading resource positions rather than into classroom positions.  
 
 
16.  District employees identified the persons occupying the 2.0 FTE 
special education positions eliminated in the Resolution, who received notice as well 
as one school counselor and a counselor on a temporary contract. 
 
 
 

 

4

17. 

In respect to the 1.0 FTE reduction in middle school principal and the 

 
1.0 FTE reduction in elementary school principal, District employees determined that 
there was a vacancy in an elementary school principal position, which eliminated 1.0 
FTE elementary principal services.  But to satisfy the 1.0 FTE reduction in middle 
school principals, two assistant middle school principals each bumped .5 FTE into an 
elementary principal position, held by interim assistant elementary school principal 
Julie Hermann.  Ms. Hermann holds a multiple subject credential and was able to  
bump junior respondent Nicole Bussell from classroom teaching. 
 
Respondents’ Challenges to Layoff Proceeding 
 
 
 

Over-Noticing 

18. 

The District acknowledges that it served a Preliminary Notice on 25 

elementary teachers, six more than the PKS authorization for a 19.0 FTE reduction in 
elementary teachers.  The District over-noticed out of legitimate concerns that middle 
school teachers and administrators subject to lay off may be able to bump into the 
elementary positions.  The District stipulates that six of these notices will be 
rescinded, but has not yet identified the affected teachers, because it needs additional 
time to make that determination.  The District wants an opportunity to look at next 
year’s schedule and determine which respondents should be retained to teach courses 
offered in 2010-2011, and wants time to perhaps apply skipping and bumping criteria 
to the respondents.  Respondents maintain that the six preliminary notice rescissions 
should be of the most senior respondents who are multiple subject holders teaching 
middle and elementary school: Roberta Blynn; Brandi Payne; Karen Long; Melanie 
Maclean; Francisca Diaz and Karmjeet Fishburn. 
 

19. 

Sections 44949 and 44955 provide procedural due process protections 
for certificated employees who have received a Preliminary Notice of termination of 
services.  One of these protections is the right to a full evidentiary hearing in which 
the employee may challenge the District’s decision to terminate his or her services, 
and the procedures the District employed in selecting the employee for termination.  
Here, the respondents identified in Finding 18 are the six most senior respondents 
who hold multiple subject credentials and, if their services are to be terminated, they 
are entitled to present evidence challenging their terminations.  They are effectively 
prevented from challenging their terminations at this hearing, because, even at the 
conclusion of the hearing, they do not know whether they are targeted for layoff and 
what defenses they may have.  It would be a clear violation of these respondents’ due 
process rights to require them to wait for an indeterminate amount of time, until May 
15 at the latest, to learn if they will be terminated.  At that time, they would have no 
avenue in which to challenge termination.  Accordingly, the Preliminary Notices 
issued to respondents Roberta Blynn, Brandi Payne, Karen Long, Melanie Maclean, 
Francisca Diaz and Karmjeet Fishburn must be rescinded.   
 
 

 

5

Application of “Skipping” 

20. 

 
 
There was no Board authorization to skip from layoff persons with 
science or math credentials or persons teaching science or math.  Yet certificated 
employees holding science credentials were skipped and math credentials were 
considered in the layoff process, although it is unclear from the evidence what 
significance was ascribed to the math credential.  The Education Code does not  
require a governing body to adopt a resolution identifying services it intends to skip in 
the layoff process.  However, here, the Board did adopt “skipping criteria,” but the 
skipping criteria were so broad that the District personnel implementing the criteria 
clearly felt confident designating various subjects and various credentials to be 
exempt from lay off.  Hence the paradox: The Board resolved to reduce certain PKS 
(school counselors, special education teachers, science teachers, reading resource 
teachers and physical education teachers under the (4.0 FTE Middle School PKS) ), 
which District personnel believed they were authorized to skip from lay off (special 
education, counseling, middle school teaching in math and science, resource teachers 
and counselors and science and physical education.)   
 

21. 

Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), places the burden upon the District 

to demonstrate a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of 
study and to demonstrate that the certificated employee skipped has special training 
and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study, which others with 
more seniority do not possess.  A blanket resolution authorizing the Board, or its 
designee, to skip unlimited and broad categories of employees cannot substitute for 
the District’s affirmative obligation to demonstrate the factors set out in section 
44955, subdivision (d)(1).  There was no evidence produced at hearing to support 
either that there was a specific need for specific personnel to teach a specific course 
or course of study, or that an inquiry was made as to whether senior persons possess 
the same skills as the skipped junior person.3  Instead, all “skipping criteria” 
employed was done for the purpose of retaining teachers who held certain credentials, 
so that they would be available to teach unspecified classes in the future.  Thus, the 
District’s application of skipping criteria was invalid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

3  

Moreover, the Board Resolution did not specifically find that it was necessary to skip 
junior persons in this proceeding.  The Resolution  merely stated that “It may also be necessary to retain 
certificated employees who possess special certifications, service credentials, training or experience, which 
other certificated employees with more seniority do not possess to teach a specific course or course of 
study, or provide services authorized by the special credential and these needs may include but are not 
limited to…” (italics added)  

 

6

22.  Accordingly, the District may not use its skipping criteria to retain a 

 
junior employee.  However, the District also used the term “skip” to pass over junior 
employees who were teaching outside of the areas affected by the PKS reductions.4  
For instance, in respect to the layoff of 4.0 FTE middle school teachers, District 
personnel mistakenly considered it a “skip” when they identified teachers who were 
teaching outside of the middle school PKS reductions.  And, District employees 
considered speech therapy teachers and special education teachers a “skip” as well as 
psychologists and pre K-instructions.   The PKS reduction of 4.0 FTE Teacher-
Middle School plainly is intended to apply to middle school teaching services, not 
these specialized services.5   
 

23.  Although section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), and its authorization for 

skipping appears to have been misunderstood, the certificated employees affected by 
the 4.0 FTE middle school teaching reduction were adversely affected by only one 
instance of “skipping.”  District employees “skipped” Valerie Verboncouer Green 
(seniority date 8/8/08), a middle school music teacher, when making the decision 
which middle school teachers were subject to lay off.  As the Board’s skipping 
criteria are invalid and there was no evidence that this skip met the requirements 
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), this was an improper skip.  Valerie Verboncouer 
Green is junior to Linda Smith, Nicole Brackett, Kristie Edmondson and Kara 
Cunningham.  Accordingly, the employee with the highest seniority, Kristie 
Edmondson (7/26/06), would have been retained had Valerie Verboncouer Green not 
been improperly skipped.  Ms. Edmondson’s Preliminary Notice must be rescinded. 
 

24. 

Linda Smith, Nicole Brackett and Kara Cunningham are the most 

junior middle school teachers and are subject to layoff. 
 

25. 

The District’s erroneous concept of “skipping” was also applied to 
determine who was affected by the elimination of 19.0 FTE elementary teaching 
positions.  Teachers teaching in special education were erroneously “skipped” 
according to “skipping criteria.”  However, as noted above, these special-education 
positions were not subject to layoff.  (The Resolution identified only two special-
education positions for layoff.)  The elementary reductions clearly pertain to regular 
elementary school positions.  Thus this erroneous “skipping” of the special education 
teachers did not adversely affect the seniority of the elementary school teachers. 

 

4  

 
5  

                                                 

Board adopted skipping criteria and the skipping information included in the Preliminary Notice.  

These errors are understandable given the confusion generated by the Resolution, the 

The Resolution states as an explanation for its 4.0 FTE Teacher-Middle School  reduction  

that its purpose is to “reduce total middle school teaching services due to class size increases by reducing 
the equivalent of four (4) full-time employees in middle school service areas including but not limited to 
one or more of the following services: Language Arts, Social Sciences, Math, Science, Exploratory and 
Physical Education.”   

 

7

26. 

There were multiple elementary school teachers who were served with 

a Preliminary Notice of layoff while junior elementary school teachers subject to 
layoff were improperly skipped.  Laura Benjamin was skipped because she had a P.E 
credential, but then was bumped by a senior teacher.  Mark Brown was skipped due to 
his science credentials.  Joshua OGeen was skipped for an unknown reason.  As the 
Board’s skipping criteria are invalid and there was no evidence that these skips met 
the requirements section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), these were improper skips.  The 
appropriate remedy is to rescinded the Preliminary Notices of the three most senior of 
respondent multiple subject holders serving in middle or elementary positions after 
rescission of notices to Kristie Edmondson, Roberta Blynn, Brandi Payne, Karen 
Long, Melanie Maclean, Francisca Diaz and Karmjeet Fishburn, pursuant to Findings 
18, 19 and 23.  The Administrative Law Judge is not in a position to make the 
determination which three respondents are the most senior and the District must do so 
without application of “skipping criteria.”  
 

Release of Temporaries and Categoricals 

27.  Ms. Slatterly testified that in preparation for the layoffs, several 

teachers were non- reelected or placed back on a rehire list.  Heather McMurray, 
Colleen Sullivan and Kelli Wilner are temporary teachers who are replacing teachers 
on leave in the 2009-2010 school year.  It appears that rather than considering these 
temporary positions as within the pool of elementary and middle school positions 
subject to layoff, District employees looked at the seniority date of the teachers the 
temporaries were replacing and determined that the teachers on leave were senior to 
any of the affected employees.  Accordingly, the three temporary positions were not 
eliminated as part of a PKS reduction.  For example, the eighth grade position taught 
by Heather McMurray, a temporary teacher, was not eliminated as part of the 4.0 FTE 
reduction of middle school teaching.  Ms. Slatterly also acknowledged that the 
position occupied by Janell Campbell (seniority date July 6, 1999), a reading resource 
teacher on a leave of absence, was not considered a vacant PKS position subject to 
layoff. 
 

28. 

Respondents argue these temporary positions should have been 

eliminated, and the District responds that the positions are retained for employees 
with seniority to those subject to lay off, and that the employees on leave are either 
compelled to return next year or have the opportunity to convert to part-time work.  
Respondents did not support their argument with authority and accordingly this 
argument was rejected. 
 

29. 

Respondents argue that there are 3.32 FTE in categorical positions that 

are occupied by temporary personnel and that these should be eliminated as part of 
the PKS reduction.  Respondent argues that the Bakersfield opinion mandates that  
categorical and temporary employees be classified as probationary employees, and 
urges that these employees be designated as probationary employees with seniority 

 

 

8

junior to respondents, and then terminated as junior employees.  This argument is not 
persuasive. 
 
 
 

Principal Vacancy Should Count Toward Teaching FTE Reductions 

30.  As set forth in Finding 17, the District eliminated a vacant 1.0 FTE 

elementary school principal position, satisfying the 1.0 FTE reduction in elementary 
school principals.  Two assistant middle school principals bumped .5 FTE into an 
elementary principal position, which in turn bumped interim assistant elementary 
school principal Julie Hermann into the classroom.  She bumped respondent Nicole 
Bussell.  Respondents argue that the Hermann bump into the classroom should not 
have occurred.  It is unclear why Respondents maintain this position.  But it appears 
there might have been some confusion about whether the 1.0 FTE principal vacancy 
was in the elementary or middle school principal ranks.  If it was in the middle school 
ranks, then no middle school principal would have to vacate a position and bump into 
the elementary school principal slot held by Hermann, thereby causing Hermann to 
bump Bussell.  However, even if the vacancy was in the middle school ranks, the 
elementary principal ranks would still be reduced 1 FTE pursuant to the Resolution, 
and the evidence was that Hermann was least senior in these ranks and would be 
entitled to bump into the classroom position held by Bussell. 
 

Tuesday Mahlberg 

31. 

Tuesday Mahlberg has a seniority date of July 1, 2006.  She is a 
seventh grade teacher and was bumped out of her position by a senior reading 
resource teacher.  She maintains that senior resource teachers were improperly 
selected for layoff, rather than junior ones.  She contends that the  senior resource 
teachers have the seniority to bump junior classroom teachers, while the junior 
resource teachers do not have the seniority to bump many classroom teachers. 
 

32.  As set forth in Finding 15, Ms. Slattery acknowledged that there are 

two junior reading resource teachers being retained to teach reading resources, Kelly 
Hall (seniority date July 25, 2002) and Kellie Welty (seniority date July 10, 2000), 
while more senior reading resource teachers were bumping into classroom positions.  
However, Ms. Mahlberg is junior to these junior resource teachers and would have 
been bumped by them, rather than the senior resource teachers, had the lay off been 
implemented as she contends.  
 

Other Defenses 

33.  Any other assertions raised by respondents at hearing which are not 

addressed above are found to be without merit. 
 
 
 

9

 

 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

As set forth the Findings, all notice and jurisdictional requirements set 

forth in sections 44944 and 44945 were met. The notices sent to respondents indicated 
the statutory basis for the reduction of services and, therefore, were sufficiently 
detailed to provide them due process.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 
144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 
116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  The description of services to be reduced, both in the Board 
Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe particular kinds of services. (Zalac 
v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.  See, also, Degener v. Governing Board 
(1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 

2. 

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular 

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another 
manner. (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California 
Teachers Association v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 
Cal.App.3d 32.)  A school board may reduce services within the meaning of the 
statute either by determining that a certain type of service shall not be performed at all 
or by reducing the number of district employees who perform such services.  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 
Cal.App.3d 167.) 
 

3. 

The services identified in PKS Resolution No. 2010-01 are particular 

kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under sections 44949 and 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for 
the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949. 
 

4. 

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides that the services of no 

permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any 
probationary employee or any other employee with less seniority is retained to render 
a service which any permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.  As 
set forth in Findings 18 through 26, employees with less seniority than ten 
respondents are being retained to render services which these respondents are 
certificated and competent to render.  The senior employees are: Kristie Edmondson; 
Roberta Blynn; Brandi Payne; Karen Long; Melanie Maclean; Francisca Diaz; 
Karmjeet Fishburn and the three next most senior of respondent multiple subject 
holders serving in middle or elementary positions. 
 

5.  With the exception of the matters set forth in Legal Conclusion 4, and 

Findings 18 through 26, the District has established that no employees junior to 
respondents are being retained to perform the services which respondents are 
competent and certificated to render. 
 

 

 

10

RECOMMENDATIONS 

1. 

The District shall rescind the Preliminary Notices issued to Kristie 

Edmondson; Roberta Blynn; Brandi Payne; Karen Long; Melanie Maclean; Francisca 
Diaz; Karmjeet Fishburn and the three next most senior of respondent multiple 
subject holders serving in middle or elementary school positions. 
 

2. 

The District may give notice to the remaining respondents in the 

inverse order of seniority that it will not require their services for the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 
 
 
DATED:  May 7, 2010 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
  ANN ELIZABETH SARLI 

 

 
   
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

          Administrative Law Judge 
          Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

11

