BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE 
HESPERIA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Involving 113 Certificated Employees of the 
Hesperia Unified School District, 
 
 
 
 
 

          Respondents. 

 

 

OAH No. 2010030961 
 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Dennis E. Wagner and Tiffany S. Woods, Attorney at Laws, represented the Hesperia 

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 

 
 
California, heard this matter in Hesperia, California, on April 27, 2009. 
 
 
Unified School District. 
 
Carlos Perez, Attorney at Law, represented most of the respondents appearing at the 
 
reduction in force hearing, each of whom was identified in the list of individuals represented 
by Carlos Perez (Exhibit A). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Yadira Moreno and Lori Esparza represented themselves. 

The matter was submitted on April 27, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

The Hesperia Unified School District (HUSD or the district) is located in the 

 
The Hesperia Unified School District 
 
 
community of Hesperia, located in the High Desert area of San Bernardino County.  The 
district encompasses about 240 square miles and serves approximately 22,000 Kindergarten 
through 12th grade students residing within the City of Hesperia, portions of the City of 
Victorville, and unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County.  The district has 15 
elementary schools, three middle schools, three comprehensive high schools, two alternative 
high schools and operates an adult education program.  The district employees about 2,000 
persons, approximately 850 of whom provide certificated services.  The district’s projected 
 1

3. 

2. 

Proposition 13, a constitutional amendment enacted in 1978, limited the 

The district is governed by an elected five member Board of Education (the 

A school district cannot determine the level of state funding it will receive until the 

A school board’s obligation to balance its budget often requires that some teachers, 

budget for the 2010-2011 school year is $145 million, far less than anticipated.  Nearly 90 
percent of the annual budget pays for the salaries and benefits of HUSD employees. 
 
 
governing board).  Mark A. McKinney is HUSD’s Superintendent of Schools and Chief 
Executive Officer.  He is assisted by an administrative staff that includes David McLoughlin, 
Assistant Superintendent of Business Services, and Alan Giles, Director of Personnel.  
 
The Fiscal Crisis – Economic Layoffs 
 
 
imposition of local property taxes and reduced a major source of assured revenue for public 
education.  After Proposition 13 was implemented, public schools have looked primarily to 
the State of California and to other governmental entities for funding.  
 
 
state budget is chaptered, an event occurring each year in late June but sometimes taking 
place much later.  Before then, a school district’s governing board must take steps to make 
certain that ends meet if the worst-case financial scenario develops.  
 
 
administrators and other certificated employees be given preliminary layoff notices, warning 
them that their services will not be required for the next school year.  Under Education Code 
section 44949, these preliminary layoff notices must be given no later than March 15. 
 
Over the past three years, HUSD’s administration (as well as the administrators of 
 
most other school districts) became aware of California’s continuing budget deficit and its 
likely crippling impact on the district in the next school year.  Declining student enrollment 
was not a factor.  As a result of the crisis, the district projected the need to trim its budget by 
more than $12 million for the 2010-11 school year.  The district was required to look into 
ways to balance its budget, including the elimination or reduction of various educational 
programs and downsizing its staff. 
 
 
retention of senior employees over more junior employees, and the retention of permanent 
employees over probationary employees and others with less seniority.  A public school 
district may deviate from the general rule requiring termination in reverse order of seniority 
only if it can demonstrate that identifiable junior employees possess specific credentials, 
special training, experience or unique qualifications necessary to teach a course of study 
which more senior employees do not possess so long as the junior employees will be 
assigned to provide services requiring such special education, training or experience. 
 
The District’s Response 
 
 
district’s budget.  According to Superintendent McLoughlin, the budget crisis for the 2010-
 2

The economic layoff statutes found in the Education Code generally require the 

Assistant Superintendent McLoughlin is responsible for analyzing the 

4. 

6. 

5. 

The services identified in the governing board’s resolutions to reduce or 

2011 exceeded projections.  Without making further reductions, he projected a $12 million 
deficit for the 2010-2011 school year.  He met with Superintendent McKinney and others to 
discuss HUSD’s fiscal situation.  It was concluded that a reduction in force was required. 
 
By memos dated January 25, 2010, Superintendent McKinney recommended that the 
 
board approve a resolution setting forth tie-breaking criteria related to a workplace reduction, 
that it approve a resolution reducing or eliminating 94 full time equivalent (FTE) positions 
related to the provision of particular kinds of services, and that it approve another resolution 
eliminating two FTE counseling positions and reducing 100 FTE administrative positions.   
 
 
Following meetings on February 8 and 9, 2010, the governing board adopted 
Resolution No. 2009/10-24 [establishing tie-breaking criteria for employees with the same 
date of seniority], which is attached hereto as Exhibit A and is incorporated herein by 
reference.  Following another meeting on March 8, 2020, the governing board adopted 
Resolution No. 2009-10-23 [reducing 94 FTEs provided by teachers] and Resolution No. 
2009/10-25 [reducing administrative services and eliminating two counseling positions], 
attached hereto as exhibits B and C, respectively, and incorporated herein by this reference.  
 
The Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
discontinue particular kinds of services were the kinds of educational services that properly 
could be reduced or discontinued.  The reduction or discontinuation of those services was not 
arbitrary or capricious and constituted a matter within the proper exercise of the governing 
board’s discretion.  No particular kinds of services were proposed to be lowered to levels less 
than those levels mandated by state or federal law.  
 
The Seniority List 
 
 
updated as new certificated employees are hired and as other employees resign or retire.  The 
seniority list is a spreadsheet arranged from the most senior employee to the most recently 
hired employee.  The spreadsheet contains each employee’s name, site where that employee 
provides services, the employee’s date of hire, the employee’s seniority date (which is the 
employee’s first day of paid service in a probationary capacity), the employee’s status 
(permanent, probationary second year, probationary first year), current assignment, list of 
credentials, and English Language authorization (e.g., BCLAD, CLAD) if any.   
 
 
required, HUSD circulated a preliminary seniority list to all employees with the request that 
each employee review the seniority list and verify or update his or her seniority information.  
If an employee did not return the list with corrections, administrative staff concluded that the 
information that had been provided was correct.  Administrative staff continued to accept 
new credentials and continued to update the seniority list through March 15, 2010, the date 
that preliminary layoff notices had to be served.  If an employee submitted evidence of new 

In November 2009, when it became apparent that a reduction in force might be 

HUSD maintains a seniority list, a constantly evolving document that is 

8. 

7. 

 3

9. 

Using the updated seniority spreadsheets, Director Giles’ staff began the 

credentials after that date or other information, the new information was noted but it did not 
impact the issuance of the preliminary layoff notices.  
 
 
The district’s use of a March 15 cutoff date was not arbitrary, and the use of that date 
was reasonable because the district was required by the Education Code to serve preliminary 
layoff notices by that date.   
 
A few employees were not aware of the need to advise the administrative staffs about 
 
concerns that they had about their seniority date or credential.  Jason Kleber testified that he 
was unaware that his failure to promptly respond to the administrative staff’s letter 
requesting verification of his status might result in his inability to establish a different 
seniority date.  However, it was not established that Kleber or any other employee suffered 
any actual prejudice as a result of any misunderstanding regarding the need to promptly 
advise administrative staff of such concerns and to provide new information. 
 
The Issuance of Layoff Notices 
 
 
painstaking process of identifying those certificated employees who should receive 
preliminary layoff notices as a result of the board’s resolutions and those who should not.  
Whenever an employee was tentatively slated to receive a preliminary layoff notice as a 
result of the governing board’s resolution, that employee’s seniority and credentials were 
carefully examined to determine if that employee was eligible to “bump” into a position that 
was held by a more junior employee.  
 
For those employees who first provided service on the same day, Director Giles’ staff 
 
applied the governing board’s tie-breaking resolution.  The criteria set forth in that resolution 
were reasonable, and the application of the tie-breaking criteria was in the best interest of the 
district and the students.  
 
 
all known positively assured attrition to determine the number of layoff notices that should 
be served.  More layoff notices were served than full time equivalents were proposed to be 
reduced to protect against the possibility of error and because many employees had the same 
seniority date.  The extent to which more notices were served than number of positions were 
ultimately reduced and eliminated was not outrageous and it did not result in any prejudice.  
 
 
individuals whose employment was impacted by the governing board’s resolutions.  The 
district timely served upon each of those employees a written notice advising that the 
superintendent had recommended that their services would not be required for the upcoming 
school year.  The formal notice and accompanying documents set forth the reasons for the 
recommendation.  The permanent and probationary employees served with the preliminary 
notice were advised of the right to a hearing, and each of them was instructed that the failure 
to submit a written request for a hearing by March 31, 2010, would constitute a waiver of the 
right to a hearing.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.  

Taking into account all known positive attrition, the district identified those 

Before issuing preliminary layoff notices, the district’s administrative staff considered 

10. 

 4

All parties to this reduction in force proceeding stipulated that all prehearing 

The recommendation that respondents be terminated from employment was not 

12.  Assistant Superintendent McLoughlin established that HUSD’s proposed 

113 certificated employees were served with the preliminary layoff notices.  81 of 

 
 
related to their fitness or abilities as teachers.  
 
 
these employees requested a hearing.   
 
 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
The Administrative Hearing 
 
 
11.  On April 27, 2010, the record in the layoff proceeding was opened.  
Jurisdictional documents were introduced and an opening statement was presented on the 
district’s behalf.  Opening statements were not provided on behalf of any respondent and 
were waived.  Sworn testimony was taken, documentary evidence was received, several 
stipulations were reached, closing argument was given, the record was closed, and the matter 
was submitted. 
 
The Reduction in Force Proceeding 
 
 
reduction in force was the result of a budgetary crisis and was initiated in good faith.  
Director Giles established that HUSD complied with all jurisdictional requirements under the 
Education Code and the Government Code in bringing the reduction in force proceeding, and 
that the reduction in force proceeding was in the best interest of the district and the students 
thereof.  Director Giles and Michele Rush, an experienced credential analyst, established that 
HUSD used seniority and competence (as defined by the board’s resolution and as used in 
the Education Code) as the basis for “bumping” employees to retain the services of the most 
senior, appropriately credentialed employee.  Rush established that in every in which an 
employee was identified to receive a layoff notice as a result of the reduction or elimination 
of the particular kind of service that employee was providing, the seniority list was carefully 
reviewed to determine that the employee was capable of assuming a position being held by a 
more junior employee.  The board’s tie-breaking criteria were applied to determine seniority 
between employees providing the same kinds of services who were hired on the same day, 
and the application of the criteria was in the best interest of the district and its students.  
 
 
In preparing for the reduction in force proceeding, the district withdrew the 
preliminary layoff notices served upon employees Beril Artan, Stefanie McKean, Timothy 
McKean, Jeremy Sauer, and Paul Mog, as well as the dismissal of the accusations filed 
against those individuals.  As to each employee other than Mog, the district’s withdrawal and 
dismissal was based upon the retirement of more senior employees whose positions these 
employees were entitled to fill as a result of their seniority and credentials.  As to Mog, the 
district discovered that it made an error in calculating his seniority date and that with the new 
seniority date, Mog should not have been served with a preliminary layoff notice.  
 

13. 

 5

There was no objection to moving Van Hulzen from the precautionary list to the 

There was no objection to the withdrawal of these preliminary layoff notices and the 

14.  As a result of the district’s proper withdrawal of the preliminary layoff notice 

 
dismissal of the accusations against these employees. 
 
 
served and the dismissal of the accusation served on Mog as a result of its mistake, the 
district moved employee Darin Van Hulzen from the precautionary layoff list to the 
preliminary layoff list on April 1, 2010.  Van Hulzen and other employees were placed on 
the precautionary layoff list for just this reason – to accommodate for the possibility of error.  
Since all jurisdictional requirements were met to include Van Hulzen in this proceeding, 
including his right to a hearing, moving Van Hulzen from the precautionary list to the 
preliminary layoff list is appropriate and lawful.   
 
 
preliminary layoff list. 
 
 
15.  On April 2, 2010, Jeremy Sauer was advised that the district was reinstating 
the accusation that had been filed against him.  Director Giles’ letter advising Sauer of the 
reinstatement advised that due to an oversight in his office, it was determined that there was 
a teacher with more seniority who held a dual credential and was able to teach music.  
Director Giles provided Sauer with request for hearing and notice of defense forms, and 
advised that the district would accept these forms if they were turned in by April 9, 2010. 
 
 
There was no objection to the reinstatement of the accusation that had been filed 
against Sauer, and it was not established that Sauer suffered any legal prejudice as a result of 
the reinstatement.   
 
 
personnel services (PPS) credential.  Yadira Moreno and Lori Esparza, each of whom 
provided services at Cedar Middle School, are the most junior counselors.  Moreno has a 
seniority date of July 1, 2007, and Esparza has a seniority date of May 21, 2007. 
 
 
particular kind of service.  In accordance with that resolution, Moreno and Esparza were 
served with preliminary layoff notices.   
 
 
and have a salary schedule that is different that the teachers’ salary schedule.  Esparza 
established that she and Moreno have served in counseling positions longer than some others 
who served last year as school counselors under the PPS credential.  Esparza believed she 
and Moore should be skipped over persons who did not have as much counseling experience.  
Esparza also testified that the retention of middle school counselors was vital to the district’s 
educational mission and that her services and Moreno’s services should be retained. 
 
 
was a particular kind of service, that counselors were treated in this reduction in force 
proceeding in the same fashion as teachers, that employee seniority dates were based upon an 
 6

Director Giles and Cindy Fortin, Director Giles’ assistant, established that counseling 

Esparza established that counselors are not members of the local teachers association 

Resolution No. 2009/10-25 eliminated two counselor FTEs.  “Counseling” is a 

The district currently employs 25 counselors, each of whom must hold a pupil 

16. 

18. 

The term “skipping” involves a school district’s effort to retain the services of 

17.  After preliminary layoff notices were served, the board offered retirement 

employee’s first date of paid service in a probationary capacity with the district, and that 
senior employees with a PPS credential were entitled to bump and/or retain counseling 
positions within the district even though their service as a counselor might be less than the 
service of others. 
 
 
The service of the preliminary layoff notices on Moreno and Esparza was appropriate 
and lawful.  Moreno and Esparza do not have the right to assert “skipping” rights and they do 
not, by reason of their seniority and credentials, have sufficient bumping rights to displace 
any junior employee.  
 
 
incentives to senior employees.  The district believes that approximately two dozen senior 
employees will take advantage of the retirement program that has been offered, but the board 
must approve the retirement of these employees before their retirement becomes effective.  If 
and when the board does so, the positions vacated by the retirees will be considered by the 
district in rescinding final layoff notices, and the vacant positions will be filled on the basis 
of seniority and competency. 
 
Skipping 
 
 
a junior employee to teach a specific course or course of study when that junior employee 
has special qualifications, training and/or experience required to teach that course or course 
of study that more senior employees do not possess.   
 
 
School P.E.” teachers and 3 FTEs for “High School P.E.” teachers.   
 
The district sought to skip Jeremy Topete, currently serving as the varsity football 
 
coach at Hesperia High School, who has a seniority date of August 6, 2008.  Topete holds 
second year probationary/intern status with a short-term staff permit (STSP) authorization in 
a single subject (Physical Education).  The STSP authorization is the lowest credential a 
district employee can hold, and it signifies that the individual who holds the credential is not 
enrolled in a credential program and either needs exam or perquisite coursework to obtain 
Internship eligibility. 
   
 
served with preliminary or precautionary layoff notices (Bethany Trojanowski, a physical 
education teacher with more seniority than Topete, successfully bumped another teacher and 
was retained; the layoff notice filed against Mog was withdrawn when it was determined that 
Mog’s seniority date was incorrect).  Seven of the nine physical education teachers initially 
served with layoff notices were permanent employees. 
 
 
Varsity football is not a “course” or a “course of study.”  Academic credit is not given 
to students who participate in varsity football.  A varsity football coach need not be a HUSD 
certificated employee, although that is customary and preferable.  It is also preferable that a 
 7

Resolution No. 2009/10-23 proposed to reduce or discontinue 2 FTE for “Middle 

Nine physical education teachers with more seniority than Topete were initially 

Director Giles testified that the district skipped Topete over more senior employees 

The district established that Topete had special qualifications, training and experience 

high school’s varsity football coach be employed on the campus where he provides services 
as the varsity football coach for a variety of reasons.  
 
 
because Topete was recruited to be the head varsity football coach at Hesperia High School.  
He testified that the revenue generated by the football program helped fund all other athletic 
programs at Hesperia High School, and that the varsity football program needed to be 
protected.  Jeff Hallett, the Vice Principal at Hesperia High School, testified that he is in 
charge of the athletic programs at Hesperia High, and that there was a need to retain Topete 
as the varsity football coach.  Hallett established that Topete had more than five years of 
successful coaching experience at Chaffey Junior College and at Hesperia High School 
before he was skipped, that Topete was an extraordinary coach who obtained scholarships for 
student athletes at NAIA and Division II schools, and that no one else was qualified to hold 
the position.  In addition to being the head football coach, Topete teaches two classes of 
football training, essentially weight lifting classes that are open to all students at Hesperia 
High for which credit is given.  Other physical education instructors are qualified to teach 
this football training course.  Robert Schnebeck, the Principal of Hesperia High School, 
testified that the school’s athletic budget is, in large measure, dependent upon the success of 
the varsity football team and that Topete is the individual most qualified to hold that position.  
According to Principal Schnebeck, “He’s the guy.”  
 
 
which others with more seniority did not possess, and was the most qualified employee to 
serve as varsity football coach, but the district did not establish that “varsity football” or 
“football training” was a legitimate “course” or “course of study” within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d).  Accordingly, the preliminary layoff notice 
served on Topete is affirmed and district’s attempt to skip Topete must be rejected.   
 
Substitute and Temporary Service 
 
 
asserted that his seniority date should be August 30, 2006, as a result of his providing long-
term substitute services in four different classrooms that lasted 75 percent of the 2006-2007 
school year.  The district asserted that one of the substitute assignments was not long term in 
nature in that it did not last for 21 days or more and that Kleber was paid at a reduced (day-
to-day) rate and was not paid the higher long-term substitute rate for services.  In addition, 
the district observed that in order for temporary or substitute service to be tacked on for 
seniority purposes, it is required that the service be in one classroom. 
 
 
Valley Union High Sch. Dist. (1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 35, 44, it is concluded that the district 
correctly assigned the August 8, 2007, seniority date to Kleber. 
 
 

Based on the decision in Centinela Valley Secondary Teachers Assn. v. Centinela 

Jason Kleber’s seniority date with the district is August 8, 2007.  Kleber 

19. 

 8

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing 
board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year . . . the 
governing board and the employee shall be given written notice by the superintendent 
of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been recommended that the notice 
be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor . . . 

Education Code section 44944 provides in part: 

1. 

 
Statutory Authority for Reduction in Force Proceedings  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

. . . 

(b) 
The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying him or her for the ensuing year . . . If an employee fails to request a 
hearing on or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his 
or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . . 

In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the proceeding shall be 

(c) 
conducted and a decision made in accordance with . . . the Government Code and the 
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency therein, except that all 
of the following shall apply: 

The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any, within five 

(1) 
days after service upon him or her of the accusation and he or she shall be  
notified of this five-day period for filing in the accusation. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge who  

(3) 
shall prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a  
determination as to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related  
to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  The proposed decision  
shall be prepared for the governing board and shall contain a determination as  
to the sufficiency of the cause and a recommendation as to disposition.   
However, the governing board shall make the final determination as to the  
 
sufficiency of the cause and disposition.  None of the findings,    
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed decision  
prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding on the governing  
board.  Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or  
governing board of the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing  
the charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.  Copies of the proposed  
decision shall be submitted to the governing board and to the employee on or  
before May 7 of the year in which the proceeding is commenced. . . .”  

 9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 

Education Code section 44955 provides in part: 

“(a)  No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes 
other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, 
inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 
cause other than as specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive. 

(b)  Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not 
later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in the opinion of 
the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary . . . to decrease the 
number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate 
the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated 
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school 
year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee 
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary 
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service 
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.  

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same 
date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis 
of needs of the district and the students thereof . . .   

(c) 
Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 15th of May  
. . . and services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in 
which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with the 
provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a permanent or 
probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for 
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year. 

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner 
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and 
qualifications entitle them to render.  However, prior to assigning or reassigning any 
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught, 
and for which he or she does not have a teaching credential or which is not within the 
employee’s major area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the 
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter competency test 
in the appropriate subject. 

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
(d) 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following 
reasons: 

. . . 

. . . 

 10

 

 
 

4. 

3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service is to be 

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with  
(2) 
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.” 

(1) 
The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a  
specific course or course of study1, or to provide services authorized by a  
services credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or  
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special   
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to  
provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jurisdiction 
 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied 
as to all respondent employees.   
 
The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the board acted unfairly or 
improperly simply because it made a decision that it was empowered to make under the 
statute.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.)  A school board’s 
decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in with any statistical 
computation.  It is within the discretion of a school board to determine the amount by which 
it will reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service as long as a district does not reduce a 
service below the level required by law.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) 
 
Competence 
 
 
The Education Code leaves to a school board’s discretion the determination of 
whether in addition to possessing seniority an employee is also “certificated and competent” 
to be employed in a vacant position.  The term “competent” relates to an individual’s specific 
skills or qualifications including academic background, training, credentials, and experience, 
but it does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance.  (Forker v. Board of 
Trustees (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)  In addition to seniority, the only limitation in 
placing a teacher in a vacant position is that the teacher selected be “certificated and 
competent” to render the service required by the vacant position.  Among employees who 
meet this threshold limitation, there is no room in the statutory scheme for comparative 
evaluation.  (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299.)  An employee 
                                                
1  
knowledge, usually provided on a semester, year or prescribed length-of-time basis.”  
 
 
courses, studies, or related activities.”  
 

Education Code section 51015 defines “course of study” as “the planned content of a series of classes, 

Education Code section 51016 defines “course” as “an instruction unit of an area or field of organized 

5. 

 11

6. 

Bumping 

The Statutory Scheme 

Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff statute, provides in 

holding a special credential or needed skill, if such credentials or competence are not shared 
by a more senior employee, may be retained when necessary and authorized under the 
Education Code even though it results in termination of a senior employee.  (Moreland 
Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.) 
 
Seniority, Bumping, and Skipping  
 
 
 
 
subdivision (b), in part, as follows:  “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of 
no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while . . . any 
other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.”  Essentially this language provides 
“bumping” rights for senior certificated and competent employees, and “skipping” authority 
to retain junior employees who are certificated and competent to render services which more 
senior employees are not.  Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to 
subdivision (b) where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course of study and that a junior certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated employee does not possess.  
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.)   
 
 
 
 
determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an 
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be 
assigned to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at pp.136-137.) 
 
 
 
 
its specific “needs” and there is nothing in the statute that requires that such needs be 
evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job descriptions, or program requirements.  
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at p. 138.) 
 
Information Filed with HUSD after March 15, 2010 
 
 
A school district must issue and serve preliminary layoff notices no later than 
March 15.  Before then a district must consider all information on file that assists the district 
in making assignments and reassignments based on seniority and qualifications.  After March 
15, the district has no authority to issue a layoff notice to an employee who has become 
junior by reason of another employee’s filing of proof of additional qualifications.  Thus, a 
credential filed with a district after March 15 cannot be the basis for bumping.  (Degener v. 
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689, 698.) 
 

Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 expressly allows a district to demonstrate 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to 

Skipping 

8. 

9. 

7. 

 12

Substitute and Temporary Service 

10.  Under Education Code section 44917, governing boards must “classify as 

In specific situations, an employee’s position in something other than a probationary 

 
substitute employees those persons employed in positions requiring certification 
qualifications, to fill positions of regularly employed persons absent from service.”  Under 
Education Code section 44953, substitute employees may be dismissed at any time at the 
pleasure of the board.  As noted in California Teachers Ass’n v. Vallejo City Unified School 
Dist. (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135, 144-145 and Balen v. Peralta Junior College District 
(1974) 11 Cal.3d 821, 826, substitute and temporary teachers fill the short range needs of a 
school district and may be summarily released. 
 
 
position may be credited retroactively as probationary employment.  Thus, a certificated 
employee working in a temporary position as a long-term replacement teacher under 
Education Code section 44920 or in a categorically funded position under Education Code 
section 44909 may accrue credit toward permanent status under certain circumstances 
described in Education Code sections 44909, 44917, 44918 or 44920.   
 
The Education Code recognizes two distinct types of substitute teachers:  Long-term 
 
substitute teachers and day-to-day substitute teachers.  Education Code section 44918 makes 
this distinction: 
 
“(a)  Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary employee, who 

serves during one school year for at least 75 percent of the number of days the regular 
schools of the district were maintained in that school year and has performed the 
duties normally required of a certificated employee of the school district, shall be 
deemed to have served a complete school year as a probationary employee if 
employed as a probationary employee for the following school year. 

 
(b) 

 
(c) 

Any such employee shall be reemployed for the following school year 

to fill any vacant positions in the school district unless the employee has been 
released pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 44954. 

If an employee was released pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 

44954 and has nevertheless been retained as a temporary or substitute employee by 
the district for two consecutive years and that employee has served for at least 75 
percent of the number of days the regular schools of the district were maintained in 
each school year and has performed the duties normally required of a certificated 
employee of the school district, that employee shall receive first priority if the district 
fills a vacant position, at the grade level at which the employee served during either of 
the two years, for the subsequent school year. In the case of a departmentalized 
program, the employee shall have taught in the subject matter in which the vacant 
position occurs. 
 

 13

(d) 

Those employees classified as substitutes, and who are employed to 
serve in an on-call status to replace absent regular employees on a day-to-day basis 
shall not be entitled to the benefits of this section. 

Permanent and probationary employees subjected to a reduction in 

force pursuant to Section 44955 shall, during the period of preferred right to 
reappointment, have prior rights to any vacant position in which they are qualified to 
serve superior to those rights hereunder afforded to temporary and substitute 
personnel who have become probationary employees pursuant to this section. 

 
(e) 

 
(f) 

 This section shall not apply to any school district in which the average 

daily attendance is in excess of 400,000.” 

 
In a very similar factual situation (a substitute teacher providing a full year’s service 
 
for two different teachers who worked at the same school) and involving the application of a 
nearly identical predecessor statue (Ed. Code, § 13336.5), the court held:   
 

“In this context we are of the opinion that the statute in question and in 

particular the phrase ‘who teaches . . . any class or classes which would have been 
taught by one person absent from service . . .’ was intended to apply to the situation 
where a substitute teacher replaces one and the same permanent teacher for an entire 
school year regardless of particular class assignments.  Stated another way, the statute 
only applies when a substitute fills a vacancy in teacher complement of one year 
duration, created by the absence of one permanent teacher and does not apply to a one 
year vacancy which results from the aggregate of several teachers being absent for 
shorter periods.  This interpretation preserves administrative discretion while 
affording fair treatment of substitutes and thus achieves what we presume to be the 
overall objective of the statute.”  (Centinela Valley Secondary Teachers Assn. v. 
Centinela Valley Union High Sch. Dist. (1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 35, 44.) 

This holding applies to Kleber’s situation.  Indeed, the failure to apply Centinela 

 
 
Valley might result in a claim that HUSD exceeded its authority. 
 
Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees 
 
11.  As a result of the governing board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of 
 
service, cause exists under the Education Code for the Hesperia Unified School District to 
give final notice to those respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment will 
be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed 
by the district for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Determination 
 
 
the evidence and were related to the welfare of the Hesperia Unified School District and its 
pupils.  Other than in the case of Jeremy Topete, the district’s administrative staff made 

The charges set forth in the accusation were sustained by the preponderance of 

12. 

 14

necessary assignments and reassignments in such a manner that the most senior employees 
were retained to render services which their seniority and qualifications entitled them to 
render.  No employee with less seniority than any respondent will be retained to render a 
service which any respondent is certificated, competent and qualified to render. 
 
 
 
 

This determination is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 

RECOMMENDATION 

It is recommended that the governing board issue final notices to the following 

It is recommended that the governing board withdraw the layoff notices served upon 

 
 
respondents Beril Artan, Stefanie McKean, Timothy McKean, and Paul Mog and that it 
dismiss the accusations filed against these respondents. 
 
 
certificated employees:  Afsari, Sahar; Alcala, Dana; Alfieri, Amanda; Avila, Eric; Antle, 
Ryan; Bales, Matthew; Barnes, Stacy; Barnhardt, Jamie; Barrales, Jr., Arturo; Biskeborn, 
Libby; Booth, Willis; Bumpass-Russo, Danielle; Burdi, Dean; Burks, Amanda; Caballero, 
Barbara; Carenzo, Trevor; Carter, James; Chacon, Lucia; Chavez, Lisa; Checa, Lourdes; 
Chouinard, Jennifer; Clements, Jennifer; Clough, Heather; Cole, Tara; Copell, Candice; 
Cordero, Rafael; Cox, Ryan; DeCourcey, Jodie; Dix, Ricky; Doremus, Eugene; Duran, 
Christopher; Edwards, Monica; Esparza, Lori; Farrell, Leticia; Feinstein, Stephen; Ferrato, 
Cheryl; Gonzalez, Melaniel; Goode, Dustin; Goodrich, Anita; Graley, Amanda; Griffin, 
Mary; Haley, Nancy; Hall, Robert; Holden, Brian; Howard, Kristina; Howard-Stoddard, 
Lora; Jackson, Kristie; Johnson, Jeffrey; Jurkiewicz, Arlene; Kensley, Michelle; Kirby, 
Emily; Kirk, Carrie; Kleber, Jason; Kruger, Jillian; Lockie, Randy; Lovewell, Erin; Lueken, 
Krissy; Mady, Jennifer; McKechnie, Michelle; Mendoza, Leticia; Mendiza, Silvia; Mercado, 
Kristina; Meukow, Stephen; Miller, Ryan; Moc, Jennifer; Monroe, Marisa; Montgomery, 
Tommy; Moreno, Yadira; Morse, Victoria; Mosley, Tawnya; Mumey, Chance; Murdock, 
Kari; Myers, Corrie; Nagy, Bridget; Olsen, Christine; Omelina, Marsha; Orlando, Lisa; 
Ortega, Franco; Osterberg, Justin; Pardo, Sarah; Payne, Thomas; Portanova, Sean; Reynolds, 
Amy; Richardson, Brianna; Rincon, Darlene; Robledo, Jamela; Rousseau-Smith, Mark; 
Sandoval, Tammy; Sauer, Jeremy; Schippell, Christina; Seybert, Christopher; Seybert, 
Teresa; Shea, Katherine; Simmons, Brett; Smith, Alice; Smith, Cheryle; Smith, Sheena; 
Thacker-Gutierrez, Susan; Thomas, Robin; Topete, Jeremy; Torrez, Lauren; Van, Alysia; 
Van Hulzen, Darin; Vaughn, Billy; Ward, Shannon; Weisz, Stacy; Wilkinson, Donald; Wind, 
Nicole; and Yucelidag, Sarah. 
 
DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
JAMES AHLER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 15

Exhibit A 
 
 

 16

 

Exhibit B 

 
 

 17

 

Exhibit C 

 

 

 18

