 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard 

      
 
       Case No.  L2010031401 
 
 

BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD 
PASO ROBLES JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SAN LUIS OBISPO 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Layoffs Of: 
 
Dolores Alexander and Other  
  Certificated Employees of the  
  Paso Robles Joint Unified School District, 
 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
this matter on May 5, 2010, in Paso Robles, California.1
 
 
Superintendent, Personnel, Paso Robles Joint Unified School District (District). 
 
 
John  F.  Sachs,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondents  Dolores  Alexander,  Sylvia 
Armendariz,  Jennifer  Bedrosian,  Emily  Boele,  Audra  Carr,  Maribel  Chavez,  Kathryn  Dale 
(Dale), Tanya Degnan, Jennifer DiBenedetto, Dena Donovan, Richard Griffin, Jennifer Hansen, 
Melissa Hernandez-Cornejo, Jillian Johnson, Thanh Kirby (Kirby), Carame Kroener, Tina Lessi 
(Lessi),  Stephanie  Lowe  (Lowe),  Michelle  Magie  (Magie),  Brenda  Matthysse,  Cynthia 
McGuffin, Debra McPherson, Ann Michelic, Michael Moore, Carrie Morgan, Rose Patch, Eric 
Poppen,  Sarah  Rhyne,  Xelina  Rojas,  Allison  Root,  Cynthia  Schroeder,  Keppi  Serpa  (Serpa), 
Carol Sheehan (Sheehan), Bill Spencer, Carrie Spiegel, Robert Springer, Kathleen Stefanek, Lisa 
Tibbetts, Karen Turner, Melissa Wills, and Sharon Wookey  (Respondents).  
 
 
themselves.  
 
 
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  and  other  certificated  employees  of  the  District  notice  of  its  intent  not  to 
reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year.  Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for  a 
determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year. 

Sarah  Carter  (Carter),  Maria  Cedillo  (Cedillo),  and  Kirk  Weller  (Weller)  represented 

Roman  J.  Muñoz,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Greig  Welch  (Welch),  Assistant 

                     

1 The hearing in this matter was continued from its previously-scheduled date, April 5, 
2010, and the deadlines set forth in Education Code sections 44949, subdivision (c), and 44955, 
subdivision  (c),  have  been  extended  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44949, 
subdivision (e). 

a. 

3. 

1. 

2. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Assistant Superintendent Welch filed the Accusation in his official capacity. 

 
 
Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing. The record was left open for 
the submission of written closing argument. The District and Respondents filed initial argument 
on May 10, 2010, and their submissions have been marked as Exhibits 16 and A, respectively. 
The District filed a reply on May 11, 2010, which has been marked for identification as Exhibit 
17. The matter was submitted for decision on May 11, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Respondents,  and  Carter,  Cedillo,  Michael  Delibar  (Delibar),  Emma  Marziello 
(Marziello),  Monica  Pafumi  (Pafumi),  Todd  Olivera  (Olivera),  and  Weller,  are  certificated 
employees of the District. 
 
 
On  March  2,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing 
Board) adopted Resolution number 10-18, reducing or discontinuing the following services for 
the 2010-2011 school year: 
 
 
Elementary K-5 
Secondary 6-12 
Administrative 
Categorical 
 
 
 
 
 
On March 9 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution number 10-
22, further reducing Elementary K-5 teaching services by one FTE position and Secondary 6-12 
teaching services by two FTE positions for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
On March 23, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution number 10-
 
23,  further  describing  services  reduced  or  discontinued  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  in 
Resolution numbers 10-18 and 10-22, as follows: 
 
 
                      Service   
 
 
Grades K-5 Teaching Services 
Grades K-5 Counseling Services 
 
Grades K-5 Music Teaching Services 
Grades K-5 Special Education Teaching Services 

                          FTE2 Positions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                           FTE Positions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                      Service   
 
 
 
 

22.00 
  1.00 
  2.25 
 3.00 

24.50 
20.55 
  2.00 
  7.06 

54.11 

Total 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

c. 

b 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                     

2 Full-time equivalent position. 

 

 
 
 

2

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   .49 

 
 
Total3   

 6.18 
 2.00 
 4.00 
 1.50 
 2.80 
 1.00 
 1.40 

 
 
    
 
 
 
 
   .80 
 
 2.00 
 7.00 
 
    
   .25 
             4.00 
 4.00 
 
   .88 
 
 4.00 
 

 
Grades K-5 Categorical Intervention Teaching Services 
 
Grades K-8 Library Services   
 
Grades 6-8 Special Education Teaching Services 
 
Grades 6-12 Music Teaching Services 
 
Grades 6-12 PE Teaching Services 
 
 
Grades 6-12 Social Studies Teaching Services 
Grades 6-12 Art Teaching Services 
 
Grades 9-12 Visual and Performing Arts Teaching Services  
 
Grades 9-12 Science Teaching Services 
 
Grades 6-12 Math Teaching Services  
 
Grades 6-12 English Teaching Services 
 
Grades 6-12 Foreign Language Teaching Services 
 
Grades 6-12 Special Education Teaching Services 
 
Grades 6-12 Counseling Services 
 
 
Grades 10-12 ROP Teaching Services 
Grades 7-12 Alternative Education Teaching Services 
 
Administrative Services                                                                                 2.00 
 
 
 
 
Before  March  15,  2009,  the  District  provided  notice  to  Respondents,  Carter, 
Cedillo, Delibar, Marziello, Pafumi, Olivera, and Weller that their services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 
Assistant  Superintendent  Welch  notified  the  Governing  Board  that  he  had 
 
recommended  that  notice  be  provided  to  Respondents,  Carter,  Cedillo,  Delibar,  Marziello, 
Pafumi,  Olivera,  and  Weller  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011  school 
year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
Respondents,  Carter,  Cedillo,  Delibar,  Marziello,  Pafumi,  Olivera,  and  Weller 
requested a hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the 2010-2011 
school year. All hearing requests were timely filed.  
 
 
On  or  about  April  14,  2010,  the  District  issued  the  Accusation,  the  Notice  of 
Hearing,  and  other  required  documents,  and  served  them  on  Respondents’  counsel,  who  had 
agreed  to  accept  service  on  behalf  of  District  Respondents,  certificated  employees  who  are 
members of the California Teachers Association (CTA). Respondents’ counsel thereafter filed a 
timely Notice of Defense on behalf his clients.  

           72.55 

   
 

6. 

7. 

5. 

4. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

                     

3 The difference between this total and the sum of the FTE positions in paragraphs 3.a. 
and 3.b. appear to be the number of temporary employees employed in categorically-funded 
programs not retained by the District for the 2010-2011 school year. 

 

 
 
 

3

 

a. 

b. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  with  respect  to  the 

 
 
Respondents, Carter, Cedillo, and Weller. 
 
 
The  District  did  not  establish  that  it  served  the  Accusation  packet  on 
individual  respondents  who  are  not  CTA  members  or  represented  by  Respondents’  counsel, 
namely, Carter, Cedillo, Delibar, Marziello, Pafumi, Olivera, and Weller.  
 
 
Respondent Cedillo appeared at the hearing, apparently because she had 
heard about it from an unidentified source. During a break in the hearing, District Administrative 
Assistant Kathy Boyd (Boyd) contacted the other six individuals by phone. Respondents Carter 
and Weller agreed to appear at the hearing. As reported by Boyd, Delibar agreed to come to the 
hearing, Marziello did not want to participate in the hearing, and Olivera was unable to attend 
because of another commitment. Marziello, Pafumi, and Olivera did not appear at the hearing. 
Delibar did not enter an appearance, although Respondent Sheehan stated that he had been in the 
hearing for an undetermined period.  
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. 
 
 
The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
finding  number  3  primarily  because  of  anticipated  declines  in  State  funding.  The  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is 
rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion. 
                
 
The reduction or discontinuance of services set forth in factual finding number 3, 
in  the  context  of  the  significant  anticipated  decline in revenue, is related to the welfare of the 
District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees as determined by the Governing Board. 
 
 
On March 2, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 10-17, 
setting forth the criteria to determine seniority among employees who first rendered paid service 
in  a  probationary  position  on  the  same  date  (tie-breaking  criteria).  The  specific  criteria  was 
listed, not necessarily in order of importance as: credentialing; certificates (BCLAD [Bilingual 
Crosscultural,  Language,  and  Academic  Development]/CLAD  [Crosscultural,  Language,  and 
Academic  Development]/Bilingual  Credential  Needs);  experience;  training;  special  education 
needs; competence; evaluations; NCLB Highly-Qualified status; Attachment B commitment and 
progress4;  and  extracurricular  activities.  No  testimony  was  provided  regarding  the  relative 
importance of the criteria for the 2010-2011 school year, and no point system was employed to 

11. 

13. 

12. 

a. 

                    

 

English language learners. 

4  This  refers  to  commitment  and  progress  toward  attaining  certification  to  teach 

 

 
 
 

4

 

 

 

c. 

a. 

b. 

14. 

The  District  did  not  need  to  apply  the  criteria  to  determine  the  order  of 

The criteria are reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of 

rank individuals. 
 
One of the tie-breaking criteria was “competence,” which was defined as 
b. 
 
“academic training and one year of successful full-time experience in the specialized area in [the 
District] in the last five years.” (Exhibit 6.) 
 
 
certificated employees.  
 
 
d. 
termination of any Respondent. 
 
 
Resolution  10-18  contained  the  following  pertinent  language:  “[B]E  IT 
FURTHER RESOLVED that it will be necessary to retain the services of certificated employees, 
regardless  of  seniority,  who  possess  qualifications  and  competencies  needed  in  projected 
educational  programs  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  which  are  not  possessed  by  more  senior 
employees thereby subject to layoff . . . .”   
 
The District has a significant number of students who are not proficient in 
 
the English language, and the District retained several employees who possess certificates that 
allow them to teach these English learners. Respondent Dale, who has a seniority date of August 
25,  2004,  is  senior  to  retained  employees  Peter  Pernell  (August  23,  2006)  and  Celia  Moses 
(September  13,  2004),  and  shares  the  same  seniority  date  with  two  other  retained  employees, 
Megen  Esquivel  and  Cynthia  Aguirre.  Respondent  Schroeder,  who  has  a  seniority  date  of 
August 19, 2005, is senior to Peter Pernell. Respondents Dale and Schroeder and the retained 
employees  hold  multiple  subject  credentials.  Respondents  hold  CLAD  certificates.  However, 
unlike Respondents Dale and Schroeder, the retained employees are currently teaching English 
language learners and, in addition to this experience, have special training as evidenced by their 
respective BCLAD certificates that enable them to meet the District’s special need for bilingual 
education instruction.  
 
 
The  Governing  Board  has  voted  to  eliminate  its  elementary  school 
counseling  program,  although  Assistant  Superintendent  Welch  expressed  the  hope  of  finding 
funds to reinstate the program. If the funding is available, the District hopes to retain Respondent 
Serpa  to  continue  performing  the  duties  of  the  position.  He  deems  the  position  to  be  very 
different  than  those  of  middle  or  high  school  counselors,  and  Respondent  Serpa  has  been 
performing her work with distinction.  
 
 
Respondent  Serpa  eloquently  testified  at  the  hearing  about  the  bond  she 
has developed with her students, some of whom have been with her for more than one year. She 
has set up her room in a unique way to connect with the students, and has an assortment of toys 
and props to assist her. Respondent Serpa is licensed as a Marriage and Family Therapist, and 
has also worked with older clients. She credibly testified that the counseling needs of elementary 

15. 

b. 

a. 

 

 

 
 
 

5

 

 

 

c. 

a. 

b. 

d. 

16. 

school students are very different than those of older students.  
 
Respondent  Lessi  has  been  working  as  a  high  school  counselor  for  12 
years. One of her first assignments was providing counseling services to teen mothers. She has 
provided counseling to special education students. She has also provided crisis intervention and 
other  personal  and  family  counseling.  Her  workload  is  increasingly  composed  of  academic 
counseling, and she has not worked as a counselor in elementary school. 
 
Respondents  Lessi  and  Serpa  hold  pupil  personnel  service  credentials, 
 
which enable them to provide services at all grade levels.  Respondent Lessi has more seniority 
than  Respondent  Serpa,  having  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  capacity  on 
December 10, 1997, as contrasted with Respondent Serpa’s September 18, 2000 date.  
 
 
Weller started working for the District on August 28, 2006, and holds a 
single  subject  (Music)  credential.  He  teaches  Music  at  Paso  Robles  High  School,  and  directs 
several school bands, including the marching band and the jazz ensemble. Weller testified that 
the District seeks to reduce his services to part-time employment. 
 
Weller was listed as a temporary employee on the seniority list, and was 
 
referred  to  as  a  temporary  employee  in  the  resolution  pertaining  to  the  non-reelection  of 
temporary employees. Weller testified that he has signed only one employment contract, when 
first  hired,  and  that  he  was  classified  as  a  temporary  employee  because  he  did  not  possess  a 
CLAD.  Weller  has  performed  the  same  assignment  on  a  full-time  basis  since  he  was  hired. 
Weller  further  testified  that  an  unidentified  site  administrator  told  him  he  was  undergoing  the 
evaluation process as a permanent employee during the 2009-2010 school year.  Except for the 
documents  referred  to  in  this  paragraph,  no  documents  or  testimony  were  introduced  to 
contradict Weller’s testimony. 
 
 
Respondent  Magie  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  22,  2007,  and  holds  multiple 
subject and single subject (Music) credentials. She teaches Music in elementary school, and has 
not taught the subject in the higher grades. Respondent Kirby has a seniority date of August 20, 
2008, holds a single subject (Music) credential, and has a CLAD certificate. He teaches Music 
and is band director for students in grades Fifth trough Eighth. Both are certificated to teach the 
classes that Weller was retained to teach on a part-time basis, but neither Respondent has taught 
high school Music in order to meet the District’s competency criteria. Also, as set forth below, 
Weller is more senior than Respondents Kirby and Magie. 
 
 
Respondent  Lowe  has  a  seniority  date  of  January  16,  2001.  She  holds  single 
subject (Social Sciences) and Library Media credentials. She has worked as a librarian for the 
past  nine  years,  often  providing  classroom  instruction  as  part  of  her  assignment.  Respondent 
Lowe  testified  that  she  was  certificated  to  teach  Social  Science  classes  that  four  unidentified 
junior teachers were retained to teach. However, she has not taught a Social Science class in the 
District to meet the competency criteria in the area.    

18. 

17. 

 

 
 
 

6

 
 
19.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent,  Carter,  Cedillo,  or  Weller 
was retained to render a service which any of these individuals is certificated and competent to 
render.   
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

4. 

2. 

3. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

 
 
44949 and 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 8. 
 
The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 
 
within  the  meaning  of  section  Education  Code  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers 3 and 10.   
 
Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the District to 
 
reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which 
cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual 
finding numbers 1 through 8, and 10 through 19.  
 
 
Cause does not exist to terminate the services of Delibar, Marziello, Pafumi, or 
Olivera  because  the  District  did  not  serve  the  Accusation  or  the  Notice  of  Hearing  on  them. 
Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c), requires that reduction in force proceedings be 
conducted  pursuant  to  the  formal  hearing  procedures  of  the  Administrative  Procedure  Act, 
Government Code section 11500 et seq. Government Code section 11505 requires service of the 
pertinent  documents  and  provides  that  “[n]o  order  adversely  affecting  the  rights  of  the 
respondent shall be made by the agency in any case unless the respondent shall have been served 
personally  or  by  registered  mail  as  provided  herein,  or  shall  have  filed  a  notice  of  defense  or 
otherwise  appeared.”  Inasmuch  as  no  notice  was  provided  to  Delibar,  Marziello,  Pafumi,  or 
Olivera, and they did not otherwise appear, no action may be taken against them.  
 
 
Districts  are  permitted  to  disregard  seniority,  and  “skip”  junior  employees,  in 
accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  which  provides,  in  pertinent 
part:  “Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 
certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons:  (1)  The  district 
demonstrates  a  specific  need  for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or to 
provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil 
personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services, 
which others with more seniority do not possess. . . .”  In this case, as set forth in factual finding 
number 14, the District established that it has a specific need for bilingual teaching services, that 
it retained employees junior to Respondents Dale and Schroeder to perform the services, and that 
the  retained  employees  possess  special  training  and  experience  qualifications  to  perform  the 

5. 

 

 
 
 

7

6. 

services which the respondents do not possess.  
 
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he 
services of no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while 
any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a 
service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.”    (Emphasis 
added.)  “Certificated”  is  defined  by  the  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  pertaining  to 
credentials, but “competent” is not specifically defined.  In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994) 
160  Cal.App.3d  13,  19,  the  Court  defined  the  term  in  a  reemployment  proceeding  under 
Education Code section 44956, in terms of the teachers’ skills and qualifications, specifically, as 
“relating  to  special  qualifications  for  a  vacant  position,  rather  than  relating  to  the  on-the-job 
performance  of  the  laid-off  permanent  employee.”  In  doing  so,  the  Court  noted  that  courts  in 
reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing Board (1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-
15,  and  Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  654-55,  had 
interpreted the term in a similar manner. 
 
 
Courts in analogous layoff and reemployment contexts, construing provisions similar to 
Education Code section 44955, have recognized that school districts have discretion to establish 
rules  to  define  teacher  competency.    Thus,  after  reviewing  earlier  cases,  the  Court  in  Duax  v. 
Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565 (Duax), wrote: “Hence, from 
these  authorities  we  conclude  that  a  board’s  definition  of  competency  is  reasonable  when  it 
considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.” (See also: Martin v. 
Kentfield School District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299-300; Forker v. Board of Trustees, supra.)  
 
 
In Duax, the governing board had established a standard of competency that required one 
year  of  full-time  teaching  in  the  subject  area  within  the  last  ten  years.    The  Court  found  such 
standard  “clearly  related  to  skills  and  qualifications  to  teach”  and  therefore  a  reasonable  one. 
(Duax, supra, 196 Cal. App.3d 555, at p. 567.)  The Court also concluded that the standard did 
not  define  competency  too  narrowly.  Consistent  with  the  foregoing  authorities,  the  District’s 
competency rule relates to the skills and qualifications of its certificated employees, and may be 
used  by  the  District  in  implementing  the  layoffs.  In  fact,  its  requirement  that  teachers  have 
training and one year in the past five of teaching experience in the subject matter in question is a 
rule similar to the one upheld in Duax.  
 
 
Application of the competency rule impacts Respondents Kirby, Magie, Lessi, and Lowe, 
who  do  not  meet  the  experience  requirement  and  may  not  displace  more  junior  certificated 
employees, as set forth in factual finding numbers 13, 15, 16, 17, and 18.  
 
 
The Education Code permits certificated employees to be classified in one of four 
ways:  permanent,  probationary,  substitute,  or  temporary.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County 
Union High School District (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911, 916 (Kavanaugh).) A certificated employee 
is classified as permanent, i.e., acquires tenure, if, after having been employed for two complete 
successive school years in a position requiring certification qualifications, he or she is reelected 

7. 

 

 
 
 

8

for the following year. (§ 44929.21, subd. (b); Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. 
Bakersfield  City  School  District  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1278-1279  (Bakersfield).) 
Probationary  employees  are  “those  persons  employed  in  positions  requiring  certification 
qualifications for the school year, who have not been classified as permanent employees or as 
substitute employees.” (§ 44915.) “[S]ection 44915 has been understood to make probationary 
status the default classification for certificated employees who are not otherwise required by the 
Code  to  be  classified  as  permanent,  substitute,  or  temporary  employees.  [Citations].” 
(Bakersfield,  supra,  145  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1281.)  Substitutes  are  “those  persons  employed  in 
positions  requiring  certification  qualifications,  to  fill  positions  of  regularly  employed  persons 
absent  from  service.  .  .  .”  (§  44917.)  Temporary  employees  are  those  requiring  certification 
qualifications,  other  than  substitute  employees,  who  are  employed  for  limited  assignments,  as 
defined in the Code, such as in sections 44918, 44919, 44920, and 44921. (California Teachers 
Association v. Vallejo City Unified School District (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135, 146 (Vallejo).)  
 
Employment  as  a  substitute  or  other  temporary  status  may  become  employment  in  a 
 
probationary  capacity  in  some  circumstances.  “A  year  of  employment  as  a  temporary  teacher 
may,  in  some  cases,  be  treated  as  a  year  of  probationary  service  for  purposes  of  attaining 
permanent status if the employee is rehired for the following year ‘as a probationary employee in 
a position requiring certification qualifications’ (§ 44909); ‘in a position requiring certification 
qualifications’  (§  44917);  ‘as  a  probationary  employee’  (§  44918);  or  ‘in  a  vacant  position 
requiring certification qualifications’ (§ 44920). . . .” (Bakersfield, supra, 145 Cal.App.4th at p. 
1279, fn 11.)  
 
 
Section  44918,  subdivision  (a),  provides:  “Any  employee  classified  as  a  substitute  or 
temporary employee, who serves during one school year for at least 75 percent of the number of 
days the regular schools of the district were maintained in that school year and has performed the 
duties  normally  required  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district,  shall  be  deemed  to 
have served a complete school year as a probationary employee if employed as a probationary 
employee for the following year.” 
 
 
In  Weller’s  case,  he  asserts  that  he  was  told  by  his  site  administrator  that  he  was 
undergoing the evaluation process as a permanent employee. Although no documentation was 
presented to support, or for that matter to contradict, Weller’s assertion, no negative inference 
was drawn from Weller’s failure to provide documentation supportive of his testimony, since he 
was  just  informed  about  the  hearing  a  short  period  before  he  appeared.  In  any  event,  it  is 
unnecessary  to  resolve  whether  he  is  a  permanent  employee,  as  it  is  clear  that  he  is  at  least  a 
probationary employee.  
 
Weller  was  told  that  he  was  a  temporary  employee  because  he  lacked  CLAD 
 
certification.  However,  as  the  courts  in  Bakersfield  and  Vallejo  held,  employees  may  not  be 
classified  as  temporary  employees  merely  because of the nature of their credential. Moreover, 
even  if  initially  employed  as  a  temporary  employee,  Weller  worked  an  entire  year  and  was 

 

 
 
 

9

thereafter  retained  in  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications,  entitling  him  to 
probationary classification as a matter of law on an additional basis.  
 
The seniority date of a certificated employee is defined as the date the employee “first 
 
rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  capacity.”  (§  44845.)    If  a  certificated  employee  is 
misclassified  as  a  temporary  teacher,  or  if  the date on which the employee first rendered paid 
service in a probationary capacity is otherwise incorrect, the employee’s seniority date may need 
to  be  adjusted  to  reflect  the  earlier  first  date  of  probationary  service.  (Bakersfield,  supra,  145 
Cal.App.4th at p. 1273.)  Weller’s correct seniority date is August 26, 2006, because he started 
working in a position requiring certification and he was retained as a probationary employee for 
the 2007-2008 school year.  However, even with this seniority date, there is no junior employee 
performing an assignment that Weller is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondents Dolores Alexander, Sylvia 
Armendariz,  Jennifer  Bedrosian,  Emily  Boele,  Audra  Carr,  Maribel  Chavez,  Dale,  Tanya 
Degnan,  Jennifer  DiBenedetto,  Dena  Donovan,  Richard  Griffin,  Jennifer  Hansen,  Melissa 
Hernandez-Cornejo,  Jillian  Johnson,  Kirby,  Carame  Kroener,  Lessi,  Lowe,  Magie,  Brenda 
Matthysse,  Cynthia  McGuffin,  Debra  McPherson,  Ann  Michelic,  Michael  Moore,  Carrie 
Morgan, Rose Patch, Eric Poppen, Sarah Rhyne, Xelina Rojas, Allison Root, Cynthia Schroeder, 
Serpa, Sheehan, Bill Spencer, Carrie Spiegel, Robert Springer, Kathleen Stefanek, Lisa Tibbetts, 
Karen Turner, Melissa Wills, and Sharon Wookey, and Carter, Cedillo, and Weller, by reason of 
factual finding numbers 1 through 8, and 10 through 19, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 
7.  
 

8. 

ORDER 

1. 

 
 
The  Accusation  is  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondents  Dolores 
Alexander, Sylvia Armendariz, Jennifer Bedrosian, Emily Boele, Audra Carr, Maribel Chavez, 
Dale, Tanya Degnan, Jennifer DiBenedetto, Dena Donovan, Richard Griffin, Jennifer Hansen, 
Melissa  Hernandez-Cornejo,  Jillian  Johnson,  Kirby,  Carame  Kroener,  Lessi,  Lowe,  Magie, 
Brenda Matthysse, Cynthia McGuffin, Debra McPherson, Ann Michelic, Michael Moore, Carrie 
Morgan, Rose Patch, Eric Poppen, Sarah Rhyne, Xelina Rojas, Allison Root, Cynthia Schroeder, 
Serpa, Sheehan, Bill Spencer, Carrie Spiegel, Robert Springer, Kathleen Stefanek, Lisa Tibbetts, 
Karen Turner, Melissa Wills, and Sharon Wookey, and Carter, Cedillo, and Weller, and Carter, 
Cedillo, and Weller, that their services will not be needed during the 2010-2011 school year due 
to the reduction of particular kinds of services. 
// 
// 
// 
// 
// 
// 

 

 
 
 

10

The Accusation is dismissed against Delibar, Marziello, Pafumi, and Olivera. 

2. 

 
 
 
DATED:____________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 

                                 
         
 

 
 

SAMUEL D. REYES 

 
Administrative Law Judge 
 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 
 
 

11

