BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
NATOMAS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
OAH No. 2010020874 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE NATOMAS 
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
 
 
 

           Respondents. 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Catherine B. Frink, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

James Scot Yarnell, Attorney at Law, of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter in Sacramento, California, on April 27, 2010. 
 
 
represented the Natomas Unified School District. 
 
Carolyn Langenkamp, Attorney at Law, of Langenkamp & Curtis, LLP, represented 
 
70 respondents identified in Exhibit A, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated 
herein by reference. 
 
 
decision on April 27, 2010. 
 
 

Evidence was received, the hearing was closed, and the matter was submitted for 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
Jurisdiction 
 

1. 

Kenneth Whittemore is the Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources of the 
Natomas Unified School District (District).  The actions of Mr. Whittemore, and the actions 
of the District Board of Trustees (Board), were taken in their official capacities. 
 

2. 

On February 24, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 10-02, which 
reduced and/or discontinued particular kinds of certificated services no later than the 
beginning of the 2010-2011 school year. 
 

 

1

3. 

The Board further determined that it shall be necessary by reason of the 

reduction and/or discontinuance of services to decrease the number of permanent and/or 
probationary certificated employees at the close of the 2009-2010 school year by a 
corresponding number of full-time equivalent (FTE) positions, and directed the 
Superintendent or his designee to proceed accordingly by notifying the appropriate 
employees to implement the Board’s determination. 
 

4. 

On or before March 15, 2010, the District served 96 certificated employees, 

including respondents, with a written notice, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, that their services would not be required for the next school year (Notice).  Each 
Notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation.  The Notice attached and incorporated 
by reference Resolution No. 10-02, which listed the services to be reduced or discontinued, 
resulting in a proposed reduction in the certificated staff by 97.55 FTE positions. 
 

5. 

Requests for Hearing were timely filed by 81 certificated employees to 

determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the next school year.   
 

6. 

The Assistant Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each of the 

certificated employees who requested a hearing.  The Accusations with required 
accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense (Accusation packet) were timely 
served on those certificated employees.   
 

7. 

Notices of Defense were timely filed by the represented respondents, and by 

the following individuals who are not represented by Ms. Langenkamp: Geri Ayoade; Maria 
Cortez; Amy Edgar; Teang Kuy; and Angela Saunders.   
 

8. 

Except as set forth in the stipulations below, any unrepresented certificated 

employee (i.e., not listed on Exhibit A) that failed to file a Request for Hearing or Notice of 
Defense, or who failed to appear at hearing, including the individuals listed in Finding 7, has 
waived his or her right to a hearing, and may be laid off by the District.  No unrepresented 
employee appeared at the hearing. 
 

9. 

Each respondent (set forth in Exhibit A) is presently a certificated 

10. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 

probationary or permanent employee of the District. 
 

sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
Stipulation Re: Rescission of Layoff Notices 
 

11.  At the commencement of the hearing, the District rescinded or confirmed the 

rescission of Notices to the following employees, who shall be retained by the District for the 
2010-2011 school year:  Tiffanie Lau; Christina Meyer; Angela Saunders; and Rebekah 
Anthony.  Rebekah Cyr is retained for .5 FTE.  Sara Thorn is retained for .6 FTE, and shall 
be laid off for .4 FTE. 

 

2

 
Services to be Reduced or Eliminated 
 

12. 

Resolution No. 10-02 called for the reduction or discontinuance of the 

following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year: 
 

Service 

A.     Elementary Teaching Services 

 

1.     Multiple Subject Service 

2.     Physical Education 

3.     Prep Specialist/Fine Arts 

B.     Secondary Teaching Services 

1.     English 

2.     English (DHS) 

3.     ELD 

4.     Physical Education 

5.     Science – Middle School 

6.     Social Science 

7.     Social Science (DHS) 

8.     Spanish 

9.     Math 

10.   ROP Auto 

C.     Other Services 

1.     Counselors 

2.     RSP Services (NP3/BC) 

3.     RSP Services (LFG) 

4.     SDC Services (NMS) 

11.   Multiple Subject Service (Middle School) 

 

3

FTE 

52.0 

3.6 

1.0 

 

3.8 

1.0 

2.0 

3.0 

3.0 

4.0 

1.0 

2.0 

1.0 

0.4 

4.0 

 

6.75 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

Service 

5.     Assistant Principals 

6.     Principal (Community Day School) 

FTE 

5.0 

1.0 

District Total

97.55 

The above-described services are “particular kinds of services” that can be reduced or 

discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. 
 

13. 

In arriving at the number of certificated employees required to be terminated, 

Resolution No. 10-02 stated that the Board “considered all positively assured attrition, 
including deaths, resignations, retirements, and other permanent vacancies, for 2010-2011 
which [had] occurred up to and including February 23, 2010.”  The Board concluded that, 
notwithstanding any vacancies resulting in positively assured attrition, it would still be 
necessary to terminate certificated employees equal to 97.55 FTE certificated positions. 
 
Seniority List – Seniority Issues 
 

14. 

The District maintains a seniority list which contains pertinent information 

such as employees’ date of first paid service, current assignment, and credentials on file.  The 
District provided certificated employees with the opportunity to confirm information in the 
District’s files concerning their seniority dates and credentials.  Resolution No. 10-02 stated, 
in part that, “for purposes of calculating seniority, credentials held and information necessary 
to apply skipping, bumping and tie-breaker criteria, the District will consider only such 
documentation provided to the Human Resources Office by certificated personnel by 
February 10, 2010.” 
 

Seniority Date – Hannah Gilman 

The parties stipulated that Ms. Gilman’s seniority date shall be changed to July 

15. 
11, 2006. 
 

Seniority Date – Deborah Eisberg   

16.  Ms. Eisberg holds a Pupil Personnel Services (PPS) counseling credential.  

She was employed full-time as a counselor for the Folsom-Cordova Unified School District 
for the 2003-2004 school year.  Her contract with Folsom-Cordova Unified School District 
ended on June 11, 2004.  On March 15, 2004, she signed an Offer of Probationary 
Employment with the District which stated, in part: 
 

You are hereby conditionally offered probationary employment 
for the 2004-2005 school year as a(n) Counselor at Inderkum 

 

 

 

 

4

High School.  You are to report to duty at Inderkum High 
School on (date) to be determined at 7:35 a.m.  This offer is 
contingent upon your securing a valid California credential prior 
to your first day of service and official election by the Board of 
Education.  Attached is a copy of the current Certificated Salary 
Schedule.  Upon receipt of all original transcripts, your 
placement on the salary schedule will be evaluated (salary 
agreement to follow).  Your assignment is for 190 work days per 
contract year pending fingerprint clearance. 

The salary payment schedule will be on a 12 month basis; the 
first salary payment will be on 09/30/04. 

 

 

 

17. 

By letter dated April 19, 2004, Ms. Eisberg was notified that, “at the April 14, 

2004 Regular Meeting of the Board of Trustees, the Board approved your employment as a 
counselor at Inderkum High School effective for the 2004-2005 school year.”  The 2004-
2005 school year commenced on July 1, 2004, and ran through June 30, 2005. 
 

18. 

Inderkum High School (IHS) was a new school that opened at the start of the 

2004-2005 school year.  According to Diane Borrecco, the District’s Human Resources 
Coordinator, it was anticipated that the counselors hired to work at IHS would begin work 
prior to the first day of school, but their exact start date was unknown in March 2004, when 
the initial offer of employment was made to Ms. Eisberg.   
 

19.  District records indicate that Ms. Eisberg performed paid services for the 
District prior to the start of the 2004-2005 school year on the following dates in 2004:  
March 25, April 2; April 14; April 16; April 23; May 6; May 7; May 12; May 14; May 18; 
May 19; May 24; May 26; June 2; and June 11.  Ms. Eisberg recorded her hours for payment 
on a document entitled, “Certificated Timesheet – To be completed for any extra duty/excess 
class size, coaching stipends, and other stipends for work beyond normal salary agreement.”  
Ms. Eisberg was paid the contract hourly rate for first year certificated employees of the 
District.  The work performed included meetings related to IHS; International Baccalaureate 
(IB) research; data entry; “Code PPSAT;” “PSAT/WASC;” and “CAS research.”  Ms. 
Eisberg also attended the California International Baccalaureate Organization (CIBO) 
teacher training workshop from June 27 to July 1, 2004.  However, the District did not pay 
her for her attendance; rather, she was given credit for her attendance for purposes of 
placement on the certificated salary schedule.  At the time Ms. Eisberg began providing 
services to the District in March 2004, she was not provided written notification that she was 
being employed as a temporary employee. 
 

20. 

Education Code section 449151 provides that, “[g]overning boards of school 

districts shall classify as probationary employees, those persons employed in positions 

                                                

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise specified. 

5

requiring certification qualifications for the school year, who have not been classified as 
permanent employees or as substitute employees.”  Section 44916 states: 
 

The classification shall be made at the time of employment and 
thereafter in the month of July of each school year.  At the time 
of initial employment during each academic year, each new 
certificated employee of the school district shall receive a 
written statement indicating his employment status and the 
salary that he is to be paid.  If a school district hires a 
certificated person as a temporary employee, the written 
statement shall clearly indicate the temporary nature of the 
employment and the length of time for which the person is being 
employed.  If a written statement does not indicate the 
temporary nature of the employment, the certificated employee 
shall be deemed to be a probationary employee of the school 
district, unless employed with permanent status. 

 

 

21.  Although Ms. Eisberg signed a contract with the District to work as a full-time 

counselor for the 2004-2005 school year, the District did not provide her with a written 
statement indicating the temporary nature of her employment when she provided services to 
the District in the spring of 2004.  The activities she performed appear to be those requiring 
certification qualifications, within the meaning of section 44915.  She was not providing 
services as a substitute employee. 
 

22. 

Respondents contend that, consistent with the holding in Kavanaugh v. West 

Sonoma County High School District (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911 (Kavanaugh), Ms. Eisberg must 
be deemed a probationary employee of the District with a seniority date of March 25, 2004, 
because she commenced paid service to the District in the 2003-2004 school year prior to 
receiving notice of her salary and temporary employment status.  This argument is 
persuasive.  As the Supreme Court stated in Kavanaugh: 
 

Section 44916 [of the Education Code] thus mandates that a school 
district comply with three requirements if it desires to hire a “new 
certificated employee” (such as plaintiff Kavanaugh) as a temporary 
employee: it must (a) notify the employee of his or her salary and status 
as a temporary employee; (b) do so in a written notice; and (c) give 
such notice “at the time of initial employment.” (Id., at p. 919) 

The Kavanaugh court concluded, “Reading section 44916 to mean that certificated 

 
 
teachers must be informed in writing, on or before their first day of paid service to their 
employing districts, of their salary and employment status is thus consistent with the 
apparent purpose of the statute.” (Id., at p. 921)   
 

23. 

The District argued that Ms. Eisberg could not obtain probationary status with 

the District while she was employed full-time with another school district, citing section 

6

44923, which states:  “In the event a permanent employee of a school district has tenure as a 
full-time employee of the district, any assignment or employment of such employee in 
addition to his full-time assignment may be terminated by the governing board of the district 
at any time.”  Section 44923 does not preclude Ms. Eisberg from commencing employment 
with the District as a probationary employee while still employed with the Folsom-Cordova 
Unified School District.  In the absence of authority to the contrary, Ms. Eisberg’s first date 
of paid service to the District in a probationary capacity was March 25, 2004, and her 
seniority date shall be changed accordingly. 
 
Bumping and Skipping 
 

24. 

Economic layoffs are generally to be carried out on the basis of seniority.  A 
teacher with more seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment than a junior 
teacher.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to a position held by a 
junior teacher if the senior teacher is properly credentialed.  That displacement of a junior 
teacher is known as “bumping.”  In general, the District has an affirmative obligation to 
reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions held by junior teachers 
if the senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to occupy such positions.  The 
seniority rule is not absolute, and a junior teacher with a needed credential or skills may be 
retained even if a more senior teacher is terminated.  Such “skipping” is recognized by 
statute (Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1)) and appellate law (Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of the Santa Clara Unified School 
District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831; Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 
Cal.App.4th 127).  In order to depart from a seniority-based economic layoff, section 44955, 
subdivision (d)(1), requires the District to “demonstrate a specific need for personnel to teach 
a specific course or course of study… and that the certificated employee [to be skipped] has 
special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study…which 
others with more seniority do not possess.” 
 

25. 

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list.  The 
District considered whether senior employees currently assigned in the various services 
being reduced or eliminated could displace, or “bump,” more junior employees.  In 
determining who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced or eliminated, the 
District first applied known vacancies and then applied in progressive sequence the seniority 
list in inverse order, from least to most senior.  Employees with the same date of hire were 
laid off according to the needs of the District and its students.  Resolution No. 10-02 set forth 
criteria to be applied to determine the relative seniority of those certificated employees who 
first rendered paid probationary service on the same day (tie-breaker criteria).  There were no 
issues at hearing concerning the application of the District’s tie-breaker criteria. 
 

Highly Qualified Teachers under the No Child Left Behind Act 

26. 

Resolution No. 10-2 states, in part, that the Board “is required by the No Child 

Left Behind Act of 2001 (‘NCLB’) to take steps to ensure that all teachers who have been 
assigned to teach core academic subjects including teachers in alternative programs, have 

 

 

7

met NCLB requirements as ‘highly qualified’ since the beginning of the 2006-07 school 
year.”  Consequently, the Board resolved to “skip” junior employees on the basis of highly 
qualified teacher status under NCLB, as follows: 
 

That due to the specific need of the District to hire and retain 
only highly qualified teachers in core academic subject areas, 
the Superintendent and/or his designee is authorized to deviate 
from terminating certificated employees in order of seniority 
only in instances where the less senior employee possesses a 
currently valid intern, preliminary or clear California teaching 
credential and evidence of core academic subject competency in 
accordance with the NCLB and the more senior employee meets 
certification or licensing requirements solely on an emergency, 
temporary, or provisional basis except a valid intern credential, 
or does not possess evidence of core academic subject 
competency in accordance with the NCLB. 

Homeless Liaison 

27. 

Resolution No. 10-02 states, in part: 

That due to the specific need of the District to provide services 
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in pupil 
personnel services and special training and experience necessary 
to provide Homeless Liaison services, the Superintendent and/or 
his designee is authorized to deviate from terminating 
certificated employees in order of seniority where the employee 
is currently assigned to provide those services and will be 
assigned to provide those services for the next school year and 
more senior employees do not possess the same specialized 
training and experience necessary to provide those services. 

28.  Amreek Singh (#516 – 9/22/08)2 holds a PPS school social work credential.  
He is the employee assigned to provide Homeless Liaison (HL) services for the District.  He 
did not receive a layoff Notice, in accordance with the provisions of Resolution No. 10-02 
set forth in Finding 27. 
 

29. 

The District’s HL position description states, in part, that “[t]he primary duty 

of the position is to ensure that the educational rights of preschool-aged and school-aged 
children in homeless situations are protected in accordance with the McKinney-Vento 
Homeless Assistance Act.  The position works to improve coordination between community 
service organizations, government agencies, housing, shelters, school and the school district, 

                                                

(#1) to least senior (#535), and seniority date. 

2 Numbers in parentheses indicate an employee’s position on the District’s seniority list, from most senior 

8

 

 

 

 

 

to best meet the needs of homeless students and families.”  The HL position is paid 
according to the salary schedule for “Psychologist/Counselor.”  Under “Education and 
Experience,” the position description states: 
 

Required: 
 
Possession of a valid credential authorizing pupil personnel 
services. 
Three years experience in human service setting. 
Experience in working with ethnic minority communities 
 
Preferred: 
 
Master’s degree in social work (MSW) or Master’s degree in 
counseling or related fields such as psychology or sociology. 

The required “Licenses and Certificates” are a “valid Pupil Personnel Services 

Credential issued by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing.” 

 
The HL position statement lists the following “Qualifications:” 
 

Knowledge of: 
•  Principles and procedures related to student support 

programs and services. 

•  Graduation and college entrance requirements. 
•  Counseling techniques, laws, rules, and regulations. 
•  Child abuse reporting laws. 
•  Registration procedures. 
•  Diverse academic, socioeconomic, cultural, disability and 

ethnic backgrounds of District students. 

•  Federal, state, and local governmental and non-

governmental agencies. 

•  Federal legislation and requirements in regards to homeless 

education principles and practices. 
•  The community and its resources. 
 
Ability to: 
•  Provide student support services to students. 
•  Communicate effectively with students, parent[s], and 
appropriate District staff regarding student progress. 
•  Perform a variety of administrative functions related to 

homelessness. 
Identify student needs related to appropriate services. 

• 

9

 

 

•  Prepare and maintain a variety of documents related to 

homeless student needs. 

•  Maintain current knowledge of program rules, regulations, 

requirements, and restrictions. 

•  Establish and maintain cooperative and effective working 

•  Read, interpret, apply and explain rules, regulations, policies 

relationships with others. 

and procedures. 

•  Develop, implement and coordinate projects. 
•  Relate to and be sensitive towards students and families 

including persons from diverse backgrounds.  

•  Operate basic office equipment. 
•  Work confidentially with discretion. 
•  Keep accurate records. 
•  Communicate effectively orally and in writing. 

 

 

30.  Deborah Eisberg (#279 – 3/25/04)3 holds a PPS counseling credential, and has 

a Masters degree in educational counseling.  She is the most senior certificated employee 
with a PPS credential who received a Notice.  As the English Language Development 
counseling coordinator for IHS, Ms. Eisberg has experience in working with ethnic minority 
communities.  She has more than eight years of experience in human services settings, due to 
her work as a school counselor.  She fully meets the qualifications listed in the HL position 
description. 
 

31. 

The District contended that it was entitled to “skip” Mr. Singh because he 

possesses a PPS school social work credential, which the District claimed was essential to 
the performance of the HL position.  This contention was not persuasive.  Ms. Borrecco 
testified that she sent a draft of the HL position description to the California Commission on 
Teacher Credentialing (CCTC) in the summer of 2008, at the request of Kay Baker, the 
District’s Coordinator of Classified Personnel.  According to Ms. Borrecco, she spoke to 
someone from CCTC’s information services staff, which Ms. Borrecco described as a “help-
line.”  Hearsay evidence suggests that she was advised by CCTC staff that the essential 
functions of the HL position required a PPS school social work credential.4  Although Ms. 
Borrecco believes she informed Ms. Baker about the information obtained from CCTC, the 
District did not modify the HL position description. 
 

                                                

3 Ms. Eisberg’s position number on the District’s seniority list was based on a seniority date of August 19, 
2004; with the correction of her seniority date to March 25, 2004, her position number would be adjusted as well, to 
#267). 

 
4 Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d), states in pertinent part: “Hearsay evidence may be used 

for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but over timely objection shall not be sufficient in 
itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. …”  
 

10

32.  Under section 44955, subdivision (d), the District has demonstrated that it has 

a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, i.e. the HL 
position.  However, it may deviate from seniority order and retain a junior employee only if 
the certificated employee to be skipped “has special training and experience necessary to 
teach that course or course of study…which others with more seniority do not possess.” 
(Emphasis added.)  In this case, the “special training and experience” possessed by Mr. 
Singh is the school social work PPS credential.  However, the evidence did not establish that 
such a credential is necessary for an individual to serve as the HL.  Ms. Eisberg has 
demonstrated that she has the necessary credential and qualifications to serve in the HL 
position.  Therefore, the District was not entitled to skip Mr. Singh, and Ms. Eisberg shall be 
retained for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Application of the District’s Competency Criteria – Bumping Issues 
 

33. 

The Board adopted competency criteria that teachers must satisfy in order to 

bump into a position held by another teacher.  As set forth in Resolution No. 10-02 the 
competency criteria states: 
 

That “competency” for the purposes of Education Code 
section 44955 shall be determined solely upon current 
possession of a preliminary or clear credential for the subject 
matter or grade level to which the employee will be assigned at 
the beginning of the 2010-11 school year and at least one (1) 
year of experience within the preceding five (5) years teaching 
the subject matter at the applicable elementary, middle or high 
school level.  Further, that due to the specific need of the district 
to hire and retain only highly qualified teachers in academic 
subject areas, “competency” shall require (highly qualified) 
current confirmation of qualifications of academic subject 
competency, or verifiable eligibility for competency if not 
previously reviewed by the District, in all subjects of a proposed 
assignment, including assignments teaching multiple academic 
subjects and assignments in secondary alternative schools, in 
accordance with the NCLB [sic]. 

 

 

 

Counselors 

34. 

The Board approved a reduction of 6.75 FTE counselor positions.  As a 

consequence of this reduction, the District issued Notices to counselors Necol Harness (#371 
– 12/12/05), Adam Munguia (#280 – 8/19/04), and Deborah Eisberg (#279 – 3/25/04), all of 
whom serve as counselors in the District’s comprehensive high schools.  The District 
proposes to retain senior counselors Joel Sigurdson (#29 – 8/29/88), Yvonne Arnold (#43 – 
8/28/90), and Brenda Borge (#106 – 9/2/97).  Ms. Arnold is a counselor at Discovery High 
School (DHS), the District’s alternative education high school.  Mr. Sigurdson and Ms. 
Borge are middle school counselors.  Although assignments are not finalized for the 2010-

11

2011 school year, the District anticipates that the three senior counselors will be reassigned 
as counselors to the comprehensive high school positions currently occupied by Ms. Harness, 
Mr. Munguia, and Ms. Eisberg.5 
 

35. 

Respondents contended that application of the Board’s competency criteria 

would preclude the three senior counselors from bumping the junior counselors, since none 
of the senior counselors had worked at a comprehensive high school in the preceding five 
years.  This contention is not persuasive.  The competency criteria refer to experience 
“teaching the subject matter at the applicable elementary, middle or high school level.” 
(Emphasis added.) This element of the competency criteria does not apply to counselors. 
 

AVID Teacher – Natomas High School 

 

36. 

The Board approved a reduction of 5.0 FTE assistant principal positions.  Janet 

Mann (#82 – 8/19/96) holds a clear single subject social science credential.  She is currently 
serving as an assistant principal at IHS and has return rights to a teaching position.  As a 
consequence of her reassignment to the classroom for the 2010-2011 school year, the District 
issued a Notice to Nancy Kidd (#475 – 9/14/07) as the employee who is being bumped by 
Ms. Mann.  Ms. Kidd holds a clear single subject health science credential.  Her assignment 
for the past three school years has been as an Advancement Via Individual Determination 
(AVID) teacher at Natomas High School (NHS).  AVID is a program to identify students 
who are not traditionally college-bound and provide support for them to succeed 
academically and apply to college.  The position of AVID teacher may be held by any 
employee with an academic credential.  Ms. Kidd was identified as the least senior teacher 
with an academic credential who was not otherwise slated for layoff. 
 

37.  NHS is an AVID-certified site.  To maintain certification, it must meet certain 

requirements, including AVID training for teachers who participate in the program.  If 
teachers in the AVID program at NHS are not AVID-trained, it could potentially jeopardize 
AVID certification (i.e., the District would not be able to use the term “AVID” to describe its 
program).  AVID is not a state or federally mandated program.  Initial AVID training is 
obtained through attendance at the AVID summer institute in San Diego.  There is on-going 
AVID training through the Sacramento County Office of Education (SCOE).  The AVID 
curriculum underwent substantial revision in 2005, and recent AVID training is therefore 
recommended by SCOE. 
 

38. 

Respondents contended that Ms. Mann was not “competent” to bump Ms. 

Kidd because she has not received recent AVID training.  Ms. Mann obtained four units of 
AVID training at the AVID summer institute at the University of San Diego in August 1993. 
 

39. 

Respondents’ contention is not persuasive.  Although her training is not recent, 
Ms. Mann has received AVID training.  It was not established that NHS’s AVID certification 

                                                

5 Ms. Eisberg’s entitlement to continued employment with the District is addressed elsewhere in this 

Decision. 

 

12

would be jeopardized by the assignment of Ms. Mann to the AVID program.  Ms. Mann is 
eligible to bump Ms. Kidd. 
 
 
 

Proposed Bump – Jacobson-Sanchez 

40.  Gregg Ellis (#148 – 8/23/99) is an assistant principal at IHS who is returning 

to the classroom as a result of the Board’s approval of 5.0 FTE reduction in assistant 
principal positions.  Mr. Ellis holds a clear single subject social science credential.  The 
District identified Mara Harvey (#367 – 9/2/05) as the least senior certificated employee with 
a social science credential who could be bumped by Mr. Ellis.  Ms. Harvey holds a clear 
single subject social science credential and a subject matter authorization to teach 
introductory English.  She also holds a CLAD certification.  Her current teaching assignment 
is social science/English Language Learner social science at NHS.  The District identified 
Kimberly Jacobson-Sanchez (#450 – 8/8/07) as a less senior teacher occupying a position 
into which Ms. Harvey could bump.  Ms. Jacobson-Sanchez holds a clear multiple subjects 
(MS) credential, as well as subject matter authorizations to teach Introductory English and 
Introductory Social Science.  She also holds an English Language Learner Authorization.  
She is currently assigned to teach English Language Development (ELD) at Natomas Middle 
School. 
 

41. 

Respondents contended that Ms. Harvey was not eligible to bump Ms. 

Jacobson-Sanchez from her position at Natomas Middle School under the Board’s 
competency criteria because Ms. Harvey has not taught at the middle school level for at least 
one year within the preceding five years.  This contention has merit.  District records 
indicated that Ms. Harvey last taught at a middle school site on October 14, 2005.  Therefore, 
she does not meet the competency criteria.  Ms. Jacobson-Sanchez must be retained by the 
District. 
 
Individual Teacher Issues 
 

Scott Fitzgerald 

42. 

The Board approved a 4.0 FTE reduction in social science services.  Scott 

Fitzgerald (#474 – 9/13/07) holds a preliminary single subject credential in social science.  
He currently teaches leadership and APEX, a credit recovery program, at NHS.  He taught 
one period of geography in the fall semester; otherwise, he has not taught social science in 
the 2009-2010 school year. 
 

43.  No specific credential is required to teach leadership or APEX.  Any 

credentialed teacher may serve in these positions. 
 

44. 

The District identified Mr. Fitzgerald as the least senior teacher with a social 
science credential, and sent him a Notice based upon the 4.0 FTE social science reduction.  
The District did not realize that Mr. Fitzgerald was not teaching social science courses when 
it identified him for layoff. 

 

 

13

 

 

 

 

 

45. 

Respondents contend that Mr. Fitzgerald cannot be laid off as a result of the 

reduction in social science services, because he is not teaching social science this school 
year.  This contention is not persuasive.  If the District had not identified Mr. Fitzgerald for 
layoff as the least senior teacher with a social science credential, it would have identified a 
more senior teacher with such a credential; that individual would have been able to bump Mr. 
Fitzgerald from his current teaching assignment.  Therefore, Mr. Fitzgerald was properly 
served with a layoff notice. 
 

Carolyn Lopes 

46. 

The Board approved a reduction of 5.0 FTE assistant principal positions, and a 
1.0 FTE reduction for the Community Day School principal.  Carolyn Lopes (#64 – 8/22/94) 
is currently an elementary school principal.  She holds a clear single subject English 
credential.  At her request, the District is reassigning her to a classroom position for the 
2010-2011 school year.  The District did not eliminate Ms. Lopes’ principal position.  The 
District characterized her reassignment as a release under section 44951.6 
 

47. 

Benjamin Odell (#487 – 1/14/08) holds a preliminary single subject English 

credential.  He is currently assigned to teach English at NHS. 
 

48. 

The District sent a Notice to Mr. Odell as a consequence of Ms. Lopes’ return 

to the classroom.  The District characterized this as a “bump.”  However, there is no 
corresponding PKS reduction to account for Mr. Odell’s proposed layoff.  The Board 
approved a reduction of 3.8 FTE English services and 1.0 FTE reduction of English (DHS) 
services.  To account for this reduction, the District identified a vacant position (.8 FTE) due 
to the nonreelection of a probationary employee, and four teachers who received Notices:  
Teang Kuy (#518 – 10/20/08); Callie Zaidel (#513 – 8/6/08); Jana Andrews (#497 – 8/4/08); 
and Paul Sanchez (#463 – 8/8/07). 
 

49. 

Respondents contended that Ms. Lopes is not eligible to bump any of the 

respondents, because her position was not reduced or eliminated as part of the PKS 

                                                

6 Section 44951 states: 

Unless a certificated employee holding a position requiring an administrative or supervisory 
credential is sent written notice deposited in the United States registered mail with postage prepaid 
and addressed to his or her last known address by March 15 that he or she may be released from 
his or her position for the following school year, or unless the signature of the employee is 
obtained by March 15 on the written notice that he or she may be released from his or her position 
for the following year, he or she shall be continued in the position. The provisions of this section 
do not apply to a certificated employee who holds a written contract with an expiration date 
beyond the current school year, or to a certificated employee holding a position that is funded for 
less than a school year, or to a certificated employee assigned to an acting position whose 
continuing right to hold this position depends on being selected from an eligible list established for 
the position, or to the termination of employment pursuant to Section 44955. 

14

reduction.  This contention is persuasive.  In essence, the District has permitted Ms. Lopes to 
transfer back into a teaching position.  If the Board had not authorized layoffs for the 2010-
2011 school year, the District would not have been permitted to terminate a certificated 
employee to “make room” for Ms. Lopes.  If the District complied with section 44951, then 
it gave Ms. Lopes “notice” of her release from her position as an administrator prior to 
March 15, 2010.  The Board could have authorized an additional PKS reduction to account 
for her return to the classroom, but did not do so.  Under the circumstances, it was not 
appropriate for the District to “bump” a junior employee because of Ms. Lopes’ return to 
classroom teaching. 
 

50. 

It appears that Mr. Sanchez has greater seniority than Mr. Odell.  Mr. Sanchez 

holds a clear single subject English credential and is currently assigned to teach middle 
school language arts.  It is not clear whether Mr. Sanchez is eligible to bump Mr. Odell from 
his high school English assignment under the District’s competency criteria.  The District 
shall be required to retain the most senior teacher with the credential and competency to 
occupy the position held by Mr. Odell or, if no one is eligible to bump Mr. Odell, shall retain 
Mr. Odell. 
 
Welfare of the District and Its Students 
 

51. 

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services 

identified in Resolution No. 10-02 was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper 
exercise of discretion. 
 

52. 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the 
welfare of the District and its pupils.  The decision was made because of a variety of factors 
affecting the District including the State budget crises with the resultant possible loss of 
revenue from the State.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services was 
necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District as determined by 
the Board. 
 

53. 

Except as specifically noted above, no certificated employee junior to any 

respondent was retained to perform any services which any respondent was certificated and 
competent to render. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 

2. 

The services identified in Resolution No. 10-02 are particular kinds of services 

that could be reduced or discontinued under section Education Code section 44955.  Cause 
exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of 

 

 

15

services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning 
of Education Code section 44949. 
 

3. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 

4. 

As set forth in Finding 15, Hannah Gilman’s correct seniority date is July 11, 

As set forth in Findings 16-23, Deborah Eisberg’s correct seniority date is 

2006. 
 

5. 
March 25, 2004. 
 

6. 

As set forth in Finding 11, the District has rescinded or shall rescind notices of 

layoff to the following individuals:  Tiffanie Lau; Christina Meyer; Angela Saunders; and 
Rebekah Anthony.  Rebekah Cyr is retained for .5 FTE.  Sara Thorn is retained for .6 FTE, 
and shall be laid off for .4 FTE. 
 

As set forth in Findings 27-32, the District shall rescind the layoff notice to 

7. 
Deborah Eisberg. 
 

Kimberly Jacobson-Sanchez. 
 

8. 

As set forth in Findings 40-41, the District shall rescind the layoff notice to 

9. 

As set forth in Findings 46-50, the District was not authorized to lay off a 

teacher as a result of the release of an administrator pursuant to section 44951, and it did not 
establish a need to lay off an additional English teacher on the basis of a reduction in PKS.  
Therefore, the District shall retain the most senior teacher with the credential and 
competency to occupy the position held by Benjamin Odell or, if no one is eligible to bump 
Mr. Odell, shall retain Mr. Odell. 
 

10.  All other arguments of the parties not specifically addressed herein were 

considered and are rejected. 
 

11.  No employee with less seniority than any named respondent is being retained 

to render a service which any named respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 6, 7, 8, and 9, the Board may give respondents final 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services will not be required for the ensuing school 
year, 2010-2011. 
 
 

 

ORDER 

16

1.  The District shall comply with Legal Conclusions 4 through 9. 

2. 

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 6, 7, 8, and 9, the Accusations served 

on respondents are sustained.  Notices of layoff shall be rescinded as to the certificated 
employees listed in Legal Conclusions 6, 7, 8, and 9.  Notices shall be given to the remaining 
respondents identified in attached Exhibit A that their services will not be required for the 
2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services.  Notice shall be given to respondents in inverse order of seniority. 
 
 

Dated: May 5, 2010. 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
CATHERINE B. FRINK 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

17

EXHIBIT A 
 
NATOMAS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 
RESPONDENTS REPRESENTED BY  
 
LANGENKAMP, CURTIS & PRICE, LLP 

Lydiana Alfaro  
Rebekah Anthony 
Lindsay Anzelc 
Sandra Asimos 
Ranbir Bains 
Brian Bellisario 
Ernest Berryman 
Kristen Bishop 
Lori Blalock 
Brandon Breckenridge 
Shannon Brinkley 
Yvonne Bruins-Scarbrough 
Christina Carpenter 
Jason Crabtree 
Linda Cravens 
Rebekah Cyr 
Joseph Daniels 
Arcy De Vera 
Beverly Drew 
Nekita DuVal 
Deborah Eisberg 
Susan England 
Scott Fitzgerald 
Shazana Gardner 
Hannah Gilman 
Kendra Gorski 
Karen Hall-Sandlund 
Julie Hanson 
Necol Harness 
Norma Hernandez 
Wendy Heu 
Roger Heym 
Melanie Intiso 
Scott Jackson 
Kimberly Jacobson-Sanchez 
Christina Jolly 

 

 

 
 
Nancy Kidd 
Allyson Kirby 
Nicole Lamb 
Tiffanie Lau 
Hannah Lingrell 
Gayle Martin 
Barbara Martinez 
Tanya Mendoza 
Christina Meyer 
Krista Meyers 
Andrea Mitchell 
 Adam Munguia 
Mario Ochoa 
Tavia D. Pagan 
Jenna Pal-Freeman 
Jessica Penney 
Alice (Rose) Penrose 
Cherie Perez 
Siurave Plantillas 
Niccole Pulis 
Erin Ryan 
Paul Sanchez 
Navneet Sandhu 
Sue Saunders 
Amy Sparks 
Scott Taylor 
Sara Thorn 
Julie Torres 
Eileen Tumacder 
Celia Valiente-Raeder 
Amanda Van Vliet 
Anna Williams 
Colleen Yates 
Callie Zaidel 

18

