BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
RIVERBANK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF STANISLAUS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
    OAH No. 2010031643 
 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 

 
DAWN ALLEN, KAREN BAKER, 
CHARLOTTE BOWDEN,  
REBECCA CAMARENA,  
ANGELA ESCAMILLA,  
JON GIANELLI, JILL HODGE,  
ISMAEL MERCADO,  
CHRISTINE PEREZ, KIM THEIS,  
ZACHARY WILKINS, and ISELA 
WESLEY,  

 
                                                        Respondents.
 
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Dian M. Vorters, Office of 

 
 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 23, 2010, in Riverbank, California. 
 

Thomas E. Gauthier, Attorney at Law,1 represented complainant, Ken Geisick, Ed.D., 

Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law,2 represented respondents who are identified in 

Superintendent, Riverbank Unified School District. 
 
 
Appendix A. 
 

The matter was submitted on April 23, 2010. 

 
 
 
 

 

                                                

1 Thomas E. Gauthier, Attorney at Law, LOZANO SMITH, One Capitol Mall, Suite 640, Sacramento, 

California  95814. 
 
2Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law, 735 Sunrise Avenue, Suite 208, Roseville, California  95661. 
 

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
General Findings Concerning Statutory Requirements 
 
 
 

Respondents are certificated district employees. 

1. 

2. 

On March 9, 2010, the governing board of the district resolved to reduce or 

discontinue particular kinds of services.  To that end, the board adopted Resolution 09-10-17 
(Layoff Resolution).  Within the meaning of Education Code section 44955, 3 the services 
are “particular kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce 
or discontinue these services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise 
of discretion. 
 

3. 

Not later than March 15, 2009, the superintendent of the district caused the 

governing board of the district and respondents to be notified in writing of his 
recommendation that preliminary notice be given to respondents, pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, that the district would not require their services for the 2010-2011 
school year.  The notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.  In recommending 
reductions in certificated staff, the superintendent considered the qualified condition of the 
district’s budget.  The recommendation was not related to respondents’ performance as 
certificated employees. 
 

4. 

Superintendent Ken Geisick, Ed.D., testified that his recommendation to the 

5. 

A Preliminary Notice of Layoff was delivered to each respondent by personal 

board was based on a $1.5 million budget shortfall for the 2010-2011 school year.  The 
deficit was caused by a projected loss in state and federal funds.  The shortfall would have 
been greater but for the board’s reduction of non-teaching staff, which saved approximately 
$800,000. 
 
 
delivery.  Dr. Geisick hand delivered the preliminary notice of layoff package to each teacher 
at his or her place of employment.  
 
 
hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, he/she had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing 
to the person sending the notice.  The request had to be delivered by a specified date, which 
was a date that was not less than seven days after the notice of termination was served.4  And 
the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 
 

The notice advised each respondent of the following: He/she had a right to a 

6. 

                                                

3 All references to the Code are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 
 
4 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

 

2

8. 

9. 

7. 

The Board must allow for positively assured attrition such as voluntary 

The governing board considered all positively assured attrition which has 

Respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to determine whether 
 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  An accusation was timely 
served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice that, if they were going to request a 
hearing, they were required to file a Notice of Defense within five days after being served 
with the accusation.5  Respondents filed timely notices of defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
Positively Assured Attrition 
 
 
resignations and retirements, which occur during the “computation period.”  (Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School Dist. (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831, 847.)   The district must “consider evidence of positively assured attrition, 
involuntary retirements for the [upcoming] school year which were known to the board when 
it made its preliminary determination on 15 March … and when it made its final 
determination on 15 May.”  (Lewin v. Bd. of Trustees of Pasadena Unified School Dist. 
(1976) 62 Cal.App.3d 977, 983.) 
 
 
occurred to date, that is, all deaths, resignations, retirements, and additional attrition which 
may occur before the start of the 2010/2011 school year in reducing these services and, but 
for the attrition already assured and the attrition anticipated, would have found it necessary to 
reduce additional kinds of service.  
 
The district received notice of two teacher retirements prior to the start of the 
 
layoff computation period.  Bruce Edwards taught biology, science, chemistry, and math at 
Riverbank High School.  He retired in December 2009.  Suzie DeWitz taught journalism and 
English at Riverbank High School.  She retired on January 12, 2010.  This attrition was 
included as part of the $800,000 staff reduction. 
 
 
reassigning site administrators to the classroom.  Administrators who are reassigned to the 
classroom do not retain their original seniority date, but receive three years teaching 
seniority.  Assistant Superintendent Ron Costa holds multiple subject and mathematics 
credentials.  He was reassigned to teach secondary mathematics.  Mr. Costa’s teaching 
seniority date was adjusted to February 2007.  Mary Lopez was also moved to the classroom.  
She holds a multiple subject credential, single subject credentials in Spanish and Introduction 
to English, and an ELS authorization.  Her seniority date will be adjusted to reflect three 
years teaching seniority. 
 

In February 2010 the board determined to trim the district’s budget by 

11. 

10. 

                                                

5 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a Notice 
of Defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
termination cases, the Notice of Defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

 

3

12. 

 In March 2010, the board approved an incentive program to help veteran 

 
teachers considering retirement.  The board offered a $25,000 cash incentive paid over five 
years to any teacher who had been in the district for twenty years or more and agreed to 
retire.  Eligible teachers were given five weeks to respond; the deadline to accept was April 
14, 2010. 
 
 
13.  Mr. Costa resigned in April 2010.  Ismael Mercado has a seniority date of 
October 2, 2007.  He holds a single subject credential in physical education, an English 
Learner (EL) authorization, and a limited assignment mathematics credential.  As a result of 
Ms. Costa’s resignation, the district rescinded Mr. Mercado’s layoff notice. 
 
 
of retirement. 
 
 

14.  After the layoff computation period began, the district received three notices 

a. 

Keith Rogers had a seniority date of September 1, 1976, and taught at Cardozo 
Middle School.  He holds standard secondary and industrial arts credentials 
and a CLAD authorization.  As a result of Mr. Rogers’ retirement, the district 
rescinded the layoff notice to Jon Gianelli.  Mr. Gianelli has a seniority date of 
August 16, 2006.  He holds a single subject Social Science credential and 
teaches Social Science, World History, and Yearbook at Cardozo Middle 
School. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

b. 

c. 

d. 

 

 

Terry Scott was hired in 1975 and since the mid-1990’s worked exclusively as 
the district’s technology coordinator.  The district will hire an “IT manager” to 
fill this position with a savings to the district.  The position is posted but not 
filled. 

Sandra Mattos has a seniority date of August 28, 1986.  She holds a multiple 
subject credential and a CLAD authorization.  She teaches at California 
Avenue Elementary School.  Dr. Geisick stated that the district intends to fill 
her position from those teachers who have received layoff notices. 

In addition to Mr. Mercado and Mr. Gianelli, the district stipulated at hearing 
that it will rescind layoff notices to Christine Perez and Kevin Bizzini. 

1) 

2) 

Ms. Perez has a seniority date of August 18, 2003.  She holds a single 
subject English credential and teaches at Riverbank High School. 

Mr. Bizzini has a seniority date of August 12, 2004.  He holds a 
multiple subject credential and EL authorization.  He teaches at Rio 
Altura Elementary.  Mr. Bizzini’s layoff is being rescinded by right of 
promotion.  In April 2010, the board appointed him to an 
administrative position.  He completed his administrative course work 
in February 2010.  He is in the process of filing for an administrative 
credential, which he could not apply for until he had a job offer.  

4

Services the District Intends to Reduce or Discontinue 
 

15. 

The governing board of the district determined, in the Layoff Resolution, that  

because particular kinds of services were to be reduced or eliminated, it was necessary to 
decrease the number of permanent employees in the district by 13.30 full-time equivalents 
(FTE).  The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to reduce 
or discontinue are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Services 
 
 
Elementary Teacher Positions 
 
English Teacher Positions 
  
Math Teacher Positions 
Science Teacher Positions 
 
Social Science Teacher Positions 
 

FTE Positions 
9.9 FTE 
 
1.0  FTE 
 
 
2.0  FTE 
            1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
 
 
 
         14.9 FTE 

Total FTE Positions   

 
 
 
 
 
    

  
 
   
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

16. 

Skipping describes the process by which the district may deviate from the 

 
Skipping/Bumping/Seniority 
 
 
order of seniority when there is an identified need for a particular type of service, there is a 
junior employee who is uniquely qualified to provide that service or teach a subject, and 
there is no senior employee who is certificated and competent to provide the service.  (Ed. 
Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).) 
 
 
Per the Layoff Resolution, the district “determined that some employees do possess 
training and experience needed that may require their retention in employment, specifically 
special education experience and experience in alternative educational settings, including but 
not limited to continuation schools.”  The district employed skipping to achieve a proper list 
of employees to receive layoff notices. 
 
 
employees who are more senior and who are competent to perform a particular kind of 
service or teach a particular subject.  The district employed bumping to achieve a proper list 
of employees to receive layoff notices. 
 
 
Among the teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority in the district 
gives a greater legal entitlement to a position.  Seniority is defined as the date upon which an 
employee first rendered paid services in a probationary position.  (Ed. Code, § 44845.) 
 

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school district.  

Bumping describes the process by which the district identifies those 

17. 

18. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b) provides that no senior employee may 
be terminated while any less senior employee is retained to render a service which the more 
senior permanent employee is “certificated and competent” to render.  “It [is] the district’s 
obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine whether any permanent 

 

5

employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic layoff possess[es] the 
seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned to another position.”   
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 137.) 
 

19.  Dr. Geisick testified that the district maintains a seniority list of all certificated 

21. 

20.  At the elementary school level, the governing board determined it was 

employees.  The seniority list is posted at each school site and employees are advised to 
review and update the list.  The seniority list is verified and maintained by the Human 
Resources Department.  All updates were noted on the seniority list prior to its use in 
identifying the proper recipients for layoff notices.  According to Dr. Geisick, no teacher 
with less seniority was retained in lieu of a more senior teacher who was competent and 
credentialed to provide a particular kind of service.  Tie-breaking criteria were not needed in 
determining order of layoff for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping at the Elementary Level 
 
 
necessary to reduce 9.9 FTE teaching positions. (Factual Finding 15.)  The district 
implemented the reduction by first looking at the seniority chart and identifying which 
employees held relevant credentials. 
 
 
To reduce 9.9 FTE K-5 Classroom instruction, the district identified the 
teachers in this assignment with the least seniority as Dawn Allen (0.4 FTE), Cristina 
Calderon, Karen Baker, Zachary Wilkins, Holly Kroutil (0.5 FTE), Rebecca Camarena, 
Kevin Bizzini, Charlotte Bowden, Isela Wesley, Jill Hodge, and Angela Escamilla.  Kevin 
Bizzini was promoted to an administrative position and his notice was rescinded.  These 
employees were the proper recipients of layoff notices. 
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping at the Secondary Level 
 
 
necessary to reduce 1.0 FTE English position, 2.0 FTE Mathematics positions, 1.0 FTE 
Science position, and 1.0 FTE Social Science position. (Factual Finding 15.)  The district 
implemented the reduction by first looking at the seniority chart and identifying which 
employees held relevant credentials. 
 
 
assignment with the least seniority as Christine Perez.  She has a seniority date of August 18, 
2003, and holds a single subject credential in English, and a CLAD authorization.  Due to 
positively assured attrition, her layoff notice will be rescinded.  (Factual Finding 14.) 
 
 
To reduce 2.0 FTE Mathematics positions, the district identified the teachers 
in this assignment with the least seniority as Kevin Hejnal and Ismael Mercado.  Mr. Hejnal 
has a seniority date of August 7, 2008, and holds a single subject credentials in Mathematics 
and Physical Education (PE), and a CLAD authorization.  Mr. Mercado has a seniority date 
of October 2, 2007.  He holds a single subject credential in PE and a limited assignment 

22.  At the secondary school level, the governing board determined it was 

To reduce 1.0 FTE English position, the district identified the teacher in this 

24. 

23. 

 

6

25. 

27. 

26. 

The governing board determined it was necessary to skip teachers assigned to 

To reduce 1.0 FTE Science position, the district identified the employee in this 

credential in mathematics.  These employees were the proper recipients of layoff notices.  
Due to positively assured attrition, Mr. Mercado’s layoff notice will be rescinded as he is the 
more senior qualified teacher.  (Factual Finding 13.) 
 
 
assignment with the least seniority as Kimberlie Theis.  She has a seniority date of August 
10, 2005.  She holds single subject credentials in Science, Geography, and Computer 
Concepts.  She teaches at Riverbank High School.  Ms. Theis was the proper recipient of a 
layoff notice. 
 
To reduce 1.0 FTE Social Science position, the district identified the employee 
 
in this assignment with the least seniority as Jon Gianelli.  Due to positively assured attrition, 
Mr. Gianelli’s layoff notice will be rescinded.  (Factual Finding 14.) 
 
Layoff/Skipping/Bumping of Continuation High School Positions 
 
 
the continuation high school.  Three teachers currently serving in that assignment were 
retained in lieu of more senior teachers who hold relevant credentials.  The Layoff 
Resolution allowed for the district to retain teachers with special training, experience, and/or 
credentials in alternative education positions.  As such, John Tivald, Elizabeth Medeiros, and 
Carl Hughes were retained over more senior teachers, to teach at Adelante High School. 
 
 
years, has approximately 60 students, and three teachers.  Many students at Adelante have 
disciplinary issues; some are teen parents, have jobs, or are otherwise unable to do 
homework.  According to Dr. Geisick, teachers are often reluctant to take on this group 
dynamic.  Most Adelante students are behind in their credits and have not mastered the core 
proficiencies.  As such, their academic needs are significantly greater than those found in a 
comprehensive school.  Instruction is divided into six week modules where each student 
works at their own instructional level.  Students graduate with 200 credits as opposed to the 
standard 230 high school credits.  Dr. Geisick stated that Mr. Hughes, Mr. Tivald, and Ms. 
Medeiros have continuing experience in their positions at Adelante and are “highly 
qualified” to teach in their subject matter area.6
 
 
secondary history and political science credential and is finishing his second year at 
Adelante.  John Tivald has a seniority date of August 10, 2006.  He holds single subject 
credentials in social science and foundational mathematics.  He teaches mathematics at 
Adelante where he is finishing his third year.  Elizabeth Medeiros has a seniority date of 

28.  Adelante High School is a continuation high school.  It has been open for three 

Carl Hughes has a seniority date of August 18, 2008.  He holds a standard 

29. 

6 Riverbank Unified School District is in Program Improvement Status/Year Three.  As such, they are 

                                                
 
audited by the State of California and must meet annual improvement goals.  As part of the corrective action plan, 
the district must develop and retain “highly qualified” teachers showing subject matter competency in every 
program assignment. 

 

7

30. 

The three teachers being retained to fulfill the district’s identified need for 

January 14, 2004.  She holds a single subject credential in English.  She teaches English at 
Adelante where she is finishing her third year.  No other teachers in the district, who are 
credentialed to teach at the secondary level, have prior experience teaching at a continuation 
school. 
 
 
alternative education at Adelante are highly qualified and possess the necessary skills, 
training, and experience.  The district appropriately skipped these teachers in their layoff 
implementation. 
 
 
credentials to bump into a teaching assignment at Adelante and their notices have been 
rescinded.  (Factual Finding 14.) 
 
 
above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 
 

Further, Jon Gianelli and Christine Perez are the only two teachers with seniority and 

31.  Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 

and 44955.  All notices and jurisdictional prerequisites required by those sections were 
satisfied. 
 

2. 

The services the district seeks to eliminate in this matter, as set forth in the 
Layoff Resolution, are the particular kinds of service that may be reduced or discontinued 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue these particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted 
a proper exercise of the board’s discretion.  Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, legal cause exists for the district to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of 
services set forth in the layoff resolution.  The reduction or discontinuance of these identified 
particular kinds of services relates solely to the welfare of the district and its pupils. 
 

3. 

No certificated employee with less seniority than any respondent is being 
retained to render a service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render.  
Legal cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to give respondents 
final notice that their services will not be required for 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

The Riverbank Unified School District’s action to reduce or eliminate the 
particular kinds of services identified in Layoff Resolution 09-10-17, for the 2010-2011 
school year is AFFIRMED. 

 

 

 

8

2. 

The Accusation against respondents is SUSTAINED.  The Riverbank Unified 
School District may give final notices to respondents that their services will not be required 
for the 2010-2011 school year, except that the preliminary layoff notices issued to Jon 
Gianelli, Ismael Mercado, and Christine Perez, shall be rescinded.  Notices shall be given in 
inverse order of seniority. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 28, 2010 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
DIAN M. VORTERS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

9

Last Name 
Allen 
Baker 
Bowden 
Camarena 
Escamilla 
Gianelli 
Hodge 

APPENDIX A  
2010 Riverbank Unified School District – List of Respondents 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8  Mercado 
9 
Perez 
10  Theis 
11  Wilkins 
12  Welsey 

First Name  Status 
Dawn 
Karen 
Charlotte 
Rebecca 
Angela 
Jon 
Jill 
Ismael 
Christine 
Kim 
Zachary 
Isela 

 
 
 
 
 
Notice Rescinded 
 
Notice Rescinded 
Notice Rescinded 
 
 
 

  

 

 

10

