 
 
BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
VALLEJO CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SOLANO, CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES, 
 
                                                 Respondents. 
 

 
 
OAH No. 2010031587 
 

 
 
PROPOSED DECISION 
 

This matter was heard before Diane Schneider, Administrative Law Judge, State of 
California, Office of Administrative Hearings, in Fairfield, California, on April 27, 2010. 
 

Lawrence M. Schoenke, Attorney at Law, Dannis, Woliver and Kelley, 71 Stevenson 

Street, Nineteenth Floor, San Francisco, California, represented the Vallejo City Unified 
School District. 
 
 
Fifth Floor, Oakland, California, represented all respondents listed in Attachment B. 
 

David Weintraub, Attorney at Law, Beeson, Tayer & Bodine, 1404 Franklin Street, 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of respondents Janet Black, Trudi Cheever, 

Donna Chin, Rachael Ford, Anne Griffin, Kirsten Morgan, Mary Elizabeth O’Connell, 
Heather Patereau, Linda Peterson, and Charlotte Sanchez. 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

 
 
Superintendent of the Vallejo City Unified School District (district). 
 

Reynaldo Santa Cruz made and filed the Accusations in his official capacity as 

2. 

On March 3, 2010, the district’s Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2461, 
which sets forth the board’s determination that it will be necessary for the district to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2010-2011 school year, for a total of 
106.96 full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated positions.  (Resolution No. 2461 is set forth in 
Attachment C.) 
 

-1- 

3 

All notices were timely and properly served.  All notices and other 

jurisdictional requirements contained in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 have 
been provided or satisfied.   
 

4. 

The certificated employees who requested a hearing are identified in 

Attachment A.  The respondents represented by Mr. Weintraub are identified in 
Attachment B.  The following respondents were neither present nor represented at the 
hearing:  Janet Black, Trudi Cheever, Donna Chin, Rachael Ford, Anne Griffin, Kirsten 
Morgan, Mary Elizabeth O’Connell, Heather Patereau, Linda Peterson, and Charlotte 
Sanchez. 
 

Prior to the hearing, the district rescinded the layoff notices issued to Danielle 

Brever and Irmozine Petite.   

5. 

 
6. 
 

Resolution No. 2461 contains skipping criteria.  It provides: 

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the District may deviate 
from terminating certificated employees in order of seniority, 
based on a specific need for personnel who possess special 
training and/or experience, or competency, necessary to teach 
specific courses, programs or courses of study or to provide 
specific services, which others with more seniority do not possess, 
as follows; 
 
1.  Instruction of English Language Learners:  Possession of 

either of the following: 

a)  Cross-Cultural language Academic Development 

Certificate (CLAD) or 

 

b)  As of February 1, 2010, possess a current emergency 
CLAD permit through the 2009- 2010 school year or 
obtaining a CLAD certificate during the 2009-2010 
school year, prior to the expiration of the emergency 
CLAD permit. 

 
2.  Vallejo Charter School:  Special training in the Expeditionary 
Learning Program, and experience teaching at the Vallejo 
Charter School at least one (1) year within the last three (3) 
years and being Highly Qualified in assigned subject matter. 

 
3.  Special Education Program:  (Professional Clear, Life, 

General, Preliminary Credentials, District/University Intern 
Credential, and/or authorizations.) 

 

-2-

 
4.  Math Program:  (Professional Clear, Life, General, and 

Preliminary Credentials.  Standard Secondary Credential, with 
a major/minor and/or supplementary authorization, Single 
Subject Credential, with a major/minor, District/University 
Intern Credential, and/or supplementary authorization.) 

 
5.  California Partnership Academy:  The California 

Department of Education will support the movement of all 
teachers identified within the California Partnership Grants, 
both academic and career tech credentialed teachers who have 
been identified as the core team of teachers for each of the 
three CA Partnership Academies from Hogan High School to 
other high schools. 

 
The only skipping criterion applied by the district was number five, pertaining 

7. 

to the California Partnership Academy (CPA).  Pursuant to skipping criterion number five, 
Nona Cohen-Bowman, Director of Human Resources, Vallejo City Unified School District, 
skipped all of the CPA core teachers with the exception of respondent Gerard Lobo.  Lobo 
teaches social science in the Biotechology Academy, which is a CPA at Hogan High School.  
Cohen-Bowman testified that she did not skip Lobo because he did not attend training 
provided to CPA teachers from February 28 to March 2, 2010, in Southern California.1  
Cohen-Bowman also stated that she did not skip Lobo because she needed to find a position 
for a social science teacher from another school.  Cohen-Bowman reassigned this social 
science teacher to Lobos’ core social science position in the CPA at Hogan High School.    
 
 
School, he falls squarely within the CPA skipping criterion.  He claims that the district acted 
unreasonably and arbitrarily when it skipped all of the core teachers in the CPA at Hogan 
High School except him.  Lobo acknowledges that he missed the training in Southern 
California.  He argues, however, that because attendance at trainings is not mentioned in the 
CPA skipping criterion, the district may not refuse to skip him based upon his failure to 
attend training.   
 
Lobo is correct.  The district erred when it applied the skipping criterion to all 
 
core teachers in the CPA at Hogan High except Lobo.  By virtue of his core teaching position 
at CPA, Lobo met the skipping criterion in the CPA skipping criterion.  Lobo’s failure to  

Respondent Lobo contends that as a core teacher in the CPA at Hogan High 

9. 

8. 

                                                

his first child.   

1  Lobo was unable to attend this training because he was on family leave following the birth of 

 

-3-

attend training does not provide a basis for excluding him from the teachers who were 
skipped, because the CPA criterion does not mandate attendance at trainings.  Under these 
circumstances, the district’s decision to skip all core teachers in the CPA at Hogan High 
except Lobo was unreasonable and arbitrary. 
 

10. 

The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 

district and of its pupils. 
 

11.  Any contentions raised by respondents and not discussed above are found to 

be without merit and are hereby rejected. 

 
12.  No junior employee is being retained to render a service that any of the 

 
respondents are certificated and competent to perform. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

The services identified in Attachment C are particular kinds of services that 

Based upon the matters set forth in Factual Findings 7 through 9, the district 

 
 
may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision 
to reduce or discontinue the identified services complied with the guidelines set forth in 
Education Code section 44955.  The board’s decision was neither arbitrary nor capricious, 
and was a proper exercise of its discretion.   
 
 
applied the CPA skipping criterion in an arbitrary fashion when it skipped all but one 
teacher, respondent Lobo, who met the skipping criteria.  (See Campbell Elementary 
Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.)  Cause, therefore, does not 
exist to give notice to respondent Gerard Lobo that his services will not be required for the 
2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Cause exists because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of 
services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents listed in 
Attachment A, other than Gerard Lobo, that their services will not be required for the 2010-
2011 school year.  The cause relates to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof 
within the meaning of section 44949. 
 

3. 

ORDER 

Notice may not be given to respondent Gerard Lobo that his services will not 

be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 

 
1. 

 

 

-4-

2. 

Notice may be given to the remaining respondents identified in Attachment A 

that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services.   
 
  
 DATED: _____________________ 
 
 

________________________________ 
DIANE SCHNEIDER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

 
List of Attachments 
Attachment A:  List of Respondents  
Attachment B:  Respondent’s represented by Mr. Weintraub  
Attachment C:  Resolution No. 2461 
 
 

 

-5-

