BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
HUNTINGTON BEACH CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 

OAH NO. 2010020987 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
IN THE MATTER OF THE ACCUSATIONS 
AGAINST: 
 
(Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” [Attached 
To the Accusation] Who Have Returned a   
Request for Hearing/Notice of Defense Form 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 

 

 

 

 

 

  

PROPOSED DECISION 

Humberto Flores, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on March 30, 2010, at the district office of the 
Huntington Beach City School District, Huntington Beach, California. 
 
 
District.   
 

Sharon J. Ormond, Attorney at Law, represented the Huntington Beach City School 

Carlos R. Perez and Steven T. Nutter, Attorneys at Law, represented the Respondents 

who appeared at the hearing. 
 
 
 

Evidence was received and the matter was submitted for decision. 

SUMMARY 

The Governing Board (Board) of the Huntington City School District (District) 

 
 
decided to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by certificated 
personnel for the 2010-2011 school year for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related 
to the capabilities and dedication of the teachers whose services were proposed to be reduced 
or eliminated. 
 
 
review of seniority, credentials, and criteria for breaking ties between employees with the 
same first dates of paid service.  The selection process complied with Education Code 
requirements. 
 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Kathy Kessler, Superintendent of the District, filed the Accusations in her 

 
 
1. 
official capacity. 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

3. 

4. 

On or prior to February 16, 2010, Superintendent Kessler recommended that 

 
 
the Board give notice that certain services performed by certificated employees be reduced or 
eliminated for the 2010-2011 school year.  Ms. Kessler also recommended that the Board 
adopt a resolution to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 
 
On February 16, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. HR-43 whereby the 
Board resolved to discontinue or reduce the particular kinds of services as recommended by 
Superintendent Kessler.  The Board further determined that based on the discontinuance or 
reduction of services, it would be necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
at the close of the present school year by a corresponding number of full-time equivalent 
(FTE) positions as follows: 
 
 
 

Reduce Kindergarten through 5th Grade Teaching Services 

27.92 FTE  

 

Reduce Middle School Core Teaching Services 

Reduce Middle School Math Teaching Services 

Discontinue Elementary School Teacher Specialist, Student Support 
 
Discontinue Middle School Teacher Specialist, Student Support  

  4.0 FTE 

  1.5 FTE 

  1.0 FTE 

  2.0 FTE 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Discontinue Teacher Inclusionary Practices/Behavioral Interventions 

  1.0 FTE 

Discontinue Middle School Academic Counseling Services 

  1.0 FTE 

Reduce Preschool Special Education Teaching Services   

  1.0 FTE 

Reduce Spec. Ed. Middle School Mild/Moderate Teaching Services 

  1.0 FTE 

Reduce Special Education Middle School RSP Teaching Services   

  1.0 FTE 

Reduce Special Education Elementary School RSP Teaching Services     1.0 FTE 

Reduce Spec. Ed. Elem. School Moderate/Severe Teaching Services   

  1.0 FTE 

Discontinue School Readiness Nurse Services 

Discontinue School Psychologist Services   
 
TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

 

  1.0 FTE 

  1.0 FTE 

           45.42 FTE 

2

 

 

8. 

5. 

7. 

6. 

9. 

In an attachment to Resolution No. HR-43, the Board set forth a selection 

On or about March 10, 2010, Ms. Kessler notified Respondents, in writing, 

Notices of Defense and Requests for Hearing were timely filed by all of the 

Pursuant to Resolution HR-43, the Board directed Superintendent Kessler to 
notify the employees affected by the Board’s resolution and give notice to said employees 
that their services would not be required for the ensuing school year and state the reasons 
therefore. 
 
 
process involving review of credentials and other criteria for breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process complied with 
Education Code requirements. 
 
 
Superintendent Kessler made and filed Accusations against each Respondent 
on March 10, 2010.  The Respondents were listed in an attachment to the Accusation, which 
was incorporated by reference and identified as Exhibit A.   
 
 
that it had been recommended their services would not be required for the next school year.  
The mailing included the reasons for the notification, a copy of the Accusation and other 
jurisdictional documents as required by the Education Code.  
 
 
employees who appeared for the hearing.  All jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
 
As a result, the Governing Board adopted Resolution HR-51 whereby the Board rescinded 
the preliminary layoff notices sent to certificated employees holding the positions of Teacher 
Specialist, Student Support Services (3 FTE) and Teacher, Inclusionary Practices/Behavioral 
Interventions (1 FTE). 
 
 
about March 17, 2010, the District rescinded preliminary layoff notices to Respondents 
Constance Clem, Jeffrey Collins, Kyliegh Eckenrod, Melissa Eisenrod, Brett Hardy, Jill 
Hart, Stephen Hawn, Lori Hiltbrand, Tara Holmes, Timothy Kamps, Cheri Pappas, and 
Joelynn Strickland.  The above mentioned Respondents, as well certain other certificated 
employees, withdrew their requests for hearing.  As a result of teacher retirements, 
rescissions of preliminary layoff notices, and Resolution HR-51, the District submitted 
exhibit 9, which is a “Final List of Respondents” subject to layoff.  
 
 
requests for leave, in determining the necessary layoff notices to be delivered to employees. 
 
 
dates, current assignments and locations, advanced degrees, credentials, and authorizations.   
 
 

11.  During the hearing, the District’s counsel informed the undersigned that on or 

10.  On or about March 16, 2010, nine teachers retired from service to the District.  

The District maintains a Seniority List which contains employees’ seniority 

The Board considered attrition, including resignations, retirements and 

13. 

12. 

3

 

 

14. 

The District identified the most junior employees working in a particular kind 

of service being reduced or discontinued.  The District then analyzed whether each 
employee, beginning with the most senior, and based on their credentials, could fill a 
vacancy or “bump” (displace) a more junior employee from their position.  The evidence 
established that for each service to be reduced, the District identified the most junior 
employees performing the services identified in the Resolution HR-43, then allowed most 
senior of these employees to exercise reassignment or “bumping rights” in their order of their 
seniority.   
 
15. 
 
Finding 6. 
 
 
Factual Finding 4, related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  
 
 
performed by any employee with less seniority who is being retained. 
 

The reduction or discontinuation of the particular kinds of services set forth in 

Respondents are not certificated and competent to render a service being 

The District properly applied the tie-break criteria referenced in Factual 

16. 

17. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
 

2. 

3. 

1. 

Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to reduce 

No junior certificated employee is being retained to perform services which a 

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
44955 were met.  Therefore, jurisdiction was established for this proceeding as to all 
Respondents. 
 
 
the number of certificated employees due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular 
kinds of services.  The Board’s decisions to reduce or eliminate the identified services were 
neither arbitrary nor capricious.  The decisions relate solely to the welfare of the District’s 
schools and the pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.   
 
 
more senior employee subject to layoff is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
in Factual Findings 10 and 11.   
 
// 
 
// 
 
// 
 
// 
 

Cause exists to dismiss the Accusations filed against the respondents set forth 

4. 

4

ORDER 
 
Notice may be given to Respondents Melissa Arneson, Michelle Baker, Elizabeth 
 
Bruton, Scott Christian, Lisa Cirac, Jenny Cook, Jennifer Espalin-Castillo, Annie Finnell, 
Amanda Hart, Laura Horn, Karen Kroeter, Sarah Krupp, Marissa Linares, Roger Mationg, 
Alyssa Mauro, Dana Palmer, Katharine Pearce, Gail Rocha, Christy Ruppert, Katrina 
Satterly, Stacy Snow, Amanda Tully and Danielle Zankich, that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
Dated: April 6, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 

_________________________________ 
HUMBERTO FLORES 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

5

