BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF  
REDWOOD CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT  
COUNTY OF SAN MATEO, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
OAH No. 2010030618 

 

 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against 
Certificated Employees: 
 
NANCY ALLEN et al., 
 
 
 
 
 

       Respondents. 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 
Administrative Law Judge Melissa G. Crowell, State of California, Office of 
 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Redwood City, California, on April 27, April 
29, and May 10, 2010. 
 
 
Janae H. Novotny, Janet Sommer, and Pascale-Sonia Roy, Attorneys at Law, Burke, 
Williams & Sorenson, LLP, represented complainant Jan Christensen, Superintendent of the 
Redwood City School District. 
 
 
Vickie Neves, Esther Rodriquez, Ruth Rodriquez, and Maria Del Sol Vasquez-Ares.   
 
 
 
 
names are listed on Attachment A. 
 
 
  

Christopher E. Schumb, Attorney at Law, represented all other respondents whose 

Patricia D. Castorena, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Martha Castro, 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of respondent Ryan Harrison. 

The matter was submitted for decision on May 10, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Jan Christensen made the accusation in her official capacity of Superintendent 

 
 
of the Redwood City School District.  
 
 
 
 
Governing Board of the Redwood City School District of her recommendation that notice be 

On March 10, 2010, Superintendent Christensen gave written notice to the 

Respondents listed on Attachment A are certificated employees of the district.   

3. 

2. 

 

1

4. 

given to respondents that his/her services would be reduced or eliminated for the 2010-2011 
school year and stated the reasons for her recommendation.  
 
 
to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year, and 
directed Superintendent Christensen or her designee to give notice to the certificated 
employees whose positions would be affected. 
 

On March 10, 2010, the board adopted Resolution No. 13, in which it resolved 

5. 

On or about March 11, 2010, Deputy Superintendent John R. Baker, Ed.D., 

gave written notice to respondents that, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 
44955, it was being recommended that their services would be reduced or eliminated for the 
2010-2011 school year.  Respondents filed requests for hearing.  The district served an 
accusation on each respondent who requested a hearing.  Each respondent filed a notice of 
defense.  There are no issues raised with respect to jurisdiction in this matter.  

In its resolution, the board resolved to reduce or discontinue the following 

Full-time Equivalent 

 
6. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
particular kinds of services:  
 
Particular Kind of Service 
 
Art Specialist  
Assistant Principal 
Counselor 
English Language Development Coach 
 
GATE Teacher  
Inclusion Specialist    
International Baccalaureate/Multi Years Program Art Teacher 
International Baccalaureate/Multi Years Program Coordinator/ 
Music  Teacher 
International Baccalaureate/Multi Years Program Spanish Teacher 
Language Arts Intervention Teacher 
 
 
Literacy Resource Teacher 
 
 
Music Teacher  
 
 
Newcomer Teacher 
 
 
 
Nurse   
 
Opportunity School Teacher  
Outreach Specialist 
 
 
Professional Development Coach – Houghton-Mifflin 
Professional Development Coach – Science 
Professional Development Coach – Special Education 
 
Psychologist   
 
Reading Intervention Specialist 
Reading Intervention Specialist 1-3  
 
Reading Support Teacher  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.0 
1.0 
3.8 
7.5 
0.5 
1.0 
1.0 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
4.4 
4.0 
1.0 
2.0 
0.5 
2.2 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
2.0 
0.7 
1.0 
3.0 

 

2

 

 

 

 

Resource Teacher 
 
 
Response to Intervention/Student Study Team (RIT/SST)  
 
Director of Student Services  
 
 
K-5 Classroom Teachers  
6-8 Classroom Teachers  
 
 
 
 
 
 
services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  No service is being reduced below a mandated level.   

The services set forth in the board’s PKS resolution are particular kinds of 

0.5 
 
0.1 
 
 
0.5 
          80.0 
2.0 
 

          127.2 

Total:   

7. 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The reductions were based on the district’s financial situation.  As a result of 

 
the state budget crisis, the district is projecting a budget deficit of approximately $10M.  
Considering this, the reductions are in the interest of the schools and their pupils.   

The district will take into account all positively assured attrition prior to 

 
8. 

 
9. 

 
11. 

 
issuing the final notices.  
 
Seniority Dates 
 

10. 

By agreement of the parties, the seniority date of respondent Lisa Rivera is 

changed to June 26, 2006.  The district will make this change on its seniority list.  

By agreement of the parties, the seniority date of respondent Vicki Neves is 

12. 

In its resolution, the board set forth competency criteria pursuant to Education 

changed to August 4, 2008.  The district will make this change on its seniority list.  
 
Bumping/Competency/Skipping 
 
 
Code section 44955, subdivision (b).  A number of senior teachers have positions for the 
2009-2010 school year that are being eliminated by the PKS resolution.  In order to eliminate 
competency issues the parties agreed that none of these teachers will be permitted to bump 
into a position currently held by a respondent.   
 
 
notices it issued to respondents Genevieve De L’ao, Victoria Defouw, Perpetual Doyle, 
Elizabeth Love, Gwendolyn Minor, and Tonya Reed.  Each of these teachers holds a single 
subject credential in Math or English, or a multiple subject credential with a supplementary 
authorization in Math and/or English.  The accusations issued against these respondents will 
be dismissed. 
 
 
Pursuant to the agreement of the parties, the district will rescind the March 15 
notices it issued to respondents Melissa Innes, Ann D. Rapacki, and Yolanda Marie White.  

Pursuant to the agreement of the parties, the district will rescind the March 15 

13. 

14. 

 

3

17. 

16. 

15. 

Pursuant to the agreement of the parties, the March 15 notices issued to 

By reason of the matters set forth above, there are no issues with respect to 

The parties have stipulated that the district may effectuate the PKS resolution 

Each of these teachers holds a multiple subject credential as well as a supplementary 
authorization in Math and/or English.  The accusations issued against these respondents will 
be dismissed. 
 
 
respondents Vickie Neves and Esther Rodriquez will be rescinded.  The accusations against 
these respondents will be dismissed.  
 
 
competency, bumping or skipping. 
 
K-5 Classroom Teacher Reduction   
 
 
reduction of 80 FTE K-5 Classroom Teachers by issuing final notices to teachers holding 
52.5 FTE positions.  The district will therefore rescind the March 15 notices it issued to the 
following certificated employees (listed here in reverse seniority order):  Christianne 
Kapelle-Curtis; Kenneth Bone-Rundle; Zoe Wilson; Ruth Rodriguez; Damian Arvizu; 
Benjamin Simons; Annamaria Rivoli; Jill Bledsoe; Jane Rojas; Josephina Schneider; Martha 
Castro; Marlene Chantri; Penny Shanks; Carrie Rolla; David Tremblay; Michelle Territo; 
Arianne Piedrahita; Maria Del Sol Vasquez-Ares; and, Jennifer Brito.1   
 
Nurse Reduction  
 
 
Oslan, a 1 FTE nurse, prior to hearing.  The accusation against Oslan will be dismissed.   
 
 
Nancy Powell, a .4 FTE nurse.  The accusation against Powell will be dismissed.   
 
Tie-Breaking  
 

19.  At hearing, the district agreed to rescind the March 15 notice it issued to 

The district rescinded the March 15 notice it issued to respondent Karen 

18. 

20. 

In its resolution, the board established criteria for determining the order of 
termination among certificated employees who have the same seniority date.  The criteria 
were applied to certificated employees who share the same seniority date.  By reason of the 
matters set forth above, there are no issues with respect to the application of the tie-breaking 
criteria to respondents.  
 
 

                                                 
 
these teachers will be rescinded as set forth in Finding 14. 

1  The parties’ stipulation also included respondents Innes, Rapacki, and White.  The notices to 

 

4

Other Matters 
 
 
21.  All contentions made by respondents not specifically addressed above are 

found to be without merit and are rejected.   
 
 
permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service 
which the permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.  

Based on the above, no permanent employee is being terminated while a 

22. 

The cause for the reduction in particular kinds of services relates to the welfare 

 
23. 

of the schools and the pupils thereof. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

3. 

4. 

2. 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 13, there is no cause pursuant to 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 14, there is no cause pursuant to 

 
 
44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been 
provided as required. 
 
 
Education Code section 44955 to give a final notice to respondents Genevieve De L’ao, 
Victoria Defouw, Perpetual Doyle, Elizabeth Love, Gwendolyn Minor, and Tonya Reed.   
 
 
Education Code section 44955 to give a final notice to respondents Melissa Innes, Ann D. 
Rapacki, and Yolanda Marie White. 
 
 
By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 15, there is no cause pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955 to give a final notice to respondents Vickie Neves and Esther 
Rodriquez. 
 
 
Education Code section 44955 to give a final notice to respondents Christianne Kapelle-
Curtis, Kenneth Bone-Rundle, Zoe Wilson, Ruth Rodriguez, Damian Arvizu, Benjamin 
Simmons, Annamaria Rivoli, Jill Bledsoe, Jane Rojas, Josephina Schneider, Martha Castro, 
Marlene Chantri, Penny Shanks, Carrie Rolla, David Tremblay, Michelle Territo, Arianne 
Piedrahita, Maria Del Sol Vasquez-Ares, and Jennifer Brito.   
 
 
pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give a final notice to respondents Karen Oslan 
and Nancy Powell.  
 
 
pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services 
will be reduced or eliminated for the 2010-2011 school year.  This cause relates solely to 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 17, there is no cause pursuant to 

By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 18 and 19, there is no cause 

Except as stated above, cause exists because of the reduction of services 

6. 

5. 

7. 

 

5

welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 
44949.  
 

ORDER  
 

1. 

The accusations against respondents Damian Arvizu, Jill Bledsoe, Kenneth 

 
Bone-Rundle, Jennifer Brito, Martha Castro, Marlene Chantri, Genevieve De L’ao, Victoria 
Defouw, Perpetual Doyle, Melissa Innes, Christianne Kapelle-Curtis, Elizabeth Love, 
Gwendolyn Minor, Vickie Neves, Karen Oslan, Arianne Piedrahita, Nancy Powell, Ann 
Rapacki, Tonya Reed, Annamaria Rivoli, Esther Rodriquez, Ruth Rodriguez; Jane Rojas, 
Carrie Rolla, Josephina Schneider, Penny Shanks, Benjamin Simons, Michelle Territo, David 
Tremblay, Maria Del Sol Vasquez-Ares, Yolanda Marie White, and Zoe Wilson are 
dismissed.  
 
 
services will be reduced or eliminated for the 2010-2011 school year.   
 
 
DATED:  May 13, 2010 
 

Except as set forth above, notice may be given to respondents that their 

2. 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
MELISSA G. CROWELL 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

6

