 
 

BEFORE THE 
 GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
FILLMORE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF VENTURA 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION

Margaret  A.  Chidester,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Jeff  Sweeney  (Sweeney), 

Nancy  Beezy  Micon,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

      
 
       OAH Case No.  2010030583 
 
 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation against: 
 
Raina Arellano, et al., who are  
Certificated Employees of the Fillmore  
Unified School District, 
 
                                         Respondents. 
 
 
 
 
 
heard this matter on April 19, 2009, in Fillmore, California. 
 
 
Superintendent of the Fillmore Unified School District (District). 
 
Tareq M. Hishmeh, Attorney at Law, represented Respondents Luana Barajas (Barajas), 
 
Melanie  Chisholm  (Chisholm),  Julie  Chang  (Chang),  Andreana  DeMoss  (DeMoss),  Veronica 
Duran  (Duran),  Randy  Garcia  (Garcia),  Barbara  Leija  (Leija),  Viviana  Magana-Laureano 
(Magana-Laureano),  Julie  McKeever-Coert  (McKeever-Coert),  Marilla  Mittan  (Mittan),  Aide 
Recendez (Recendez), Kristina Renelli (Renelli), Delia Silva (Silva), Lacy Swensen (Swensen), 
Christine Villegas (Villegas), and Janelle Williams (Williams).   
 
The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2010-2011  school  year. 
Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not 
reemploying them for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
Prior to the start of the hearing, the District rescinded its notices of non-reemployment 
issued to, and the Accusation as it pertains to, Respondents Raina Arellano (Arellano), Heather 
Atwood  (Atwood),  Raymond  Barrera  (Barrera),  Kathleen  Berrington  (Berrington),  Jill  Capra 
(Capra),  Judith  Chaffee  (Chaffee),  Claudia  Cornejo  (Cornejo),  Shelia  DeMeritt  (DeMeritt),  
Kristen  Dunst  (Dunst),  Paul  Fitzgerald  (Fitzgerald),  Jennifer  Fitzpatrick  (Fitzpatrick),  Joseph 
Fry (Fry), Mary Allyn Garcia-Lovett  (Garcia-Lovett),  Patricia  Gradias  (Gradias),  Carrie  Gray 
(Gray), Amber Henrey (Henrey), Susan Hersh (Hersh), Nancy Kirkpatrick (Kirkpatrick), Kristy 
Lim (Lim), Jenny Lindemann (Lindemann), Debra Louth (Louth), Marisa Martinez (Martinez), 

Evidence was received by way of stipulation, testimony and documents.  The record was 

Although  Respondent  Chang  did  not  submit  a  notice  of  defense,  she  appeared  at  the 

Before the start of the hearing, Respondent Daniel Vincent (Vincent) resigned from his 

Theresa Marvel (Marvel), Maria Meza (Meza), Kevin Molloy (Molloy), Norma Perez-Sandford 
(Perez-Sandford),  Valorie  Potter  (Potter),  Martha  Ramos  (Ramos),  Rebecca  Raskin  (Raskin), 
Juliette  Resor  (Resor),  Ronda  Reyes-Deutsch  (Reyes-Deutsch),  Brian  Ricards  (Ricards),  Erin 
Sebek (E. Sebek), Mark Sebek (M. Sebek), Carolyn Shea (Shea), Matthew Stockton (Stockton), 
Jennifer Weir (Weir), and James White (White).  
 
 
position for the 2010-2011 school year.   
 
 
hearing and the District did not challenge her status as a Respondent.   
 
 
Respondents  Arellano,  Atwood,  Barrera,  Berrington,  Capra,  Chaffee,  Cornejo, 
DeMeritt, DeMoss, Dunst, Fitzgerald,  Fitzpatrick,  Fry,  Garcia-Lovett,  Gradias,  Gray,  Henrey, 
Hersh, Cristina Ibarbia (Ibarbia), Kirkpatrick, Leija, Lim, Lindemann, Louth, Martinez, Marvel, 
Meza, Mittan, Molloy, Perez-Sandford, Potter, Ramos, Raskin, Resor, Reyes-Deutch, Ricards, 
E.  Sebek,  M.  Sebek,  Shea,  Stockton,  Villegas,  Vincent,  Weir,  White,  and  Williams  were  not 
present at the hearing. 
 
 
closed, and the matter submitted for decision on April 19, 2010.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On  March  2,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
adopted Resolution Number 09-10-14, reducing or discontinuing the following services for the 
2010-2011 school year: 
 
 
 
Elementary School Classroom Teaching 
Elementary School Music Teaching   
 
School Psychology 
Categorical Programs Coordinator 
 
Sespe School Intervention Teaching  
Alternative Education Teaching 
 
                     

Superintendent Sweeney filed the Accusation in his official capacity. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

20.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  0.8 
  3.0 

               FTE1 Reduction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Service 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 

1. 

3. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 Full-time equivalent position. 

 

 
 
 

2

 

 

5. 

4. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 

 
Sierra High School dean 
Middle School science teaching 
 
Middle School social studies teaching 
 
High School English teaching 
 
High School science teaching 
High School health teaching   
 
High School social studies teaching   
 
Middle School Counseling 
 
Middle School English teaching 
 
High School math teaching 
 
 
Elementary School principal   
Independent Study teaching   
 
 
Total                                                                                                   38.8  
 
 
Superintendent  Sweeney  thereafter  provided  written  notice  to  the  Governing 
Board and to Respondents that he recommended the termination of Respondents’ services for 
the 2010-2011 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
On March 9 through 15, 2010, the District provided notice to Respondents that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2010-2011  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of 
particular kinds of services. Respondents filed timely requests for hearing.  
 
 
On March 22 through 26, 2010, the District filed and served the Accusation and 
other  required  documents  on  Respondents.  Respondents  thereafter  timely  filed  notices  of 
defense,  seeking  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the 
2010-2011 school year.  
 
 
 
 
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.2
 
 
The Governing Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth 
in factual finding number 3 primarily because of uncertainty surrounding future funding. The 
District estimates a revenue shortfall for the 2010-2011 school year. The decision to reduce the 
particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of 
the District's discretion. 
 
                     

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

7. 

8. 

6. 

9. 

 
2 All further references are to the Education Code. 

 

 
 
 

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

Service 

10.  After 

               FTE Reduction

the  District  and 
the  adoption  of  Resolution  Number  09-10-14, 
 
representatives  from  the  California  Teachers’  Association  (CTA)  reached  an  agreement 
allowing a reduction in the school year, incentives for teacher retirement, and an adjustment in 
health and welfare benefits.  As a result, the number of positions to be reduced was decreased 
from 38.8 to 16.7, as follows:  
 
 
 
Elementary School Classroom Teaching 
 
School Psychology 
 
Categorical Programs Coordinator 
Sespe School Intervention Teaching  
 
Middle School science teaching 
 
Middle School English teaching 
 
 
High School math teaching 
Elementary School principal   
 
 
Total                                                                                                   16.7  
 
 
The reduction of services set forth in factual finding numbers 3 and 10 is related 
to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number 
of certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board. 
 
 
The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  and  retirements  in 
determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.  
In  determining  the  number  of  final  layoff  notices  to  issue,  the  District  expects  to  take  into 
account any retirements and resignations to reduce the number of actual layoff notices. 
 

10.7 
  0.4 
  1.0 
  0.8 
  0.8 
  1.0 
  1.0 
  1.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12. 

11. 

 
13.  On  March  2,  2010,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  criteria  for  determining  the 
relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  
It  provided  that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its 
students. The tie-breaking criteria are reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of 
certificated employees, and the District properly applied the criteria. 
 
14.  At  the  hearing,  the  District  rescinded  the  Accusations  against  Respondents 
 
DeMoss,  Leija,  McKeever-Coert,  Mittan,  Recendez,  Renelli,  Silva,  Villegas,  and  Williams.  
The parties agreed that Mittan and Villegas are temporary teachers who may be released from 
service for the 2010-2011 school year.   
 
 
from a 1.0 FTE position to a 0.2 FTE position.  

The parties agreed that the services of Respondent Chisholm would be reduced 

15. 

 

 
 
 

4

16. 

 
 
The  District  did  not  retain  any  certificated  employee  junior  to  Respondents 
Barajas, Chang, Chisholm, Duran, Garcia, Ibarbia, Magana-Laureano, or, Swensen, to render a 
service which these Respondents are certificated and competent to render.   
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

 
 
44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 7. 
 
The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
 
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 
and 8.   
 
Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction of the particular 
 
kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause relates solely to the welfare 
of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 16.   
 
 
Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondents  Luana  Barajas,  Julie 
Chang, Veronica Duran, Randy Garcia, Cristina Ibarbia, Viviana Magana-Laureano, and Lacy 
Swensen, and to reduce the services of Melanie Chisholm from one full time equivalent (FTE) 
position  to  a  0.2  FTE  position,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  16,  and  legal 
conclusion numbers 1 through 3.  
 

4. 

RECOMMENDATION 

2. 

1. 

 
 
It is recommended that the Accusation be sustained, and the District may notify 
Respondents  Luana  Barajas,  Julie  Chang,  Veronica  Duran,  Randy  Garcia,  Cristina  Ibarbia, 
Viviana  Magana-Laureano,  Lacy  Swensen,  and  Daniel  Vincent  that  their  services  will  not  be 
needed  during  the  2010-2011  school  year,  and  that  Melanie  Chisholm’s  services  may  be 
reduced to a 0.2 FTE position, due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
It  is  recommended  that  the  layoff  notice  be  rescinded,  and  the  Accusation  be 
dismissed  as  to  Respondents  Raina  Arellano,  Heather  Atwood,  Raymond  Barrera,  Kathleen 
Berrington, Jill Capra, Judith Chaffee, Claudia Cornejo, Shelia DeMeritt,  Andreana DeMoss, 
Kristen  Dunst,  Paul  Fitzgerald,  Jennifer  Fitzpatrick,  Joseph  Fry,  Mary  Allyn  Garcia-Lovett, 
Patricia Gradias, Carrie Gray, Amber Henrey, Susan Hersh, Nancy Kirkpatrick, Barbara Leija, 
Kristy  Lim,  Jenny  Lindemann,  Debra  Louth,  Marisa  Martinez,  Theresa  Marvel,  Julie 
McKeever-Coert,  Maria  Meza,  Marilla  C.  Mittan,  Kevin  Molloy,  Norma  Perez-Sandford, 
Valoria Potter, Martha Ramos, Rebecca Raskin, Aide Recendez, Kristina Renelli, Juliette  
 
/// 

 

 
 
 

5

 
Resor,  Ronda  Reyes-Deutsch,  Brian  Ricards,  Erin  Sebek,  Mark  Sebek,  Carolyn  Shea,  Delia 
Silva, Matthew Stockton, Christine Villegas, Jennifer Weir, James White, and Janelle Williams.  
 
DATED:  May 6, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 
 

 
 
Administrative Law Judge 
 

 
                                 
         
 

____________________________ 
Nancy Beezy Micon 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

6

