BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE  
MORONGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Involving the Respondent’s Identified in 
Exhibit A. 
 
 
 

 

OAH No. 2010030635 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 15, 2010, in Twentynine Palms, 
California. 
 

Mark Thompson, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented Morongo 

Unified School District.  

Karla Buchanan appeared and represented herself. 

Jocelyn McMinn appeared and represented herself. 

 
Dana Martinez, Attorney at Law, represented 16 of the respondents identified in 

No appearance was made by or on behalf of respondents Heather Bawdon, Jessica 

 
Appendix A, as well as the three employees listed in Appendix B who received 
precautionary layoff notices.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bellenfant, Tanya Charles, Jessica Dellinger, Caitlin Eash, Pamela Graham, Jessica Hadley, 
Robert Harrigan, Chelcee Hughes, Jill Mitsch, Cecelia Nicholson, Lindsay Owens, Katherine 
Palunuik, Dana Queener, Regina Schwab, Ashley Smith, Sharon Stanberry, and Denise 
Tennison, who did not request a hearing.  
 
 
Newby, who requested a hearing. 
 
 
 
 

No appearance was made by or on behalf of respondents Sherri Gonzalez and Rachel 

The matter was submitted on April 15, 2010. 

 

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1. 

 
 
Douglas Weller made and filed the accusation in his official capacity as the 
Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources of the Morongo Unified School District (the 
district). 
 

2. 

Respondents are identified in Appendices A and B, which are attached hereto 

and incorporated by reference.  Each respondent is a certificated employee of the district.  
The respondents listed in Exhibit A are those employees whom the district proposes laying 
off and the respondents listed in Exhibit B are those employees to whom the district issued 
precautionary layoff notices. 

5. 

4. 

An accusation was served on each respondent.  All prehearing jurisdictional 

On February 16, 2010, the district’s governing board adopted Resolution No. 

 
10-11, which reduced particular kinds of services and directed the superintendent to give 
appropriate notices to those certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the 
action.  The resolution specified that 42 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions were to be to be 
reduced. 
 
On and before March 1, 2010, Assistant Superintendent Douglas Weller gave 
 
written notice to 38 certificated employees of the recommendation that their services would 
not be required for the 2010-11 school year and he gave written precautionary layoff notices 
to three employees that their services might not be required for the 2010-11 school year.  The 
reasons for the recommendation were set forth in these preliminary layoff notices. 
 
 
requirements were met. 
 
 
positively assured attrition.  The district must issue final layoff notices before May 15, and 
when it does so, the district will take into account any additional attrition that has occurred.  
After that, any further attrition will allow the district to rehire laid off employees.  
Documents introduced at hearing contained the names of 17 employees who had retired or 
resigned, most of whom were unaccounted for when the governing board passed Resolution 
No. 10-11.  Respondents argued that the governing board’s failure to consider these 
vacancies caused by the retirement of these individuals before issuing the March 15 notices 
disrupted respondents’ lives and invalidated the entire layoff proceeding.  However, the 
evidence did not establish that the attrition that now exists was “positively assured” as of 
March 15, 2010.  Moreover, respondents failed to demonstrate prejudice because the district 
has acknowledged that it will continue to consider those retirements and resignations in this 
reduction in force proceeding, and that it will recall and rehire respondents in accordance 
with their seniority rights.  

Before issuing the preliminary layoff notices, the district took into account all 

6. 

The layoffs will not reduce any of the district’s offerings in any courses below 

the level required by law.  

 
3. 

 
7. 

 

 

2

8. 

The district defined “competency” pursuant to Education Code section 44955, 

 
subdivision (b), for the purposes of bumping as: “(1) possession of a valid credential in the 
relevant subject matter area; (2) for secondary math and science position the ability to bump 
the whole F.T.E. assignment.”  The evidence did not establish that the district’s competency 
criteria were arbitrary or capricious.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627, 637.)  
 
 
termination for those employees who shared the same seniority dates.  
 
 
employee could bump into a position being held by a junior employee.  
 

The district also created a bump analysis to determine which qualified senior 

The district established tie-breaking criteria to determine the order of 

10. 

9. 

11. 

Respondents argued that there were sufficient funds in the budget to retain all 
the respondents.  However, insufficient evidence on this was introduced at hearing, and the 
decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is matter reserved to the district’s 
discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this proceeding.  (Rutherford v. Board of 
Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  A school district 
has wide discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was 
fraudulent or so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a 
matter of law.  (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 
Cal.App.3d 318, 322.) 
 

12. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c), set forth a general rule 
requiring school districts to retain senior employees over more junior employees and to retain 
permanent employees over temporary employees.  Any exception to this general rule must be 
based on statute. 
 
13.  A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not be 

 
fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious.  For employees hired on the same date, Education Code 
section 44955, subdivision (d) provides: 
 

“(d)  Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a 
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons: 
 

(1) 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential with 
a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that 
the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that 
course or course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority 
do not possess. 
 

(2) 

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with constitutional 

requirements related to equal protection of the laws.” 

 

 

3

 

 
15. 

14.  Under subdivision (d)(1), the district may skip a junior teacher over a more 
senior teacher for specified reasons.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 
Cal.App.4th 127, 131.)  Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers 
only if the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior 
counterparts lack.  (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of 
Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)  

Respondent Heather Sterling possesses an English credential and a BCLAD 

 
credential.  She teaches a reading intervention program, Language!, and is being bumped by 
a more senior employee1 with an English credential and AB 2913 authorization2 who teaches 
social science at the continuation school.  The district alleged that the more senior employee 
had the competency to bump Sterling because the senior employee possessed an English 
credential; however, Assistant Superintendent Weller admitted during his testimony that the 
district requires teachers to complete a language reading intervention training course in order 
to teach the reading intervention program.  The parties stipulated that Sterling had the 
requisite training to teach the reading intervention program, but that the more senior teacher 
did not.  The district argued that the more senior teacher could obtain the training in the 
future and/or while teaching the course, because Sterling began teaching reading intervention 
before she had completed the training.  However, the district offered no evidence to support 
that position and its assertion was contradicted by Weller’s testimony.  Without that critical 
evidence, it was established that Sterling is currently a junior employee who possesses special 
competence as a result of her training and who should be retained over the senior employee who 
currently lacks such competence.  (Alexander v. Delano Joint Union High School District 
(1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567.)  It is recommended that the district rescind Sterling’s layoff 
notice, dismiss the accusation, and reinstate her to her employment.  
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, 

2. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 

3. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 

Identified as Employee #113 on the seniority list. 

                     
1  
 
2  
 

AB 2913 is a 40-hour program that allows English teachers to teach English learners.  

 

 

4

senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is currently filling that 
position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.)  Junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers only if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Santa 
Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified 
School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) 

 
4. 

Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant 
 
to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.  The 
district has properly identified the certificated employees who are providing the particular 
kinds of services that the governing board directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is 
recommended that the governing board give all respondents other than Heather Sterling 
notice before  
May 15, 2009, that their services will not be required by the District for the school year 
2010-11. 
 
 
accusation, subject to the recommendations listed in the factual findings.  This determination 
is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 
 
 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

5. 

RECOMMENDATION 
 
It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the respondents whose 

names are set forth below except for Heather Sterling (identified in the Factual Finding 15) 
that their employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their 
services will not be needed for the 2010-2011 school year. 

 

 
 
DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 
 
                               
                               
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings  

 

5

 
 

Appendix A 

  

LAST NAME 

FIRST NAME 

  

LAST NAME 

FIRST NAME 

1  BARONE-JACKSON 

2  BAWDON 

3  BEATTY 

4  BELLENFANT 

5  BOYLES 

6  BRAGINTON 

7  BUCHANAN 

8  CARNES 

9  CHARLES 

10  DAHLBERG 

11  DELLINGER 

12  DENOGEAN 

13  EASH 

14  GONZALEZ 

15  GRAHAM 

16  HADLEY 

17  HARRIGAN 

18  HENRY 

19  HOVEY 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MICHELLE L 

NICOLE M 

JESSICA F 

HEATHER N 

KIMBERLY A 

 
 
 
 
 
 
KARLA A 
 
CHRISTINE M   
TANYA A 
 

PAULINE 

JENNIFER C 

JESSICA M 

MONICA 

CAITLIN R 

SHERRI A 

PAMELA J 

JESSICA A 

ROBERT G 

SUSAN M 

TOM A 

20  HUGHES 

21  JONES 

22  McCALLUM 

23  McMINN 

24  MITSCH 

25  NEWBY 

26  NICHOLSON 

27  NORQUIST 

28  OWENS 

29  PALANUIK 

30  QUEENER 

31  SCHWAB 

32  SMITH 

33  STANBERRY 

   

35  TENNISON 

36  VILLAMERO 

37  WALTERS 

38  WILKINSON 

CHELCEE K 

PHILLIP D 

KOJO L 

JOCELYN G 

JILL M 

RACHEL D 

CECELIA 

MELISSA K 

LINDSEY A 

KATHERINE 
K 
DANA B 

REGINA M 

ASHLEY M 

SHARON I 

 

DENISE R 

LEANNE K 

DOUGLAS A 

ZACHARY 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6

 

 

 

LAST NAME 

1  ANNALA 

2  HOWES 

3  VONGPRATEEP 

Appendix B 

FIRST NAME 

 

JOHN A. 

STEVEN E. 

K. PEARL 

 
 
 

 

   

   

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

7

