BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE  
SAN YSIDRO SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

         OAH No. 2010020339 
 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Involving the Respondent’s Identified in 
Exhibit A. 
 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 22, 2010, in San Ysidro, California. 
 

Maria Mendoza, Garcia, Calderon, Ruiz LLP, represented San Ysidro School District.  

 
 
Jon Vanderpool, Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax, represented the respondents 
identified in Appendix A, including respondents Gabriela Gonzalez and Victor Vargas who 
did not appear at hearing or file notices of defense.1  
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 22, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1. 

Jennifer Brown de Valle2 made and filed the accusation in her official capacity 

as Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources of the San Ysidro School District. 
 

2. 

Respondents are identified on Appendix A, attached hereto and by this 

3. 

On February 25, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 09/10-

reference are incorporated herein.  Each respondent is a certificated employee of the district. 
 
 
0007 reducing particular kinds of services and directing the superintendent to give 
appropriate notices to certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the 
action.  The resolution identified 30 FTEs to be reduced.  The decision to reduce or 
discontinue a particular kind of service is matter reserved to the district’s discretion and is not 
                     
1  
 
2  

The parties stipulated that all respondents filed a request for hearing. 

Jennifer Brown de Valle is also known as Jennifer Brown. 

 

 

 

1

6. 

4. 

5. 

The district skipped employees who possess an active special education 

In its resolution the district defined “competency” pursuant to Education Code 

subject to second-guessing in this proceeding.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower 
Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) 
 
 
section 44955, subdivision (b), as an employee who had actually rendered instruction or 
services in the subject matter area in which he/she claimed to be entitled to render instruction 
or services, while employed by the district.  
 
 
The district established skipping criteria pursuant to Education Code section 
44955(d)(1).  The district was required to implement the governing board’s resolution in a 
manner that was consistent with the board’s policies and the district’s efforts to offer certain 
services to its students.  There is no legal requirement mandating that skipping criteria be 
contained in a governing board’s resolution.  Employees who met any of the skipping criteria 
for some but not all of their assignment(s) shall be retained only as to that portion of their 
assignment that meets the skipping criteria.  
 
 
credential, are currently working in a special education position, and are expected to work as 
a special education teacher in the 2010-2011 school year.  The district skipped special 
education teachers because it is difficult to recruit and retain teachers to fill those positions.  
 
 
Determination (AVID) certification and are expected to teach AVID in seventh and/or eighth 
grade classes in the 2010-2011 school year.  The district skipped AVID teachers because of 
the district’s need to expose its students to the concept of obtaining a post-secondary 
education and to prepare them for college.  
 
 
mathematics, have taught mathematics in a core setting in the seventh and/or eighth grades 
during each year in the past four school years including the current 2009-2010 school year, 
and are expected to teach mathematics, in a core setting in the seventh and/or eighth grades 
in the 2010-2011 school years.  The district skipped mathematics teachers because it is 
difficult to recruit and retain teachers to fill those positions and the district is focused on 
improving its students’ math scores.  
 

The district skipped employees who possess Advancement Via Individual 

The district skipped employees who possess specialized training in 

8. 

7. 

9. 

The district’s skip list demonstrated that 19 teachers had been skipped; 12 
because of special education, four because of AVID, and three because of mathematics.  

 
10. 

The district established tie-breaking criteria to determine the order of 

 
termination for those employees who shared the same seniority dates.  
 
 
could bump into a position being held by a junior employee.  
 

11. 

The district also implemented a bump analysis to determine which employees 

 

2

12. 

The evidence established that the master schedules for the schools for the 2010-

 
2011 school year have not yet been established.  
 
13.  On or about March 3, 2010,3 Superintendent Manuel Paul gave written notice 
 
to certificated employees, including respondents, of the recommendation that their services 
would not be required for the 2010-11 school year.  The reasons for the recommendation 
were set forth in these preliminary layoff notices.  Thereafter, an accusation was served on 
each respondent. 
 
 
this matter and that all prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 

14.  A Stipulation introduced at hearing indicated that there were 17 respondents in 

15. 

Before issuing the preliminary layoff notices, the district took into account all 

positively assured attrition.  The district must issue final layoff notices before May 15, and 
when it does so the district will take into account any additional attrition that has occurred.  
After that, further attrition will allow the district to rehire laid off employees.  The testimony 
between Superintendent Paul and Assistant Superintendent Brown was in conflict regarding 
whether or not any employees had retired since March 15, but the district asserted that it 
would continue to consider those attritions for purposes of rehiring and recalling 
respondents, and no evidence contradicted that assertion. 

The layoffs will not reduce any of the district’s offerings in code mandated 

courses below the level required by law.  

 
The district alleged that it had relied on its seniority list when making layoff 
decisions which was the reason it sent verification requests to employees prior to March 15 
to verify the accuracy of the information on that list.4  During the hearing the district revised 
its seniority list but those revisions5 did not result in the district rescinding any layoff 
notices.  
 
 
Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c), set forth a general rule 
requiring school districts to retain senior employees over more junior employees and to retain 
permanent employees over temporary employees.  Any exception to this general rule must be 
based on statute.  For employees hired on the same date, Education Code section 44955, 
subdivision (d) provides: 
 

18. 

“(d)  Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a 
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons: 
 

 
16. 

 
17. 

The district introduced a sample of the notice sent to employees which was dated March 3, 2010. 

The district also referenced the seniority list that was introduced into evidence at last year’s hearing. 

Respondent Norma Sedano was placed “higher up” on the seniority list, above two employees and 

                     
3 
 
4  
 
5  
Respondent Luis Ramos was placed ahead of one employee. 

 

3

(1) 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential with 
a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that 
the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that 
course or course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority 
do not possess. 
 

(2) 

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with constitutional 

requirements related to equal protection of the laws.” 

 

19.  Under subdivision (d)(1), the District may skip a junior teacher being retained for 
specified reasons.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 131.)  
Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers only if the junior 
teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)   

 
A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not be 

fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627, 637.)  A district’s decision to retain junior bilingual teachers absent a showing 
that they were employed to teach classes in a formal bilingual program was improper.  
(Alexander v. Delano Joint Union High School District (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567.) 

 
20.  At issue in this hearing was the district’s skipping criteria.  Three respondents, 

Ana Alvidrez, Luis Ramos and Brenda Huerta testified that they are credentialed and competent 
to teach math at the middle school, although all three currently teach at an elementary school.  
The district’s middle schools are structured as “Core settings” in which the teachers teach in 
two subject areas, either English Language Arts and History or Mathematics and Science.  The 
district described the unique characteristics of the Core math program, all of which the 
elementary school teachers implement.6  Assistant Superintendent Brown explained the 
Improvement Plans currently taking place in the district and the great strides the district has 
made to improve student test scores and performances.  Assistant Superintendent Brown 
credibly explained the needs of the district to retain math teachers in the middle schools.  
Respondent Huerta had at one time accepted an offer to teach math at the middle school and 
then changed her mind to accept a position at the elementary school.  Unfortunately, the risk 
any teacher runs when choosing which district job to take is the possibility that the chosen job 
will be eliminated, as occurred here.  The district’s decision to skip middle school mathematics 
teachers did not appear arbitrary or capricious. 

 
21. 

The more disturbing skip was the district’s decision to skip middle school AVID 

certified teachers.  AVID is a program designed to teach certain skills to students in order to 
better their chances for attending college.  In the 2009 layoff proceeding, the district skipped all 
teachers who were AVID certified, a skip that was upheld following last year’s hearing.  This 
                     
6  
scores and data and teacher trainings. 

Those characteristics included team meetings, collaboration with colleagues, reviews and analysis of test 

 

4

year the district narrowed its skip to AVID certified teachers who were expected to teach AVID 
to seventh and/or eighth graders during the next school year.  The district explained that the 
AVID middle school program, unlike in the elementary schools, consists of a separate AVID 
class taught to a specific group of students and that AVID middle school teachers undergo 
unique and more intensive training than do AVID elementary school teachers.  

 
22.  While the evidence established that AVID middle school teachers have received 

additional training that their elementary colleagues have not, it did not establish that the 
respondents who are presently AVID certified were not certified and competent to teach an 
AVID middle school course.  Although there are various trainings that teachers can take after 
receiving AVID certification, and those trainings appeared to be directed towards the particular 
ages of students taught, the initial AVID certification is the same for all teachers; there is no 
distinction between certification for middle school AVID teachers and certification for 
elementary school AVID teachers.  As such, the district’s skip was a distinction without a 
difference making the skip arbitrary and capricious. 

 
23. 

Respondents Brenda Huerta and Norma Sedano asked the district to take the 
AVID training, but were refused.  Respondents Luis Ramos and Catalina Jauregui, who are 
AVID certified, requested to participate in the additional middle school AVID training but were 
denied.  Specifically precluding groups of teachers from participating in the middle school 
AVID training and then using that training as a basis to skip those teachers, further made the use 
of that AVID training as a skipping criteria arbitrary and capricious.7  This is not to say that the 
use of AVID certification as a skipping criteria was arbitrary and capricious; rather its 
restriction to middle school teachers in the district’s resolution made it so.8  

  
24.  Any respondent certificated and competent, who received a layoff notice and 

 
is senior to a certificated employee who was skipped because the junior teacher was an 
AVID middle school teacher was improperly noticed, the notice should be rescinded and that 
respondent retained.  Respondents Brenda Huerta, Norma Sedano, Luis Ramos, and Catalina 
Jauregui who requested AVID training, but were denied by the district, were improperly 
noticed, the notices should be rescinded and those respondents retained. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, 

Even assuming arguendo that the skip was not arbitrary, the district’s resolution only skipped employees with 

and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required. 
 
                     
7 
AVID certification “who are expected to teach AVID” in middle school next year and since the master schedules are not 
final, the evidence did no establish that any of the AVID respondents were unable to meet that skip.  
 
8  
As an aside, the district’s resolution appeared to be inconsistent with its professed desire to implement AVID 
district-wide to all of its students.  If that were true, it seemed odd to implement a resolution which would eliminate any 
AVID certified teachers.  
 

 

 

5

2. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)   
 

3. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.)  Junior teachers 
may be given retention priority over senior teachers only if the junior teachers possess 
superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School 
District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) 

 
4. 

 
Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant 
to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2010-2011 school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.  The 
district has identified the certificated employees who are providing the particular kinds of 
services that the Governing Board directed be reduced or discontinued.  It is recommended 
that the Governing Board give respondents notice before May 15, 2009, that their services 
will not be required by the District for the school year 2010-11. 
 
 
accusation subject to the recommendations listed in the factual findings.   This determination 
is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions. 
 
 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the 

5. 

RECOMMENDATION 
 
It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the respondents whose 

names are set forth below except for those respondents identified above in the Findings of 
Fact Nos. 21-24, inclusive, that their employment will be terminated at the close of the 
current school year and that their services will not be needed for the 2010-2011 school year. 

 
 

 
DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 
 
                               

 

 

 

________________________________ 

 

6

                               
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings  

 

7

Appendix A 

 
             RESPONDENTS 

 

Ana Veronica Alvidrez 
Alejandra Camacho 
Amy Carey 
Sally J. Del Rio 
Karla Garciadealba 
Gabriela Gonzalez 
Lorena Guerrero 
Brenda Huerta 
Catalina Jauregui 
Christian Lopez 
Carmen Luna 
Cynthia Mosqueda 
Vanessa Murphy 
Luis Ramos 
Yvonne San Martin Vallejo 
Norma Sedano 
Loreana Torres 
Erika Valarezo 
Victor Vargas 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
 

 

8

