BEFORE THE 
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 
TULARE COUNTY 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Employment Status of: 
 
RONNI AGUILAR, et al., 
 
                                                 Respondents. 
 
 

 
 
 
    OAH No. 2010031425 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Robert Walker, Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of 

 
 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Visalia, California, on April 29, 2010. 
 

Desiree Y. Serrano, Deputy County Counsel, County of Tulare,1 represented the 
complainant, Jim Vidak, County Superintendent of Schools, Tulare County, California. 
 

James F. McBrearty, Attorney at Law, 2 represented the respondents.  There are seven 

respondents, and they are listed in exhibit A. 
 

The matter was submitted on April 29, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
GENERAL FINDINGS CONCERNING STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS 
 

Respondents are certificated district employees. 

1. 

2. 

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955,3 provide for two notices to be 

given in connection with terminating an employee.  The first notice is given by the 
superintendent.  The superintendent makes a recommendation that certain employees be laid 
off, and the superintendent gives notice of that recommendation to those employees and the 
                                                

1 Desiree Y. Serrano, Deputy County Counsel, County of Tulare, 2900 W. Burrel, County Civic Center, 

Visalia, California 93291. 

 
2 James F. McBrearty, Attorney at Law, 750 E Bullard, Suite 101, Fresno, California 93710. 
 
3 All references to the Code are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified. 
 

 
 

 

 

1

governing board.  The superintendent must give that notice no later than March 15.  That 
notice will be referred to as the Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff Recommendation.  There 
is no requirement that a governing board take any action in March.  But while it is 
unnecessary, governing boards usually adopt a resolution ratifying the superintendent’s 
recommendation.   
 

3. 

In this case, because the superintendent is the employing authority, he 

designated a delegate to give the Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff Recommendation. 
 

4. 

The second notice is a notice of a governing board’s decision to terminate an 
employee.  That notice is provided for in Code section 44955 and must be given before May 
15. 
 

5. 

In this case, not later than March 15, 2010, the superintendent’s delegate 

caused the superintendent and respondents to be notified in writing that it was recommended 
that respondents be notified before May 15, 2010, that the County Office would not require 
their services for the ensuing school year. 
 

6. 

The Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff Recommendation stated the reasons for 

the recommendation.  The recommendation was not related to respondents’ competency. 
 

7. 

A Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff Recommendation was delivered to each 
respondent, either by personal delivery or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, 
registered, postage prepaid, and addressed to respondent’s last known address. 
 

8. 

The Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff Recommendation advised each 

respondent of the following: He or she had a right to a hearing.  In order to obtain a hearing, 
he or she had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person sending the notice.  
The request had to be delivered by a specified date, which was a date that was not less than 
seven days after the notice was served.4  And the failure to request a hearing would 
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
 

9. 

Respondents timely filed written requests for a hearing to determine whether 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing year.  An accusation was timely 
served on respondents.  Respondents were given notice that, if they were going to request a 
hearing, they were required to file a notice of defense within five days after being served 
with the accusation.5  Respondents filed timely notices of defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met. 
                                                

4 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.  Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a hearing “shall not be less than 
seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee.” 

5 Pursuant to Government Code section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served must file a notice 
of defense in order to obtain a hearing.  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher 
termination cases, the notice of defense must be filed within five days after service of the accusation. 

 

2

10. 

The County Office resolved to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 

services.  Within the meaning of Code section 44955, the services are “particular kinds of 
services” that can be reduced or discontinued.  The decision to reduce or discontinue these 
services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
 
SERVICES THE COUNTY OFFICE INTENDS TO REDUCE OR DISCONTINUE 
 

11. 

The County Office determined that, because particular kinds of services are to 

be reduced or discontinued, it is necessary to decrease the number of permanent or 
probationary employees in the district by 13 full time equivalents (FTE). 
 

The particular kinds of services the County Office resolved to reduce or 

12. 
discontinue are: 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Court/Community School Teaching Services 
 
Neverstreaming Teaching Services   
 
La Sierra Charter School Teaching Services 
 
Reconnecting Youth Coping and Support Facilitator/Teacher 
 
Project Coordinator/Community Challenge Grant   
 
School Counseling Services  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.0 

3.0 

5.5 

1.0 

1.0 

   .5 

 
USE OF TIE-BREAKING CRITERIA BASED ON THE CURRENT NEEDS OF THE DISTRICT AND STUDENTS 
 

13. 

Pursuant to Code section 44955, subdivision (b), tie-breaking criteria were 
adopted for determining the order of termination as among employees who first rendered 
paid service on the same day.  It was not necessary, however, to use the tie-breaking criteria 
for determining the order of layoff. 
 
INTENTION TO DEVIATE FROM SENIORITY (SKIPPING) 
 

14. 

Pursuant to Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the County Office 

resolved to deviate from terminating employees in the order of seniority.   
 

15. 

The County Office identified the following courses or courses of study as ones 

creating a specific need for personnel:   
 

Speech and Language 
Special Education 
English 

 

3

Mathematics 
Biological Science 
Physical Science 
Geoscience 
Social Science 

 

 

16. 

The County Office demonstrated a specific need for personnel to teach those 

courses or courses of study. 
 

17. 

The County Office properly skipped employees who have special training and 

experience necessary to teach those courses or courses of study. 
 
RIGHT TO BE RETAINED ACCORDING TO SENIORITY AND QUALIFICATIONS – DATE OF HIRE 
 

18. 

Job security is not inherent in seniority.  The Legislature chose to provide 

teachers with limited job security according to their seniority.   
 

19. 

There is a dispute as to the date from which Rohn Wittwer’s seniority should 

be measured.  The County Office contends it should be measured from September 18, 2002.  
Respondents Patrick Jones, Stephen Reid, and Phillipa Smith were employed after that date 
but before August 17, 2006.  They contend Mr. Wittwer’s seniority should be measured form 
August 17, 2006.  The district did not send Mr. Wittwer a Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff 
Recommendation.  Mr. Wittwer and the three respondents are permanent employees.  Code 
section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in part, “the services of no permanent employee 
may be terminated . . . while . . . any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render 
a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.”  If one of 
the three respondents is certificated and competent to render the service Mr. Wittwer is 
rendering and if Mr. Wittwer’s seniority should be measured from August 17, 2006, the most 
senior respondent who is certificated and competent to render the service must be retained.   
 

20.  Mr. Wittwer first taught for the County Office on September 18, 2002.  
Because he was teaching on an emergency permit, the County Office did not consider him to 
be in a probationary status.  However, he was not a substitute, and there is no evidence that 
the County Office notified him that he was temporary.  Mr. Wittwer now holds a preliminary 
multiple subject credential.  It is not clear why the County Office gave him a probationary 
classification as of August 17, 2006.  It is possible that that is when he obtained his 
preliminary multiple subject credential.  It is not necessary, however, to determine why the 
County Office chose that date.  It is not necessary because, as is explained below, his 
seniority must be measured from September 18, 2002. 
 
RIGHT TO BE RETAINED ACCORDING TO SENIORITY AND QUALIFICATIONS – BUMPING 
 

21. 

The second paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), does not add to 

teachers’ seniority rights.  It does, however, make it clear that governing boards must make 
assignments in such a way as to protect seniority rights.  Employees must be retained to 

4

render any service their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.  Thus, if a senior 
teacher whose regular assignment is being eliminated is certificated and competent to teach a 
junior teacher’s courses, the district must retain the senior teacher and reassign him or her to 
render that service.  This is commonly referred to as bumping.  The district must either 
reassign or terminate the junior employee. 
 

22. 

The County Office operates certain alternative or continuation schools.  

Education Code section 44865 provides special credentialing rules for teachers in various 
special settings – including teachers in alternative and continuation schools.  A teacher may 
be assigned to teach in those special settings if he or she has a bachelor’s degree and special 
fitness to perform.  The credentialing requirements to teach in a regular, academic high 
school are more restrictive.  In August of 2009, the County Office opened a college 
preparatory high school, University High School.  The County Office is working to obtain 
accreditation for University High School.  Two of the respondents, Patrick Jones and 
Stephen Reid, teach in alternative or continuation schools.  If University High School were 
an alternative or continuation school they would have the right to bump into positions there.  
They contend that, because University High School is not yet accredited, it should be treated 
as an alternative or continuation school.  They, however, cited no authority for that 
proposition and offered no evidence in support of it.  It is found that Education Code section 
44865 does not apply to University High School and that neither Mr. Jones nor Mr. Reid has 
the credentials required to bump into a position that some other teacher holds at University 
High School. 
 
MANDATED SERVICES 
 

23. 

State and federal laws mandate that certain services be provided at or above 
mandated levels.  There was no evidence that the district is reducing those services below 
mandated levels. 
 
STIPULATION TO RESCIND ONE NOTICE 
 

24. 

Complainant stipulated that the Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff 

Recommendation sent to Robert Roldan will be rescinded. 
 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS REGARDING RETENTION OF EMPLOYEES 
 

25.  With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district is not 

retaining any probationary employee to render a service that such a respondent is certificated 
and competent to render. 
 

 

5

26.  With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district is not 

retaining any employee with less seniority than such a respondent has to render a service that 
the respondent is certificated and competent to render.6 
 

27.  With regard to respondents who are either permanent or probationary 
employees, the district is not retaining any employee with less seniority than such a 
respondent has to render a service that the respondent’s qualifications entitle him or her to 
render.7 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

 
PROCEDURAL MATTERS 
 
 
notice and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
THE DATE FROM WHICH MR. WITTWER’S SENIORITY SHOULD BE MEASURED 
 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Code sections 44949 and 44955.  All 

2. 

As noted above, there is a dispute as to whether Mr. Wittwer’s seniority 

should be measured from the date he began teaching with only an emergency permit or the 
date when the County Office recognized him as a probationary employee.   
 

3. 

Three recent cases deal with the consequences of a teacher’s being or not 

being classified as a probationary employee. 
 

4. 

Summerfield v. Windsor Unified School District (2002) 95 Cal.App.4th 1026, 

concerns a teacher who taught under an emergency permit for two years and under a 
preliminary credential the following year.  Before March 15 of the teacher’s third year, the 
district sent her a notice of non-reelection.  She contended that, as a result of being reelected 
after serving two years under the emergency permit, she became a tenured teacher and that, 
therefore, she no longer was subject to non-reelection.  The court disagreed and held that 
time spent teaching under an emergency permit cannot be counted toward accruing tenure as 
a permanent employee.   
 

5. 

California Teachers’ Association v. Governing Board of the Golden Valley 

Unified School District (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 369, concerns a mid-year, “for cause” 
dismissal.  The court held that teachers serving under an emergency permit, who are not 
classified as permanent or substitute employees, are entitled to the statutory protections 
                                                

6 Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides seniority protection for a permanent employee in terms of 

the services the employee is “certificated and competent to render.”   

 
7 Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides seniority protection for both permanent and probationary 

employees in terms of the services an employee’s “qualifications entitle [him or her] to render.”  
 

 

6

governing the dismissal of a probationary employee.  The Golden Valley court acknowledged 
the ruling in Summerfield.  Thus, in essence, the Golden Valley court created a new category 
of probationary employees – individuals who are entitled to the statutory dismissal 
protections provided to probationary employees but who never attain probationary status for 
tenure purposes.  Because first year probationary employees are often referred to as “Prob-1” 
and second year probationary employees as “Prob-2,” the new category created by the 
Golden Valley holding has been dubbed “Prob-0.”  So long as Prob-0 employees hold only 
emergency permits, they remain in that category; they cannot advance to Prob-1 status until 
they obtain preliminary or clear credentials.  They, however, may not be dismissed mid year 
without being given the procedural protections afforded a teacher who is being dismissed for 
cause. 
 

6. 

Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Ass’n v. Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006) 

145 Cal.App.4th 1260, involves teachers who were classified as temporary.  The school 
district classified a number of teachers as temporary because they were teaching on 
emergency permits or other certifications that were less than preliminary or clear credentials.  
Thus, the district made an employee’s classification dependent on his or her certification 
rather than on the position he or she occupied.  At page 1277, the court noted that this was 
inappropriate. 
 

[A] person who has been determined qualified to teach is not a 
temporary employee simply because he or she is not yet fully 
accredited, but rather because he or she occupies a position the 
law defines as temporary.  It is necessary, therefore, to 
differentiate a teacher’s classification from his or her 
certification. 

7. 

At page 1280, the court observed that teachers who are not classified in any 

other classification are classified as probationary. 
 

Thus, section 44915 has been understood to make probationary 
status the default classification for certificated employees who 
are not otherwise required by the Education Code to be 
classified as permanent, substitute, or temporary. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

The Education Code’s “complex and somewhat rigid” 
classification scheme is intended . . . to limit rather than to 
enlarge the power of school districts to classify teachers as 
temporary employees. 

8. 

At page 1293, the Bakersfield court noted that there are three significant 

differences between certificated employees classified as probationary and those classified as 
temporary.  “First, probationary employees are afforded more procedural protections in the 

7

 

 

 

 

 

event a school district proposes to dismiss them for cause or . . . lay them off as part of a 
workforce reduction.”  [¶] . . . [¶] “Second, service as a probationary employee generally 
counts toward the two consecutive years required to attain permanent status (tenure).  [¶] . . . 
[¶]  [Whereas] a year of service as a temporary employee may be counted toward permanent 
status.  [¶] . . . [¶]  Third, the seniority of a certificated employee is determined as of the date 
the employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.  (§44845.)  Temporary 
employees do not accrue seniority.” 
 

9. 

At page 1293, in footnote 20, the court addressed the fact that tenure and 
seniority are distinct concepts.  Tenure is a relationship between a teacher and a school 
district.  Seniority, however, has to do with a relationship among teachers and provides job 
security according to one’s years of service. 
 

10. 

The Bakersfield court then reviewed Summerfield and Golden Valley and 

noted that those cases dealt with whether a teacher with only an emergency permit is entitled 
to some of the benefits normally associated with probationary employees.   
 

Those cases did not resolve the issue of whether a teacher 
having only an emergency permit – who is not serving in a 
temporary or substitute position – has a right to be classified as 
a probationary employee.   

11.  At page 1299, the court held that teachers – including those with only an 

emergency permit – must be classified according to the position they occupy. 
 

If a certificated employee occupies a position the Education 
Code defines as temporary, he or she is a temporary employee; 
if it is not a position that requires temporary classification (or 
permanent or substitute) he or she is a probationary employee.  
(§44915.)  The Code grants school districts no discretion to 
deviate from this statutory classification scheme.  (Italics 
added.) 

12.  At pages 1299 through 1300, the court reiterated the holdings of Summerfield 

and Golden Valley.   
 

A probationary employee working under an emergency teaching 
or specialist permit does not accrue credit toward permanent 
status . . . but is entitled to the statutory protections accorded 
such employees in the event of a dismissal for cause or 
unsatisfactory performance . . . or a layoff as the result of a 
reduction in the workforce. 

13.  Neither Summerfield nor Golden Valley resolved the issue of whether a 

probationary teacher with only an emergency permit can accrue seniority. 

 

 

 

 

8

14.  At page 1300, the Bakersfield court quoted Code section 44845. 

Every probationary or permanent employee . . . shall be deemed 
to have been employed on the date upon which he [or she] first 
rendered paid service in a probationary position. 

15.  At page 1301, the court concluded: 

[H]aving determined that certificated employees with less than a 
regular credential must in certain circumstances be classified as 
probationary, we cannot then overlook the clear directive in 
section 44845 that, as probationary employees, they are entitled 
to accrue seniority. 

16. 

Based on the holding in Bakersfield, it is determined that Mr. Wittwer should 

have been classified as a probationary employee as of September 18, 2002, and that his 
seniority must be measured from that date. 
 
THE NOTICE SENT TO MR. ROLAND SHOULD BE RESCINDED 
 

17. 

Based on the district’s stipulation, it is determined that the notice sent to Mr. 

Roland should be rescinded. 
 
THE DISTRICT MAY SEND FINAL LAYOFF NOTICES TO THE REMAINING RESPONDENTS 
 

18.  Within the terms of Code sections 44949 and 44955, the district has cause to 

reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services and to give notices to the remaining 
respondents that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year.  The cause 
relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils. 
 
 

ORDER 

The Superintendent’s Notice of Layoff Recommendation that was sent to Mr. 

1. 

 
 
Roland is rescinded. 
 

2. 

The district may give notice to the remaining respondents that the district will 

not require their services for the ensuing school year. 
 
Dated:  May 6, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

_________________________________ 
ROBERT WALKER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

9

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT A 
RESPONDENTS 

 
 
Ronni Aguilar 
Rhonda Hash 
Patrick Jones 
Robin Perna Edwards 
Stephen Reid 
Robert Roldan 
Phillipa Smith 
 

 

10

