 

 

BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD  
SOUTH BAY UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

OAH No. 2010020399 

 
 
 
 
IN THE MATTER OF THE REDUCTION 
IN FORCE ACCUSATIONS AGAINST: 
 
KATHY ASHLEY, et. al; 
SEE THOSE EMPLOYEES LISTED IN 
EXHIBIT B TO THE ACCUSATION WHO 
TIMELY REQUESTED A HEARING, 
 
                                               Respondents. 
 
GWENDOLYN GARCIA, et. al; 
SEE THOSE EMPLOYEES LISTED IN 
EXHIBIT B TO THE ACCUSATION WHO 
TIMELY REQUESTED A HEARING, 
 
 
 
 
 

             Precautionary Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Clifford D. Weiler, Attorney at Law, represented the South Bay Union School 

On April 28, 2010, in Imperial Beach, California, Alan S. Meth, Administrative Law 

 
 
Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, heard this matter.  
 
 
District. 
 
Kent Morizawa, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Olga Bajo, Laura 
 
Cappadona, Gwendolyn Garcia, Annalicia Guido, Carolina Ruvalcaba, Alexandra Vargas, 
Patricia Villegas, Irene Camargo, Jose Villegas, Delia Uribe, Teresa Vaca, and Salvador 
Macias. 
 
 
Fern M. Steiner, Attorney at Law, represents respondents Kathy Ashler, Laura Davis 
(Crowe), Andrea Duff, Marc Emmons, Carol Guardiana, Elizabeth Malis, Deborah Mason, 
Kathleen McKinney-Nokes, Helena Medina, Jenni Meyer, Hilda Mercado, Desiree Million, 
Karen Parker, Brenda Robles, Liliana Robles, Lisa Powell, Alexandra Smith, Kelly Sullivan, 
Alfonso Sumaya, Jr., and Michele Syverson. 
 

 

1

Jacqueline Padilla and Beverly Gonzalez represented themselves. 

The matter was submitted on April 28, 2010. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

2. 

1. 

3. 

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 

Before March 15, 2010, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 

On or about April 5, 2010, Kim Phifer, Assistant Superintendent, Human 

 
 
Resources, South Bay Union School District (hereafter, “the District”), made and filed the 
accusations against respondents in her official capacity. 
 
 
 
 
44955, Ms. Phifer, as Designee of the District Superintendent, notified the Governing Board 
of the District of the Superintendent's recommendation that respondents be notified their 
services will not be required for the ensuing school year.  The Superintendent's notification 
to the Governing Board set forth the reasons for the recommendation. 
 
 
the Superintendent had recommended that notice be given to respondents, pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that their services will not be required for the 
ensuing year.  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation.  The notices 
satisfied the requirements of sections 44949 and 44955.  San Jose Teachers Association, Inc. 
v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 632; Campbell Elementary Teachers Association v. 
Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 803-04, distinguishing Karbach v. Governing Board 
(1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 355, 360-63. 
 
 
cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.  Accusations were timely served 
on respondents, and each respondent filed a timely Notice of Defense.  All pre-hearing 
jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

Each respondent timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is 

On or before March 15, 2010, each respondent was given written notice that 

4. 

5. 

The Governing Board of the District took action in Resolution No. 10-114 to 

6. 

 
discontinue the following services for the 2010-11 school year: 
 
Particular Kind of Service

Discontinuance or 
Reduction

reduction 

Kindergarten through 6th grade 
regular education classroom 
teaching services 

Full time Equivalents

48.0 

(achieved via 20 FTE 
regular education 
classroom teacher 
retirements plus layoffs 
of remaining 28 FTEs) 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

2

Language Academy regular 
education classroom teacher 
services 
Resource teacher services (relates 
to academic resource teachers, not 
special education nor language 
academy) 
Speech language and hearing 
teaching services 

reduction 

reduction 

reduction 

Literacy coach services (Reading 
First)  

discontinuance 

Assistant principal services 
Social worker services* 
Services of Coordinator, 
Educational Services 

Resource specialist services 
(special education) 

reduction 
discontinuance 
reduction 

reduction 

Principal on special assignment 

discontinuance 

4.0 

4.0 

1.0 
(achieved via a 
vacancy) 
2.0 (all) 
(achieved via 1 FTE 
retirement  plus layoff 
of remaining 1.0 FTE) 
1.0 
1.0 (all) 
1.0 
(achieved through a 
vacancy) 
1.0 

(achieved through a 
retirement) 

1.0 (all) 

(achieved through a 
resignation) 

35.0 (all) 

Impact teacher services (including 
categorically funded)* 
 
 

discontinuance 

TOTAL FTEs

99.0 

* 
Inclusion of any categorically funded services within this Resolution is not intended 
to grant those individuals who are impacted any rights greater than provided by law, nor to 
nullify any provisions within each impacted individual’s employment contract, nor to 
supersede any other action by this Board to release or otherwise terminate the services of any 
impacted individual. 

The resolution also provided: 

“5. 
Subject to requirements (if any) within the Educational Employment Relations 
Act, that for purposes of “competency” as to “bumping” (displacement) rights within 
the meaning of Education Code section 44955(b) and as to reemployment rights 
within the meaning of Education Code sections 44956 and 44957, to the extent such 
might apply, “competency” shall be based upon all of the following: 

 

 

 

 

 

3

(a) 

The criteria as set forth within Board Policy 4117 (“To be considered 

competent, an employee must have academic training and one year of full-time 
experience in the specialized area to which the district would be able to assign 
him/her.  The district will also consider the recency of the employee’s experience.”), 
such that to allow for “bumping” or reemployment into the position, the employee 
bumping or being reemployed must have previously served in this school district for 
at least one school year of continuous full-time experience in those particular kinds of 
services into which the employees will bump or be reemployed; and 

(b) 

possession and current filing of a preliminary or clear credential for the 
subject matter into which the employee would bump for the 2010-2011 school year or 
be reemployed, and 

(c) 

highly qualified status within the meaning of the No Child Left Behind 
Act (if required or appropriate for the position into which the employee would bump 
for the 2010-2011 school year or be reemployed, and  

(d) 

an appropriate EL authorization (if required by the position into which 

the employee would bump for the 2010-2011 school year or be reemployed).” 

The Governing Board adopted Board Policy 4117.3, which it last revised on July 20, 

2006.  In it, the Governing Board provided: 

“To be considered competent, an employee must have academic training and 
one year of full-time experience in the specialized area to which the district would be 
able to assign him/or.  The district will also consider the recency of the employee’s 
experience.” 

The services set forth above are particular kinds of services which may be reduced or 

 
discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  California Teachers 
Association v. Board of Trustees of the Goleta Union School District (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 
32, 34-37 and cases cited therein.  See also San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen, supra at 
635-38, in which the court specifically rejected the reasoning of Burgess v. Governing Board 
(1974) 41 Cal.App.3d 571; Zalac v. Governing Board (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 853-54. 

Furthermore, these services may be reduced because of budgetary difficulties.  Zalac 

 
v. Governing Board, supra, and cases cited therein.  The decision to reduce or discontinue 
the services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but rather a proper exercise of the District's 
discretion. 
 
 

In Resolution No. 10-114, the Board also provided: 

7. 

In addition to the criteria referenced above in section 5, Education Code 

“7. 
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), shall be implemented to deviate from terminating 
certificated employees in order of seniority, as related to the following specific 
courses and/or courses of study: 

 

 

 

4

(A) 

The visual performing arts program at Mendoza Elementary School; 

(B) 

instrumental music program (instructional music teaching services); 

(C) 

this district’s Language Academy's certificated staff such as classroom 

teachers and its resource teacher. 

The certificated employees currently serving in those specific courses or courses 
of study shall be “skipped” and not subject to layoff, as permitted by Education 
Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1) due to the current employees serving in those 
specific courses and/or courses of study possessing special training and experience 
necessary to teach each respective course or course of study, which others with more 
seniority do not possess.  Such employees also shall not be “bumped” or displaced 
by any more senior employee, and no employee shall be reemployed into any of 
the above specific courses or courses of study unless such employee has 
previously served in such applicable specific courses or courses of study within 
the amount and duration referenced above in section 5 (a) and otherwise meets 
the qualifications within section 5, above.” 

9. 

8. 

10. 

The Governing Board established tie-breaker criteria for determining the 

The Governing Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements 

 
The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 
District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees of the District as determined by the Governing Board. 
 
 
and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be 
delivered to its employees. 
 
 
relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  
The Board provided the order of termination shall be based on the needs of the District and 
its students.  
 
The District created a Seniority List which contains employees’ seniority dates 
 
(first date of paid service), hire date, credential, sit/position, and funding source.  The District 
used the Seniority List to develop a proposed layoff and “bumping” list of the least senior 
employees currently assigned in the two services being reduced.  The District then 
determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another area and were 
entitled to “bump” other employees.  In determining who would be laid off for each kind of 
service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by the known 
vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  The 
District then checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they could “bump” 
other employees.  
 
 
special education to mild/moderate students.  Her seniority date is September 9, 2009 and she 
is the only special education teacher proposed for layoff.  The Governing Board intends to 

Jacqueline Padilla has a special education credential and currently teaches 

12. 

11. 

 

 

 

5

reduce the services of a resource specialist in special education, but that reduction was 
achieved through a retirement. 
 

Lisa Powell (seniority date of August 30, 2006) holds a multiple subject credential 

and teaches first grade.  She also holds a special education credential.  She was proposed for 
layoff as a regular education K-6 classroom teacher.  By virtue of her special education 
credential and her seniority, Ms. Powell could bump Ms. Padilla and teach in the special 
education program.  When she was notified of her opportunity to bump Ms. Padilla and teach 
special education, Ms. Powell indicated she did not want to do so.  By letter dated March 5, 
2010, Ms. Phifer wrote to Ms. Powell, summarized what had occurred, offered her an 
opportunity to serve in special education for the 2010-11 school year, and requested a 
response by March 19, 2010.  Ms. Powell did not respond to the letter. 

13. 

The District operates a Language Academy at Nestor Elementary School.  

 
Ms. Powell testified at the hearing that she knew she had the right to bump a junior 
teacher and remain with the District to teach special education, and knew that if she did not 
do so, she would be laid off.  Ms. Powell testified she preferred the layoff, and added that if 
she were laid off and a special education position later became available, she would decline 
it.  
 
 
Nestor is the only site within the District which has a language academy.  Nestor is a magnet 
school.  The language academy is a dual immersion (also called two-way immersion) 
program for students beginning in kindergarten.  In kindergarten and first grade, the students 
are taught the all subjects with 90 percent of the instruction in Spanish and 10 percent in 
English.  In the second grade, all subjects are taught with 80 percent of the instruction in 
Spanish and 20 percent in English.  The ratio of Spanish and English instruction continues to 
change until by fifth and sixth grade, instruction is provided half in Spanish and half in 
English.  There is no transitioning within the program.  The strategies for teaching within the 
program are different from the strategies used in either regular classrooms or English learner 
classrooms.  The goals of the English learner and dual immersion programs are also 
different.  In English learner programs, the goal is to prepare Spanish-speaking students to 
learn in English, and by the third grade, Spanish is only used in support of the teaching that 
takes place in English.  The effect of the dual immersion program is that all students are 
taught all subjects in both languages.  The goal is to develop multiculturalism and 
bilingualism so that students read, write and speak in two languages proficiently. 
 
 
in the teachers it assigns to the program.  It looks for teachers who want to be involved in the 
immersion program and are aligned with its goals.  Every teacher must have a BCLAD as a 
minimum and demonstrate a high level of proficiency in Spanish.  The District requires a 
higher level of Spanish proficiency than it requires of a teacher who teaches in the English 
learner program.  The District uses the hiring process to determine if a teacher has the 
requisite proficiency.  Hiring is done by a committee composed of the principal, a resource 
teacher, a classroom teacher or others.  Part of the selection involves a written test and parts 
of the hiring interview are conducted in Spanish.  
 

In order to implement the Language Academy program, the District is very selective 

 

 

 

6

 

Once a teacher is selected to teach in the Language Academy, he or she receives 

 
specialized in-house training.  Teachers are required to spend three hours a week in 
curriculum planning, they must receive new teacher training from a coordinator, there is 
continuous staff development, they observe other teachers, and so forth.  The school 
maintains a log which shows professional development.  In addition, many of the teachers 
are attending a dual language certification program at SDSU. 
 

14.  Desiree Million (seniority date of August 30, 2006) has a multiple subject 
credential and a BCLAD.  She teaches a sixth grade English immersion class at Oneata, 
which is an English learner class.  She testified at the hearing that she uses the same 
textbooks as those used in the Nestor Language Academy.  She testified she has a 
supplemental credential in Spanish although that was not reflected in the District’s files, and 
is fluent in Spanish.  She deals with parents of her students in Spanish and often translates 
letters for them.  She testified she received GLAD training (Guided Language Acquisition 
Development) which teachers in the Language Academy also receive and attended a CABE 
conference that some dual immersion teachers attended.  She believes she uses the same 
strategies that dual immersion teachers use. 

 
Ms. Million testified she lived for a year in Chile and completed her Spanish degree at 

15. 

Lilliana Robles (seniority date of September 25, 2006) has a multiple subject 

a university there.  She testified she considered interviewing for a position at the Language 
Academy but did not apply, and has not taught dual immersion, although she did student 
teaching in bilingual classrooms. 
 
 
credential and a BCLAD.  She was born in Tijuana and attended a bilingual school there 
until the sixth grade and obtained bachelor degrees in Spanish and liberal arts from SDSU.  
She is fluent in Spanish and teaches a structured English immersion class at Bayside.  She 
teaches Spanish-speaking student to speak English. 
 
 
in dual immersion but did attend some training programs at Nestor that other teachers in the 
dual immersion program attended.  She would teach in the Language Academy if offered a 
position there. 
 

Ms. Robles has never taught at the Language Academy.  She has not received training 

16.  Hilda Mercado (seniority date of 8/29/07), Mark Emmons (seniority date of 
8/30/06), Brenda Robles (seniority date of 9/30/08), and Carol Guadiana (seniority date of 
9/18/08) have multiple subject credentials and each has a BCLAD.  None have taught in the 
dual immersion program, none have applied to teach in the Language Academy, and none 
have had the training that teachers in the dual immersion program have received. 

 
It was stipulated at the hearing that each would testify to similar matters as did Ms. 

Million and Lilliana Robles. 

 
The least senior teacher assigned to the Language Academy at Nestor is Salvador 

Macias, whose seniority date is September 25, 2006. 

 

 

 

7

17. 

Carolina Ruvalcaba (seniority date of 8/30/06) has a multiple subject 

credential and a BCLAD.  She teaches in the dual immersion program at Nestor.  Before she 
was hired, she went through the interview process which included testing of her Spanish 
proficiency.  Since she began teaching at Nestor, she has received extensive training in the 
dual immersion program and is currently attending the SDSU program in dual immersion.  
She testified at the hearing that the training she has received is focused on dual immersion.  
She testified the information contained on the Professional Development Log was accurate.  
Ms Ruvalcaba received a precautionary layoff notice. 

 
It was stipulated at the hearing that the other teachers who teach in the Language 

18. 

The District employs a number of teachers who serve in the position of 

The job and education requirements are a current California teaching credential, a 

Academy at Nestor and who received precautionary notices of layoff would testify that the 
information contained on the Professional Development Log was accurate as to them. 
 
 
Academic Coach.  The Governing Board approved a job description of Academic Coach on 
April 23, 2009 and it provides that an Academic Coach leads and supports the members of 
the school staff to assure “. . . that effective and efficient systems are in place to support the 
continuous academic progress in all content areas.”  The coach serves as a liaison for the 
learning community to provide support to teachers for grade level plans, curricula, 
monitoring student progress, differentiating instruction, instructional materials, professional 
development, site activities, parent involvement and communication, and promoting safe 
schools.  The job description listed a number of “essential job functions” and other job 
functions. 
 
 
CLAD or BCLAD, and a Bachelor’s Degree with a Master’s Degree desirable.  For 
experience, the job requires a strong background and demonstrated success in teaching 
language arts, English development and mathematics; demonstrated success in differentiating 
to meet the needs of the English Language Learners, at-risk learners, and gifted and talented 
learners; experience or leadership in mentoring, peer coaching and conducting professional 
development; and training and experience in bilingual/cross-cultural teaching methodologies 
and successful classroom teaching experience, English as a Second Land instruction, and 
sheltered instruction; and at least five years of successful classroom experience. 
 
 
the spring of last year but the program began in the 2009-10 school year.  She testified the 
hiring process was two-tiered.  The District had a reading specialist position which it 
eliminated, but the teachers in that position were considered for the coaching positions.  She 
testified there were some qualifications the District preferred, including five years of 
teaching, knowledge of strategies in math, proficiency in teaching skills, and modeling. 
 
 
subject credential and a CLAD.  She is an Academic Coach at Berry School.  
 
 
Delia Diaz (seniority date of September 11, 2007) holds a multiple subject credential 
and a BCLAD, and a clear reading certificate.  She is an Academic Coach at Imperial Beach. 

According to Ms. Phifer, the teachers who serve as Academic Coaches were hired in 

Cynthia Smith-Ough (seniority date of September 4, 2007) holds a multiple 

19. 

 

 

 

8

The Governing Board did not reduce or discontinue the services of an Academic 

20.  Michelle Syverson (seniority date of October 3, 2005) holds a multiple subject 

 
 
Ms. Smith-Ough and Ms. Diaz began serving as academic coaches at the beginning of 
the 2009-10 school year.  There is no evidence that they served in a similar capacity with the 
District prior to the creation of the position of Academic Coach on April 23, 2009.  Neither 
teacher received a precautionary layoff notice. 
 
 
Coach.   
 
 
credential and a CLAD.  She was bumped by a more senior teacher whose position as a 
literacy coach was discontinued, and received a layoff notice.  She testified at the hearing 
that she has interviewed for the position of literacy coach and would serve as an academic 
coach next school year if she could. 
 
 
Ms. Syverson testified that she obtained her credential in 2001 and began teaching in 
Anaheim in the 2001-02 school year.  Among her duties was as a shared SAT9 coordinator.  
She taught in Lemon Grove for the 2002-03 school year and taught two years in the Chula 
Vista Elementary School District.  Since being hired by the District in 2005, Ms. Syverson 
has been a district trainer in SB472, HSP Math, and Fast Forward Math, has been a site 
trainer, and served on various committees.  In these capacities, she has trained other teachers 
in math.  She believes she is qualified to serve as an Academic Coach.  She has not taught 
language arts. 
 

21. 

Beverly Gonzalez (seniority date of November 2, 2005) holds a multiple 

subject credential and a BCLAD.  She testified at the hearing that she coaches teachers in art 
and bi-literacy and has coached other teachers in reading but not math.  She believes she 
could teach at the language academy and applied for a position there four to five years ago 
but then withdrew her application.  She has taught English Language Learners in the District 
but has not taught in the dual immersion program.  She has not held a position as a job coach. 

 
Ms. Gonzalez did not request a hearing nor did she advise the District that she was 

qualified to teach other positions. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction in this matter relating to the elimination of 99 full-time equivalent 

1. 

 
 
positions exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  All notices and 
jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 
 
 

Education Code section 44949 provides in part: 

2. 

“(b)  The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying him or her for the ensuing year.  A request for a hearing shall be in 
writing and shall be delivered to the person who sent the notice pursuant to 

 

 

 

9

subdivision (a), on or before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be 
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon the employee. If 
an employee fails to request a hearing on or before the date specified, his or her 
failure to do so shall constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing. The 
notice provided for in subdivision (a) shall advise the employee of the provisions of 
this subdivision.” 
 
3. 

Regarding Factual Finding 21, Ms. Gonzales did not request a hearing after 

 
she received her layoff notice.  She offered no explanation for her failure to request a 
hearing.  Based upon section 44949, it must be concluded that she waived her right to a 
hearing.  See Tucker v. San Francisco Unified School District (1952) 111 Cal. App. 2d 875, 
883-84.  She therefore is not entitled to have her credentials considered to determine whether 
she may bump one of the Academic Coaches or a teacher in the Language Academy. 
 

4. 

Education Code section 44955 provides in relevant part: 

. . .  

 
(b) 
[W]henever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not 
later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in the opinion of 
the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary . . . to decrease the 
number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate 
the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated 
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the 
school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent 
employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to 
render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 
render. . .  As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the 
same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the 
basis of needs of the district and the students thereof.  Upon the request of any 
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the governing board shall 
furnish in writing no later than five days prior to the commencement of the hearing 
held in accordance with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in 
determining the order of termination and the application of the criteria in ranking 
each employee relative to the other employees in the group.  This requirement that the 
governing board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for determining 
the order of termination shall not be interpreted to give affected employees any legal 
right or interest that would not exist without such a requirement. 
 
(c) 
 
 
manner that the employees shall be retained to render any service which their 
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. . . 

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a 

. . . 

 

 

 

 

 

10

. . . 

(d) 
Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following 
reasons: 

(1) 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 

specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services 
credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a 
school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, which 
others with more seniority do not possess. 

(2) 

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 

constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws. 

 
 
To put it more succinctly, a senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the 
right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  
In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling 
that position.  See Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.  Junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess 
superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  See Poppers v. 
Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; see also Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School 
District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831. 
 

5. 

Regarding Factual Finding 12, Lisa Powell, with a special education 

credential, is senior to Jacqueline Padilla, and has a statutory right to bump Ms. Padilla.  
Knowing that she has that right, and knowing that if she did not exercise it, she would be laid 
off, Ms. Powell preferred a layoff than to teach special education.  A statutory right may be 
waived.  Tucker v. San Francisco Unified School District, supra.  Ms. Powell’s waiver was 
done knowingly and voluntarily.  Consequently, Ms. Padilla should not be bumped from her 
position, and the accusation against her must be dismissed. 

 
6. 

Regarding Factual Findings 13 through 17, the District takes the position that 

the teachers currently employed in the Language Academy at Nestor and who have taught 
there for at least one year satisfy the Governing Board’s competency standard set forth in 
Resolution Number 10-114 and Board Policy 4117.3, while the teachers who do not teach 
within the Language Academy do not meet the competency standard. 

 
Before turning to the application of the competency standard, it must be noted that 

respondents Lilliana Robles, Hilda Mercado, Brenda Robles, and Carol Guadiana have less 
seniority that Salvador Macias, who is the most junior teacher assigned to the Language 
Academy.  Thus, none of those respondents have the right to bump into a position as a 
teacher in the Language Academy.  Only respondents Desiree Million and Marc Emmons 
have sufficient seniority to bump into a position in the Language Academy. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11

 

 

 
However, it must be concluded that while they have the requisite credentials to teach 
in the program, they do not have the competence required by section 44955, subdivision (b).  
The Governing Board determined that “one year of full-time experience in the specialized 
area” was a criterion of competence.  A District is permitted to establish a standard of 
competency that includes prior teaching experience in the relevant subject area.  Duax v. 
Kern Community College Dist., (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 562-67.  Given the rigorous 
requirements for Spanish proficiency incorporated into the hiring process for a position in the 
Language Academy, and the significant on-going training teachers within the program 
receive, it is appropriate to require a teacher who desires to bump a teacher within the 
program to have one year of experience in the specialized area of dual immersion. 

 
Neither Ms. Million nor Mr. Emmons satisfy this criterion.  Accordingly, their layoffs 

must be upheld. 
 
7. 

Regarding Factual Findings 18, 19, and 20, the same considerations of 

competence apply, but the conclusion is different.  The evidence established that the position 
of Academic Coach was established by the Board on April 23, 2009.  Teachers began serving 
as Academic Coaches in the 2009-10 school year.  Thus, at the time the District determined 
who it was going to lay off, no one had served one year in that position.  There was some 
testimony that the Academic Coach position evolved from a reading specialist position, but 
no evidence was offered to show that competence as an Academic Coach could have been 
achieved by a teacher serving in that or any other position.  The Governing Board did not 
establish any specific criteria for competence as coaches nor did it choose to apply section 
44955, subdivision (d) to Academic Coaches in order to skip junior teachers. 

 
Michelle Syverson is senior to both Cynthia Smith-Ough and Delia Diaz who serve as 
Academic Coaches.  She holds the same credentials as they do and has extensive experience 
as a coach.  No persuasive evidence was offered to establish that Ms. Smith-Ough and Ms. 
Diaz should have been skipped and Ms. Syverson should have been laid off.  Accordingly, 
the accusation against Ms. Syverson must be dismissed. 
 
 
Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the District 
to discontinue particular kinds of services relating to 99 full-time equivalent positions.  The 
cause for the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the 
welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  A preponderance of the evidence sustained the 
charges set forth in the Accusation.  It is recommended that the Board give respondents 
notice before May 15, 2010, that their services will no longer be required by the District.  
 
 

8. 

1. 

 
 
Syverson are dismissed. 
 
 

2. 

 

The accusations served on respondents Jacqueline Padilla and Michelle 

The accusations served on the precautionary respondents are dismissed. 

ORDER 

12

3. 

The Accusations served on the remaining respondents set forth in Exhibit B, 

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

below, are sustained.  Notice shall be given to each respondent before May 15, 2010 that his 
or her services will not be required for the 2010-11 school year pursuant to the Governing 
Board’s resolution because of the reduction of particular kinds of services.  
 
 
 
 
 
DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________________ 
ALAN S. METH 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

 

 

 

 

 

13

SOUTH BAY UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
EXHIBIT “B” TO ACCUSATION 
First Amendment; April 27, 2010 @ 3:30 p.m. 
 

RESPONDENTS (hi-lighted) WHO REQUESTED A HEARING (Ed C 44949)  
Those who initially requested a hearing but later FAILED to file a Notice of Defense are 
crossed out. 
 
RESPONDENTS  (received standard notices):

 

 

(.5 FTE) 

Ashley, Kathy 
Bajo, Olga 
Camargo, Irene 
Davis, Laura 
Duff, Andrea 
Emmons, Marc 
Guadiana, Carol 
Guido, Annalicia 
Jacobs, Desiree 
Luna, Gil 
Malls, Elizabeth 
Mason, Deborah 
McKinney-Nokes,  Kathleen
 
Medina, Helena 
Mercado, Hilda 
Meyer, Jenni 
Million, Desiree 
Parker, Karen 
Pehrson, Erika 
Powell, 

Lisa 
[issue:  does  not  want  to 
bump] 
Robles, Brenda 
Robles, Liliana 
Smith, Alexandra 
Sullivan, Kelly 
Sumaya Jr., Alfonso 
Villegas, Jose

 

14

 

 

 

 
PRECAUTIONARY RESPONDENTS (included due to potential arguments of others): 

Garcia, Gwendolyn  [issue: LA skip] 
Macias, Salvador    [issue: LA skip] 
Ruvalcaba, 
 
Uribe,  Delia 
Vargas, 
Villegas, Patricia    [issue: LA skip] 

(filed 
Alexandra 

Carolina 

late  44949 

 

 

request 
 

 

 
[issue: 
for  hearing) 

[issue: 

LA 
[issue:  LA 
LA 

skip] 
skip] 
skip] 

PRECAUTIONARY  RESPONDENTS    (categorical,  temporary  contracts;  served 
should each disagree that possess no right to layoff process) 

(None) 
 

 

EMPLOYEES  WHO  NEVER  FILED  44949  REQUEST  FOR  HEARING  BUT  FILED 
NOTICE OF DEFENSE  

PRECAUTIONARY RESPONDENTS 
 

Cappadona, 
Vaca, Teresa    [issue:VPA skip] 
 

Laura 

 

 

[issue:VPA 

skip] 

****************************************************************************** 
****************************************************************************** 

EMPLOYEES WHO WERE SERVED NOTICES AND  
FAILED TO FILE ANY REQUEST FOR HEARING  
OR NOTICE OF DEFENSE 

Served 

with 

standard 

notices: 

 
Ambriz, Saul 
Arancibia, Candice 
Cuevas, Lorena (0.5 FTE) 
Ferguson, Jackie 
Fuller, Jennifer 
Gonzalez, Beverly 
Kuenzi, Kayne 
McFerrin, Deborah 
Meyers, Jessica 
Nelson, Michelle 
Quinby, Katie 
Rogan, Kathleen 
 

Served with precautionary notice due to potential arguments of others: 

Acuna, Aracely  [issue: LA skip] 

 

 

15

Served  with  precautionary  notices  should  each  disagree  that  possess  no  right  to  layoff  process 
(categorical, temporary contracts):  

Ballestamon, Caren 
Barrera, Vanessa 
Boyd, William 
Costello, Kathryn 
De Ochoa-Dewald, Esmeralda 
De Vos, Virginia 
Ecclefield, Erin 
Feilen, Barbara 
Frazier, Thomas 
Galbadores, Faith 
Gibbs, Cecily 
Guzman, Yessenia 
Hendricks, Kelly 
Huchingson, Amy 
Kyle, Stephanie 
Leahy Jr., John 
Mann, Maggie 
Mann, Nicole 

Matthew, Alexia 
Mazza, Dean 
Meeks, Roseann 
Miana, Elaine 
Moua, Pa 
Munguia, Gladys 
Robinson, Natalie 
Stanley, Kathleen 
Slater, Colleen 
Stall, Stacia 
Sullivan, Joan 
Viani, Michael 
Walters, Mark 
Weinhouse, Marilyn 
White, Shaina 
Wraith, Patrick 
Wraith, William 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16

