BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD  
OF THE 
CAJON VALLEY UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
OAH No. 2010020612 

 

 
 
 
 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
Certificated Employees Listed in Exhibit 
“A,” 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in El Cajon, California on April 14, 2010. 
 
 
Kari S. Hull, Assistant Superintendent of Personnel Services. 
 

Anthony P. De Marco, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo represented 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Respondents Rebecca Chui, Kathryn 

Connolly, Ana Hernandez, Kristen Luck, Nora Menzies, Marcos Michel, Jacklyn Pike, 
Lindsay Pugh, Lauren Sauer, Christina Shields, Teresa Simms and Kellyn Thompson.  
 

Fern M. Steiner, Esq., Tosdal, Levine, Smith, Steiner & Wax, represented all 

Respondents, with the exception of those listed in the foregoing paragraph. 

 
The matter was submitted on April 14, 2010. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
The Board of Education of the Cajon Valley Union School District determined to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers for budgetary reasons.  
The decision was not related to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose 
services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.   
 

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving 

review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” “skipping” and breaking ties between/among 

 
1

 
 
 

 

1. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in accordance 
with the requirements of the Education Code.  
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” (Respondents) are probationary or 

permanent certificated employees of the Cajon Valley Union School District (District). 

On March 2, 2010, Janice Cook, the District’s Superintendent 
(Superintendent) notified the District’s Governing Board (Board) of her recommendation to 
reduce or discontinue services for the ensuing school year and stated the reasons for her 
recommendation. 

On March 2, 2010, the Board adopted the Superintendent’s recommendation 

 
and thereby took action to reduce or eliminate the following particular kinds of services, 
commencing the 2010-2011 school year.  Further, the Board directed the Superintendent or 
her designee to send the appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the District who 
would be laid off as a result of the reduction of the particular kinds of services. 
 

4. 

On March 3, 2010, the Superintendent served permanent and probationary 

5. 

6. 

On March 17, 2010, the Superintendent made and filed an Accusation for lay-

Each Respondent submitted a timely Request for Hearing to determine if there 

certificated employees with written notice that she recommended not to re-employ them in 
the 2010-2011 school year and stated the reasons therefor.  In addition, the notice advised 
Respondents of the right to hearing, that the request for hearing must be delivered to the 
District’s office no later than March 12, 2010, and that the failure to request a hearing would 
constitute waiver of the right to a hearing.  
 
 
was cause for not re-employing him or her for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
off of certificated employees.  She served each individual who submitted a Request for 
Hearing with an Accusation, Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing and related materials. 
 
 
 
 
Travis Lee is a certificated employee who received a layoff notice, did not file a 
timely Request for Hearing and/or Notice of Defense and appeared at the hearing.  The 
District had no objection to his presence at but objected to his participation in the hearing. 
 
 
Christina Duncan, Katherine O’Donoghue and Jacob Ruth are certificated employees 
of the District; each received a layoff notice, filed a timely Request for Hearing, did not file a 
Notice of Defense and appeared at the hearing.  The District waived objection to their 
participation in the hearing.   
 
 

In response, Respondents submitted a timely Notice of Defense. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied. 

7. 

 
2

 

 

8. 

On March 2, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution number 03-10-848 JC, 

 
 
ordering the release of temporary certificated employees from their temporary assignment in 
order to effectuate the reduction of particular kinds of services.  Nevertheless, the District 
noticed temporary certificated employees and allowed them to participate in the hearing.  
There is no dispute that the employment of all temporary certificated employees will be 
terminated at the conclusion of the 2009-2010 school year.  

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Respondents Rebecca Chui, 

Kathryn Connolly, Ana Hernandez, Kristen Luck, Nora Menzies, Marcos Michel, Jacklyn 
Pike, Lindsay Pugh, Lauren Sauer, Christina Shields, Teresa Simms and/or Kellyn 
Thompson. 
 

10. 

Prior to conclusion of the hearing, the District rescinded layoff notices 

previously issued to Respondents Dyana Bible, Nicole Bradshaw, Jenny Finnegan, Timothy 
Staninger and Robert Wade. 

 
 
11.  On March 2, 2010, the Board adopted Resolution No. 03-10-847 JC and 
thereby took action to reduce or eliminate the following particular kinds of certificated 
services commencing the 2010-2011 school year as follows: 

 
9. 

 

Type of Service 
6 Grade, Core Instruction 
6-8, Newcomers 
Art 
ASB 
AVID 
Band 
Career Explorations 
Computer Animation 
Counseling 
Creative Writing 
Drama 
Early Admission to Kindergarten 
English 
English Language Development 
Facilitator, English Learner 
Facilitator, Title I 
Geography 
History 
Hourly Support Teachers 
Instructional Coach 
Intervention, 6-8 
K-5 Classroom Instruction 
K-5, Bilingual Classroom Instruction 
Life Skills 
Math 
Music 
Physical Education 
Publications 
Science 7 
Spec. Ed: Adaptive P.E. 

 
3

FTE
3.5 
2.9 
1
0.2 
1.4 
0.2 
0.2 
0.4 
1
0.2 
0.6 
3.36
4.8 
2
1.5 
1.2 
0.4 
2.8 
28
1.9 
1
27.3 
5
0.2 
2
0.3 
4.3 
0.2 
2
0.6 

 

Spec. Ed: Community Day 
Spec. Ed: RSP 
Spec. Ed: Reading Coach 
Spec. Ed: DHH 
Spec. Ed: M/M 
Sports Leadership 
Support Teacher 
Support Teacher, Art 
Support Teacher, Bilingual 
Support Teacher, CSR 
Support Teacher, EL 
Support Teacher, ELA 
Support Teacher, High Point 
Support Teacher, Intervention 
Support Teacher, Life Lab 
Support Teacher, Music 
Support Teacher, Newcomers 
Support Teacher, P.E. 
Support Teacher, REACH 
Support Teacher, Read 180 
Tech Arts 
TOTAL FTE

 
 

0.5 
0.3 
3
0.2 
4.65
0.8 
0.45
0.9 
0.9 
2.3 
0.45
0.45
0.4 
0.4 
1.8 
0.4 
0.45
1.35
1
123.16 

 

 

The proposed reductions totaled 123.16 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. 

 
12. 

 
actual number of final layoff notices to be delivered to its certificated employees. 

The District considered all positively assured attrition in determining the 

 
13.  Kari Hull, the District’s Assistant Superintendent, Personnel Services 
(Assistant Superintendent) was responsible for implementing the technical aspects of the 
layoff.  The District developed four different seniority lists.  The seniority list for noticed 
certificated employees contained, among other matters, the teacher’s name, seniority date, 
status, site, assignment, English Language Certification (if any) and credential(s). 

 
The seniority date was based on the first date of paid service rendered in a 

probationary position.1  A teacher hired as a probationary employee who worked as a 
substitute or temporary employee for at least 75 percent of the school days during the 
previous year and who had performed the duties normally required of a certificated employee 
of the school district was deemed to have served a complete school year as a probationary 
employee if that individual was employed as a probationary employee for the following 
school year.  The individual was entitled to have that earlier year counted as a year of 
probationary service.  The prior year was “tacked” on for seniority purposes but only one 
year could be tacked.2

Education Code section 44845. 

                                                 
1  
 
2  
 

Education Code section 44918. 

 
4

14. 

In reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services, the services of no 

permanent employee may be terminated while retaining any employee with less seniority to 
render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.3   

 
The District used the seniority list for permanent and probationary certificated 
 
employees to develop a proposed order of layoff and a “bumping” list to determine the least 
senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced.  The District then 
determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another area that would 
entitle them to “bump” other junior employees.  In determining who would be laid off for 
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions and determined 
the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  The District then checked the 
credentials of affected individuals and whether they could “bump” other employees. 

 
In general, certificated employee layoffs occur in order of seniority.  However, 

statutorily authorized exceptions apply in cases where “special training or experience” is 
necessary to teach a particular course or provide a particular service which others with more 
seniority do not possess.4   

Certain junior employees with specialized education and training who were 

hired after other more senior Respondents were skipped and retained by the District.  Among 
other things, these junior employees hold a Special Education (Mild/Moderate and/or 
Moderate/Severe) Credential or Administrative Credential.   

Some employees named as Respondents have the same seniority date.  By 
adoption of Resolution No. 03-19-847 JC, dated, the Board adopted tie-breaker criteria to 
determine the order of termination of employees with the same seniority date.  The Board 
determined their order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the District and its 
students.  Under these criteria the District properly retained certain employees while the 
Respondents were properly given notice that their services would not be required for the 
ensuing school year.  With the exception of “Completion of International Baccalaureate 
Training”, the tie-breaker criteria are the same as last year.  As such, for those employees 
who have the same seniority date and again received layoff notices, the District did not apply 
tie-breaker criteria unless there had been a change of circumstances. 

 
17.  As a result of reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and/or 

bumping, the following Respondents will experience a partial reduction of position.   

 
15. 

 
16. 

 

•  For the 2009-2010 school year, Respondent Laura Graham has a 1.0 FTE 
position.  For the ensuing school year, her position will be reduced by .30 
FTE; she will retain .70 FTE position. 

                                                 
3  
 
4  
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b). 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d). 

 
5

 

•  For the 2009-2010 school year, Respondent Casey Lange has a 1.0 FTE 

position.  For the ensuing school year, her position will be reduced by .40 
FTE; she will retain .60 FTE position. 

•  For the 2009-2010 school year, Respondent Rachel Conroy has 1.0 FTE 

position.  For the ensuing school year, her position will be reduced by .40 
FTE; she will retain .60 FTE position. 

•  For the 2009-2010 school year, Respondent Nina Tubbs has a .80 FTE 

position.  For the ensuing school year, her position will be reduced by .65 
FTE; she will retain .15 FTE position.  

•  For the 2009-2010 school year, Respondent Robert Bush has a .80 FTE 

position.  For the ensuing school year, his position will be reduced by .50 
FTE; he will retain .30 FTE position. 

 

 

18. 

The services that the District proposed to reduce were “particular kinds of 

services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was 
not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  

 
19. 

The District’s reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services 
 
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
of the District as determined by the Board.  

 
20.  No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform 

 
services which any Respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
 
Valley Union School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause 
for the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to the 
welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  
 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the Cajon 

3. 

 
6

4. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he/she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior 
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Lacy vs. 
Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 469.)  
 

5. 

The District has the discretion to determine whether teachers are certificated 
and competent to hold the position for which said teachers have been skipped and retained.  
(King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016)  Junior teachers may 
be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or 
capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High 
School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 
v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831)   
 
 
perform a service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
the law and therefore rejected. 
 
 

All arguments not addressed herein are not supported by the evidence and/or 

No employee with less seniority than any Respondent is being retained to 

6. 

7. 

ORDER 
 

1. 

The Accusation against Respondents Dyana Bible, Nicole Bradshaw, Jenny 

Finnegan, Timothy Staninger and Robert Wade is dismissed. 

 
The Accusation against Respondent Laura Graham is sustained.   

2. 
 
Notice shall be given to Respondent Laura Graham that her position will be reduced 

by .30 full-time equivalent for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  

The Accusation against Respondent Casey Lange is sustained.   

 
3. 
 
Notice shall be given to Respondent Casey Lange that her position will be reduced by 

.40 full-time equivalent for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  

The Accusation against Respondent Rachel Conroy is sustained.  

 
4. 
 
Notice shall be given to Respondent Rachel Conroy that her position will be reduced 

by .40 full-time equivalent for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  

 

 

 
7

The Accusation against Respondent Nina Tubbs is sustained.   

5. 
 
Notice shall be given to Respondent Nina Tubbs that her position will be reduced by 

.65 full-time equivalent for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  

The Accusation against Respondent Robert Bush is sustained.   

 
6. 
 
Notice shall be given to Respondent Robert Bush that his position will be reduced by 

.50 full-time equivalent for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  

Except as provided in the foregoing paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this 

Order, the Accusation served on Respondents listed on Amended Exhibit “A” is sustained.  
Notice shall be given to Respondents listed on Amended Exhibit “A” before May 15, 2010 
that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school year because of the 
reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

   
7. 

 
8. 

 
 

DATED:  ___________ 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
VALLERA J. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 

 
8

