BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
SOUTH FORK UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT  
COUNTY OF KERN 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 
In The Matter of the Accusation Against: 
 
SHANNON DAMRON 
MICHAEL LANE 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
OAH No. 2010031553 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
H. Stuart Waxman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 7, 2010, at Bakersfield, 
California. 
 
 
District (District). 
 
 
 

Paul A. Welchans, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents.    

Peter C. Carton, Attorney at Law, represented the South Fork Union School 

The matter was submitted on April 7, 2010. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
The Governing Board of the South Fork Union School District (Board) 
determined to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers 
and other certificated employees for budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related 
to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to 
be reduced or eliminated.   
 
/// 
 

1

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process 

involving review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process was in 
accordance with the requirements of the Education Code.  
  
  

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

2.  Respondents are permanent certificated District employees. 

5.  The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each of the 

1.  Sherry Nichols made and filed the Accusation in her official capacity as 

4.  Respondents timely submitted written requests for a hearing to determine if 

 
 
Superintendent of the District. 
 
 
 
 
3.  On or before March 15, 2010, the District personally served on each 
respondent a written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to each 
respondent, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that his/her 
services would not be required for the next school year (Notice of Recommendation 
Not to Reemploy).  Each written notice set forth a reason for the recommendation and 
noted that the Board had passed a Resolution (Board Resolution Number 10-09) 
reducing the certificated staff. 
 
 
there is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year. 
 
 
certificated employees who requested a hearing.  The Accusations, with required 
accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense, were timely served on those 
certificated employees.   
 
 
 
 
tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated employees 
who first rendered paid service on the same date.  It provided that the order of 
termination shall be based on the needs of the District and its students. 
 
 
dates (first date of paid service), current assignments and locations, advanced degrees, 
credentials, and authorizations.  Credential and authorization data are obtained from 
the records of the County Office of Education, at which certificated employees must 
register such documents. 
 
 
 
/// 

6.  Timely Notices of Defense were filed by and on behalf of the respondents.   

7.  Board Resolution Number 10-07, adopted on January 12, 2010, established 

8.  The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

9.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 

 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

     

3.0 

1.0 

0.28 

11.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform 

NUMBER OF FULL TIME
EQUIVALENT POSITIONS

10   On March 9, 2010, the Board took action to reduce or discontinue the 

 
following particular kinds of services for the 2010-2011 school year: 
 
SERVICES 
 
 
 
Self-Contained Classroom 
Instruction, Grades K-6 
 
Self-contained Classroom 
Non-EL Qualified Instruction, 
Grades K-6 
 
 
Departmentalized Instruction, 
Junior High 
 
Administrator, 
Principal Tucpan-CDS 
 
Total Full Time Equivalent Reduction:   
 
 
any services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render. 
 
12.  The eliminated services were “particular kinds of services” that could be 
 
reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The 
Superintendent’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services 
was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  
 
 
the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees of the District as determined by the Board.   
 
 
date of paid service to the District with Dawne Gibson.  Respondent Damron 
conceded that the District properly applied the Board’s tie-breaker criteria and did not 
abuse its discretion in retaining Dawne Gibson and issuing a layoff notice to 
Respondent Damron. 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

14.  Respondent Shannon Damron (Respondent Damron) shares the same first 

13.  The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to 

4.28 

 

 

3

17.  The District has failed to meet the state’s Academic Performance Index 

16.  Respondent Lane holds a clear multi-subject credential.  He formerly held 

15.  Respondent Michael Lane (Respondent Lane) presently teaches the 
 
District’s Community Day School, a non-CLAD-compliant program.  That program is 
being eliminated at the end of the current school year because of state-imposed cuts in 
community day school funding1. 
 
 
a Special Education credential, but allowed it to lapse.  Respondent Lane does not 
hold a CLAD certification. 
 
 
(API) standards and is now in Program Improvement status.  By virtue of that status, 
the District must improve its students’ test scores.  Failure to do so may result in 
losses of state funding and, eventually, the removal of the District’s superintendent.  
To avoid those sanctions, the District must assist students in making academic 
progress, especially students from low income families and English language learners.  
Out of the District’s approximately 280 students, five are English language learners.  
The evidence did not disclose how many English language learners will be enrolled 
with the District in the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 
to be specially certified.  (Ed. Code,2 §§ 44253.3, 44253.4, 44253.10.) 
 
 
Respondent Lane that he must obtain his CLAD certification.  He failed to do so.  In 
or around September 2007, Respondent Lane was informed that, if he failed to obtain 
a CLAD emergency permit, his next pay warrant would be withheld.  Respondent 
Lane failed to do so, but the District did not withhold his pay warrant.   
 
20.  The District allowed a number of teachers with multi-subject credentials 
 
and first dates of paid service later than that of Respondent Lane to skip Respondent 
Lane.  Each of those teachers holds a CLAD certification.  Respondent Lane argued 
that he should be retained over those teachers, despite his lack of CLAD certification, 
because he is senior to those teachers, because the Board has not adopted a policy 
mandating CLAD certification for its teachers, because the District did not impose 
any sanctions against him such as withholding his pay warrant, despite its threat to do 
so, and because his layoff, based on a lack of CLAD certification, constitutes an 
abuse of discretion in light of the fact that only five of the District’s 280 students are 
English language learners.  Respondent Lane is incorrect. 

19.  On at least four occasions, beginning in January 2007, the District notified 

18.  Public school teachers who teach English language learners are required 

                                                 
1 The 1.0 full time equivalent listed under “Self-Contained Classroom Non-EL 
 
Qualified Instruction, Grades K-6” on the Board’s List of Certificated Services Being 
Reduced or Eliminated, refers to the elimination of the Community Day School. 
 
 

2 All statutory references are to the Education Code. 

 

4

21.  Because of its Program Improvement status on the API, the District is 
 
under great pressure to improve its students’ test scores or face additional funding 
cuts which will directly impact the District and its students.  Although only a small 
percentage of the District’s students are English language learners, they are entitled to 
the same academic opportunities as their peers whose primary language is English, 
and the District may not deny them those opportunities because of their race, color, 
sex, or national origin by failing “to take appropriate action to overcome language 
barriers that impede equal participation by its students in its instructional programs.” 
(20 U.S.C. § 1703.)  Further, as is referenced in Paragraph 25, below, the number of 
English language learners in California is rapidly increasing.  Therefore, the District 
must anticipate a rise in the number of English language learners it must serve in the 
upcoming school year. 
 
 
22.  Although a senior teacher may “bump” a junior teacher from his/her 
position if the senior teacher is certificated and competent to render the service being 
provided by the junior teacher (§ 44955, subd. (b).), he/she is not permitted to do so if 
“[t]he district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or 
course of study . . . and that the certificated employee [the junior teacher] has special 
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which 
others with more seniority do not possess.”   (§ 44955, subd. (d)(1).)   
 
23.  “Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 expressly allows a district to 
 
demonstrate its specific ‘needs’ and there is nothing in the statute that requires such 
needs to be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job descriptions, or 
program requirements.”  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 
Cal.App.4th 127, 138.)  Accordingly, the District was not required to have a policy in 
place requiring its teachers to obtain and maintain a CLAD certification. 
 
24.  In this case, the non-CLAD-compliant program in which Respondent 
 
teaches is being eliminated.  If Respondent “bumps” a more junior teacher, he will be 
placed into a self-contained classroom but will not be permitted by law to teach 
English language learners, a group the District has identified as having one of the 
most critical needs for improvement, and a group the District is required and 
committed to assist. 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 

 

5

25.  In Governing Board of Ripon Unified School District v. Commission on 
 
Professional Conduct (2009) 177 Cal.App.4th 1379, 1386-1388, the Court held that 
the school district was permitted to terminate a teacher (Messick) who was required 
by the District to obtain a CLAD certification but who refused to do so.  The Court 
reasoned: 
 

The District is required to provide its EL students with equal 
opportunity to all of the District’s programs.  And the Legislature has 
required all teachers who teach EL students to be certified to do so.  
(Ed. Code, §§ 44253.1, 44253.10.)  A district is subject to monitoring 
and penalties if it assigns an EL student to a teacher who has not been 
certified to teach them.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44258.9, 45037.)  As a result of 
Messick’s refusal to become EL certified, if an EL student registers for 
a music class, the District can either deny the student the opportunity to 
take the class, or it can risk sanctions for assigning the student to 
Messick.  Neither of these options is viable. 
 
Messick also complains that as of yet no EL student has been denied 
access to music education and the District was terminating her based on 
an anticipated harm.  That may be so, but the Legislature has 
recognized that the number of EL students in the state is increasing, and 
it has clearly instructed the state to prepare for this need:  “The 
Legislature finds and declares that almost one million, or one of every 
five, pupils in California’s public schools are of limited English 
proficiency, and that the number of those pupils is increasing rapidly.  
In addition, the number of primary languages spoken by California’s 
limited-English-proficient pupils is increasing.  The Legislature 
recognizes that limited-English-proficient pupils have the same right to 
a quality education as all California pupils.  For these pupils to have 
access to quality education, their special needs must be met by teachers 
who have essential skills and knowledge related to English language 
development, specially designed content instruction delivered in 
English, and content instruction delivered in the pupils’ primary 
languages.  It is the intent of the Legislature that the Commission on 
Teacher Credentialing implement an assessment system to certify those 
teachers who have the essential skills and knowledge necessary to meet 
the needs of California’s limited-English-proficient pupils.”  (Ed. Code, 
§ 44253.1.) [Footnote omitted.] 
 
[¶] . . . [¶] 

 
/// 
 
/// 
 

 

6

Messick claims her failure to obtain the credential is not a legitimate 
ground for terminating her, a tenured teacher, because the credential 
requirement was unlawful.  This argument merely begs the question of 
whether the District’s action was preempted by state law.  The District 
can terminate a tenured employee for, among other reasons, 
unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, and persistent 
violation of, or refusal to obey, reasonable regulations prescribed by the 
District.  (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds. (a)(1), (5), and (7).)  If the 
District’s requirement that all certificated teachers, including tenured 
teachers, become EL certified is lawful, Messick’s persistent refusal to 
comply with the District’s requirement is a lawful ground on which to 
initiate termination proceedings against her. 
 
 
26.  The rationale in Ripon, supra, is equally applicable here.  If termination of 
a tenured teacher for failure to obtain an EL certification is deemed by the Court to be 
a lawful exercise of the District’s discretion, it follows that the District’s requirement 
of a CLAD certification in relation to the less onerous issue of a reduction in force3 
also falls within that discretion. 
 
 
27.  The Legislature has determined that an EL certification is necessary to 
comply with federal law and to provide English language learners with the quality 
education enjoyed by their peers whose primary language is English.  The District 
will face sanctions for its failure to comply with the laws relating to English language 
learners and, unless English language learners are taught by CLAD-compliant 
teachers, they will not reap the benefit of those laws.  Respondent has received 
several notices/warnings to obtain a CLAD certification, and he has had ample 
opportunity to do so over more than three-years.  His arguments in favor of retention 
do not reflect California law, and his retention would inure to the detriment of the 
District and its students.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 

 
 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
                                                 
 
although in both cases, the teacher finds himself/herself out of work, the dismissal 
involves discipline against the credentialed individual, but the reduction in force does 
not. 

3 The reduction in force is deemed less onerous than a dismissal because, 

 

7

2.  The services identified in Board Resolution Number 10-09 are particular 

 
kinds of services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 
44955.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for 
the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s 
schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 

5.    No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

3.  A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall 
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board 
of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)  
  
 
4.  Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District 
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  The District 
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the 
Board directed be reduced or discontinued.   
 
 
services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 
  
6.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, 
the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 
position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  Junior 
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers 
possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.  
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara 
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

 

8

ORDER 

1.  The Accusation against the respondents is sustained.  Notice may be given 

2.  Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 

 
 
to the respondents that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school 
year because of reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
  
  
DATED:  April 12, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
H. STUART WAXMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

9

