BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
DENAIR UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 

In the Matter of the Accusation (Reduction 
in Force) Against: 
 
  RACHEL WATTS,  
 
                                                    Respondent. 
 
 

 

 

 
OAH No. 2010021008 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge JoAnn Irwin Eshelman, Office of Administrative 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Denair, California, on May 17, 2010. 
 
 
represented the Denair Unified School District (District). 
 

Marissa R. Lincoln, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

Respondent Rachel Watts (respondent) was represented by Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, 

Attorney at Law. 
 

Oral and documentary evidence were received.  The record was closed and the 

matter was submitted for decision on May 17, 2010. 
 

Because this matter was continued pursuant to Education Code section 44949, 
subdivision (e),1 the May 7 deadline set forth in section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), was 
extended to June 11, 2010, and the May 15 deadline set forth in section 44955, subdivision 
(c) was extended to June 19, 2010.  The parties stipulated that the proposed decision in this 
matter is due on June 11, 2010. 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
Board Resolution for Reduction in Force 
 

1.  On March 11, 2010, the Governing Board of the District (Board) adopted 
Resolution No. 031110-R11 (Resolution), by which it determined that it was necessary to 
reduce or discontinue certain identified particular kinds of services (sometimes referred to as 
PKS) of the District for the 2010-2011 school year.  Due to this reduction or discontinuance 
                                                 

1  All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise noted.  

of particular kinds of services, the Board determined that it was necessary to terminate the 
employment of certain certificated employees of the District at the end of the 2009-2010 
school year.  The Board directed the Superintendent, Edward E. Parraz, or his designee to 
send appropriate notices to all employees whose services will be terminated as a result of the 
Board’s action.  The PKS reductions and discontinuances are based solely on economic 
factors and are not related to the skills, abilities or work performance of the affected teachers.   
 

2. 

In the Resolution, the Board identified the following particular kinds of 

services for reduction or discontinuance: 
 

 
 

 
Services 
  K-8 Teachers   
  Assistant Vice Principals 
  K-12 Independent Study/Home School 
  Teachers – Charter School 
    

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

Number of FTE Positions2
 
 
 

12.0 FTE 
  3.0 FTE 
  8.3 FTE 

 

    

 TOTAL:         23.3 FTE Positions 

 

3. 

These are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued 

 
 
within the meaning of section 44955.   The Board considered all positively assured attrition, 
including deaths, resignations, retirements and other permanent vacancies for 2010-2011, 
which had occurred by March 11, 2010, in determining the services to be reduced or 
eliminated.  The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue services was a proper exercise of 
its discretion. 
 
Preliminary Layoff Notices and Hearing Requests 
 

4. 

Pursuant to the Resolution, on March 11, 2010, the Superintendent 

recommended to the Board that 54 certificated employees, identified for layoff, be given 
preliminary written notices that their services will not be required for the 2010-2011 school 
year. 
 

5. 

On March 12, 2010, Jody L. Jorge, Administrative Assistant to the 

Superintendent, mailed preliminary layoff notices to the 54 employees, along with a blank 
Request for Hearing form, a copy of the Resolution, and copies of Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955.  The letter informed the employees of their right to request a hearing and 
the procedure to do so. 
 
 
hearing from 17 employees, one of whom was Rachel Watts. 3  Ms. Watts submitted a 

In response to the preliminary layoff notices, the District received requests for 

6. 

                                                 

measurement and staff calculation.    
 

2  FTE is an abbreviation for the term “full-time equivalent.”  This is the basic unit of employment 

3  The other 16 employees are Inga Bernard, Kara Binkley, Rosanne Cantwell, Stacy Criswell, Coree 
Fitzgerald, Patricia Guillen, Susanna Jones, Stephen Ladine, Amanda Naranjo, Justin Riggs, Dina Rodriguez, 
Melinda Rosenquist, Sarah Schuchterman, Tamara Sondeno, Susan Tanis, and Quinn Waterson.   

 

2

timely request for hearing on March 18, 2010.  She is a certificated employee of the District. 
On March 25, 2010, the Superintendent personally served a Certificated Layoff Hearing 
Packet on Ms. Watts and each of the 16 other employees who had requested a hearing.  The 
packet included a Statement to Respondents, Accusation with Exhibits A through C, Notice 
of Hearing, blank Notice of Defense, Request for Discovery, Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955, and Government Code sections 11506, 11507.5, 11507.6, 11507.7, and 
11520. 
 

7. 

Prior to the hearing, the District narrowed the scope of the reduction in force, 

and rescinded preliminary layoff notices for 16 of the 17 employees.  The only employee 
whose preliminary notice was not rescinded was Rachel Watts.  The revised and current 
scope of the reduction in force is as follows: 
 

 
 

Services 
 
  K-8 Teachers   
  Assistant Vice Principals 
  K-12 Independent Study/Home School 
  Teachers – Charter School 
    

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

Number of FTE Positions
 
 
 

  2.2 FTE 
  3.0 FTE 
  8.3 FTE 

 

    

 TOTAL:         13.5 FTE Positions  

9. 

8. 

On March 26, 2010, Ms. Watts filed a timely Notice of Defense. 

All of the pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
met its burden under section 44955, subdivision (d)(1) to justify the “skip” of a less senior 
employee, Sheila Gianfortone.  That issue is addressed below. 
 
The District’s “Skip” of Ms. Gianfortone 
 

10.  Ms. Watts challenges her proposed layoff on grounds that the District has not 

11. 

In the Resolution, the Board set forth “skipping” criteria which would allow 
the District to retain certain junior employees with special training and experience needed 
by the District.  The Resolution stated, 
 

That due to the unique needs of the District to hire and 
retain only teachers who possess necessary 
authorizations to teach certain classes within the 
District’s curriculum, the Superintendent or designee is 
authorized to deviate from terminating certificated 
employees in order of seniority (“skipping”) in instances 
where the less senior employee possesses one of the 
following credential authorizations and will be providing 
services pursuant to said credential: 

 

 

3

1) Single Subject Math; 2) Supplemental Subject Math; 
3) Special Education- Mild to Moderate; 4) BCLAD; 5) 
Single Subject English; 6) Single Subject Spanish; 7) 
Single Subject Science (including, but not limited to 
Agriculture, but excluding Social Science); 8) Single 
Subject Business; 9) Designated Subject Law 
Enforcement, Criminal Justice; 10) Single Subject 
Special Education; or 11) Clear Specialist 
Instructional-Reading; or 12) Single Subject Physical 
Education. (Emphasis added.) 

12.  Ms. Watts holds a clear multiple subject credential, and a Crosscultural, 

 
 
Language and Academic Development (CLAD) Certificate.  She does not hold a reading 
specialist credential and there was no evidence that she has experience either assessing 
reading skills or teaching reading.  Her 2009-2010 school year assignment was teaching 
middle school language arts and social science.  Ms. Watts’ seniority date is August 7, 2008.   
 
13.  Ms. Gianfortone holds a clear multiple subject credential, a CLAD Certificate 
 
and a Specialist in Reading – Reading and Language Arts credential.  Her 2009-2010 school 
year assignment involved teaching at a middle school and at the Denair Charter Academy, a 
charter school which provides only independent study and home school programs.  Ms. 
Gianfortone taught one period of computer literacy, coordinated the Supplemental 
Education Services (SES) intervention program at the middle school, did reading 
assessments and taught reading.  Ms. Gianfortone’s job description does not require a 
reading specialist credential.  Her seniority date is August 8, 2008, one day junior to Ms. 
Watts. 
 
 
in the fall that will be “classroom-based” with some independent study students.  The 
District needs a teacher with specialized training and experience in reading to work with 
students who will be enrolling in the new charter school.  Ms. Gianfortone has used her 
reading credential in her 2009/2010 school year assignment and will be able to use it at 
three sites (an elementary school and two charter schools) in the fall, affording the District 
greater flexibility.  The Board’s Resolution authorizes “skipping” any teacher with a Clear 
Specialist Instructional-Reading credential who will be providing services pursuant to that 
credential.  Ms. Gianfortone has the reading credential and the specialized training and 
experience which the District needs in the 2010-2011 school year.  Ms. Watts does not have 
a reading credential.  For these reasons, the District “skipped” and intends to retain Ms. 
Gianfortone. 
 
 
language in section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).  That language requires that the district 
demonstrate that it has a specific need for personnel “to teach a specific course or course of 
study.”  Ms. Watts contends that the reading assignment of Ms. Gianfortone is not a specific 
course or course of study.  The District conceded this point, but argues that it needs a 

The Superintendent testified that the District is opening a new charter school 

15.  Ms. Watts contends that the District has not met its burden under the 

14. 

 

4

17. 

The Superintendent testified that it was not possible to separate the 

teacher with the reading credential to work with students at the new charter school.  Because 
Ms. Watts does not have that credential or the specialized training and experience it 
represents, she would not be able to handle that portion of the anticipated 2010-2011 
assignment for Ms. Gianfortone.  The District also argued that it is retaining Ms. 
Gianfortone because this allows more flexibility for the District to meet its needs in the 
upcoming school year. 
 
16.  Although the reading assessment and teaching portion of Ms. Gianfortone’s 
 
assignment does not amount to a specific course or course of study as such, it is clearly an 
extremely important and basic service which the District must provide to its students.  As 
such, the reading assessment and teaching portion of Ms. Gianfortone’s anticipated 
assignment falls within the purview of the statute.  The District has demonstrated that it has 
a specific need for a teacher with a reading credential, and with experience assessing and 
teaching reading at three different District sites.  Ms. Watts does not have that credential or 
the experience to assess and teach reading. 
 
 
percentage of Ms. Gianfortone’s time that would be devoted to her reading assignment.  It is 
also not necessary for the District to do so in order to accommodate the requirements of 
section 44955 to retain more senior employees by splitting a position.  The District’s 
decision to deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority and to 
“skip” Ms. Gianfortone, as permitted by its “skipping” criteria in the Resolution, was 
correct. 
 
Other Findings 
 
 
are mandated by state or federal laws or regulations below mandated levels. 
 
 
There was no evidence that the District proposes to retain any permanent or 
probationary employee to render services that respondent is certificated and competent to 
perform.  Employees were terminated in the inverse order from which they were employed, 
as determined from a seniority list prepared by Ms. Jorge, under the Superintendent’s 
direction. 
 
 
waived.  Any other assertions put forth by respondent at the hearing and not addressed 
above are found to be without merit and are rejected.   
 
 

20.  Any defenses or issues not specifically raised in this proceeding are deemed 

There was no evidence that the District proposes to reduce any services that 

18. 

19. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

There is jurisdiction to proceed in this matter under sections 44949 and 44955.  

The District has complied with all notice and other jurisdictional requirements of those 
sections, as set forth in Factual Findings 1 through 9. 

 

 

5

2. 

3. 

The notices sent to respondent indicated the statutory basis for the reduction of 

 
services and were sufficiently detailed to provide her with due process.  (San Jose Teachers 
Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. 
Governing Board, supra, 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  The description of services to be reduced, 
both in the Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe particular kinds of services.  
(Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.  See, also, Degener v. Governing 
Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)  
 
 
As set forth in Factual Finding 3, the services identified in the Resolution are 
particular kinds of services that could be reduced or discontinued under section 44955.  The 
Superintendent’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious and was a proper exercise of discretion.  Cause exists to reduce the 
number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates 
solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949. 
 
 
Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, “Except as otherwise provided by 
statute, the services of no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of 
this section while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is 
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 
render.”  Section 44955, subdivision (c), provides in pertinent part, “… and services of such 
employees shall be terminated in the inverse order in which they were employed, as 
determined by the board in accordance with the provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.”  
As set forth in Factual Finding 19, the District has satisfied these requirements. 
 
 
 

Section 44955, subdivision (d), provides,  

4. 

5. 

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may 
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order 
of seniority for either of the following reasons: 
 
(1)  the district demonstrates a specific need for 
personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or 
to provide services authorized by a services credential 
with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or 
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated 
employee has special training and experience necessary 
to teach that course or course of study or to provide those 
services, which others with more seniority do not 
possess. 

 

 

¶ 

 
 
Gianfortone was proper under section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).  

As set forth in Factual Findings 11 through 17, the District’s decision to “skip” Ms. 

6

6. 

Because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services 

 
pursuant to section 44955, cause exists to give notice to Ms. Watts that her services will not 
be required for the 2010-2011 school year. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice may be given to respondent Rachel Watts that her services will not be required 

for the 2010-2011 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of 
services in the District. 
 
 
 
Dated: June 9, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

____________________________ 
JOANN I. ESHELMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

7

