BEFORE THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
ALTA LOMA SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Accusations Against:

JENNIFER BENNETT,
VICTOR SOLIS,
DANIEL STEVENSON,

Respondents.

OAH No. 2011030126

PROPOSED DECISION

Erlinda G. Shrenger, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings,
State of California, heard this matter on April 4, 2011, at the Alta Loma School District in
Alta Loma, California.

Rutan & Tucker, LLP, by David C. Larsen, Attorney at Law, represented the Alta

Loma School District (District).

Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, by Richard J. Schwab, Attorney at Law, represented
certificated employees Jennifer Bennett, Victor Solis, and Daniel Stevenson (collectively,
Respondents). All Respondents were present at the hearing.

Evidence was received by stipulation, documents, and testimony. The matter was

submitted on April 4, 2010.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Michael Whisenand is the Superintendent of the District and filed the

Accusation in his official capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District. The District is

comprised of elementary and junior high schools.

1

3.

On February 24, 2011, the Governing Board of the District, by adoption of

Resolution 02-24-11 (Resolution), determined to reduce or discontinue the following
particular kinds of services for the 2011-2012 school year, as follows:

Service

FTE1 Reduction

Grades 1-3 Class Size Reduction

18.0

4.

The Governing Board, in the Resolution, directed the Superintendent or his
designee to give written notice, prior to March 15, 2011, to the certificated employees who
may be laid off in order to reduce the number of certificated positions as proposed in the
Resolution. The Governing Board, in the Resolution, also established tie-breaker criteria for
determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service
on the same date, based on the needs of the District and its students.

5.

The Governing Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set

forth in Factual Finding 3 because of the State's on-going budget crisis and the District's need
to reduce or discontinue services in order to maintain a balanced budget and provide essential
services. The elimination of the Class Size Reduction Program2 in grades 1 to 3 would save
the District an estimated $1.173 million. Staffing ratios in those grades would increase to 30
to 1 and result in a reduction of 18 teaching positions.

6.

Pursuant to the Resolution, the Superintendent notified the Governing Board

of his recommendation that 19 certificated employees, including Respondents, be given
notice that their services would not be required for the 2011-2012 school year and stating the
reasons for that recommendation.

7.

On or before March 15, 2010, the Superintendent notified 19 certificated

employees, including Respondents, in writing, of his recommendation that notice be given to
them pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be
required for the 2011-2012 school year. Each written notice set forth the reasons for the
recommendation and informed the employee of his or her right to request a hearing.

8.

Of the 19 employees served with the March 15 layoff notice, Respondents
Bennett, Solis, and Stevenson are the only employees who timely requested a hearing, in
writing, to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school

1 FTE stands for full-time equivalent.

2 The Class Size Reduction Program is governed by Education Code section 52120 et
seq. The purpose of the program is "to ensure that children in public school in kindergarten
and grades 1 to 3, inclusive, receive instruction in classrooms where there are not more than
20 pupils." (Ed. Code, § 52122.)

2

year. The other 16 employees who did not request a hearing waived their right to a hearing
and cannot contest the recommendation of their non-reemployment by the District. (Ed.
Code, § 44949, subd. (b).) The 16 employees who did not request a hearing are: Joni Baker;
Sandy Chou; Cynthia Diamond; Matthew Dzama; Joshua Estes; Calli Jo Frei; Janine
Gonzales; Kristina Hedlund; Rebecca Kenyon; Jody Kinsey; Meggan Markey; Curtis
Quanstrom; Jennifer Rice; Melody Simons; Courtney Tartamella; and Lauren Weischedel.

9.

The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against Respondents Bennett,

Solis, and Stevenson. The Accusations with required accompanying documents and blank
Notices of Defense were timely served on Respondents. A Joint Notice of Defense was
timely filed on behalf of Respondents.

10.

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority date

(first date of paid service), employment classification, and credentials and authorizations.
The District used the seniority list to identify the least senior employees currently assigned in
the particular kinds of services being reduced. The District determined whether the least
senior employees held credentials in another area and were entitled to "bump" other
employees. Respondents Bennett, Stevenson, and Solis have been identified for layoff due to
being displaced or "bumped" from their positions by other employees. Respondents are
currently teachers at Alta Loma Junior High School.

11.

Respondent Jennifer Bennett has a seniority date of August 4, 2010, which she

does not dispute. Bennett currently teaches seventh grade pre-Algebra and eighth grade
Algebra and Algebra I. She received her single subject credential in foundations math in
January 2009. Bennett is certified for Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development
(CLAD), and is rated Highly Qualified under No Child Left Behind (NCLB).

12.

Respondent Daniel Stevenson has a seniority date of August 4, 2010, which he

does not dispute. He currently teaches eighth grade Algebra I. Stevenson holds a single
subject credential in math, with a supplemental authorization in business. He is rated Highly
Qualified under NCLB, and is English Language certified to teach English language learners.

13.

Respondent Victor Solis has a seniority date of August 5, 2009, which he does

not dispute. He currently teaches seventh grade life science. He holds a single subject
credential in geosciences, which he received in 2006. He is CLAD certified and rated Highly
Qualified under NCLB. Solis has six years of teaching experience, consisting of two years at
Alta Loma Junior High School and four years at a high school outside the District.

14.

Employee Julia Olsen is currently a kindergarten teacher for the District. She
has a seniority date of August 31, 1999. She holds a clear multiple subject credential, with a
supplemental authorization in math. Based on her credential and supplemental authorization,
Olsen is qualified to teach the seventh and eighth grade math classes currently taught by
Respondents Bennett and Stevenson.

3

15.

Employee Deborah Markey is currently a fourth grade teacher for the District.

She has a seniority date of August 27, 1996. She holds a clear multiple subject credential,
with supplemental authorizations in English and math. Based on her credential and
supplemental authorizations, Markey is qualified to teach the seventh and eighth grade math
classes currently taught by Respondents Bennett and Stevenson.

16.

Employee Pamela Boyd is currently a third grade teacher for the District. She
has a seniority date of November 1, 1995. She holds a clear multiple subject credential, and
a single subject credential in life science. Based on her credentials, Boyd is qualified to
teach the seventh grade life science class taught by Respondent Solis.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

4.

5.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections

44949 and 44955 were met. (Factual Findings 1-9.)

The services identified in Resolution 02-24-11 -- the elimination of the Class

Size Reduction Program in grades 1 to 3 -- are particular kinds of services that could be
reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. (Zalac v. Governing Board of
the Ferndale Unified School District (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 853-854.) A district may
reduce services within the meaning of section 44955 by "determining that proffered services
shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to deal with the
pupils involved." (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

3.

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due
to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. Cause for the reduction or
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and students
within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. (Factual Findings 3-5.) The Governing
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services

which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

The District correctly identified Respondents as employees subject to layoff in

accordance with Education Code section 44955. Respondents are subject to layoff because
they are being "bumped" from their current positions by other employees based on seniority
and qualifications. A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer
to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)

6.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides, in pertinent part:

"The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that

4

employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications
entitle them to render." The District's proposed reassignment of employees Boyd, Olsen, and
Markey, respectively, to the positions currently held by Respondents Solis, Bennett, and
Stevenson, respectively, is proper, as the reassigned employees have the seniority and
qualifications to render the services of those positions.

7.

Employees Boyd, Olsen, and Markey, by their credentials, are qualified to

render the services of the positions currently held by Respondents. Education Code section
44203, subdivision (d), states: "'Authorization' means the designation that appears on a
credential, certificate, or permit that identifies the subjects and circumstances in which the
holder of the credential, certificate, or permit may teach, or the services which the holder
may render in the public schools of this state."

8.

Under California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80057.5, subdivision (a),

the holder of a valid teaching credential may have one or more subjects added as a
supplementary authorization upon verified completion of either: (1) 20 semester hours or 10
upper division semester hours of non-remedial collegiate course work in each subject to be
listed, or (2) a collegiate major in a subject directly related to each subject to be listed. The
subjects that may be added as supplementary authorizations to a valid teaching credential
include, but are not limited to, mathematics and science. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80057.5,
subd. (c)(10) & (13).) A supplementary authorization in mathematics requires "at least one
course in each of the following areas (all course work shall be at least at a level for which
intermediate algebra is a prerequisite): algebra, geometry, and development of the real
number system or introduction to mathematics; or three courses in calculus or other
mathematics courses for which algebra and geometry are prerequisites." ((Cal. Code Regs.,
tit. 5, § 80057.5, subd. (c)(10).) A supplementary authorization in science requires "at least
one course in each of the following areas: biological sciences, chemistry, geosciences, and
physics." (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80057.5, subd. (c)(13).)

9.

Employee Boyd has more seniority than Respondent Solis, and her single

subject credential in life science qualifies her to perform the services of the position currently
held by Solis. Employees Olsen and Markey each have more seniority than either of
Respondents Bennett and Stevenson. Markey and Olsen each hold a supplemental
authorization in math, which qualifies them to perform the services of the positions currently
held by Bennett and Stevenson. The District's proposed reassignment of employees to the
positions currently held by Respondents complies with Education Code section 44955 and,
therefore, establishes a basis for subjecting Respondents to layoff.

10.

Respondents contend they should be not be subject to layoff because they do
not perform the elementary school services being reduced or discontinued, and they do not
hold multiple subject credentials, which are required for elementary school assignments.
(Ed. Code, § 44256, subd. (b).) This contention must fail. Under Education Code section
44955, subdivision (b), when a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued,
and the governing board determines it is necessary to decrease the number of permanent
employees in the district, the governing board may terminate the services of "not more than a

5

corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the district." There is no provision
in section 44955 which limits a governing board's authority to terminate employment only of
employees who perform the particular kinds of services being reduced or discontinued.
Further, the Governing Board, in the Resolution, recognized that "the reduction or
elimination of [the particular kinds of] services may result in the reassignment and laying off
of certificated employees."

11.

Respondents also contend they should not be subject to layoff because the

employees to be assigned or reassigned to the positions currently held by Respondents have
not been shown to have the requisite competency for the positions. This contention must
fail. As discussed above, the employees to be reassigned to Respondents' positions, by virtue
of their credentials and supplemental authorizations, are competent to teach those positions.
Further, contrary to Respondents' argument, the District is not required to have the
employees pass a subject matter competency test, pursuant to Education Code section 44955,
subdivision (c). The subject matter competency test under subdivision (c) only applies when
a certificated employee is to be assigned or reassigned "to teach a subject which he or she has
not previously taught, and for which he or she does not have a teaching credential, or which
is not within the employee's major area post secondary study or the equivalent thereof."
(Emphasis added.) The employees to be reassigned to Respondents' positions have the
credentials to teach in those positions.

ORDER

1.

Notice may be given to employees occupying 18.0 full-time equivalent

certificated positions that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year
because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services. Such notices
may be given to Joni Baker; Jennifer Bennett; Sandy Chou; Cynthia Diamond; Matthew
Dzama; Joshua Estes; Calli Jo Frei; Janine Gonzales; Kristina Hedlund; Rebecca Kenyon;
Jody Kinsey; Meggan Markey; Curtis Quanstrom; Jennifer Rice; Melody Simons; Victor
Solis; Daniel Stevenson; Courtney Tartamella; and Lauren Weischedel.

2.

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

Dated: April ___, 2011

___________________________
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

