BEFORE THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
OF THE SANTA MONICA-MALIBU UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

OAH No. 2011030355

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
(NURSES) OF THE SANTA MONICA-
MALIBU UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Howard W. Cohen, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 25, 2011, in Santa Monica.

Elizabeth Zamora-Mejia, Attorney at Law, represented the Santa Monica-

Malibu Unified School District (District).

Deborah Eshaghian, Attorney at Law, represented Rachel Bressler Deese,

Sandra Cano, JoAnn Housman, Margaret Mahon, Nora McElvain, Aimee Rand, Teri
Sachs, and Sherry Waldorf (respondents), all of whom were present at the hearing.

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain services and has

given respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2011-2012 school
year. Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for
not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing. The record was

closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 25, 2010.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Tim Cuneo, the District’s Superintendent, and Debra Moore

Washington, the District’s Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, took all
relevant actions in their official capacity.

2.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

//

//

3.

On February 17, 2011, the Board of Education (Board) of the District

adopted Resolution No. 10-20 (Ex. 1) reducing or discontinuing the following
particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2011-2012 school year:

Services

K-5 Classroom Teaching Services

Nursing Services

Total Certificated Positions

FTE1

6.0

5.6

11.6

4.

Resolution No. 10-20 further provides, among other things, that, due to

the need of the District to retain those school nurses with special training, skills, and
experience to provide bilingual nursing services to English Language Learners, which
more senior school nurses do not possess, the Superintendent or his designee may
deviate from terminating those school nurses in order of seniority where they can
demonstrate that they are bilingual and fluent in both English and Spanish and that
they are currently providing nursing services to District students whose primary
language is other than English. Resolution No. 10-20 further provides that due to the
need of the District to retain those school nurses with special training and experience
to serve in the position of District Coordinating Nurse, the Superintendent or his
designee may deviate from terminating those school nurses in order of seniority
where they have special training and experience to serve in the position of District
Coordinating Nurse.

5.

The Board further determined that due to the reduction or

discontinuance of particular kinds of services, the corresponding number of
certificated employees of the District shall be terminated at the end of the 2010-2011
school year, and directed the Superintendent or his designee to take all actions
necessary and proper to accomplish the purposes of Resolution No. 10-20.

6.

On or before March 15, 2011, the District provided written notice to
respondents, under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955,2 that their services
would not be required for the 2011-2012 school year. Each written notice set forth the
reasons for the District’s decision and noted that 11.6 FTE positions, consisting of 6.0
FTE K-5 classroom teaching positions and 5.6 FTE nursing services positions, would
be reduced or discontinued.

1 Full-time equivalent position.

2 All statutory citations are to the Education Code, unless indicated otherwise.

2

8.

9.

7.

Between March 18 and March 22, 2011, the District filed and served

the Accusation and related documents on respondents.3 Respondents thereafter timely
filed Notices of Defense, seeking a determination of whether cause exists for not
reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.4

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

The services set forth in factual finding 3 are particular kinds of

services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.

10.

The Board took action to reduce the services set forth in factual

finding 3 because of uncertainty surrounding future state funding. The decision to
reduce services was not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals
whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated. The decision to reduce the
particular kinds of services is related solely to the welfare of the District and its
pupils, and is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the
District’s discretion.

11.

For the 2010-2011 school year, the District employed 11 nurses filling

9.8 FTE positions. These individuals provided a multitude of services to
approximately 11,500 students at 16 schools and a child development site. A portion
of the student population has serious health issues, including asthma and diabetes.
Some students require specialized physical or mental health care services. The school
nurses develop care plans for students, and coordinate and perform mandated vision,
hearing, and scoliosis screening. They also perform federally mandated student
assessments as part of the special education process.

12.

Resolution No. 10-20 reduces 5.6 FTE nursing services positions. This
would leave the District with 4.2 FTE credentialed school nurses. Several respondents
contend that the District will not be able to provide federal and state mandated
services to students with only 4.2 FTE school nurses.

13.

Debra Moore Washington, the District’s Assistant Superintendent,

Human Resources, was involved in recommending reductions in particular kinds of
services, as reflected in Resolution No. 10-20, including the reduction in nursing
services. The District acknowledged that it must continue to provide legally mandated
health services, including hearing, vision, and scoliosis screening. The District
argued that the Education Code does not mandate that all the health care services

3 The District served precautionary written notices and Accusations on
respondents Mahon and Rand even though the District proposes to retain the services
of those respondents. (See factual finding 20.)

4 All respondents provide nursing services. None of the K-5 classroom

teachers filed a hearing request.

3

which the District’s school nurses are currently providing must be provided by a
certificated school nurse employed by the District. The District believes it will be able
to meet its legal obligations to provide mandated services to students with 4.2 FTE
certificated school nurses and additional services provided through other means that
the District is currently exploring through the use of an ad hoc committee that will
make recommendations to the Board. Other means being considered include the use
of non-employee licensed vocational nurses or health clerks working under the
supervision of registered nurse employees of the District. The District’s argument was
persuasive.

Seniority

14.

At hearing, respondent Housman questioned her seniority date of

August 31, 1998. She testified that she was first hired by the District for the 1994-
1995 school year as a temporary nurse, working three days per week, and that she
accepted other temporary positions at the District between 1994 and 1998. She
testified that she does not believe she worked 75 percent of full-time or more in any
school year before 1998. The parties agree that the issue of respondent’s seniority
date is not dispositive of the District’s right to lay off respondent in these
proceedings. Based on the evidence presented, Ms. Housman’s seniority date is
August 31, 1998.

Tie-Breaking

15.

On February 17, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 10-22

establishing tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated
employees with the same date of first paid service. The criteria provide that the order
of layoff shall be determined according to the following criteria:

1. Possession of a Clear School Nurse Services
Credential.

2. Experience serving in the position of District
Coordinating Nurse.

3. Number of verified years of certificated employee’s
actual work experience within the District.

4. Number of verified years of employment as a school
nurse in other school districts in California.

5. Number of verified total full time years of
employment as a licensed nurse.

6. Assuming the preceding paragraphs do not resolve all
ties, the tie will be broken by drawing of lots.

4

16.

The tie-breaking criteria of Resolution No. 10-22 were applied in this

matter to resolve a tie in seniority amongst certificated personnel, specifically to Lora
Morn, who holds a school nurse services credential, and respondent JoAnn Housman.
Both have a seniority date of August 31, 1998. The District applied criteria one—
possession of a Clear School Nurse Services Credential—and then two—experience
serving in the position of District Coordinating Nurse—which broke the tie in favor
of Ms. Morn.

17. Ms. Housman testified to her belief that all nurses should be able to
take any nursing position in the District, that the nursing coordinator position was
once contemplated to be a shared position, and that she has experience in team
meetings coordinating the Headstart program, and in ensuring compliance with
federal requirements for that program, at the Child Developmental Services
preschool.

18.

School districts are given wide discretion in determining tie-breaking
criteria.5 In this case, the District reasonably exercised its discretion by giving credit
for tie-breaking purposes to those with experience serving in the position of District
Coordinating Nurse, given the need of the District expressed in Resolution No. 10-20
to retain those school nurses with special training and experience to serve in the
position of District Coordinating Nurse. It cannot be concluded that the failure to
include Headstart coordinating experience or the capabilities of the District’s school
nurses as a general matter in the tie-breaking criteria was an abuse of discretion or
otherwise rendered the tie-breaking process not solely related to the welfare of the
District and its students.

Skipping

19.

On February 17, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 10-23, which

provides in part that, due to the need of the District to retain those individual school
nurses with special training, skills, and experience to provide bilingual nursing
services to English Language Learners, which more senior school nurses do not
possess, the Superintendent or his designee are authorized to deviate from terminating
those school nurses in order of seniority in instances where they can demonstrate (a)
they are bilingual and fluent in both English and Spanish, or another language that the
District determines is utilized as the primary language for a significant number of
parents or students, and (b) that they are currently providing nursing services to
District students whose primary language is other than English. Resolution No. 10-23
further provides that, due to the need of the District to retain those individual school
nurses with special training and experience to serve in the position of District
Coordinating Nurse, the Superintendent or his designee are authorized to deviate from

5 Section 44955, subdivision (b), requires only that such criteria be based

“solely on the basis of needs of the District and the students thereof.”

5

terminating those school nurses in order of seniority where they have special training
and experience to serve in the position of District Coordinating Nurse.

20.

The District seeks to retain two respondents, Margaret Mahon and
Aimee Rand, who were served precautionary layoff notices and who are junior to
other respondents. Both hold credentials that enable them to provide school nursing
services.

21.

All respondents contested the application of the District’s skipping

criteria set forth in Resolution 10-23. Respondents Cano and Waldorf argued that they
are bilingual and are more senior than respondents Mahon and Rand. Other
respondents argued that the criteria are arbitrary in that they are not clearly defined or
that nursing services may be provided to Spanish-speaking pupils with the aid of a
liaison.

22.

In applying those criteria, the District ascertained respondents’

experience through a questionnaire asking each respondent whether she speaks a
second language, considers herself bilingual, has taken any courses or had any
training in a second language or has had any training to help in the delivery of
bilingual services, and is currently using a second language in the delivery of services
and, if so, the percentage of time she uses that second language in the delivery of
services.

23.

Respondent Mahon is in a 0.8 FTE position and has a seniority date of
August 30, 2002. Ms. Mahon testified that she has performed proficiently in Spanish
as a nurse, and worked at the District’s Edison Language Academy (Edison), a dual
immersion program elementary school, for eight years.

24.

Respondent Rand is in a 0.4 FTE position and has a seniority date of

September 4, 2009. Ms. Rand is a school nurse at Edison. She testified that she speaks
and writes Spanish and that, at Edison, she speaks Spanish about 50 percent of the
time she is delivering nursing services.

25.

Respondent Cano, who is in a 0.5 FTE position and who has a seniority

date of September 2, 2005, testified that she considers herself bilingual. She testified
that she studied Spanish in high school and for two years in college, has worked in
local hospitals for over 30 years, where she has used Spanish, substituted at Edison
about ten times during the 2009-2010 school year, and currently uses Spanish about
five percent of the time she is delivering nursing services.

26.

Respondent Waldorf, who is in a 1.0 FTE position and who has a

seniority date of August 30, 2002, testified that she studied Spanish for two years in
college, and once participated in a live-in program in Cuernavaca, Mexico. She
testified that she has not needed to use Spanish a lot over the years and, sometimes
with the aid of an interpreter, has been able to communicate with students in Spanish.

6

27.

Respondents Bressler Deese, Housman, McElvain, and Sachs admitted

that they are not bilingual.

28.

A school district may deviate from terminating certificated employees

in order of seniority where it demonstrates a specific need for personnel to provide
services authorized by a services credential with, in the case of school nurses, a
specialization in health that others with more seniority do not possess and that the
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to provide those
services.6 The District demonstrated a specific need for nurses with special training,
skills, and experience to provide bilingual nursing services to English Language
Learners.

29.

The criteria used by the District to ascertain which school nurses have

the requisite training, skills, and experience are neither arbitrary nor capricious but are
rather a proper exercise of the District’s discretion, except insofar as they require that
a school nurse currently be using a second language in the delivery of services.
Requiring current, rather than recent, use of a second language in the delivery of
nursing services does not rationally distinguish, as to the ability to provide specialized
services for the District, between nurses who are bilingual. Nor did the District,
although it requested information about the percentage of time spent delivering
nursing services in a second language, establish any scoring system or any cutoff
below which the nurse’s experience would be deemed inadequate.

30.

The respondents with greater seniority than the two retained

respondents served with precautionary notices failed to demonstrate that they possess
the experience and specialized training that would allow them to provide the
specialized services, with the exception of Ms. Cano, who did submit evidence
sufficient to show that she possesses the required experience and specialized training.
The Accusation is, therefore, dismissed as to Ms. Cano, who is in a 0.5 FTE position.
Ms. Cano is senior to both Ms. Mahon and Ms. Rand; Ms. Mahon is senior to Ms.
Rand. The Accusation is, therefore, sustained as to Ms. Rand, who is in a 0.4 FTE
position. Ms. Mahon, who is in a 0.8 FTE position, has demonstrated the requisite
training and experience to provide the services. The Accusation is, therefore,
sustained as to Ms. Mahon with respect to 0.1 FTE only, and is dismissed as to Ms.
Mahon with respect to a 0.7 FTE position.

Other Findings

31.

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related

to the welfare of the District and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuation of
particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated
employees of the District as determined by the Board.

6 Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

7

32.

Except as set forth in factual finding 14, there was no challenge to the

order of seniority on the seniority list.

33.

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations,

retirements, and requests for transfer in determining the number of layoff notices to
be delivered to employees by March 15, 2011.

34.

Except as set forth in factual finding 30, the District did not retain any

certificated employee junior to respondents to render a service that respondents are
certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists under sections 44949 and

44955, by reason of factual findings 1 through 8.

2.

The services identified in factual finding 3 are particular kinds of
services that may be reduced or discontinued under section 44955, by reason of
factual findings 3 and 9.

3.

Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction of the

particular kinds of services set forth in factual finding 3, which cause relates solely to
the welfare of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of factual findings 1 through
34.

4.

School districts “shall give diligent care to the health and physical
development of pupils, and may employ properly certified persons for the work.”
(§ 49400 (italics added).) School districts must also “maintain fundamental school
health services at a level that is adequate to accomplish all the following: [¶] (1)
Preserve pupils’ ability to learn. [¶] (2) Fulfill existing state requirements and policies
regarding pupils’ health. [¶] (3) Contain health care costs through preventive
programs and education.” The Education Code requires school districts to conduct
sight and hearing screening (§ 49452) and scoliosis screening (§ 49452.5). The
Education Code also contains provisions governing the administration of medication
to students (§ 49423) and the delivery of specialized physical health care services and
other services that require medically related training (§ 49423.5.)

5.

Courts have permitted districts to reduce or discontinue particular kinds
of services, including those of school nurses, as long as mandated services continue to
be performed. (See Gallup v. Alta Loma School District Board of Trustees (1996) 41
Cal.App.4th 1571, 1585-1589; San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144
Cal.App.3d 627, 639-640.) These statutory provisions do not, however, require that
only certificated school nurses can provide the described health care services. (Gallup
v. Board of Trustees, supra, 41 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1585-1589, distinguishing Santa
Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)

8

6.

The District plans to continue to provide state-mandated nursing

services, and it was not established that the discontinuation of nursing services set
forth in factual finding number 3 will preclude the District from discharging its health
care obligations. The District need not have a finalized plan in place for the provision
of nursing services for the 2011-2012 school year at the time that it opts to reduce or
eliminate nursing services and give notice to affected certificated employees. It must
be presumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the District will comply with its
legally mandated obligations (Evid. Code § 664; Degener v. Governing Board (1977)
67 Cal. App.3d 689, 696.) The District has discretion to determine how and in what
manner mandated services are to be provided. (Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn.
v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 811; Gallup v. Board of Trustees, supra, 41
Cal.App.4th at pp. 1582-1590.) Changing the way in which a service is to be
performed constitutes a reduction in a particular kind of service, as does having fewer
employees available to perform the service. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976)
64 Cal. App.3d 167, 179; Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Abbott, supra, 76
Cal.App.3d at p. 811.) The evidence did not establish that the District would not be
able to provide all legally mandated health care services to students if it reduces its
certificated school nursing staff by 5.6 FTE positions.

7.

Respondent Cano shall be retained in a 0.5 FTE position and

respondent Mahon shall be retained in a 0.7 FTE position, by reason of factual
findings 19-30. The Accusation may be dismissed as to Ms. Cano, and may be
dismissed in part as to Ms. Mahon.

8.

Cause exists to terminate the services of respondents Rachel Bressler

Deese, JoAnn Housman, Nora McElvain, Aimee Rand, Teri Sachs, and Sherry
Waldorf, by reason of factual findings 1 through 34 and legal conclusions 1 through
7.

ORDER

The Accusation is sustained as to respondents Rachel Bressler Deese, JoAnn

Housman, Nora McElvain, Aimee Rand, Teri Sachs, and Sherry Waldorf, and the
District may notify them that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012
school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. The Accusation is
dismissed as to respondent Sandra Cano. The Accusation is dismissed in part and
sustained in part as to respondent Margaret Mahon.

Dated: May 3, 2011

__________________________
HOWARD W. COHEN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

9

