BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION
OF THE PALM SPRINGS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH No. 2011030917

Respondents listed in Appendices A and B.

PROPOSED DECISION

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State

of California, heard this matter in Palm Springs, California, on April 6, 2011.

William A. Diedrich and Mark W. Thompson, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud &

Romo, Attorneys at Law, represented the Palm Springs Unified School District.

Jon Y. Vanderpool, Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax, Attorneys at Law, represented the

respondents listed in Appendix A.

The matter was submitted on April 6, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Mauricio Arellano, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, Palm Springs

Unified School District, made and filed the accusation dated March 11, 2011, in his official
capacity as the designee of district superintendent Dr. Lorri McCune.

1

Respondents1 are certificated district employees.

2.

3.

On March 8, 2011, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and

44955, the superintendent notified the Board of Education of the Palm Springs Unified
School District in writing of her recommendation to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of
services for the upcoming school year. The superintendent stated the reasons for the
recommendation.

4.

On March 8, 2011, the board adopted Resolution No. 2010/2011-59,

determining that it would be necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services at
the end of the current school year. The board determined that the particular kinds of services
that must be reduced for the 2011-2012 school year were the following full time equivalent
(FTE) positions:

Particular Kind of Service

Full-Time Equivalent

Elementary (K-6) Classroom Teachers
ARRA Intervention Teachers
Counselors
High School Dean
High School English Teacher
Middle School English Teacher
Secondary Social Science Teachers
Middle School Science Teachers
Middle School Math Teachers
Middle School Choir Teachers
Middle School Theater Teacher
Middle School Art Teachers
Read 180 Teacher
High School Computer Teacher
Middle School Computer Teacher
Psychologists
Alternative Education Opportunity Teacher
After School Independent Study Teacher

50
8
4
1
1
2
2
2
2
1.4
1
2
1
0.6
1
2
1
0.8

1

The district initially identified 84 certificated employees for layoff (though there

were 85 names, it appears that one employee, Russell Eves, was inadvertently named twice).
Eight employees (Michelle Baker, Megan Gross, Curtis Hough, Syreeta Hunter, Lori Moore,
Kaitlyn Stockdale, Carole Weed, and Lynn Woodley) did not request a hearing. The district
subsequently dismissed several accusations. By the conclusion of the hearing, there
remained 74 such respondents; they are listed in Appendix A. The district also served 17
employees with precautionary layoff notices in case the district’s proposed layoff list was not
upheld in its entirety. These employees are listed in Appendix B, except that one of the
employees initially served with a precautionary layoff notice (Amanda Bond) was later
designated by the district for actual layoff via the bumping process. Bond is therefore listed
in Appendix A and not in Appendix B.

2

The proposed reductions totaled 82.8 FTE positions.

5.

The board further determined in Resolution No. 2010/2011-59 that

“competency,” as described in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for the
purposes of bumping, “shall necessarily include: (1) possession of a valid credential in the
relevant subject matter area; (2) ‘highly qualified’ status under the No Child Left Behind Act
in the position into which the employee is bumping; (3) an appropriate EL authorization (if
required by the position); (4) with regard to bumping into High School Theatre, High School
Band, or High School Chorus positions, special training and experience necessary to serve in
said positions and at least one (1) full year of experience in the previous five years serving in
the positions; (5) with regard to bumping an employee who possesses a National Board
Certification, possession of a National Board Certification; (6) with regard to bumping an
employee assigned to Cielo Vista Charter Elementary School who has completed
ProjectLearn Academy Training, special training and experience in project-based learning, as
evidenced by completion of ProjectLearn Academy Training; and (7) with regard to bumping
into a high school position, one full year of experience within the last five years serving at
the high school level.”

A number of issues relating to bumping were raised at the hearing. These are

considered below.

6.

The board further determined in Resolution No. 2010/2011-59 that it would be
necessary to retain certificated employees who possess special training and competency that
other certificated employees with more seniority might not possess, to wit: teachers
possessing the special training and experience to teach High School Theatre classes; teachers
possessing the special training and experience to teach High School Band and/or Chorus
classes; teachers possessing a National Board Certification and who therefore possess the
special training and experience associated therewith; and teachers assigned to Cielo Vista
Charter Elementary School who possess special training and experience in project-based
learning, as evidenced by completion of ProjectLearn Academy Training.

The first two skipping criteria played no role in this proceeding, i.e., the district did
not in fact skip any employees on the basis of either of these criteria. The district skipped
one employee on the basis of the third criterion, and skipped a number of employees based
on the fourth criterion. The propriety of those skips is considered below.

7.

The board directed the superintendent or her designee to determine which

employees’ services would not be required for the 2011-2012 school year as a result of the
reduction of the foregoing particular kinds of services. The board further directed the
superintendent or her designee to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the
district who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services.

8.

On or before March 15, 2011, the district timely served on respondents a
written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services would not be
required for the upcoming school year, along with the related accusation. The notice set
forth the reasons for the recommendation. The notice advised respondents of their right to a

3

hearing, that each respondent had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person
sending the notice by the date specified in the notice, a date which in each case was more
than seven days after the notice was served, and that the failure to request a hearing would
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing.

9.

Respondents timely filed written requests for hearing and notices of defense.

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

10.

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of the

district.

11.

The services the board addressed in Resolution No. 2010/2011-59 were

“particular kinds of services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of
Education Code section 44955. The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these
particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious and constituted a proper exercise
of discretion.

12.

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the
welfare of the district and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as
determined by the board.

13.

The board considered all positively assured attrition of which it was aware at
the time it issued preliminary layoff notices, in determining the actual number of necessary
layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.

Skipping Criterion Three: National Board Certification

14.

The district’s assistant superintendent for human resources, Mauricio Arellano,

testified that National Board Certification is a program offered to create a “master” level of
teacher. Obtaining national board certification is a very intense process, including the
teacher’s self-reflection, the reflection of other teachers, filming, critiquing, and school work
reports. One of the district’s schools, Julius Corsini Elementary School, has adopted the
certification program. The purpose of this action was to help pull the school out of a
program improvement plan. In fact, the school is no longer on an improvement plan, and the
school’s participation in the certification program was a major reason for this positive
outcome. Arellano believes that if Corsini lost any of its teachers who achieved certification,
it would have a negative impact on the school.

15. With regard to national board certification, the district demonstrated a specific

need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study. Though apparently one
employee was skipped by the district on the basis of national board certification, that
individual was not identified at the hearing. Further, it was not asserted that any particular
respondent is to be laid off as a result of the retention of and despite having greater seniority
than the skipped employee. Accordingly, it cannot be concluded that the district improperly
implemented the third skipping criterion.

4

Skipping Criterion Four: Cielo Vista Charter Elementary School

16.

The district’s Cielo Vista Charter Elementary School is in its inaugural year.

Since it is a “dependent” charter school, the district retains flexibility with regard to
curriculum and budget. The school is an open enrollment institution; interested students
apply for admission. The school uses a different curriculum than the rest of the district’s
schools, one that involves “project-based learning.” All Cielo Vista teachers are trained to
teach a variety of educational standards within the context of a single project. The standards
to be incorporated in a single project may include such subjects as science, art, music,
language arts, and math standards, for example. Some Cielo Vista projects are school-wide,
some are grade level-wide, and some are limited to individuals. For school-wide projects,
teachers all work together on the projects’ implementation, i.e., students work on a single
project from kindergarten through sixth grade.

Cielo Vista has sent all of its teachers to an intense, two-day training program
administered by ProjectLearn, a service entity. All current Cielo Vista teachers have
completed the training. The school also sends staff to monthly on-going training. The
school also works with its teachers in a peer coaching program that takes place at monthly
staff meetings.

Cielo Vista principal Lynda Lake testified that if a teacher were to be reassigned to
Cielo Vista without having had the foregoing training, it would adversely impact the entire
program. She explained that two Cielo Vista teachers were hired after the beginning of the
present school year – about two months before the administrative hearing. They took the
intensive training at an additional cost ($1,000) to the district. But even after taking that
training, the two teachers still had to be brought up to speed with regard to discussions and
planning that had occurred at monthly staff meetings. Having to “catch up” the two teachers
mid-year was a “hardship.” Lake added that if teachers from other district schools were
reassigned to Cielo Vista next year, the school’s program would be affected.

Lake testified that she believes it is important for Cielo Vista teachers to believe in

the project-based learning philosophy of the school. She added that she does not believe that
every teacher is a good fit for every school. By implication, then, it was her view that if
several teachers were transferred from other district schools to Cielo Vista as a result of this
lay-off proceeding, they might not be a good fit.

Lake testified that if her junior teachers were not skipped pursuant to the board’s
resolution, it would affect three of the school’s 28 teachers, i.e., three teachers would be
subject to displacement by more senior district teachers currently assigned to other schools.

17.

Pursuant to a memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the district and

the Palm Springs Teachers Association, Cielo Vista teachers do not have access to certain
kinds of leave that are available to other teachers, e.g., child rearing leave, study leave,
opportunity leave.

5

18. Maritza Castro has a clear elementary (i.e., multiple subject) credential and an

ELL certificate. She has a seniority date of August 29, 2007. She teaches fifth grade in a
self-contained classroom.

Castro testified that she has had exposure to project-based learning training. During

the 2006-07 school year, she worked at a community day school in Covina, where she
received two intensive trainings (two six-hour days), as well as an additional hour of training
per month throughout that school year, provided by Cal Poly Pomona. The training was
provided through her superintendent, using materials produced by ProjectLearn.

Castro testified that she subscribes to the project-based educational concepts used at

Cielo Vista. She believes she is qualified to teach there. She believes anyone can do design-
based learning. She herself did so at the day school in Covina.

19.

Based on the evidence presented at the hearing, the district demonstrated a

specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study in connection with
Cielo Vista’s project-based learning curriculum, and that the certificated employees to be
skipped has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study
which others with more seniority do not possess. The evidence established that the district’s
implementation of the fourth skipping criterion was neither arbitrary nor capricious, but
instead constituted a reasonable exercise of the district’s discretion.

Lake’s testimony established that the project-based learning program is a valuable

and effective pedagogical tool. Further, she testified that reassigning teachers to Cielo Vista
who have not already had the intensive ProjectLearn training would be disruptive to the
program. This testimony was supported by the school’s experience when two teachers were
reassigned to the school during the course of the current academic year. While the extent of
such disruption may be expected to be less at the outset of an academic year than it was
during the course of a year in progress, one cannot confidently infer that disruption would be
eliminated. Lake’s testimony that it is important to have teachers who embrace the project-
based learning philosophy is also significant.

Bumping Criterion Six: ProjectLearn Academy Training

20.

The findings immediately above relating to the fourth skipping criterion apply

as well to the sixth bumping criterion. The district’s decision was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, but instead constituted a reasonable exercise of the district’s discretion.

This result is unaffected by the testimony of Castro. Though she has had some

project-based learning training, and though that training used ProjectLearn materials, she
could not state that the training she received through another school district was the
equivalent of the ProjectLearn training received by Cielo Vista employees. Certainly it could
be reasonably argued that her training should be considered sufficient to permit her to bump
more junior Cielo Vista employees. But, it is not inherently unreasonable, arbitrary or
capricious for the district to require senior employees to have the same training as Cielo
Vista teachers receive before they can be permitted to displace the latter.

6

Accordingly, Castro was not competent to bump any junior Cielo Vista teacher. As

no evidence was presented that any other district teacher had the ProjectLearn Academy
training, it was not established that any other such teacher was competent to bump any Cielo
Vista teachers.

Bumping Criterion Seven: One year of Experience in Previous Five for High School
Positions

21.

Ramona Mueller has a seniority date of August 27, 2008, and presently

teaches middle school math. She has a single subject math credential. When she applied for
employment with the district, she was hoping to secure a high school assignment, but the
only opening was in a middle school position.

Mueller testified that she did not think there was necessarily a difference between

teaching middle school and high school math. She believes she is capable of teaching at the
high school level and has been waiting for an opportunity to do just that. She does not
believe her lack of actual high school teaching experience lessens her ability to teach high
school students. Mueller thus believes she should be permitted to displace high school math
teachers even though she does not have a year of high school teaching experience.

22.

Francisco Lopez has a seniority date of August 27, 2008. He presently teaches

middle school math. He has a single subject math credential. He taught in another district
for seven to eight years before commencing his employment with the district. Prior to his
teaching career, Lopez worked for TRW Aerospace as a manager of the space technology
group, which built space craft and satellites. He has both a bachelor’s and a master’s degree
in electronics. He draws on his TRW experience during his teaching.

Lopez testified that he has taught algebra 1 the past two years during the summer

school session at Palm Springs High School. His students were high school students. The
summer sessions were six weeks long, five hours per day, five days per week. The classes he
taught were the equivalent of a one-year algebra class. He has thus taught the equivalent of
two full one-year algebra classes. He has also tutored algebra, geometry, trigonometry, and
calculus.

Lopez testified that he disagrees with the bumping criterion requiring a year of prior

experience at the high school level in order to bump into a high school position. He
questions drawing a distinction between middle school and high school students, when the
teacher has a single subject credential. He believes that math for grades seven through 10 is
essentially the same. He does not perceive an actual or substantial difference in the
psychological profiles of middle school and high school students; even if there is one, he
does not believe it would make a difference.

23.

Beth Brian has a seniority date of August 29, 2007, and has a multiple subject

credential and several supplementary authorizations or certificates. She had about eight
years teaching experience before her employment with the district. She currently teaches in
an ARRA-intervention assignment at the middle school level.

7

Brian taught high school students for two summers (2008, 2009) at the district’s

Cathedral City High School. She believes she should be permitted to bump into some high
school positions, even though she does not have a year of teaching experience at the high
school level. She reasoned that since she was considered capable of teaching at the high
school level during the summer, she should be considered capable of doing so during the
regular school year. Further, she was transferred to her current (ARRA) position
involuntarily and quite recently, i.e., January 2011. Brian did not identify any specific high
school teachers that she felt she should be permitted to displace.

24.

The district’s Arellano testified that the competency criterion seven was

justified because of the greater in-depth knowledge a teacher must have to teach high school
students.
In addition, middle school students are going through certain stages of life change,
whereas high school students are at a different stage, e.g., looking at change of life decision
relating to college.

The district’s Riccio testified that high school math teachers do not typically teach
only algebra, but also teach upper level math courses. He noted that neither Mueller nor
Lopez has taught at the high school level for a full year within the past five years.

Brian Murray, the district’s director of secondary curriculum and instruction, testified
that high school summer school is a remedial program for credit recovery purposes to enable
students to secure credit for classes required for graduation. The 24-day summer program
does not equate to a full year (180-day) of instruction. For example, the summer curriculum
is greatly compacted.

Murray testified that he was unable to identify a specific skill that a high school math

teacher has that a middle school teacher would not have.

25.

As with the ProjectLearn competency criterion, the evidence concerning the

one-year-in-five criterion is mixed. It was, however, sufficient to establish that the district’s
competency criterion number seven was neither arbitrary nor capricious, but instead
constituted a reasonable exercise of the board’s discretion.2 Neither Alexander nor Duax,
relied on by respondents, affects this finding.

Other Bumping Issues

26.

Tarra Bercegeay has a seniority date of August 26, 2010, and teaches digital

video production at the high school level. She has a preliminary three-year technology

2

That Brian was involuntarily transferred to her current position only recently does not

affect this analysis. The district retains the right to deploy its teachers in those positions it
deems best. The layoff statute does not affect that right. No evidence was presented to
suggest that Brian’s transfer to her current position was brought about for the specific
purpose of providing the district with a means to lay her off or that her transfer was
otherwise improperly motivated.

8

education (art, media and entertainment) waiver. Bercegeay teaches six classes in beginning,
intermediate, and advanced cinema, television production, and media, and her students host a
ten-minute news broadcast throughout the day.

Bercegeay was not initially slated for layoff, but she is being bumped by Shari Pate, a

more senior employee who currently teaches computers and AVID at the high school level
and who holds a clear industrial technology credential and a computer concepts
supplementary authorization. Bercegeay testified that she does not believe Pate’s credential
necessarily qualifies her to do all that respondent herself does. Bercegeay believes that a
great deal of experience is needed to teach what she teaches, and that she herself has the
necessary experience.

The district’s Riccio testified that Pate’s credential permits her to teach Bercegeay’s

classes and that Pate’s other qualifications make her competent to bump Bercegeay.
Bercegeay’s view is understood to be essentially that Pate is not as qualified as she is to
teach her classes. Whether or not that is true, the evidence established that Pate is
certificated and competent to bump Bercegeay pursuant to the district’s competency criteria.

27.

Cecile Hall has a seniority date of August 26, 2010, and has a single subject
English credential. Prior to her teaching career, she had 22 years experience as an editor in
the film industry. She currently teaches in the Palm Springs High School Arts Institute
program. She teaches four arts English classes (three of which are honors classes). These
classes are more than mere English classes – Hall integrates all aspects of culture into these
classes. She also teaches a western humanities (arts and culture) class, a class she herself
designed, and which encompasses art, philosophy, music, and dance. In addition, all five of
her classes have a project-based curriculum.

Hall is being bumped by Terry Meisenburg, who currently serves as a school
counselor, and has a clear school counseling and a preliminary single subject English
credential.

Hall testified that she did not believe Meisenburg should be able to displace her,

because she (Hall) does not teach “simply English.”

The district’s Riccio testified that Hall’s students receive English credit for her

courses. Further, a teacher with a single subject English credential is authorized to teach
those courses. Meisenburg has a preliminary English credential, and also meets the other
competency criteria to teach Hall’s classes.

Hall’s qualifications and experience are quite impressive. Nonetheless, whether or

not she is more qualified to teach her classes than is Meisenburg, it was established that
Meisenburg is certificated and competent to bump Hall.

9

Other Issues

28.

Christine Miramontes has a seniority date of August 29, 2007. She teaches

third grade at a distract elementary school. Miramontes testified that she has had a two-year
training program administered by WestEd in standards-based objectives training designed to
give teachers a certain style of instructional modeling. The training is based on state
standards and involves high expectations for student achievement. Her principal desires the
school to have high achievement, and all teachers at the school have had at least one year of
the special training; all teachers who have been at the school for two years have had both
years of the training. Essentially, it is the principal’s vision that all teachers undergo this
training.

Miramontes testified that there were about seven teachers at her school who are slated

for lay off. The layoffs have posed difficulties for her school. For example, the school has
had many motivated, high-quality teachers, but many have left. When new teachers are
brought in, it takes time to instill in new staff the same kind of motivation. Some of the new
staff who have come to the school have not had the previous training program.

The district’s Murray testified that the WestEd program is not unique to the school

where Miramontes teaches.

It is inferred that Miramontes believes teachers at her school should be designated for

skipping. However, whether or not the district could have skipped them, it was not
established that the district was required to, nor was it established, for example, that the
district’s failure to skip teachers at Miramontes’ school was arbitrary and capricious when
compared with the district’s decision to skip teachers at Cielo Vista who had received
ProjectLearn training.

29.

Christine Mulligan testified that she believed the district incorrectly
determined her seniority date. She conceded, however, that even if the district had
determined her seniority date in the manner she believed to be correct, she would still be
properly slated for layoff. Accordingly, no determination as to Mulligan’s seniority date
need be made here.

Ultimate Finding

30.

No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any

services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.

10

2.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3.

Pursuant to section 44995, a senior teacher whose position is discontinued has
the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to
fill. In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is
filling that position. (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.) In
fact, the district has an obligation under section 44955 to determine whether any permanent
employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic layoff possesses the
seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned to another position.
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra. at 136-137.)

4.

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in

with any statistical computation. It is within the governing authority’s discretion to
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law. (San Jose
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) A school district has wide
discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or
so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of
law. (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d
318, 322.)

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district and
establishing requirements for employment. This discretion encompasses determining the
training and experience necessary for particular positions. Similarly, school districts have
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) Districts
also retain discretion to determine standards of competency for purposes of teacher layoffs,
and those standards will be upheld as long as they are reasonable. (Duax v. Kern Community
College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.)3

5.

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the

accusation. Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the district to
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services. The cause for the reduction or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the welfare of the schools and
the pupils thereof. Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the district
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The district

3

Duax involved the layoff of community college teachers pursuant to Education Code

section 97743, but is applicable here by analogy.

11

identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board
be directed be reduced or discontinued. It is recommended that the board give respondents
notice before May 15, 2011, that their services are no longer required by the district.

ADVISORY DETERMINATION

The following advisory determination is made:

1.

The accusations served on the respondents identified in Appendix A are

sustained. Notice may be given to such respondents before May 15, 2011, that their services
will not be required because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular services as
indicated.

2.

The accusations served on the respondents identified in Appendix B are not

sustained. Notice may not be given to such respondents that their services will not be
required because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services.

DATED: May 2, 2011

_____________________________
DONALD P. COLE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

12

Appendix A4

Abraham Aparicio
1.
Tarra Bercegeay (0.6 FTE)
2.
Amanda Bond
3.
Beth Brian
4.
Joseph Bryan
5.
Andrew Buchanan
6.
Jennifer Cameron
7.
Maritza Castro
8.
Amanda Clem
9.
Deborah Collier
10.
Elba Cortez
11.
Cheri D’Amicio
12.
Russell Eves
13.
Ursula Fabiano
14.
Daniel Faddis
15.
Tricia Feffer
16.
Krista Fleischner
17.
Amber Goscoigne
18.
Kristen Goerzen
19.
Tatyana Goldshteyn
20.
Lindsay Goodwin
21.
Desira Grandmain
22.
Cecile Hall
23.
Rebecca Heard
24.
Amber Hernandez
25.
26.
Shelby Holton
27. Monica Horn
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

Allyson Huntsman
Clint James
Rachel Johnson
Casey Kistler
Amy Kudlac
Brandy Lee
Heidi Lee
James Leon
Amy Long
Francisco Lopez
Sabrina Lopez
Ryan Ludwin
Kai Lyles
Eduardo Martinez

4

Where the lay off of a respondent is less than a full-time-equivalent position, the

applicable fraction of a full-time equivalent position is indicated in parentheses opposite the
individual’s name.

13

Caroline Paz
Veronica Pena-Silva
Brenda Perez-Valuenzuela

Leigh-Ann Nisco
Sandra Nuno

Pamela Mathis
Kim McClinton
Sharla McCullough
Norman McKee
Christina Miramontes
Amber Moser
Ramona Mueller
Christine Mulligan

42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50. Maria Munoz
51.
52.
53. Mayra Orozco
54.
55.
56.
57. Maria Pimentel-Jaimes
58.
Demesia Pinon
Scott Rhoton
59.
60. Maria Rivas
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70.
71. Michael Verhasselt
72.
73.
74.

Elizabeth Robinson
Brandi Rosen
Rebecca Sandles
Erin Schroer
Jessica Simpson
Shannon Smith
Nancy Smith
Kenneth Stagg
Katharine Surdin
Chelsey Traylor

Robyn Walters
Angela Whittaker
Jason Yasuda

14

Appendix B

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Gail Bobro
Staci Bond
David Catanzarite
Mary Cleveland
Heather Clutter
Genovefa Griffis
Ashley Jackson
Naureen Jahangir
Tara La Beaf
Katie Lambert
Fides May Le Roy
Thomas McMorris
Jessica Parent
Juanita Perezchica
Doris Rodriguez
Kristen Silvey
Karen Wright

15

