BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
WATERFORD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STANISLAUS COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CHRISTINA BRIONEZ, ELENA GUTIERREZ,
AMY KISSEE, STEVEN MARKS, ELSA
MCCLURE, LISA MILLINAZZO-BARNETT,
JEANINE OLIVER-NOMOF, JENNIFER
PARMAN, MEGAN PUNT, JESSICA
RODRIGUEZ, AND MATTHEW STEFFEN,

OAH No. 2011030268

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Marilyn A. Woollard, Office of Administrative

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter in Waterford, California, on
April 25, 2011.

Chesley D. Quaide, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of the Waterford
Unified School District. Director of Personnel Ysabel Rockwell was also present.

Ernest Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of all respondents.

Oral and documentary evidence was presented and the parties waived closing
argument. The record was then closed and the matter was submitted for decision on
April 25, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Waterford Unified School District (District) serves approximately

1700 students in kindergarten through high school.

2.

Don Davis is the District’s Superintendent. Ysabel Rockwell is the
District’s Director of Personnel. The actions of Mr. Davis, Ms. Rockwell, and the
District Governing Board (Board) were taken in their official capacities.

1

3.

On March 10, 2011, at the Superintendent’s recommendation, the

Board passed Resolution No. 110310-01, authorizing a reduction or discontinuance of
particular kinds of services with a resulting layoff of certificated employees
(hereafter, PKS Resolution). In the PKS Resolution, the Board determined that the
reduction of the following particular kinds of services, designated as full-time
equivalent (FTE) certificated positions, was in the best interest of the District:

PKS Service

FTE Reduced

K-6 Elementary Teachers
Middle School Science
High School Agriculture
Secondary Special Education
Secondary Physical Education/Health
Secondary English/Language Arts
Secondary Mathematics
Secondary Social Science
Principal High School

9.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

TOTAL FTE

=

17.0

4.

The PKS Resolution directed the Superintendent or his designee to

send all appropriate notices to certificated employees whose positions may be
affected by its terms in accordance with the provisions of Education Code sections
44949 and 44955.1

5.

As set forth in section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c), economic

layoffs are generally to be carried out on the basis of seniority. A teacher with more
seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment than a junior teacher. The
District has an affirmative obligation to reassign senior teachers who are losing their
positions into positions held by junior teachers if the senior teacher has both the
credentials and competence to occupy such positions. The displacement of a junior
teacher is known as “bumping.” The seniority rule is not absolute, and a junior
teacher with a needed credential or skills may be retained even if a more senior
teacher is terminated. “Skipping” a less senior employee from inclusion in a layoff
proceeding is authorized by statute. In order to depart from a seniority-based
economic layoff, section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), requires that the District must
demonstrate “a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of
study… and that the certificated employee (to be skipped) has special training and
experience necessary to teach that course or course of study…which others with more
seniority do not possess.”

1Unless otherwise indicated, all undesignated statutory references are to the

Education Code.

2

6.

To assist the Superintendent in implementing its terms, the PKS

Resolution included “tie-break” criteria that the District would consider to determine
the order of termination if any of the affected certificated employees shared the same
seniority date; i.e., the first date of paid service rendered to the District. The PKS
Resolution also included: (1) a definition of “competent,” to be used if a more senior
employee affected by the PKS reductions seeks to “bump” a junior employee; and (2)
“skipping” criteria the District would use to deviate from terminating certificated
employees in the inverse order of seniority.

7.

On March 11, 2011, a “Notice of Recommendation That Your Services
Will Not Be Required for The Ensuing School Year (2011-2012)” (Notice), signed by
Superintendent Davis, was served by personal delivery on each of the named
respondents and on an additional certificated employee, Tim Swartz. The Notice also
contained copies of the PKS Resolution, a blank Request for Hearing form and
relevant sections of the Education Code.

8.

All respondents timely filed a Request for a Hearing. Mr. Swartz did
not file a request and accordingly waived his right to a hearing in this matter. (Educ.
Code§ 44949, subd. (b).)

9.

On April 6, 2011, Superintendent Davis made and signed the
Accusation against respondents, asking that the Board be authorized to give
respondents final notice that their services would not be required for the 2011-2012
school year, pursuant to the PKS Resolution and sections 44949 and 44955.

10.

On April 6, 2011, each of the respondents was personally served with
the Accusation, the PKS Resolution, a blank Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing,
and copies of relevant statutes and related documents. Thereafter, each of the
respondents timely filed a Notice of Defense. The matter was set for an evidentiary
hearing before an Administrative Law Judge of the Office of Administrative
Hearings, an independent adjudicative agency of the State of California, pursuant to
Government Code section 11500, et seq.

11.

All jurisdictional requirements have been met. Respondents do not

contend that there are any procedural defects with the Board’s notice of the reduction
in force mandated by its PKS Resolution.

Preliminary Notices Rescinded

12.

At the commencement of the hearing, the District advised that it had

rescinded the preliminary lay off notices issued to these three certificated employees:
Elena Gutierrez, Steven Marks, and Lisa Millinazzo-Barnett. The Accusations
against these employees will be dismissed.

3

Appropriate PKS

Implementation of Lay Off

13.

Respondents did not dispute that the particular kinds of services the

Board resolved to reduce or discontinue in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of
services that may be reduced or discontinued.

14. Ms. Rockwell, with assistance from her administrative staff, was

primarily responsible for creating and maintaining the District’s seniority list,
identifying the certificated employees to be noticed for layoff and generally
implementing the PKS Resolution. Her testimony is paraphrased as relevant below.

15.

District’s Seniority List: The District maintains a seniority list for its

certificated employees. The seniority list was initially compiled three years ago when
the District implemented its first reduction in force. At that time, the personnel file of
each certificated employee was reviewed to determine the seniority date and
credential/s for each employee reflected in the District’s records. Each certificated
employee was then provided this information and asked to verify the accuracy of their
particular information. The District’s records were updated if appropriate. In each
subsequent year, the District has updated its records to accurately reflect seniority
dates and credentials.

16.

To determine which certificated employees should be noticed for lay

off, Ms. Rockwell identified the least senior employee within each PKS identified by
the PKS Resolution. Ms. Rockwell testified that it was not necessary to use the tie-
break criteria to determine the least senior certificated employee to be laid off.

Respondents posed no challenges to the District’s seniority list and provided

no evidence or argument to suggest that the District should have implemented the tie-
break criteria.

17.

Attrition: The PKS Resolution affirmed that the Board had considered

all positively assured attrition, including deaths, resignations, non-reelections and
other permanent vacancies for the 2011-2012 school year in determining the extent of
necessary PKS reductions. In her testimony, Ms. Rockwell noted that there was one
retirement in special education which satisfied the PKS Resolution requirement for a
1.0 FTE reduction in Secondary Special Education. There was also one retirement in
Middle School Science which satisfied the PKS reduction in this area. There were no
retirements of teachers with multiple subject credentials.

18. Ms. Rockwell reviewed the credentials of each of the individuals

identified as affected by the PKS Resolution in light of the District’s seniority list.
Based on this review, she determined that none of the respondents had any rights to
“bump” less senior employees in other District positions. The PKS Resolution

4

establishes that less senior teachers who hold necessary authorizations to teach
English Language (EL) Learners (CLAD, BCLAD, SDAIE, or regular EL certificate)
may be skipped from layoff, over more senior employees who do not possess such
authorizations. Because all teachers in the District hold appropriate EL credentials,
no junior employee was skipped for layoff over a more senior employee.

19.

Respondents posed no challenges to the District’s determination that
none of them had any bumping rights and did not assert that any junior employees
were skipped. There was no evidence that employees junior to respondents are being
retained to perform the services which respondents are certificated and competent to
render.

20.

The District proceeded with the PKS reduction based upon its need to

maintain financial solvency in light of its “qualified” status. The reduction or
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and
pupils.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Education Code section 44949 provides, in pertinent part, as follows:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not
be required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in
Section 44955, the governing board and the employee shall be
given written notice by the superintendent of the district or his
or her designee, or in the case of a district which has no
superintendent by the clerk or secretary of the governing board,
that it has been recommended that the notice be given to the
employee, and stating the reasons therefor.

[¶]. . .[¶]

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there
is cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. . .
If an employee fails to request a hearing on or before the date
specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his or her
waiver of his or her right to a hearing. The notice provided for
in subdivision (a) shall advise the employee of the provisions of
this subdivision.

5

2.
part that:

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides in pertinent

(b) Whenever in any school year . . . a particular kind of service
is to be reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the
following school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the governing
board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any
of these conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees
in the district, the governing board may terminate the services of not
more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated employees
of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the
school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this
section while any probationary employee, or any other employee with
less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render. . .

3.

The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the

evidence that the proposed reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and
the preliminary notice of layoff served on respondents are factually and legally
appropriate.

4.

As set forth in Factual Findings 1 through 11, all notices and all

jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. The timely
notices personally delivered on each of the respondents indicated the statutory basis
for the reduction of services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them
due process. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627;
Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d
831.) The description of services to be reduced, both in the Board Resolution and in
the notice, adequately describe particular kinds of services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD
(2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838. See, also, Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67
Cal.App.3d 689.)

5.

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another
manner. (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California
Teachers Association v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132
Cal.App.3d 32.) A school board may reduce services within the meaning of the
statute either by determining that a certain type of service shall not be performed at all
or by reducing the number of district employees who perform such services.
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167.)

6

As set forth in Factual Finding 13, the services set forth in the PKS Resolution

are particular kinds of services which may be reduced or discontinued within the
meaning of Education Code section 44955. Cause for reduction or discontinuation of
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the
meaning of Education Code section 44949.

6.

As set forth in Factual Finding 12, the preliminary layoff notices issued

to respondents Elena Gutierrez, Steven Marks, and Lisa Millinazzo-Barnett were
rescinded by the District at the hearing. Consequently, the accusations against these
three respondents will be dismissed.

7.

As set forth in the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole,

the District has established that no employee/s junior to respondents Christina
Brionez, Amy Kissee, Elsa McClure, Jeanine Oliver-Nomof, Jennifer Parman, Megan
Punt, Jessica Rodriguez, and Matthew Steffen are being retained to perform the
services which the respondents are competent and certificated to render.

RECOMMENDATION

1.

2.

The Accusations against respondents Elena Gutierrez, Steven Marks,

and Lisa Millinazzo-Barnett are dismissed based on Legal Conclusion 6.

Notice shall be given to respondents Christina Brionez, Amy Kissee,

Elsa McClure, Jeanine Oliver-Nomof, Jennifer Parman, Megan Punt, Jessica
Rodriguez, and Matthew Steffen that the District will not require their services for the
2011-2012 school year, due to the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of
services.

DATED: April 27, 2011

___________________________
MARILYN A. WOOLLARD
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

