BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
WILLOWS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
GLENN COUNTY
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation/Non-
Reemployment of Certificated Employees of
the Willows Unified School District:

OAH No. 2011031315

DIANA ABOLD
LAUREN ALBERT
SHARON BUSLER
CHRISTINA CAMERON
THOMAS CHISHOLM
KERI CONKLIN-TAFURO
WENDY FARNSWORTH
CATHRYN FLEMING
GRICELDA LOZANO-TRUJILLO
MELANIE PERRIN
CHRISTINE STEWART
ADDIE VIERRA,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Catherine B. Frink, Office of Administrative

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter in Willows, California, on
April 14, 2011.

Matthew Juhl-Darlington, Attorney at Law, represented the Willows Unified

School District (District).

Ted Lindstrom, Attorney at Law, represented all of the respondents.

Oral and documentary evidence was presented and the parties offered oral

closing arguments. The record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision
on April 14, 2011.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Morton J. Geivett II, Ed.D., is the District Superintendent. His actions,

and those of the District’s Governing Board (Board), were taken solely in their
official capacities.

2.

Respondents Diana Abold, Lauren Albert, Sharon Busler, Christina

Cameron, Thomas Chisholm, Keri Conklin-Tafuro, Wendy Farnsworth, Cathryn
Fleming, Gricelda Lozano-Trujillo, Melanie Perrin, Christine Stewart, and Addie
Vierra are all certificated employees of the District.

3.

The District serves approximately 1,558 students in kindergarten

through twelfth grade. The District operates the following school sites: Murdock
Elementary School (MES), grades kindergarten through four; Willows Intermediate
School (WIS), grades five through eight; Willows High School (WHS), grades nine
through 12; and Willows Community High School (WCHS), grades nine through 12.
The District operates an independent study program for approximately 30 students,
mostly in grades nine through 12.

4.

The District is facing a budget shortfall for the 2011-2012 school year,
and expects a decrease in revenue due to competition from a recently opened charter
school.

5.

On March 10, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2010-11-19,

Resolution to Decrease the Number of Certificated Employees Due to a Reduction in
Particular Kinds of Services (Layoff Resolution) reducing or eliminating particular
kinds of services (PKS) affecting 10.6 full-time equivalent certificated positions
(FTE).

6.

The Layoff Resolution was based on the Superintendent’s
recommendation that it was necessary to reduce or discontinue PKS no later than the
beginning of the 2011-2012 school year. In making his recommendation, the
Superintendent took into account all positively assured attrition (i.e., resignations or
retirements, and additional attrition which may occur before the start of the 2011-
2012 school year) which was known to the District as of the date of adoption of the
Layoff Resolution. According to Dr. Geivett, but for the attrition already assured and
the attrition anticipated as of March 10, 2011, the District would have found it
necessary to reduce additional certificated service.

7.

The District became aware of additional attrition after the adoption of

the Layoff Resolution. As the result of the retirement of Maureen Calonico, the
District rescinded the layoff notice to respondent Wendy Farnworth, the most senior
certificated employee with a Multiple Subject (MS) credential identified for layoff.

2

8.

The Layoff Resolution states that the Board determined that it was

necessary to reduce the following PKS of the District not later than the close of the
current school year:

Services

Number of FTE Positions

Various Multiple Subject Teaching Positions
At Murdock Elementary School

Various Teaching Positions at Willows
Community High School

Various Multiple Subject Teaching Positions
At Willows Intermediate School

Various Teaching Positions at Willows
High School:

 AP U.S. History (1 period)
 Art (1 period)
 Spanish (1 period)
 Physics (1 period)
 Calculus (1 period)
 Anatomy/Physiology (1 period)

TOTAL

6.0 FTE

1.6 FTE

2.0 FTE

1.0 FTE

_________
10.6 FTE

9.

As a result of the above PKS reductions and/or eliminations, the Board

determined that it was necessary to decrease 10.6 FTE positions for certificated
employees in the District no later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year, in
accordance with Education Code section 44955.1

10.

The Layoff Resolution directed the Superintendent or his designee to

send appropriate notices to all employees whose services would be terminated by
virtue of the Board’s action.

11.

Before March 15, 2011, Dr. Geivett caused a letter entitled “Notice of
Non-reemployment for 2011-12” (Preliminary Notice) to be served in person and by
mail on each of the employees affected by the PKS reductions and/or eliminations set
forth in the Layoff Resolution. The Preliminary Notice advised that the
Superintendent had recommended to the Board that the recipient be given preliminary
written notice that his/her services would be terminated at the close of the current

1 All statutory references are to the California Education Code unless

otherwise indicated.

3

school year due to reductions in PKS. The Preliminary Notice set forth the reasons
for the recommendation and attached a copy of the Layoff Resolution.

12.

Respondents timely filed a Request for Hearing to determine whether

there was cause for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

13.

Respondents are all permanent certificated employees of the District.

14.

On March 28, 2011, the Superintendent signed the Accusation, and
caused it to be served on respondents. Respondents, through their legal counsel,
timely filed a Notice of Defense.

Teaching Positions at WCHS

15. WCHS currently has 30 students in ninth through twelfth grades.

There are four teachers who are assigned to WCHS. Of these, two are employed by
the Glenn County Office of Education.2 The other two, Michael Rutherglen (1.0
FTE) and Sharon Busler (.6 FTE), each hold MS credentials.

16.

According to Dr. Geivett, the Board has decided to close WCHS,

thereby leading to the reduction of 1.6 FTE teaching positions for individuals holding
MS credentials.

17.

Prior to March 10, 2011, Mr. Rutherglen informed the District of his

intention to retire at the end of the 2010-2011 school year. Mr. Rutherglen’s
retirement was taken into account by the Board as positively assured attrition in its
determination that a total of 10.6 FTE reduction in PKS was necessary for the 2011-
2012 school year.

18.

Students in grades nine through 12 are taught in departmentalized

classes by certificated employees who hold a single subject (SS) or other credential in
the subject matter taught.

Teaching Positions at WHS

Teaching Positions at WIS

19.

Fifth and sixth grade students are taught by certificated employees

holding MS credentials in self-contained classrooms. Students in seventh and eighth
grades are taught in departmentalized classes by certificated employees who hold MS
credentials with supplemental authorization(s) in the subject matter taught, or by
certificated employees holding an SS credential in the subject matter taught.

2 Since these individuals are not employees of the District, none of the

respondents would be able to displace them from their positions.

4

Teaching Positions at MES

20. With the exception of music and physical education, certificated
employees providing instruction in grades kindergarten through five hold MS
credentials.

Development of the District’s Seniority List

21.

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school

district. Among the teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority
in the district gives a greater legal entitlement to a position. Seniority is defined as
the date upon which an employee first rendered paid services in a probationary
position. (§ 44845.)

22.

At the start of the 2010-2011 school year, the District emailed a copy of
the certificated seniority list to all certificated employees, so that they could verify the
information on file with the District relating to their credentials and coursework. In
addition, a copy of the seniority list was placed in each teacher’s mailbox in
September 2010, and copies were provided to those individuals occupying leadership
positions in the Willows Unified Teachers Association (WUTA). The District
emailed an updated version of the certificated seniority list to certificated employees
in January of 2011. On March 3, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2010-11-
17, Resolution to Determine Order of Employment of Certificated Employees for
Reductions in Particular Kinds of Services, in which it adopted the seniority list.
Resolution No. 2010-11-17 stated, in part: “BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the
Seniority List may be corrected from time to time by the Superintendent or his
designee based on valid evidence presented by any certificated employee of any
change and said corrected Seniority List shall be valid absent action by the Governing
Board.” The seniority list was further updated on March 14, 2011.

Seniority Date – Sharon Busler

23. Ms. Busler occupies a .6 FTE teaching position at WCHS. Her

seniority date, as listed on the District’s seniority list, is September 24, 2004. Ms.
Busler contended that her seniority date should be August 16, 2003, as she believes
this was her first date of paid service with the District. Ms. Busler was hired as a
long-term substitute in August of 2003, and she worked in that capacity for the entire
school year. She replaced another teacher and performed all of his teaching duties
during the 2003-2004 school year. The following year she was hired as a
probationary teacher. Ms. Busler raised the issue of her seniority date in the 2009
layoff proceedings, and a determination was made that her seniority date of
September 24, 2004, was correct. Ms. Busler did not contact the District in the 2010-
2011 school year, prior to the date of hearing, to contend that her seniority date was
incorrect. Nevertheless, her claim for an earlier seniority date was considered, and is
persuasive.

5

24.

Section 44918, subdivision (a), states that “Any employee classified as
a substitute or temporary employee, who serves during one school year for at least 75
percent of the number of days the regular schools of the district were maintained in
that school year and has performed the duties normally required of a certificated
employee of the school district, shall be deemed to have served a complete school
year as a probationary employee if employed as a probationary employee for the
following school year.”

25.

In Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City

School District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, the court determined that provisionally
credentialed teachers must, in some circumstances, be classified as probationary. The
court stated:

Section 44845 states: “Every probationary or permanent
employee ... shall be deemed to have been employed on
the date upon which he [or she] first rendered paid
service in a probationary position.” (See San Jose
Teachers Assn. v. Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at pp.
640–641 [statute applies to probationary service in
children’s center, i.e., in any position requiring
certification qualifications, as well as to service in
regular program].) If the Legislature had intended that
only probationary and permanent employees with a
preliminary or clear credential shall acquire seniority, it
would not have been difficult to say so. We recognize in
making this observation that very little in the Education
Code seems to be stated in the easiest or most direct way.
(Haase, supra, 113 Cal.App.3d at p. 917 [“Entry into the
Education Code is painful”].) But once having
determined that certificated employees with less than a
regular credential must in certain circumstances be
classified as probationary, we cannot then overlook the
clear directive in section 44845 that, as probationary
employees, they are entitled to accrue seniority.

(Id., at pages 1300-1301. Italics in original.)

26.

The court further held that, once employees are classified as

probationary, they “must be accorded the rights of probationary employees as
provided in the Code, including the right to accrue seniority (§ 44845) and the rights
to notice and a hearing in the event of a workforce reduction (§§ 44949, 44955).”
(Ibid.) The court found that misclassified employees who did not receive a layoff
notice must be retained. The court further stated: “It also follows that the order in
which those employees were laid off and reemployed, relative to the teachers and
counselors classified by the District as probationary employees, must be redetermined

6

based on the relative seniority dates of the misclassified temporary employees, and
their layoff and reemployment priorities adjusted accordingly.” (Id., at p. 1302.)

27.

The clear holding in Bakersfield is that, once employees are deemed to
be probationary, they accrue seniority from the date they provided paid service in that
capacity. Thus, under section 44918, subdivision (a), a substitute employee who is
deemed to have served a full year as a probationary employee if he or she is rehired as
a probationary employee in the following school year must be accorded seniority
rights dating back to the date he or she first provided service in a probationary
capacity, i.e., the date of full-time substitute employment. (See also, California
Teachers Association v. Vallejo City Unified School Dist. (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th
135, 156.)

28.

In the 2009 layoff proceedings, Ms. Busler contended that her correct

seniority date should be August 19, 2003. In the current proceedings, Ms. Busler
claimed that she was required to attend an in-service on August 16, 2003, prior to the
start of the school year. She was not able to state with certainty how she was paid for
her service prior to the first day of the school year. Payroll records introduced into
evidence show that Ms. Busler was paid $600 for the period ending August 31, 2003.
It is not possible from those records to determine Ms. Busler’s first date of paid
service in August 2003. Therefore, the District shall be required to redetermine Ms.
Busler’s seniority date in accordance with District records. As is further discussed in
the Factual Findings below, the change in seniority date for Ms. Busler does not affect
the District’s determination that Ms. Busler is properly identified for layoff.

Implementation of Layoff

29.

District staff used the Board-adopted seniority list in identifying
employees affected by the PKS reductions. With the exception of the 1.0 FTE
reduction in teaching positions at WHS, as set forth in the Layoff Resolution, all of
the affected reductions involved positions in which certificated employees hold MS
credentials. Therefore, according to Dr. Geivett, he and his staff identified the least
senior persons holding MS credentials occupying 9.6 FTE positions, the total number
affected by the PKS reductions.3

30. When the least senior persons occupying the positions affected by the
PKS reductions were identified, District staff looked at each individual’s credentials
to determine whether he or she could displace any less senior certificated employees.

3 As a result of the retirement of Ms. Calonico, and the rescission of the layoff

notice to Ms. Farnworth (Finding 6), the PKS reduction in MS teaching positions at
MES is reduced from 6.0 FTE to 5.0 FTE, and the total FTE reduction in MS teaching
positions is reduced to 8.6.

7

31.

Before March 15, 2011, District staff served the Preliminary Notice

identified in Finding 11, on the most junior employees affected by the PKS reduction,
as set forth in further detail below.

Reduction of 8.6 FTE Multiple Subject Teaching Positions

32.
follows:4

The 9 least senior certificated employees holding MS credentials are as

A.

Gricelda Lozano-Trujillo (10/9/06) teaches 1.0 FTE English Language

Development (ELD) at MES. She holds an MS credential and a BCLAD-Spanish
authorization.

B.

Lauren Albert (8/16/04) teaches 1.0 FTE History and Computer

Literacy at WIS. She holds an MS credential with supplemental authorizations in
Science and English; she also holds SS credentials in Social Science and English.

C.

Diana Abold (8/28/03) teaches 1.0 FTE English and Journalism at WIS.

She holds a MS credential and an SS English credential.

D.

Cristina Cameron (8/18/03) teaches 1.0 FTE Kindergarten at MES.

She holds an MS credential, an SS Spanish credential, and a BCLAD-Spanish
authorization.

E.

Kathryn A. Vierra (8/18/03) was on leave of absence for the 2010-2011

school year. She previously taught 1.0 FTE English at WHS with a waiver. She
holds an MS credential with a supplemental authorization in English (CLAD in
training).

F.

Melanie Perrin (8/18/03) teaches 1.0 FTE sixth grade at WIS. She

holds an MS credential.

G.

Christine Stewart (8/18/03) teaches 1.0 FTE Algebra/Mathematics at

WIS. She holds an MS credential with a supplemental authorization in Mathematics.

H.

Sharon Busler (August 2003 – exact date to be determined per Finding

28) teaches .6 FTE grades 9-12 at WCHS. She holds an MS credential.

I.

Cathryn Fleming (September 11, 2002) teaches 1.0 FTE fifth grade at

WIS. She has an MS credential.

4 Except as noted, all respondents hold a CLAD authorization.

8

Respondents’ Arguments

33.

Respondents contend that the Layoff Resolution is impermissibly

vague, in that it refers to “various multiple subject teaching positions” at MES and
WIS, and “various teaching positions” at WCHS. This contention is not persuasive.
There were only two teachers at WCHS who were employed by the District at
WCHS, occupying 1.6 FTE positions. Since the Layoff Resolution reduced services
at WCHS by 1.6 FTE, it is clear that the services of both teachers were being
eliminated.

34. With respect to reductions at MES and WIS, the court held in San Jose
Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, that “A preliminary notice
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949, subdivision (a), and 44955
recommending that a school district terminate certain certificated employees because
of a reduction in particular kinds of services is sufficiently specific if it designates the
categories of services to be reduced or discontinued, even though it does not specify
the specific positions to be eliminated,” and “At the elementary school level,
reduction of classroom teaching can be a reduction of a particular kind of service.”
(Id., at pp. 630-631.) The reference to “various multiple subject teaching positions”
clearly refers to positions in grades kindergarten through six, where an MS teaching
credential is required.

35.

Respondents Melanie Perrin (grade 6) and Cathryn Fleming (grade 5)

teach in multiple subject teaching positions at WIS. They were properly identified for
layoff of 2.0 FTE reduction in multiple subject teaching positions at WIS.

36.

Respondents Cristina Cameron (kindergarten) and Gricelda Lozano-

Trujillo (ELD) teach in multiple subject teaching positions at MES. They were
properly identified for layoff as part of the 5.0 FTE reduction in multiple subject
teaching positions at MES. Ms. Lozano-Trujillo contended that, since ELD was not
specifically reduced or eliminated in the Layoff Resolution, her position should not be
affected, and she should be retained. This contention is not persuasive, since the
District would not be obligated to reassign Ms. Lozano-Trujillo to the ELD class for
the 2011-12 school year. With her seniority date and MS credential, there is no
certificated employee with less seniority that Ms. Lozano-Trujillo with a teaching
assignment that Ms. Lozano-Trujillo could displace.

37.

Respondents contend that the subjects taught by Lauren Albert, Dianna

Abold, Kathryn Vierra, and Christine Stewart were not specifically reduced or
eliminated in the Layoff Resolution, and that the District has improperly identified
them for layoff, because they hold supplemental authorizations or SS credentials that
allow them to teach departmentalized classes. Furthermore, Ms. Albert, Ms. Abold,
and Ms. Vierra were identified for layoff as a result of the reduction in multiple
subject teaching positions at MES, when they teach departmentalized classes at WIS;
Ms. Stewart was identified for layoff as a result of the reduction in teaching positions

9

at WCHS, when she also teaches at WIS. Respondents’ arguments are not persuasive.
Again, the District is not obligated to reassign any of these respondents to the same
classroom assignments for the 2011-2012 school year. Each of them holds an MS
credential that would permit the District to assign them to a self-contained classroom.
Therefore, they were properly identified for layoff for teaching positions where an
MS credential is required. Due to their seniority dates, there are no certificated
employees with less seniority than these respondents with teaching assignments that
these respondents could displace.

38. Ms. Busler was properly identified for layoff as part of the 1.6 FTE
reduction of teaching positions at WCHS. Even with her adjusted seniority date,
there is no certificated employee with less seniority that Ms. Busler with a teaching
assignment that Ms. Busler could displace.

Reduction of 1.0 FTE Teaching Positions at WHS

39.

As a result of the reduction of one period (.17 FTE) of AP U.S. History

and .17 FTE of Anatomy/Physiology, no layoff notice was sent to any certificated
employee.

40.

As a result of the .17 FTE reduction of Art, a Preliminary Notice was

sent to certificated employee Brandon Boyd. Mr. Boyd did not file a request for
hearing, and he is not a respondent herein.

41.

As a result of the .17 FTE reduction of Spanish, a Preliminary Notice
was sent to certificated employee Maria Herrera. Ms. Herrera did not file a request
for hearing, and she is not a respondent herein.

42.

As a result of the .17 FTE reduction of Physics, a Preliminary Notice

was sent to respondent Thomas Chisholm (8/19/94). Mr. Chisholm holds an SS
credential in Life Science/Physical Science. During the current school year, Mr.
Chisholm taught three periods of Earth Science, one period of World History, one
period of Physics, and one period of Chemistry.

Amanda Samons (8/13/07) holds an SS credential in Agriculture, and an

Agriculture Specialist Instruction credential. During the current school year, Ms.
Samons taught two periods of Earth Science, one period of Integrated Ag Biology,
one period of Animal Science, one period of Agriculture, and one period of “Project.”
Ms. Samons was not served with a Preliminary Notice, and she will be retained by the
District for the 2011-2012 school year.

Respondents contend that the District improperly noticed Mr. Chisholm for
layoff, because he is senior to Ms. Samons and is qualified to displace her from one
period of Earth Science. The District contends that, since Mr. Chisholm is not
certificated and competent to displace Ms. Samons from her entire assignment, it

10

cannot be required to “bump” Ms. Samons from a portion of her assignment. The
District’s argument is without merit. Section 44955, subdivision (b), states in
pertinent part: “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent
employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to
render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.” In this case, Mr. Chisholm is already teaching three periods of the same
course that is being taught by Ms. Samons. He is clearly certificated and competent
to teach Earth Science. Inasmuch as a less senior teacher has been retained to provide
a service that Mr. Chisholm is certificated and competent to render, the layoff notice
issued to Mr. Chisholm was improper, and the Accusation must be dismissed as to
him.

43.

As a result of the .17 FTE reduction of Calculus, a Preliminary Notice
was sent to respondent Keri Conklin-Tafuro (8/16/04). Ms. Conklin-Tafuro holds an
SS credential in Mathematics. During the current school year, Ms. Conklin-Tafuro
taught three periods of Geometry, one period of Integrated Math II, one period of
Algebra Lab, and one period of Algebra II. There is no certificated employee with
less seniority that Ms. Conklin-Tafuro with a teaching assignment that Ms. Conklin-
Tafuro could displace. Ms. Conklin-Tafuro was properly identified for layoff of .17
FTE. However, Ms. Conklin-Tafuro was served with a Preliminary Notice which
informed her that her entire teaching assignment (1.0 FTE) was being eliminated. At
hearing, Dr. Geivett stated that Ms. Conklin-Tafuro had been given a “precautionary”
layoff notice for 1.0 FTE because of “declining enrollment.” The Layoff Resolution
does not address or otherwise authorize a reduction in the number of certificated
employees of the District due to a decline in average daily attendance. The proposed
layoff of Ms. Conklin-Tafuro for 1.0 FTE is improper, and the Preliminary Notice
must be rescinded except as to .17 FTE.

44.

All other arguments of the parties not specifically addressed herein

were considered and are rejected.

Welfare of the District and Its Students

45.

The Superintendent correctly identified the certificated employees

providing the particular kinds of services that the Board directed be reduced or
discontinued. Except as otherwise noted, no junior certificated employee is scheduled
to be retained to perform services which a more senior employee is certificated and
competent to render. The reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the
welfare of the District’s schools and pupils, within the meaning of Education Code
section 44949.

11

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

As set forth in the Findings, all notice and jurisdictional requirements

set forth in sections 44944 and 44945 were met. The notices sent to respondents
indicated the statutory basis for the reduction of services and, therefore, were
sufficiently detailed to provide them due process. (San Jose Teachers Association v.
Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing
Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The description of services to be reduced, both
in the Board Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe particular kinds of
services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838. See, also, Degener v.
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)

2.

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another
manner. (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California
Teachers Association v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132
Cal.App.3d 32.) A school board may reduce services within the meaning of the
statute either by determining that a certain type of service shall not be performed at all
or by reducing the number of district employees who perform such services.
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167.)

3.

The services identified in Resolution No. 2010-11-19 are particular

kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under sections 44949 and
44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for
the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the
District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

4.

As set forth in Findings 23 through 28, the seniority date for respondent

Sharon Busler must be adjusted to account for her year of service which was deemed
probationary by operation of section 44918, subdivision (a). The District shall
redetermine Ms. Busler’s seniority date in accordance with District records.

5.

As set forth in Finding 42, the District did not establish cause to issue a

Preliminary Notice to respondent Thomas Chisholm pursuant to sections 44949 and
44955, in that a less senior certificated employee was retained to provide a service
that Mr. Chisholm is certificated and competent to render. Therefore, the District
shall rescind the Preliminary Notice and dismiss the Accusation as to Mr. Chisholm.

6.

As set forth in Finding 43, the District did not establish cause to issue a
Preliminary Notice to respondent Keri Conklin-Tafuro for 1.0 FTE. The Preliminary
Notice shall be rescinded except as to .17 FTE.

12

7.

With regard to the remaining respondents, as set forth in the Findings

and Legal Conclusions, the District has established that no employees junior to
respondents are being retained to perform the services which respondents are
certificated and competent to render.

RECOMMENDATION

1.

2.

The District shall redetermine the seniority date of respondent Sharon

Busler in accordance with District records.

The Accusation is dismissed as to respondent Thomas Chisholm. The

District shall rescind the Preliminary Notice issued to Mr. Chisholm, and Mr.
Chisholm shall be retained for his full 1.0 FTE position.

3.

The District shall rescind the Preliminary Notice issued to respondent

Keri Conklin-Tafuro as to .83 FTE. The District may give notice to Ms. Conklin-
Tafuro that her position shall be reduced by .17 FTE for the 2011-2012 school year.

4.

The District may give notice to the remaining respondents in inverse

order of seniority that it will not require their services for the 2011-2012 school year.

Dated: April 20, 2011

____________________________
CATHERINE B. FRINK
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

13

