BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
SAN GABRIEL UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of
Certificated Staff of the San Gabriel Unified
School District (31.84 Full Time Equivalent
Positions),

Respondents.

OAH No. 2011030573

PROPOSED DECISION

David B. Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 21, 2011, at the San Gabriel Unified
School District office in San Gabriel, California.

Warren S. Kinsler, attorney at law, of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo,

represented the San Gabriel Unified School District (District). Richa Amar, attorney at law,
of Rothner, Segall & Greenstone, represented Respondents Justin Doring, Stephen Feng,
Patricia Gallegos, Alison Hussar, Megan Michaelis, Kent Monteleone, Keri Seeger, Christina
Shi and William Wong. Respondent J. Michael Hammett was present and represented
himself.

Stipulations were placed on the record, oral and documentary evidence was received,
and argument was heard. The record was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision
on April 21, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. Complainant Susan C. Parks filed the Accusations while acting in her official

capacity as the Superintendent of the District.

2. Respondents are certificated employees of the District. The District serves
approximately 5,400 students at eight schools including elementary, middle and high schools
and a continuation school.

3. On February 22, 2011, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted a

resolution (Resolution No. 15) to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of services
provided by the District no later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year. A total of
31.84 full time equivalent positions (FTEs) were affected, in the particular services set forth
in the resolution. (Exhibit 1.

1

4. The Board further determined that the reduction in services necessitated a decrease

in the number of certificated employees at the close of the 2010-2011 school year by a
corresponding number of FTE positions, and directed Ms. Parks to notify the appropriate
employees to implement the Board’s determination. The main reason for the reduction was
proposed budget shortfalls due to the State budget.

5. On or before March 15, 2011, the District gave notice (preliminary layoff notice)

to each certificated staff member identified as related to the services to be reduced or
eliminated of the potential elimination of his/her position for the 2011-2012 school year.
Some certificated staff members who received the preliminary layoff notices requested a
hearing, and are referred to as Respondents. Respondents are probationary or permanent
certificated employees of the District. On March 24 or 25, 2011, the District served an
Accusation on each Respondent.

6. In some instances, the District also served temporary certificated employees “as a

precaution.” As alleged in paragraph VI of the Accusation (Exhibit 8), the District has or
will nonreelect and release such employees separately from the layoff proceeding, but also
served a preliminary notice to allow such employees to request a hearing and assert their
position. This allegation relates to employees who are no longer involved in these
proceedings.

7. In some instances, the District also served other probationary or permanent
certificated employees “as a precaution.” These may be characterized as “over-notices,” as
the District alleges in paragraph VIII of the Accusation (Exhibit 8), that the seniority of these
employees is such that they should not be laid off. However, if events occur to alter the
proposed order of layoffs, it may affect their positions and their reemployment will be
implicated. This allegation relates to nine employees; the following remain as Respondents
at this time: Justin Doring, Stephen Feng, Patricia Gallegos and William Wong. As set forth
below, at the hearing the District rescinded the Accusation against all of these Respondents
except William Wong.

8. Respondents timely filed Notices of Defense to determine if there was cause for

not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

9. The services set forth in Resolution No. 15 are particular kinds of services which
may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. The
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified particular kinds of services was
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and constituted a proper exercise of discretion.

10. The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services was related solely

to the welfare of the District and its pupils. It was not related to the capabilities and
dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.

2

11. The Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements and requests

for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its
employees.

12. The resolution also included criteria to break the ties in seniority of employees

who shared the same date of first paid service to the District (tie-breaking criteria). A point
system was established for various credentials, certificates, experience, training and
coursework. Among teachers who shared a date of first paid service, the greater the number
of points attained by a teacher, the higher the seniority.

13. The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority dates,

current assignments, permanency description and credential and certificate information.
(Exhibit 12.)

14. The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the least

senior employees currently assigned in the services being reduced. The District then
determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another area and were
entitled to displace, or “bump,” other employees. In determining who would be laid off for
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by
the known vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of
seniority.

15. At the hearing, the District rescinded the Accusation against the following
Respondents: Daphne Chase, Justin Doring, Karen Estrada, Amy Feng, Stephen Feng,
Patricia Gallegos, Jenny Mizokami and Heather Wolpert.

16. Pursuant to a settlement agreement (Exhibit 17), the following Respondents

rescinded their requests for hearing and notices of defense: Christina Baker, Eric Burruss,
Gabriel Cabrera, Daphne Chase, Trisha Chun, Jenna Dizon, Karen Estrada, Amy Feng,
Michael Gray, Tiffany Guzman, Socorro Hernandez, Maria Jarak, Sarah Jones, Julie Lanier,
Joan Lapiratanagool, Jenny Mizokami, Jennifer Trapp, Diane Tse, Courtney Vanis, Jennifer
Vargas and Heather Wolpert.

17. The following Respondents testified: Megan Michaelis, Keri Seeger, Christina

Shi, William Wong, Kent Monteleone and J. Michael Hammett. Among the contentions
raised are that the District should not have reduced or eliminated certain services; that some
possess specific training and experience that is valuable to the District and may be more
significant than the qualifications possessed by other teachers; that the tie-breaking criteria
should have been different; that by eliminating “overload” periods (extra periods taught by
some teachers), some of the FTE reductions have been met; bumping should allow a teacher
to be retained; an incorrect seniority was assigned; and the District improperly considered the
categorical funding of certain positions. Except as set forth in more detail below, these
contentions were not supported by sufficient evidence or the law and, therefore, are rejected.

3

18. One of the tie-breaking criteria is listed as “AVID,” which stands for
Advancement Via Individual Determination. This is a two-day program, most recently
provided by the Los Angeles County Office of Education, for which a certificate of
completion is supplied. Anna Molinar, the District Assistant Superintendent for Human
Resources, interpreted this tie-break criterion as requiring the completion certificate. Ms.
Michaelis has received training in AVID subjects from other teachers in the District, but has
not taken or completed the two-day program or received a certificate. Ms. Molinar properly
considered her as not having the completion certificate and therefore not entitled to added
points for tie-breaking.

19. Ms. Michaelis’ other training and experience, although valuable to the District

and her students, does not entitle her to be retained over more senior teachers who are
certificated and competent to fill her position under section 44955, subdivision (b). (See
Legal Conclusion 1.)

20. Similarly, Keri Seeger’s training and experience, although valuable to the District

and her students, does not entitle her to be retained over more senior teachers who are
certificated and competent to fill her position under section 44955, subdivision (b). (See
Legal Conclusion 1.)

21. The potential issue of rehire rights of Ms. Michaelis and Ms. Seeger are not

within the jurisdiction of the ALJ to address in this matter.

22. Ms. Seeger and Ms. Hussar’s positions were eliminated to satisfy a 2.0 FTE

reduction in English. Respondents contend that the District improperly accounted for the
position of Julie Lanier and that, as a result, reductions in English were over-noticed by 0.4
FTE and Ms. Seeger, as the most senior English teacher, should be retained to the extent of
0.4 FTE. Ms. Lanier is identified as a temporary teacher who has been nonreelected but who
also received a precautionary layoff notice (see Factual Finding 6). For the present school
year, Ms. Lanier served as a temporary teacher in two positions, each with categorical
funding. In the first part-time position, Ms. Lanier is “backfilling”; that is, another teacher
left for a position with categorical funding and Ms. Lanier is filling in. In the second part-
time position, Ms. Lanier is paid with categorical funds to teach English Language Learner
(ELL) high school students. Ms. Molinar credibly testified that the availability of categorical
funding next year is uncertain. Ms. Lanier was properly considered a temporary employee.
She received a notice of nonreelection. Neither of the two part-time positions she held
should have affected the 2.0 FTE reductions in English.

23. Christina Shi questioned the manner in which the District determined the
particular kinds of services slated for reduction as well as the different points assigned to the
tie-breaking criteria. These decisions are well within the District’s discretion and are not
within the jurisdiction of the ALJ to address in this matter. (See Legal Conclusion 6.) Ms.
Shi shares the same seniority date with William Wong. Her contention that she was entitled
to more points based on her number of units was insufficient, as the Dsitrict properly
converted her quarter units to semester units. Mr. Wong was entitled to more tie-breaking

4

points and the tie-breaking criteria were properly applied to both of them. Although Mr.
Wong was identified as satisfying the 1.0 FTE reduction in math, he is able to bump Ms. Shi.
Therefore, although Mr. Wong was considered as receiving a precautionary notice due to tie-
breaking issues, those issues are resolved and the Accusation as to Mr. Wong will be
dismissed.

24. William Wong and other Respondents asserted that by eliminating overload
assignments the District had effectively satisfied the goal of the resolution to eliminate
certain math FTEs. For example, five overload classes in math are the equivalent of the
teaching load for one full time math teacher. The District established that overload
assignments are not regular teaching assignments, are completely discretionary and the
District does not intend to authorize them for next school year. The District properly
considered the overload periods as not affecting the FTEs identified for reduction. The
Respondents’ contention was not supported by sufficient evidence or the law and, therefore,
is rejected.

25. Kent Monteleone’s position as a health instructor is being eliminated. He raised
two contentions: first, that his position was improperly identified for elimination; and second
that he is credentialed and competent to bump another less-senior employee who is being
retained by the District.

Mr. Monteleone submitted evidence that he had been served with Notices of
Unsatisfactory Acts by the District, that the District sought to terminate him for cause, and
that a settlement of that matter required the District to reinstate him as an employee. (See
Exhibits F and 21.) He also submitted evidence that his health course includes the
mandatory subject of HIV education. He contends that the District, having been
unsuccessful in terminating him for cause, now seeks to lay him off by eliminating his FTE
position in health in this layoff proceeding, and that this is an improper motive or reason for
layoff. The District established that the health course taught by Mr. Monteleone is a one-
semester course and that the teaching position for the second semester course taught in
conjunction with it (a freshman social science course) is also subject to layoff. There is no
requirement that the mandatory HIV education be provided by a teacher with a credential in
health, such as Mr. Monteleone. The District plan for next year is for the mandatory HIV
education to be provided by physical education teachers. It was not established that the
District had an improper motive in identifying the health position for elimination.

26. With respect to bumping, Mr. Monteleone identified one teacher, junior to him in

seniority, being retained by the District and who is in a position that Mr. Monteleone could
assume. More specifically, Mr. Monteleone has a seniorty date of September 1, 1999, and a
seniority number of 100. At number 169 is Bo Botts, seniority date August 30, 2004. Mr.
Botts is presently assigned to Del Mar High School, the District’s continuation program,
assigned to teach co-educational physical education and electives. There is no particular
credential required for his position. When Ms. Molinar was asked whether Mr. Monteleone
could bump Mr. Botts, she testified that the focus of the implementation of bumping (found
in Exhibit 14) related to the proposed reduction of 0.50 FTEs at the continuation school and

5

effecting employees Jennifer Trapp and Gabriel Cabrera, and that “we missed” any attempt
to analyze whether Mr. Monteleone could bump any other more junior employee.

27. The resolution contains three criteria that apply to determine if a senior teacher is
credentialed and competent to render the entire service currently being performed by a junior
teacher. (See Resolution No. 15, Exhibit 1.) As applied to Mr. Monteleone, he is considered
competent because: (1) he possesses a clear credential in health, and Ms. Molinar testified
that no particular credential is needed for the position held by Mr. Botts; (2) as there is no
Highly Qualified status under the No Child Left Behind Act for the subject matters taught by
Mr. Botts, this criterion does not apply; and (3) as there is no English Learner authorization
needed for Mr. Botts’ assignment, this criterion does not apply.

Based on this evidence and these circumstances, Mr. Monteleone established that the
District was retaining someone more junior to him in a position for which he is credentialed
and competent. Therefore, the Accusation against Mr. Monteleone must be dismissed.

28. J. Michael Hammett was originally hired by the District to begin as a teacher on

August 23, 1996. There was no evidence whether this was in a temporary position or
otherwise or what type of credential or teaching authorization he held at that time. Mr.
Hammett later took a leave of absence, and then resigned effective June 30, 2006. He claims
to have had 10 years of seniority at that time. He returned and was reemployed by the
District on August 24, 2009. He was returned to his status as a permanent teacher, and the
District based his seniority on the date of reemployment. Mr. Hammett received a layoff
notice because of the elimination of his FTE position in social science. Mr. Hammett
contends that he has twelve years of seniority (he includes his time while on leave of absence
but not between his resignation and rehire).

Section 44931 requires that if a permanent employee resigns and is reemployed

within 39 months of the date of his resignation, the employee must be restored to all of the
“rights, benefits, and burdens of a permanent employee, except as otherwise provided in this
code.” Section 44848 requires that the date of employment of a certificated employee who
resigns and returns to employment be deemed to be the date on which the employee first
rendered paid service after reemployment. In San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144
Cal.App.3d 627, 641, the court interpreted sections 44931 and 44848 such that the rehired
teacher regains his “individual rights, burdens and benefits, but not as to seniority rights
which affect other employees.” This is not discretionary with the District, as claimed by Mr.
Hammett. Nor is San Jose incorrect. While the District may have made minor errors (e.g.,
incorrect dates on correspondence), it handled Mr. Hammett’s seniority correctly under the
circumstances. Mr. Hammett’s claim that section 44848 does not apply because it only
affects resignations “for cause” is rejected as contrary to the plain language of the statute. In
accordance with the requirements of sections 44848 and 44931, Mr. Hammett resigned and
later returned and was restored to permanent status, but with a new seniority date upon his
return to employment with the District. The District assigned the correct seniority date to
Mr. Hammett.

6

29. Other than as set forth above (Factual Findings 26 and 27 re Mr. Botts), no
certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform any services which
any Respondent was certificated and competent to render.

30. Respondents raised several contentions at the hearing, some of which are
discussed herein. Except as specifically set forth herein, these contentions were not
supported by sufficient evidence or the law and, therefore, are rejected.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. Education Code1 section 44949, subdivision (a), states in pertinent part:

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing

board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year for the reasons
specified in Section 44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given written
notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.”

Section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), states in pertinent part:

“The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge who shall prepare a
proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. . . .
Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or governing board of the
school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the charges unless the errors are
prejudicial errors.”

2. Section 44955 provides, in pertinent part:

“(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes other
than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive,
and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as
specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive.

“(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not

later than the beginning of the following school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing
board may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the
school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or

1 All citations are to the Education Code.

7

any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render.

“As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the

same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of
needs of the district and the students thereof. . . .

“(c) . . . [S]ervices of such employees shall be terminated in the reverse order in

which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with Sections 44844
and 44845. In the event that a permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices
and a right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed
reemployed for the ensuing school year.

“The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner

that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications
entitle them to render. . . .

“(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a

certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons:

“(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific
course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential with a
specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or
course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not
possess.”

3. Sections 44949 and 44955 establish jurisdiction for this proceeding. The notice

and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and 44945 were met. (Factual
Findings 1 through 8.)

4. A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

5. The District must be solvent to provide educational services, and cost savings are
necessary to resolve projected District budget reductions, to insure that its schools provide,
and students receive, required instruction in an effective and efficient manner. Such
financial circumstances can dictate a reduction in certificated staff, and “section 44955 is the
only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.” (San Jose
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 639.) The Board’s decision to reduce
services in light of its budget does address the welfare of students, and was a proper exercise

8

of the Board’s discretion. Respondents did not establish that the proposed reductions in
services would violate any statutory or regulatory requirement governing the District.

6. Boards of education hold significant discretion in determining the need to reduce

or discontinue particular kinds of services, which is not open to second-guessing in this
proceeding. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees, supra, 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) Such policy-
making decisions are not subject to arguments as to the wisdom of their enactment, their
necessity, or the motivations for the decisions. (California Teachers Assn. v. Huff (1992) 5
Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.) Such decisions and action must be reasonable under the
circumstances, with the understanding that “such a standard may permit a difference of
opinion.” (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d
831.)

Numerous cases stand for the proposition that the process of implementing layoffs

is a very flexible one and that school districts retain great flexibility in carrying out the
process. (See, for example, Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76
Cal.App.3d 796.)

7. Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to
the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. Cause for the reduction or
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils
within the meaning of section 44949.

8. A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a

continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)

9. For the reason set forth in Factual Findings 7, 15, 25, 26 and 27, the Accusation

should be dismissed against Respondents Daphne Chase, Justin Doring, Karen Estrada, Amy
Feng, Stephen Feng, Patricia Gallegos, Kent Monteleone, Jenny Mizokami, Heather
Wolpert, and William Wong.

//

//

//

//

9

10. No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform any
services which any Respondent was certificated and competent to render, except as set forth
in Factual Findings 26 and 27.

11. Except as provided in Legal Conclusion 9, cause exists within the meaning of

section 44955 for reducing or terminating Respondents’ employment for the 2011-2012
school year as set forth in Factual Findings 1 through 30.

WHEREFORE, THE FOLLOWING ORDERS are hereby made:

ORDERS

1. The Accusations served on Respondents Daphne Chase, Justin Doring, Karen

Estrada, Amy Feng, Stephen Feng, Patricia Gallegos, Kent Monteleone, Jenny Mizokami,
Heather Wolpert and William Wong are dismissed.

2. The Accusations served on all other Respondents are sustained. Notice may be

given to those Respondents before May 15, 2011, that their services will be reduced or
terminated for the 2011-2012 school year.

Dated: April 25, 2011.

___________________________
DAVID B. ROSENMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

