BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
GARVEY SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In The Matter Of The Lay Offs Of:

OAH No. 2011030907

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE
GARVEY SCHOOL DISTRICT,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Mark Harman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) of the
Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 7, 2011, in Rosemead.

James R. Lynch and George M. Yin, Attorneys at Law, represented Garvey School
District (District). Jean Shin, Staff Attorney, California Teachers Association, and Joshua
Adams, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Claudia P. Barajas, Debra T. Benavidez,
Suzana Carlos, Sappho Chow, Jenny Duque, Gloria Galaz (Galaz), Rene Herrera (Herrera),
Sandra Seonah L. Hong, Charles Lee Howell, Tran Ma, Michelle Mendoza, Blanca Rios-
Quiroz, Teresa S. Rodriguez (Rodriguez), Lindsay M. Sotero (Sotero), May Yueh Tam,
Monica A. Upathumpa, Breanna Hunt, and Tonie Tran-Wang, all of whom were present.
There were no appearances by or on behalf of respondents Robert Boyd, Martin Garcia,
Susan Kobilarcsik, or Elizabeth C. Silva.1

The District decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and gave

respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2011-2012 school year.
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not
reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

Evidence was received by oral stipulations, documents, and testimony. The matter

was submitted for decision on April 7, 2011.

1 These four certificated administrators may have rights affected by this proceeding.
The District has released them from their administrative positions effective at the end of the
school year. According to the District, Martin Garcia and Elizabeth Silva may be able to
“bump” into position currently filled by other respondents in this proceeding.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The District operates 11 schools for approximately 5,500 students. Sandra D.
Johnson, Ed.D. (Johnson), is the Superintendent of the District. Genaro Alarcón (Alarcón),
Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, and his staff were responsible for
implementation of the technical aspects of the layoff. Alarcón filed the Accusation in his
official capacity.

2.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

3.

On or before March 10, 2011, Johnson recommended to the Governing Board
of the District (Governing Board) that it reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services for
the 2011-2012 school year and, for that reason, that it give notice to certain certificated
employees that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year. On March
10, 2011, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 10-11-11 (the Resolution),
determining to reduce or discontinue services of 14.54 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions,
as specified below, and to terminate at the end of the 2010-2011 school year the employment
of certificated employees of the District in a quantity and kind corresponding to the 14.54
FTE’s.

PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES

NUMBER OF FTE
POSITIONS

K-6 Classroom Teacher

K-8 Art Teacher

K-6 Resource Specialist (RSP) Teacher

7-8 Art Teacher

7-8 Language Arts Teacher

7-8 Science Teacher

7-8 Social Studies Teacher

Physical Education Teacher

Adapted Physical Education Teacher

Total FTE Reduction

2

7.00

1.00

0.34

1.00

1.60

1.00

1.00

1.40

0.20

14.54

4.

On March 11, 2011, Johnson provided written notice to the Governing Board

and to respondents that she recommended the termination of respondents’ services for the
2011-2012 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. Respondents
received these notices and requested a hearing. On or after March 17, 2011, the District
served an Accusation and related materials on respondents, and respondents filed their
Notices of Defense. The parties stipulated that service of all notices and jurisdictional
documents was proper. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

5.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of
services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code
section 44955.2

6.

The Governing Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set
forth in factual finding number 3 primarily because of the State’s proposed reduction of
funding for education. The decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services
is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s discretion.

7.

The reduction or discontinuance of services set forth in factual finding number

3 is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to
decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board.

8.

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority

dates (the date that an employee first rendered paid service in a probationary capacity),
current assignments, and credentials. The Resolution included criteria for determining the
order of seniority of those employees with the same seniority date (tie-breaking criteria).
The District applied these criteria to determine the order of seniority among employees who
had the same seniority date. No respondent challenged either the reasonableness of these
criteria or the manner in which the District applied the tie-breaking criteria to determine the
particular persons who would receive layoff notices.

9.

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed lay-off list of the

least senior employees who would be laid off for each kind of service being reduced or
discontinued. The District counted the number of reductions not covered by the known
vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority. The
District then determined whether these employees held credentials in another area and were
entitled to “bump” other, more junior employees.

10.

The District stipulated that two of the respondents who were noticed for this

proceeding are not subject to being laid off: Herrera and Rodriguez. Herrera currently
teaches 0.60 Assisted Physical Education (APE) and 0.40 Physical Education (P/E). In the
2011-2012 school year, he will be teaching 1.0 APE, having bumped junior teacher Galaz of
0.40 of her APE assignment (the remainder of Galaz’s assignment of 0.20 will be

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

3

eliminated). Sotero is a P/E teacher and is senior to Herrera, but she does not have
authorization to teach APE. Her 1.0 assignment of P/E classes is being eliminated, as well as
Herrera’s 0.40 assignment. Since Sotero is not able to teach APE, she may not bump into the
APE position that Herrera will teach next year.3

11.

Rodriguez has a clear multiple subject (M/S) teaching credential and

"Embedded English Learner Program" authorization from the California Commission on
Teacher Credentialing. She has been teaching a 7th grade language arts
departmentalized classroom since September 2005 pursuant to the Governing Board’s
authorization. (See § 44256, subd. (b), under which a Board may authorize a person with an
M/S teaching credential to teach any subject in departmentalized classes to a given class or
group of students below grade 9, provided the teacher has completed at least 12 semester
units, or six upper division or graduate units, of coursework in the subject to be taught.) The
Board’s authorization and the oral stipulation by the parties establish that Rodriguez is
qualified to teach 7th grade language arts in the 2011-2012 school year, and that no
respondents have challenged this assertion. Three teachers of language arts, Tamera
Dominguez, Ruth S. Mak, and Robert Richardson, did not receive lay-off notices. Each of
these teachers is junior to Rodriguez and Rodriguez has bumping rights as to these teachers’
positions. Therefore, Rodriguez is not subject to termination in this proceeding.

12.

The District stipulated that the seniority date of respondent May Yueh Tam is

November 22, 2010.

13.

Charles Lee Howell (Howell) has been teaching nearly 30 years. He teaches
visual arts to middle school students. The Governing Board is eliminating his position and
the position of the only other art instructor in the District, Debra T. Benavidez. Howell
argued many reasons why visual arts instruction is critical and unique to the entire
educational program of the District. He believes the District will continue some form of art
program in the future, perhaps without certificated personnel. The District asserted it is not
legally required to provide visual arts courses as part of the District’s educational program.

14. Michelle Mendoza is employed part time, three hours per day, as a resource

specialist program (RSP) teacher at Dewey Elementary School. She has taught special
education in the District, with a short break in service, since 1998. Her 0.34 position will be

3 Sotero is one of two female P/E teachers of 7th and 8th grade girls at Garvey
Intermediate School. Sotero argues, as further grounds for her being retained, that she and
her female colleague must supervise the girls’ locker room before and after P/E classes, and
that a single person would not be able to manage the 70 - 90 girls each period under the
present circumstances, nor is it possible for the District to assign these duties to a male P/E
teacher. The ALJ lacks jurisdiction to decide whether the Governing Board’s determination
to eliminate Sotero’s position is wise. On this record, the District has established that it is
within its discretion to provide alternative means to ensure the safety of students in the locker
room and it is not required by law to retain Sotero to perform this function.

4

eliminated at the end of this school year. She argued that the Governing Board’s
determination ignores a real need for more rather than fewer RSP teachers in the District.

15.

Except as modified herein, the District will not retain any certificated

employee junior to respondents to render a service which respondents are certificated and
competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and

44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 4.

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services

that could be reduced or discontinued under section 44955. The ALJ has considered the
circumstances and individual arguments presented by respondents.

3.

Cause exists for the District to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of
services listed in factual finding number 3, which cause relates solely to the welfare of the
District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949, as set forth in factual finding
numbers 1 through 7.

4.

Cause exists to terminate the services of Claudia P. Barajas, Debra T.

Benavidez, Suzana Carlos, Sappho Chow, Jenny Duque, Gloria Galaz, Sandra Seonah L.
Hong, Charles Lee Howell, Tran Ma, Michelle Mendoza, Blanca Rios-Quiroz, Lindsay M.
Sotero, May Yueh Tam, Monica A. Upathumpa, Breanna Hunt, Tonie Tran-Wang, Robert
Boyd, Martin Garcia, Susan Kobilarcsik, and Elizabeth C. Silva for the 2011-2012 school
year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services, by reason of factual finding numbers 1
through 15, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 3.

The Accusation is sustained and the District may notify respondents Claudia P. Barajas,

Debra T. Benavidez, Suzana Carlos, Sappho Chow, Jenny Duque, Gloria Galaz, Sandra
Seonah L. Hong, Charles Lee Howell, Tran Ma, Michelle Mendoza, Blanca Rios-Quiroz,
Lindsay M. Sotero, May Yueh Tam, Monica A. Upathumpa, Breanna Hunt, Tonie Tran-
Wang, Robert Boyd, Martin Garcia, Susan Kobilarcsik, and Elizabeth C. Silva, that their
services will not be needed during the 2011-2012 school year due to the reduction of particular
kinds of services.

Dated: April __, 2011

_______________________________
MARK E. HARMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

ORDER

5

