BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
LODI UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL
EMPLOYED BY THE LODI UNIFIED
SCHOOL DISTRICT,

OAH No. 2011020718

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Jonathan Lew, State of

California, Office of Administrative Hearings in Lodi, California, on April 14, 2011.

Paul R. Gant and Justin J. Simpson, Attorneys at Law, represented the Lodi Unified

School District (District).

Thomas J. Driscoll, Jr., Attorney at Law, represented the respondents who are
identified as being represented on Attachment B to Attachment 1 hereto (represented
respondents).

Respondents Dirk Bruno, Elizar Ceballos, Julie Fikse, Asheley Jones, Alisa Kearns,

Mery Lo, Maria Mack, Waddell Robinson, William Robinson and Julie Vaz were
unrepresented. There was no appearance by, or on behalf of these ten named respondents at
the time of hearing.

On April 14, 2011, the District reached a stipulated settlement with the represented
respondents, as set forth in the proposed decision below. Evidence was then received and
testimony heard on remaining issues, and closing argument was made on behalf of
represented respondents. The record remained open pending receipt of the District’s written
closing argument. The Post Hearing Brief of the Lodi Unified School District was received
on April 19, 2011, and marked as Exhibit 22 for identification. The matter was thereafter
submitted for decision on April 19, 2011.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

The District and the represented respondents agreed to the Stipulations, which

are attached hereto as Attachment 1, and are incorporated herein by reference.

Represented Respondents

1.

2.

Paragraph Seven of the Stipulation provides:
District concedes that the certificated employees that are
teaching in a Regional Occupational Program who were
released/non-reelected, have “Probationary 0 classification” and
shall have those release/non-reelections rescinded. However,
the rescission of these releases/non-re-elections is without
prejudice to the District’s right to release such employees at any
time upon the expiration of the program or upon termination of
the contract.

The following respondents represented by Mr. Driscoll fall within the category of
employees covered by Stipulation paragraph seven: Tarah Hauger, Debra Miller, Bradley
Vander Hamm, Kristin Cronin, Sandra Nishimura, Cherie Thornsberry, Karen Gonzalez,
Cheryl Evans, Mary Boskovich, Gary Grafius, and Julie Abernathy.

3.

Previously, members of the Lodi Pupil Personnel Association (LPPA) who
were affected by the proposed layoff were represented by Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at
Law. By the time of hearing, issues respecting LPPA members had been resolved and all
LPPA members represented by Mr. Tuttle had withdrawn their requests for hearing.

Unrepresented Respondents

4.

Ten respondents who were not represented by Mr. Driscoll did not appear at

the hearing. These unrepresented respondents are the certificated employees listed on
Attachment B to Attachment 1, who do not have an “X” in the column under the heading
“Rep. By Driscoll.” The District properly and timely served these unrepresented respondents
with all notices required under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.1 In addition, the
District served upon these unrepresented respondents a Notice of Hearing, issued on March
3, 2011, which notified them that the hearing would begin at 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, April
13, 2011. Counsel represented that no unrepresented respondent appeared on April 13, 2011,
at the time the hearing was scheduled to commence. Similarly, no unrepresented
respondents appeared on April 14, 2011, when the hearing was scheduled to commence.
Because these unrepresented respondents did not appear at the hearing on either of these two
dates, this matter proceeded as a default against them under Government Code section
11520.

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise indicated.

2

Classification of Respondents LeLeaux, Kotecki and Paris

5.

Respondents Shannon LeLeaux, Aleta Kotecki and Cynthia Paris each

rendered one complete year of probationary service during the 2008/2009 school year. Each
of them was properly laid off from employment under Education Code section 44949 and
44955 at the close of the 2008/2009 school year, for the 2009/2010 school year. Each of
them rendered differing amounts of substitute service for the 2009/2010 school year. They
did so by virtue of the rights provided to them while on the layoff/reappointment list under
Education Code section 44957.2

For the 2010/2011 school year, respondents LeLeaux, Kotecki and Paris were

reappointed and were classified as probationary employees in their second year of
probationary service. Respondents contend that the intervening substitute service rendered to
the District during the 2009/2010 school year, pursuant to Education Code section 44957,
while on the layoff/reappointment list must count towards the attainment of permanent
status. Respondents therefore believe that they should each be classified as permanent
employees at the commencement of the 2010/2011 school year.

2 Education Code section 44957, subdivision (a) provides as follows:

For the period of 24 months from the date of such termination,
any employee who in the meantime has not attained the age of
65years shall have the preferred right to reappointment, subject
to the prior rights to reappointment by all permanent employees
as set forth in Section 44956, in the order of original
employment as determined by the governing board in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 44831 to 44855,
inclusive, if the number of employees is increased or the
discontinued service is reestablished, with no requirements that
were not imposed upon other employees who continued in
service. Except as otherwise provided, no probationary or
temporary employee with less seniority shall be employed to
render a service which such employee is certificated and
competent to render and provided that such an employee shall
be given a priority over employees whose right to a position is
derived pursuant to Section 44918. However, prior to
reappointing any employee to teach a subject which he or she
has not previously taught, and for which he or she does not have
a teaching credential or which is not within the employee’s
major area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject
matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

3

6.

Education Code section 44918, subdivision (a) provides:

Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary
employee, who serves during one school year for at least 75
percent of the number of days the regular schools of the district
were maintained in that school year and has performed the
duties normally required of a certificated employee of the school
district, shall be deemed to have served a complete school year
as a probationary employee if employed as a probationary
employee for the following school year.

Respondents rely upon section 44918 in contending that they are entitled to tack the
2009/2010 year of substitute service to their one year (2008/2009) of probationary service
with the District, and thereby be deemed permanent employees at the commencement of the
2010/2011 school term. For the reasons discussed below, this is not permitted.

7.

Education Code section 44918, by its terms, applies to the immediately

preceding year of substitute/temporary service. Certificated employees are deemed to have
served a complete school year as a probationary employee when they satisfy the 75 percent
service requirement and are “employed as a probationary employee for the following year.”
(Italics supplied.) Section 44918 clearly contemplates a certificated teacher serving as a
second year probationary employee upon appointment to a regular probationary position.
The public policy underlying section 44918 “is to prevent school boards and administrators
from abusing their discretion in hiring substitute teachers so as to circumvent the tenure
rights of teachers.” (Centinella Valley Secondary Teachers Assn. v. Centinella Valley Union
High School District (1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 35, 38.) This is simply not the case here. Rather,
respondents LeLeaux, Kotecki and Paris were already classified as probationary employees,
and then for school year 2009/2010 the District was applying the preferred right to
reappointment scheme set forth in section 44957. The District correctly noted that section
44918 did not contemplate the circumstance where a District would lose its opportunity to
evaluate a second year probationary teacher because such teacher was previously laid off and
exercised his/her entitlement to substitute service under section 44957. Importantly, under
section 44957, the District had no discretion to manipulate classifications and it was required
to offer preferred right to reappointment in order of seniority, as it did to respondents here.

8.

This interpretation also makes practical sense. Under respondents’

interpretation, for laid off probationary teachers to avoid non-reelection while on the
reappointment list, they would be required to demonstrate effective service in various
intermittent substitute assignments in other teachers’ classrooms, teaching other teachers’
students, implementing other teachers’ lesson plans, and possibly teaching in an assignment
for which they are not specifically credentialed. It is also problematic for a school district as
it would be unable to reasonably evaluate such teachers in their critical second year of
probationary employment. The teachers would be teaching across multiple school sites,
under the direction of multiple supervisors, in other teachers’ classrooms with other teachers’
students, and implementing other teachers’ lesson plans. In short, the laid off employee
rendering substitute service would not be afforded the same opportunity to succeed as a

4

regular probationary employee. And the district would not be offered the same opportunity
to evaluate the employee in a regular employment setting.

By reading section 44918 to allow only tacking back one year, the district and the

employee will have the critical second year to evaluate and prove worth in a regular
assignment. The District makes a persuasive argument that if tacking forward were allowed,
it would result in “a hodge podge of differing assignments all of which may or may not count
toward probationary status depending upon whether sufficient substitute assignments arise
after March 15th to net the necessary seventy-five percent of service under Section 44918.”
Because the District would not know until March 15 whether an employee will render 75
percent service, it would be faced with the decision of whether to risk a premature non-
reelection based on this same “hodge podge” of substitute service, or risk retention of a
potentially substandard employee in permanent status should such employee be reappointed
by virtue of his or her entitlement under section 44957.

9.

The First District Court of Appeal decision in Schnee v. Alameda Unified

School District (2004) 125 Cal.App.4th 555 is instructive. In Schnee, the teacher was
employed for approximately eight years as a reading specialist, a position that was
categorically funded under Education Code section 44909. She was then hired full-time as a
third grade teacher in a position supported by general funds in the district’s regular education
program. The district classified her as a second year probationary employee. At the end of
the school year the district notified her that she would not be reelected and terminated her
employment. The teacher filed a petition for a writ of mandate, alleging that the district had
disregarded Education Code sections 44909 and 44929.21, subdivision (b), in classifying her
as a probationary employee, and not as a permanent employee. The Court of Appeal held
that when a certificated teacher has been employed for several years in a categorically funded
position, and is subsequently employed by the district in a probationary position, the teacher
obtains permanent status only if and when the teacher is retained for the succeeding school
year.

Section 44909, like section 44918, contains terms and conditions under which
certificated employees may be credited with one year of service toward attainment of
permanent status if they are employed for at least 75 percent of the number of days the
regular schools of the district are maintained. In Schnee, the teacher argued that under
section 44909, she attained permanent status at the “commencement” of the probationary
appointment. In rejecting this contention, the court explained:

If Schnee’s interpretation of the statute were accepted, on the
date on which a teacher who formerly served in a categorically
funded program for at least two years first renders paid service
in a probationary position (see § 44845), the individual would
immediately acquire permanent status. In effect, the individual
would never serve as a probationary employee, much less do so
for a school year, although section 44909 requires as a condition
of receiving credit for service in a categorically funded program

5

that the person be “subsequently employed as a probationary
employee.”

(Id. at p. 563.)

10.

The Schnee court further noted that “Schnee’s interpretation unquestionably

would deprive the school district of the opportunity to evaluate the performance of the
individual as a general curriculum teacher, and would require the district to decide whether
to grant tenured status based solely on the individual’s performance in the categorically
funded program.” (Id. at pp. 563-564.) And while a teacher may possess the qualifications
rendering her eligible for permanent status as a teacher, the “mere fact that an individual
possesses the qualifications rendering him or her eligible for permanent status does not
dispense with the importance of permitting the school district to evaluate the suitability of
that person for a permanent position in the district before tenure is secured.” (Id at p. 564.)

11.

Of note here, in determining that permanent status did not attach until the

employee served at least one full probationary year subsequent to the categorical service, the
appellate court referenced legislative history relating to provisions of the Education Code
dealing with temporary employees. Citing to both Education Code sections 44920 and
44918, the Schnee court indicated: “Regardless of the number of years that the employee
may have served in a temporary status in a position with certification qualifications, the
employee must serve one year as a probationary employee before receiving credit for the
prior period of temporary employment and acquiring permanent status. Although the
language of section 44909 is more opaque, we conclude that the same period of probationary
employment is required before permanent status may be obtained.” (Ibid.)

12.

For the above reasons, respondents LeLeaux, Kotecki and Paris are not

entitled to tack the 2009/2010 year of substitute service to their one year (2008/2009) of
probationary service with the District, and thereby be deemed permanent employees at the
commencement of the 2010/2011 school term. The substitute service offered to them under
section 449573 does not fall within the scope of the circumstances against which section
44918 was intended to offer protection. Section 44918 was enacted to stop public school
employers from abusing their discretion in hiring substitute/temporary teachers so as to
circumvent tenure rights. That is not what occurred here. The District was required to hire
respondents per their preferred rights to reappointment under section 44957. Section 44918
was not enacted to undermine the policy underlying section 44929.21, or to abrogate a
district’s right to evaluate a probationary employee in a regular assignment in his or her
second year of probationary employment.

3 The District also suggested that Education Code section 44957, subdivisions (c) and
(d) prohibit such service from counting towards the attainment of permanent status. This is
not the case. Subdivision (c) relates to the period of “absence” from service not being
counted as part of the service required for attaining permanent status in the district. It does
not apply to actual service following exercise of preferred right to reappointment.
Subdivision (d) relates to, among other matters, the retention of one’s “previous
classification and rights” not being affected by substitute service.

6

Rescission of Layoff Notices Due to Conversion of Temporary Employees to Regular Status

13.

Respondents contend that the District failed to match section 44909 temporary

employees to specific regular employees assigned to categorical programs. Section 44909
provides in part: “Whenever any certificated employee in the regular educational program is
assigned to a categorically funded project not required by federal or state statute and the
district employs an additional credentialed person to replace that certificated employee, the
replacement certificated employee shall be subject to the provisions of Section 44918.”

In this case, the District released from employment, effective the close of the
2010/2011 school year, 26 teachers classified as temporary. There are 14.3 FTE certificated
employees employed to replace teachers on leave of absence. There are an additional 40.9
FTE regular employees in categorically funded assignments. These teachers were
presumably in the regular education program before being reassigned to a categorically
funded project. Teachers employed by the District to backfill behind them in their regular
assignment would be considered temporary employees under Education Code section 44909,
and subject to the provisions of section 44918.

14.

Seven represented respondents now challenge their classification as temporary

employees on grounds that their credentials do not match any of the credentials held by
teachers reassigned to categorical assignments.4 For example, respondent Charles Anema
holds a single subject credential for physical education, and an adaptive physical education
credential for special education. The District’s list of regular employees in categorically
funded assignments does not contain any individuals who match these credentials.
Respondents represent that 35 of these categorical employees hold multiple subject
credentials, four hold special education credentials and two hold single subject credentials
(English and Life Sciences/Chemistry). Respondents contend that even if the 26 teachers are
offset by the 14.3 FTE teachers on leave of absence for the 201//2011 school year, there are
still 11.7 positions that cannot be justified based upon any match between regular employees’
teaching credentials and authorizations, and those held by corresponding temporary
employees.

15.

It is undisputed that the District was allowed to hire at least as many temporary

employees as it required for the 2010/2011 school year to replace teachers on leave of
absence, and that there was no requirement that a temporary teacher be assigned to the
classroom of a particular permanent or probationary teacher whose absence due to leave or
illness necessitated the hiring of the temporary teacher. (Santa Barbara Federation of
Teachers v. Santa Barbara High School District (1977) 76 Cal.App.3d 223; Paulus v.
Sequoia Union High School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 59.) The Santa Barbara court
recognized that the Legislature, by allowing school districts to replace employees on leaves

4 Respondents challenging their classification as temporary employees include:

Charles Anema, Tanya Campoy, Aritz Cardenas, Kelsey Christenson, Tamara Cornaga,
Kristopher Goldstein and Melissa Zermeno. The remaining employees receiving releases
either failed to request a hearing or failed to appear and were dismissed from the proceeding.

7

of absence, created “a device which insures continuity of instruction while avoiding the
problems of overstaffing.” (Id. at p. 232.) Without such discretion and means to assign
teachers to various classes, the fear was that “school districts would resort to filling
temporary vacancies on a day-to-day basis with various substitute teachers; such practice
would be harmful to both the students and their substitute teachers.” (Ibid.) Thus, school
districts are only required to insure that the number of temporary teachers not exceed the
total number of probationary and permanent employees on leave at any one time.

16.

Respondents specifically contend that Santa Barbara is limited in its

application to section 44920 temporary employees, and that it has no application to section
44909 categorical employees. For the reasons discussed below, respondents’ arguments are
persuasive.

The District argues that all the concerns expressed by the Santa Barbara court with
regard to teachers hired to replace teachers absent on leave hold equal force where teachers
were hired due to reassignment of regular teachers to categorically funded projects. The
Santa Barbara court recognized that discretion should be given to school districts to freely
assign and transfer teachers according to the best interests of the educational process. (Id. at
p. 234.) The appellate court explained that in interpreting legislation dealing with the
educational system, “the fundamental purpose of such legislation is the welfare of the
children.” (Ibid.) The Santa Barbara court noted that petitioners were properly classified as
temporary teachers and that the parties stipulated that all of the various classes taught by
them could have been conducted by probationary or permanent employees had they not been
away on leaves of absence. (Id. at p. 233.) However, this does not appear to be the case here
as respondents contend that their credentials do not match any of the credentials held by
teachers reassigned to categorical assignments.

Interestingly, the Santa Barbara court identified a single replacement teacher
assigned to teach an industrial arts class, and noted that there was no teacher on leave who
was qualified to teach that class. It indicated that it was “debatable” whether this industrial
arts teacher was actually a replacement teacher, but then engaged in a discussion of possible
reassignment scenarios that would ultimately allow for a replacement for the teacher on
leave. In allowing for such reassignments the appellate court’s underlying premise was that
the need for an additional teacher stemmed from the fact that a math teacher was on leave
and that the math instructor vacancy at some point needed to be filled.5 (Id. at p. 234.) Thus,

5 The appellate court noted: “Although no one on leave during that school year was

qualified to teach industrial arts, the facts indicate that Mr. Grant, a mathematics teacher not
on leave, could have been reassigned to teach industrial arts, and his classes could have been
taught by a mathematics teacher on leave, Janice Gute, had she not been away. In other
words, instead of hiring petitioner Tucker, respondent could have reassigned a math teacher
to teach industrial arts and hired a different temporary teacher to fill the resultant math
instructor vacancy created by the fact that another math teacher was away on leave of
absence; in both instances the need for an additional teacher would stem from the fact that a
math teacher was on leave.” (Italics added. Id. at pp. 233 – 234.)

8

while wide latitude is afforded school districts in making assignments and reassignments,
such still stems from and is necessitated by the fact that a particular teacher is on leave. The
District must minimally satisfy such nexus here, however general, as the Santa Barbara
court requires.

17.

Respondents also noted differences in the language of Education Code

sections 44909 and 44920. Section 44909 governs categorically funded projects and makes
reference to one who is employed to fill behind a certificated teacher from the regular
educational program as “an additional credentialed person to replace that certificated
teacher.” (Italics added.) This is more specific than comparable language in section 44920,
the section governing temporary employees that was interpreted by the Santa Barbara court.
Section 44920 makes only general reference to temporary employees as follows:

[E]mployment of such persons shall be based upon the need for
additional certificated employees during a particular semester or
year because a certificated employee has been granted leave for
a semester or year, or is experiencing long-term illness, and
shall be limited, in number of persons so employed, to that need,
as determined by the governing board.

The section 44909 reference to hiring an additional teacher to “replace that certificated
teacher” suggests a stronger need to demonstrate a direct match and nexus for teachers
replacing those reassigned to categorically funded programs. Santa Barbara considered only
the more general language of section 44920. While the broad discretion afforded districts to
assign and reassign teachers on account of absent teachers generally applies in all cases,
section 44909 may properly be read to require a greater showing than what the District has
proffered here. The District has not made even a minimal showing that any of the
respondents challenging their temporary status hold credentials that match any of the
certificated teachers in categorically funded programs.

It is also true that the seven respondents who raised this challenge have not

demonstrated that they were specifically engaged to backfill for teachers in the pool of
regular employees assigned to categorically funded projects, as opposed to the pool of
regular employees on leaves of absence. Still, after accounting for the 14.30 FTE teachers on
leave of absence for the 2010/2011 school year, the District must account for 11.70 FTE
teachers in categorically funded programs. Absent a showing that corresponding backfill
employees were properly classified as temporary employees, they must be classified as
probationary employees. (Ed. Code, § 44915. See also Bakersfield Elementary Teachers
Association v. Bakersfield City School District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260.)

18.

The District requests that should a finding be made that it exceeded its

“temporary entitlements” that it be required to reclassify some of its temporary employees,
but that the particular employees to be converted to regular status be under the discretion of
the District. The District noted that some or all of such employees may well possess
credentials that do not place them in the pool of employees to be laid off and thus would not

9

affect the layoff itself. Respondents request that only the seven teachers who contested their
classification have their notices rescinded.

The District should be ordered to correct the imbalance, in this case up to 11.7 FTE.

However, it remains within the District’s discretion to determine the manner in which to
make necessary adjustments and to rescind any preliminary layoff notices as necessary based
on the qualifications and seniority status of the converted employees.

Section 44955 Reassignments for 2011/2012 School Year

19.

The District has an obligation under Education Code section 44955,

subdivision (c), to “make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that employees
shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to
render.” Respondents have identified senior employees who were not noticed for layoff who
they believe should be assigned next school year to mathematics and special education to
save junior employees from layoff. For example, Linda Brandt has served over the past six
years as high school librarian. She holds a single subject credential in mathematics, and a
multiple subject credential. She taught high school mathematics between 1989 and 1996,
and has a preference for mathematics over elementary school instruction. She has never
taught in a self-contained K-8 classroom. Ms. Brandt is being reassigned next year to
elementary school instruction based upon her multiple subject credential. Respondents
believe she should instead be assigned to teach high school mathematics, and thereby bump a
probationary employee, Paige Blevins, instead of more senior permanent elementary teachers
holding multiple subject credentials. Respondents have identified five permanent teachers
holding multiple subject credentials with at least five years employment with the District.

20.

The District has discretion as to whether additional assignments and

reassignments should be made to save other junior teachers. However, its obligation to make
assignments and reassignments under section 44955 is “limited to attempting to place an
employee who would otherwise be terminated in a position being held by another employee
with less seniority.” (Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d
555, 568.) Thus, the District is not obligated to reassign senior teachers who are not losing
their positions in an effort to save junior teachers. That is what respondents are seeking here
by way of “inverse bumping” and this was not contemplated in the process by which districts
exercise discretion as to which assignments and reassignments are made.

21.

Respondents characterize Ms. Brandt’s assignment to elementary instruction
as “irrational” in support of claims that the District abused its discretion in not assigning her
to high school mathematics instruction for school year 2011/2012. A party seeking to
demonstrate “abuse of discretion must make some showing that the body invested with
discretion has acted arbitrarily, capriciously, fraudulently, or without due regard for his rights
and that the action was prejudicial to him.” (Fair v. Fountain Valley School District (1979)
90 Cal.App.3d 180.) District Assistant Superintendent Mike McKilligan, Jr. testified that the
District considered qualifications and credentials, including those held by Ms. Brandt, in
making its determination to reassign, and where to reassign them for the 2011/2012 school
year. The District only reassigned employees to positions for which they were qualified and

10

credentialed to render services. In doing so, the District considered the general circumstance
that employees with credentials in the area of mathematics, science and special education are
in high demand. It sought to retain employees with credentials in those subject areas. While
respondents strongly disagree with such reasons, it was not established that the District acted
arbitrarily, capriciously or otherwise abused its discretion in making these assignments and
reassignments for next school year.

22.

There was no evidence that the District proposes to eliminate any services that

are mandated by state or federal laws or regulations.

23.

Any other assertions put forth by any respondents at the hearing and not

addressed above are found to be without merit and are rejected.

24.

There was no evidence that any junior employees are being retained to render

services that more senior respondents are certificated and competent to perform.

25.

The District’s reductions and eliminations of particular kinds of services relate

solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth

in sections 44949 and 44955.

2.

The services identified in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of services
that may be reduced or eliminated under section 44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or
eliminate the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper
exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or elimination of services relates solely to the
welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

3.

The District shall correct the imbalance, up to 11.7 FTE, created by failing to
match credentials of certificated teachers employed to replace regular teachers assigned to
categorically funded programs. However, it remains within the District’s discretion to
determine the manner in which to make necessary adjustments and to rescind any
preliminary layoff notices as necessary based on the qualifications and seniority status of the
converted employees. (See Findings 13 through 18.)

4.

Cause exists to reduce certificated employees of the District due to the

reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services. Except as noted in Legal
Conclusion 3, the District properly identified the certificated employees to be laid off as
directed by the Board.

5.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services

that a more senior respondent is certificated and competent to render.

11

6.

Cause exists to give notice to the represented respondents consistent with their

stipulations with the District as set forth in Attachment 1, and to the unrepresented
respondents, that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2011-2012
school year because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.

RECOMMENDATION

1.

2.

The Board shall adopt the stipulations reached by the District and the

represented respondents as set forth in Attachment 1 hereto.

After making necessary adjustments per Legal Conclusion 3, notice may be

given to respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the
2011/2012 school year, consistent with the stipulations between the District and the
represented respondents, as set forth in Attachment 1. Notice shall be given in inverse order
of seniority.

DATED: April 28, 2011

____________________________
JONATHAN LEW
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

12

