BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION
LA MESA – SPRING VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Employment Status of:

Christina Adamek, et al.,

OAH No. 2011030186

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Robert Walker, Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in La Mesa, California, on April 5, 2011.

Melanie A. Petersen, Attorney at Law,1 represented the complainant, the

superintendent of the La Mesa – Spring Valley School District.

The respondents are listed in exhibit A.

Fern M. Steiner, Attorney at Law,2 represented the respondents listed in exhibit B.

Respondent Laura Marshall appeared in propria persona.

No appearance was made by or on behalf of John Ashley, Maryam Ayanti, Serena

Conde, Karen Dingewall, Delyse Espineli, Kelly Rabasco, Maggie Schulman, Steven
Sheeler, or Tira Wakayama.

The matter was submitted on April 5, 2011.

1Melanie A. Petersen, Attorney at Law, 1 Civic Center Drive, San Marcos, California

92069.

California 92101-7911.

2 Fern M. Steiner, Attorney at Law, 401 West A Street, Suite 320, San Diego,

1

DEFAULT

As to John Ashley, Maryam Ayanti, Serena Conde, Karen Dingewall, Delyse
Espineli, Kelly Rabasco, Maggie Schulman, Steven Sheeler, and Tira Wakayama, on proof
of compliance with Government Sections 11505 and 11509, this matter proceeded as a
default pursuant to section 11520.

General Findings Concerning Statutory Requirements

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Education Sections 44949 and 449553 provide for two notices to be given in
connection with terminating certificated employees. The first notice, which will be referred
to as the Preliminary Layoff Notice, is given by the superintendent. It is given to the
governing board and to the employees the superintendent recommends for layoff. The
Preliminary Layoff Notice gives the board and the employees notice that the superintendent
recommends that those employees be laid off. The superintendent must give the Preliminary
Layoff Notice no later than March 15. There is no requirement that a governing board take
any action in March. But while it is unnecessary, governing boards usually adopt a
resolution ratifying the superintendent’s recommendations. In this case, the superintendent
delegated to Claudia Baker, Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources, the authority to
serve Preliminary Layoff Notices. And Ms. Baker served those notices on behalf of the
superintendent.

2.

The second notice is a notice of a governing board’s decision to terminate an
employee. That notice is provided for in Section 44955 and must be given before May 15.
That notice advises a teacher that the district will not require his or her services for the
ensuing school year. That notice will be referred to as a Termination Notice.

3.

In this case, not later than March 15, 2011, the superintendent notified the

governing board and the respondents of the recommended that the respondents not be
retained for the ensuing school year.

The Preliminary Layoff Notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.

The recommendation was not related to respondents’ competency.

A Preliminary Layoff Notice was delivered to each respondent, either by

personal delivery or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, registered, postage
prepaid, and addressed to respondent’s last known address.

4.

5.

3 All references to the Code are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified.

2

6.

The Preliminary Layoff Notice advised each respondent as follows: He or she
had a right to a hearing. In order to obtain a hearing, he or she had to deliver a request for a
hearing in writing to the person sending the notice. The request had to be delivered by a
specified date, which was a date that was not less than seven days after the notice was
served.4 And the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a
hearing.

7.

Respondents either timely filed written requests for a hearing or obtained a

waiver of their failure to file. An accusation was timely served on respondents. Respondents
were given notice that, if they were going to request a hearing, they were required to file a
notice of defense within five days after being served with the accusation.5 Respondents
either filed timely notices of defense or obtained a waiver of their failure to file. All
prehearing jurisdictional requirements were either met or waived.

8.

The governing board of the district resolved to reduce or discontinue particular
kinds of services. Within the meaning of Section 44955, the services are “particular kinds of
services” that can be reduced or discontinued. The decision to reduce or discontinue these
services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.

Services the District Intends to Reduce or Discontinue

9.

The governing board of the district determined that, because particular kinds

of services are to be reduced or discontinued, it is necessary to decrease the number of
permanent or probationary employees in the district by 113 full time equivalents (FTE).

10.

The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to

reduce or discontinue are:

Counseling Services

Elementary Teaching

Services, including Early

5.9

62.0

FTE

FTE

4 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.
Education Section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for
a hearing “shall not be less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon
the employee.”

5 Pursuant to Government Section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served

must file a notice of defense in order to obtain a hearing. Education Section 44949,
subdivision (c)(1), provides that, in teacher termination cases, the notice of defense must be
filed within five days after service of the accusation.

3

Admission Kindergarten

Elementary Teaching

Services for Primary

Language Program

(BCLAD)

English Learner

Resource Teaching

Services

Middle School Art

Teaching Services

Middle School English

Teaching Services

Middle School Industrial

Technology Teaching

Services

Middle School Math

Teaching Services

Middle School Physical

Education Teaching

Services

Middle School Science

Teaching Services

Middle School Social

Studies Teaching

Services

Middle School Spanish

Teaching Services

Middle School Teaching

Services for Primary

Language Program

2.0

2.0

4.0

.6

5.0

4.6

5.0

5.0

1.8

2.0

4

2.0

FTE

FTE

FTE

FTE

FTE

FTE

FTE

FTE

FTE

FTE

FTE

3.6

2.0

3.0

2.0

.5

FTE

FTE

FTE

FTE

FTE

(BCLAD)

Resource Specialist

(Mild/Moderate)

Teaching Services

Special Day Class

(Mild/Moderate)

Teaching Services

Special Day Class

(Moderate/Severe)

Teaching Services

Teaching Services,

Home Education

Teaching Services,

Home Tutor – General

Education

Erin Bland
Katherine Halloran
Joe Malek
Ann McCafferty
Anna Packham
Jennifer Weber

Notices Rescinded

11.

The district advised that it had rescinded the Preliminary Layoff Notices

served on the following teachers:

12.

Thus, as of the time of the hearing, these teachers no longer were parties to the

proceeding.

USE OF TIE-BREAKING CRITERIA BASED ON THE CURRENT NEEDS OF THE DISTRICT AND STUDENTS

13.

Pursuant to Section 44955, subdivision (b), the governing board of the district

adopted criteria for determining the order of termination as among employees who first
rendered paid service on the same day. Section 44955, subdivision (b), requires a district to

5

adopt such criteria and provides that the criteria are to be based on “needs of the district and
the students . . . .” The district’s tie-breaking criteria are as follows:

The following rating system shall be applied in determining the
order of termination of certificated employees who share the
same first day of paid service in a vacant probationary position:

Prior Temporary, Probationary or Tenured Certificated

1.
Service in La Mesa-Spring Valley School District
A point value of +1 will be granted for each year of temporary,
probationary or tenured certificated employment with the
District that was rendered prior to the current seniority date/first
date of paid service in a probationary position. This criterion
applies to certificated employees who prove prior service with
the District. A year of service is defined as contract service for
seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the number of working
days of any school year, including paid leave, but excluding
leaves without pay.

Prior Contracted Certificated Employment Outside of the

2.
La Mesa-Spring Valley School District
A point value of +1 will be granted for each year of full-time
temporary, probationary or tenured certificated employment
with another school district prior to the current seniority
date/first date of paid service in a probationary position with the
La Mesa-Spring Valley School District. A year of service is
defined as contract service for seventy-five percent (75%) or
more of the number of working days of any school year,
including paid leave, but excluding leaves without pay.

Earned Degrees Beyond the BA/BS Level
3.
A point value of +1 will be added for each earned degree
beyond the BA/BS level.

4.
Teaching and/or Special Service Credentials
A point value of +1 will be added for each teaching and/or
special service credential held, including Reading Certificate.
(This does not include any English Learner Authorization,
including CLAD Certificate.)

Supplementary Authorizations

5.
A point value of +1 will be added for each supplementary
authorization issued to the employee by the California
Commission on Teacher Credentialing.

6

Lottery

6.
In the event common day hires have equal qualifications based
on application of the above criteria, the District shall break ties
by utilizing a lottery conducted by the Assistant Superintendent,
Human Resources. The lottery will be held in the presence of a
representative from the La Mesa-Spring Valley Teachers
Association.

14.

Application of the tie-breaking criteria resulted in determining the order of

termination solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students thereof.

DISTRICT’S INTENTION TO DEVIATE FROM SENIORITY (SKIPPING)

15.

Pursuant to Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the governing board of the
district resolved to deviate from terminating employees in the order of seniority, i.e., the
board resolved to skip over teachers with a particular qualification and terminate more senior
teachers who do not possess that qualification. A district may skip a junior employee only if
employees with more seniority do not possess the special training and experience necessary
to teach a specific course or course of study (specific course).

16.

The district identified two courses as creating specific needs for personnel.
The first is the Community Day School core instructional program in the subject areas of
language arts, math, social studies, and science. The Community Day School is a school for
students with academic, behavior, attendance, and emotional challenges. The second course
is the Technology and Assessment Resource Teacher. As explained below, however, the
district failed to prove that teachers with more seniority do not possess the special training
and experience necessary to teach these courses.

17.

The board resolved as follows:

WHEREAS, it shall be necessary to retain certificated
employees who possess special training or experience, which
other certificated employees with more seniority do not posses,
to teach a specific course of study. Said training and experience
includes possession of the following skills, knowledge and
experience:

Possession of a Multiple Subjects credential issued by the
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, together with
three (3) years teaching experience within the past five (5)
school years in the District’s Community Day School
Alternative Program providing the core instructional program in
the subject areas of language arts, math, social studies and
science to students with academic, behavior, attendance and
emotional challenges; and

7

Possession of a Multiple Subjects credential issued by the
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, together with
two (2) years of experience serving as a Technology and
Assessment Resource Teacher, including providing leadership
in the area of education technology and providing support of the
implementation of state testing, district testing and student
academic data management . . . .

18.

As noted above, Claudia Bender is the Assistant Superintended of Human

Resources for La Mesa – Spring Valley School District. Ms. Bender applied the skipping
criteria and skipped Rachel Guera, who presently holds the Community Day School position,
and Kathryn Saballett, who currently is the Technology and Assessment Resource Teacher.

19. Ms. Bender testified as to the special training and experience necessary to
teach each of the courses. Regarding the Community Day School position, Ms. Bender
noted the board’s skipping criteria, which specifies experience in working with children who
have academic, behavior, attendance, and emotional challenges. The position requires a
teacher who is adept at working with children who have extreme academic and emotional
challenges. One must be adept at working with children who come from dysfunctional
families; who have been abused; and who, themselves, may use alcohol and drugs. One must
be able to work with social workers, the police, probation officers, and other people involved
in the juvenile justice system. One must be able to intervene in crisis situations and diffuse
problem situations calmly and patiently.

20.

Regarding the Technology and Assessment Resource Teacher position, Ms.

Bender noted the board’s skipping criteria, which specifies experience in education
technology and implementation of testing and student data management. The position
requires one to be knowledgeable about determining which students qualify for special
intervention. One must be able to provide the principals with the data they need regarding
various test results. And one must provide reports to the State of California. Failing to
provide reports to the state can have serious, negative consequences for the district.

21. Ms. Bender praised Ms. Guera and Ms. Saballett. Ms. Bender testified
extensively regarding ways in which each met and exceeded the requirements of her position.

22. Ms. Guera’s date of hire is August 13, 2007. The district may skip her only if
employees with more seniority do not have the special training and experience necessary to
teach in the Community Day School position. Emily Fleming, whose date of hire is August
9, 2004, and Deborah Kim Brown, whose date of hire is August 9, 2005, both contend that
they have the special training and experience necessary to teach in the Community Day
School position. If Ms. Fleming does have that special training and experience, the district
may not terminate her while retaining Ms. Guera to render that service. If Ms. Fleming does
not have that special training and experience but Ms. Brown does, the district may not
terminate Ms. Brown while retaining Ms. Guera to render that service.

8

23. Ms. Saballett’s date of hire is August 9, 2004. The district may skip her only

if employees with more seniority do not have the special training and experience necessary to
be the Technology and Assessment Resource Teacher. Koreen Corbett, whose date of hire is
August 11, 2003, contends that she has the special training and experience necessary to be
the Technology and Assessment Resource Teacher. If Ms. Corbett does have that special
training and experience, the district may not terminate her while retaining Ms. Saballett to
render that service.

24. Ms. Fleming holds a multiple subject credential with a credential in reading

and a supplemental authorization in business. She has a crosscultural, language, and
academic development (CLAD) certificate, which authorizes her to provide certain types of
instruction to English learner students. She currently teaches English and sciences in a
middle school. She previously taught first grade for three years and fourth grade for three
years. She has confronted many behavioral issues. Her current principal observed that she
was adept at dealing with behaviorally challenged students, and the principal tends to place
those students in Ms. Fleming’s classes. The principal has assigned Ms. Fleming the
students with the most difficult attendance, emotional, and behavioral issues. In a class with
24 students, seven are special education students. In a class with 33 students, 12 are special
education students. Ms. Fleming occasionally intervenes to deescalate situations in which
students are in arguments. Ms. Fleming, as a volunteer in a program to support children
whose parents have been incarcerated, mentors a sixth grade student whom Ms. Fleming
taught when the child was in the first and fourth grades.

25. Ms. Brown holds a multiple subject credential with a supplemental
authorization in mathematics. She is highly qualified in mathematics and has a CLAD
certificate. She presently teaches mathematics in a middle school. From 1985 to 1990, Ms.
Brown worked as a probation officer in the Orange County juvenile justice system. She
worked in juvenile hall and was in charge of a unit that housed 10 to 18 juveniles. She
provided counseling and helped residents with their homework. She often had to break up
fights and deescalated tense situations. Ms. Brown moved to San Diego County and worked
in a junior high school as a long term, site substitute. She taught seventh through ninth
grades in an opportunity school – a school for students who, for various reasons, were not
permitted to attend a regular school. For three years, Ms. Brown ran an after-school tutorial
program for special education students who needed extra help with English, mathematics, or
social studies. Ms. Brown moved to Denver and did substitute teaching for a few years. For
three years she taught in a middle school in Colorado; she taught an integrated program
without pull-outs for both regular and special education students. In 2005, she returned to
San Diego and began her present position. Ms. Brown testified that she has the experience to
teach in the Community Day School position; she said she could do very well there.

26. Ms. Corbett holds a single subject credential in health science with credentials

in biology and chemistry and supplemental authorizations in geosciences and psychology.
She has a CLAD certificate. She presently teaches science in a middle school. Before 2009,
the district had a Technology Resource Teacher and a separate Assessment Teacher. From
June of 2007 through June of 2009, Ms. Corbett was the Technology Resource Teacher. In

9

2009, the district combined the two positions and assigned Ms. Saballett to the combined
position. As the Technology Resource Teacher for two years, Ms. Corbett developed a web
site for teachers, trained teachers to implement their students’ use of technology, and
developed training for teachers. Along with another teacher, Ms. Corbett developed an
electronic report card for the elementary grades. She coded the staff website at the district
intranet. Each school had a lead teacher for technology, and Ms. Corbett met with each lead
teacher twice a month. She also published a bimonthly technology newsletter for the
district’s teachers. Ms. Corbett compiles complex queries in Aeries, has used Edusoft, and is
certified as a Micro Soft expert in ACCESS. Ms. Corbett testified that, on occasion, Ms.
Saballett has asked for her help. Ms. Corbett explained that data based programs use tables
of data. She said she has extensive experience in working with such programs, filtering
information, and doing complex searches. Ms. Corbett testified that she is qualified to do the
job of Technology and Assessment Resource Teacher. She said the district uses a few
computer programs with which she is not familiar, but she said she could easily learn them in
a couple of months.

27.

As noted above, the district’s skipping criteria provide for specified periods of

experience. For the Community Day School position, the board specified “three (3) years
teaching experience within the past five (5) school years in the District’s Community Day
School . . . .” For the Technology and Assessment Resource Teacher position, the board
specified “two (2) years of experience serving as a Technology and Assessment Resource
Teacher.”

28.

Last year, the district had exactly the same skipping criteria for the same

positions, except that the specified experience for the Community Day School program was
only two years, and the specified experience for the Technology and Assessment Resource
Teacher position was only one year.

29.

As of the end of the present year, Ms. Saballett actually will not have the two
years of experience specified in the skipping criteria. She will be shy of that by one or two
months.

30. When Ms. Bender applied the skipping criteria, she did not consider whether

particular senior teachers had the special training and experience necessary to teach the
courses.

31.

Counsel for complainant contended that, with respect to the Technology and

Assessment Resource Teacher position, the district needs continuity.

32.

As will be explained below, it is found and determined that Ms. Brown and
Ms. Corbett have the special training and experience necessary to teach in the positions the
district identified for skipping.

10

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS REGARDING RETENTION OF EMPLOYEES

33.

Except as to Ms. Brown and Ms. Corbett, with regard to respondents who are

permanent employees, the district is not retaining any probationary employee to render a
service that such a respondent is certificated and competent to render.

34.

Except as to Ms. Brown and Ms. Corbett, with regard to respondents who are
permanent employees, the district is not retaining any employee with less seniority than such
a respondent has to render a service that the respondent is certificated and competent to
render.6

35.

Except as to Ms. Brown and Ms. Corbett, with regard to respondents who are
either permanent or probationary employees, the district is not retaining any employee with
less seniority than such a respondent has to render a service that the respondent’s
qualifications entitle him or her to render.7

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

General Conclusions

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Sections 44949 and 44955. All notice

and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.

Within the terms of Sections 44949 and 44955, the district has cause to reduce

or discontinue particular kinds of services and to give Termination Notices to certain
respondents. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils.

1.

2.

Skipping

3.

Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), provides, in part, that a district may deviate
from terminating teachers according to seniority if the “district demonstrates a specific need
for personnel to teach a specific course” and demonstrates that a junior “employee has
special training and experience necessary to teach that course . . . which others with more
seniority do not possess.”

6 Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides seniority protection for a permanent

employee in terms of the services the employee is “certificated and competent to render.”

7 Section 44955, subdivision (c), provides seniority protection for both permanent and

probationary employees in terms of the services an employee’s “qualifications entitle [him
or her] to render.”

11

4.

Thus, Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), requires that a district satisfy two

conditions before it can consider skipping a junior employee. First, a district must
demonstrate a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course. Second, a district must
demonstrate that employees with more seniority do not have the special training and
experience necessary to teach that course. Until a district demonstrates both of those things,
there is no reason to consider whether a junior employee has the special training and
experience necessary to teach the course. Whether a junior employee has the special training
and experience necessary to teach the course is irrelevant unless a district has demonstrated
that employees with more seniority do not have the special training and experience necessary
to teach it.

5.

In Bledsoe v. Biggs (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, the third appellate district

dealt with a skipping issue. Bledsoe was senior to teachers who were skipped. Bledsoe
contended he had the special training and experience necessary to teach the course for which
the junior teachers were retained. The court did not read Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1),
as requiring one to first dispose of the issue of whether a senior teacher has the special
training and experience necessary. The court first found that Bledsoe had, at least, the
minimal training and experience necessary to teach the course. The court then reviewed the
junior teachers’ special training and experience and found that the junior teachers had special
training and experience necessary to teach the course. Finally, the court reviewed Bledsoe’s
special training and experience and found that he did not have the special training and
experience that the junior teachers had. The court said, “This evidence supports the finding
that Bledsoe does not possess the special training and experience that Gates and Sormano
possess.” (Bledsoe, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th at pp. 135 - 142.)

6.

There is an ambiguity in the court’s conclusion that “Bledsoe does not possess

the special training and experience that Gates and Sormano possess.” Immediately prior to
that, the court found that “Gates and Sormano have the ‘special training and experience
necessary to teach’ [the course.]” (Bledsoe, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th at p. 142.) Thus, the
court’s conclusion concerning Bledsoe could be taken to mean that he did not possess the
special training and experience necessary to teach the course. And if the conclusion
concerning Bledsoe is read that way, it is perfectly consistent with the requirements of
Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

7.

If, on the other hand, one reads the court’s conclusion concerning Bledsoe as

meaning only that he did not have as much special training and experience as Gates and
Sormano had, the court failed to make an essential finding. Before a district may skip a
junior teacher, section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), requires the district to demonstrate that
personnel “with more seniority do not possess” the “special training and experience
necessary to teach [the] course . . . .”

8.

A district may not use specified periods of experience in its skipping criteria

simply to secure continuity in a position. Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), allows a district
to maintain continuity in a position only if the district demonstrates that employees with
more seniority do not have the special training and experience necessary to fill the position.

12

Here, a few things support a conclusion that the specified periods of experience are being
used not to identify a special experience that is necessary but to exclude consideration of
senior teachers who might be well qualified to fill the positions. First, why would the
specified periods change from one year to the next? Last year the board concluded that the
Community Day School position needed someone with two years of experience; this year it
is three years of experience. There was no evidence that the position changed. What has
changed is that Ms. Guera now has three years of experience rather than two. Adding an
additional year to the criterion simply allows the district to keep Ms. Guera and at the same
time make it more difficult for a senior teacher to demonstrate that he or she is qualified.
And the same is true of the Technology and Assessment Resource Teacher position. Last
year it was one year experience; this year it is three years. Again, there was no evidence that
the position changed. What has changed is that Ms. Saballett now has an additional year of
experience. Adding an additional year to the criterion simply allows the district to keep Ms.
Saballett and at the same time make it more difficult for a senior teacher to demonstrate that
he or she is qualified. Another matter supports a conclusion that the specified periods are
being used not to identify experience that is necessary but to exclude consideration of senior
teachers who might be well qualified; as noted above, as of the end of the present year, Ms.
Saballett actually will not have two years of experience. She will be shy of that by one or
two months. If two years of experience actually was “necessary,” the district would not have
skipped Ms. Saballett. And with regard to the Community Day School position, the criterion
concerning experience is even more blatantly tailored to allow the district to retain Ms.
Guera without regard to the qualifications of senior teachers; the three years of experience
has to have been in the district’s own Community Day School program. And finally, there is
Ms. Bender’s testimony that she did not even consider whether particular senior teachers had
the special training and experience necessary to teach the courses. It is understandable that
she would not have considered that. There was no need because the skipping criteria were
designed to make such a consideration unnecessary.

9.

The rule-making authority conferred on the governing boards of school

districts is limited to the adoption of rules not in conflict with other statutory restrictions.
(Patton v. Governing Board (1978) 77 Cal.App.3d 495, 501. “The governing board of each
school district shall prescribe and enforce rules not inconsistent with law, or with the rules
prescribed by the State Board of Education, for its own government.” (Section 35010, subd.
(b).) Administrative regulations that alter or amend a statute or enlarge or impair its scope
are void. (Dyna-Med, Inc. v. Fair Employment & Housing Com. (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1379,
1389.) These rules apply to dismissal of tenured teachers. “[I]t is the function of the
governing board of each district to suspend, demote or dismiss employees” as provided by
statute. “To the extent [any rule or regulation] is contrary to these statutory provisions, it is
void, for an administrative agency has no authority to enact rules or regulations which alter
or enlarge the terms of legislative enactments.” (California Sch. Employees Assn. v.
Personnel Commission (1970) 3 Cal.3d 139, 143-144)

13

10.

Administrative practices that circumvent valid expectations of reemployment

created by the tenure statutes are not permitted. (Balen v. Peralta Junior College Dist.
(1974) 11 Cal.3d 821, 830-831; Santa Barbara Federation of Teachers v. Santa Barbara
High School Dist. (1977) 76 Cal.App.3d 223, 230.)

11.

Layoffs must proceed in accordance with the procedures prescribed by statute,

which are to be strictly followed. (Greer v. Board of Education (1975) 47 Cal.App.3d 98,
105.)

12.

Because subdivision (b) of section 44955 mandates that “the services of no

permanent employee may be terminated . . . while any probationary employee, or any other
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent employee
is certificated and competent to render,” junior employees may be given retention priority
pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), only if they possess special training and
experience that their more senior counterparts lack. (Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983)
139 Cal.App.3d 567, 571; Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648,
655.)

13.

In interpreting the meaning of a statute, words must be given the meaning they

bear in ordinary usage. (In re Rojas (1979) 23 Cal.3d 152, 155.) The meaning of an
enactment should not be determined from a single word or sentence; the words must be
construed in context, and provisions relating to the same subject matter must be harmonized
to the extent possible. (Dyna-Med, Inc. v. Fair Employment & Housing Com. (1987) 43
Cal.3d 1379, 1386-1387; Title Ins. & Trust Co. v. County of Riverside (1989) 48 Cal.3d 84,
91.)

14.

The “special training and experience necessary” language in section 44955,

subdivision (d)(1), must be read in context with 44955, subdivision (b). When one does that,
it appears that the word “necessary” substantially limits 44955, subdivision (d)(1). A district
may require special training and special experience, but a district cannot require more of
either than is “necessary” to teach the course. If “necessary” were not read in that limiting
way, 44955, subdivision (d)(1), could be used to circumvent the seniority rights secured by
44955, subdivision (b). On the other hand, reading “necessary” in that limiting way
harmonizes the language of the two subdivisions.

15.

Thus, a district may not use skipping criteria that are not “necessary” to teach

a course. Requiring a certain type of experience or a certain length of experience may be
appropriate but only if it is shown to be “necessary.” There are a few decisions in which
courts have approved of a requirement of prior experience. Martin v. Kingfield School
District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, is an example. The case concerned the section 44956
preferred right of reappointment. An elementary school teacher who had been terminated
asserted her right to be rehired to fill a new position as a middle school science teacher, a
position for which she was credentialed. The district established a requirement of prior

14

experience as a middle school teacher and did not rehire Martin for the position. The case
stands for the proposition that a district, in requiring prior middle school experience for a
middle school science position, did not abuse its discretion.

16.

Skipping a junior teacher and terminating a senior teacher instead of

terminating the junior teacher is such a fundamental departure from the tenure system that
the legislature’s limitation of “necessary” should be strictly respected. A district should be
allowed to terminate a senior teacher for not having “necessary” experience only if the
experience actually is “necessary.” And it is useful to consider that there was no evidence
that, three years ago, Ms. Guera had had experience teaching in a Community Day School or
that, two years ago, Ms. Saballett had had experience as a Technology and Assessment
Resource Teacher.

17.

In the present case, the district improperly used specified periods of experience

to make it difficult for senior teachers to demonstrate that they had the experience necessary
to teach the courses.

18.

The evidence does not support a finding that the periods the district specified

are, in fact, necessary.

19.

By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 17, 19, and 24, it is determined
that Ms. Fleming does not have the special training and experience necessary to teach in the
Community Day School position. Ms. Fleming’s experience has been with children who are
in the regular school program. She has dealt with the students who, in that population, have
the most difficult attendance, emotional, and behavioral issues. But there was no evidence as
to how those students and their problems compare with a population of students who have
been unable to function in the regular school program. Also, there was no evidence as to Ms.
Fleming’s ability to work with social workers, the police, probation officers, and other
people involved in the juvenile justice system.

20.

By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 17, 19, and 25, it is determined
that Ms. Brown has the special training and experience necessary to teach in the Community
Day School program. From 1985 to 1990, Ms. Brown worked as a probation officer in the
Orange County juvenile justice system. She provided counseling and helped residents with
their homework. She often had to break up fights and deescalate tense situations. Ms.
Brown moved to San Diego County and worked as a substitute in an opportunity school – a
school for students who, for various reasons, were not permitted to attend a regular school.
For three years, Ms. Brown ran an after-school tutorial program for special education
students who needed extra help with English, mathematics, or social studies. Ms. Brown
testified that she has the experience to teach in the Community Day School position; she said
she could do very well there. Ms. Brown’s training and experience correspond very well
with the special training and experience necessary for a teacher to fill the Community Day
School position.

15

21.

Because the district is retaining Ms. Guera to render a service for which Ms.
Brown has the necessary special training and experience, the district may not terminate Ms.
Brown.

22.

By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 17, 20, and 26, it is determined
that Ms. Corbett has the special training and experience necessary to be the Technology and
Assessment Resource Teacher. The evidence shows that Ms. Corbett is extremely well
qualified to deal with the technical requirements of the position. And one can infer from her
accomplishments that she is a reliable and responsible person who can be trusted to provide
reports to the State of California.

23.

Because the district is retaining Ms. Saballett to render a service for which Ms.
Corbett has the necessary special training and experience, the district may not terminate Ms.
Corbett.

24.

It is clear from the evidence that Ms. Guera and Ms. Saballett are excellent

teachers. But because there are senior teachers who have the special training and experience
necessary to fill the positions, Ms. Guera and Ms. Saballett’s qualifications are not relevant.

Cause Exists to Terminate Certain Respondents

25.

Cause does not exist to terminate Ms. Brown or Ms. Corbett.

26. With those exceptions, cause exists to give notice to the respondents that their

services will not be required for the ensuing school year.

ORDER

1.

2.

As to Ms. Brown and Ms. Corbett, the accusation is dismissed.

The district may give Termination Notices to the remaining respondents.

Dated: April 22, 2011

_________________________________
ROBERT WALKER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

16

EXHIBIT A
RESPONDENTS
LA MESA – SPRING VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT
2011

1. Christina Adamek
2. Karen Alexander
3. Donna Allmann
4.
John Ashley
5. Maryam Ayati
6.
7. Elizabeth

Batchelder
8. Michael Begley
9. Christina Benjamin
10.
11. Veronica Brand
12. Paloma Bravence
13. Nicole Brierley
14. Deborah Kim

Brown

15.
16. Lindsay Buck
17. Michelle

Castiglione
18. Krystal Castillo
19. Veronica Chalco
20. James Christopher
21. Serena Conde
22. Koreen Corbett
23. Nicole Demuth
24. Paul Devos
25. Kimberly Dilling
26. Karen Dingwall
27. Johanna Dorsha
28. Amy Dow
29. Joshua Dowell
30. Nicole Duncan
31. Lorena Escamilla
32. Delyse Espineli
33. Emily Fleming
34. Camden Flores
35. Silvia

17

Frankenberger

36.
37. Cathy Gaspar
38. Abby George
39. Megan Gonzales
40. Jennifer Gordon
41. June Greever
42. Jennifer Griggs
43.
44. Gerald Hoffman
45. Pamela Johnson
46. Marsha Juarez
47. Lauren Keane
48. Brandie Keaveny
49. Adrienne Korbel
50. Melissa Kroeger
51.
52. Lindsay

Lewandoski
53. Laramie Littig
54. Amber Lockwood
55. Joseph Lodico
56. Elizabeth Lopez
57. Amber Lunde
58.
59.
60.
61. Vita Marinesi
62. Laura Marshall
63. Heather Martin
64. Natalie Martinez
65. Marjorie Mayen
66.
67. Melissa Medina
68. Brian Mendoza
69. Heidi Meyers
70. Kellie Mills
71.
72. Wendy Murphy
73. Oscar Nava
74. Margaret Neill
75.
76.
77. Numila Palmer
78. Karly Pecorella

18

79. Lalita Platfoot
80. Sheila Pourhashem
81. Kealy Prouty
82. Kelley Rabasco
83. Elizabeth Rackliffe
84. Jennifer Rambo
85. Jolene Reish
86. Meaghan Rice
87. Katherine

Richardson
88. Dana Riggs
89. Bethany Riley
90. Stephanie Rutledge
91. Maggie Schulman
92. Caren Sebok
93.
94. Steven Sheeler
95. Katherine Sheets
96.
97. Nicole Shellman
98. Suzanne Shubert
99. Francesca Shuruk

100. Karla Sierra
Scott Smith
101.
102. Amy Symons
103. Nicole Tavolazzi
104. Kelly Taylor
105.
106. Claudette Toland

JoAnn Thomas

107.
108. Tira Wakayama
109. Katharine Wardell
110.
111. Samantha Webster
112. Nichi Whitaker
113. Angela Wilson
114. Cary Zarzan
115. Jean Zelt

19

EXHIBIT B
RESPONDENTS MS. STEINER REPRESENTED
LA MESA – SPRING VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT
2011

116.Christina Adamek
117.Karen Alexander
118.Donna Allmann
119.
120.
121.
122.Elizabeth

Batchelder
123.Michael Begley
124.Christina Benjamin
125.
126.Veronica Brand
127.Paloma Bravence
128.Nicole Brierley
129.Deborah Kim

Brown

130.
131.Lindsay Buck
132.Michelle

Castiglione
133.Krystal Castillo
134.Veronica Chalco
135.James Christopher
136.
137.Koreen Corbett
138.Nicole Demuth
139.Paul Devos
140.Kimberly Dilling
141.
142.Johanna Dorsha
143.Amy Dow
144.Joshua Dowell
145.Nicole Duncan
146.Lorena Escamilla
147.
148.Emily Fleming
149.Camden Flores
150.Silvia

20

Frankenberger

151.
152.Cathy Gaspar
153.Abby George
154.Megan Gonzales
155.Jennifer Gordon
156.June Greever
157.Jennifer Griggs
158.
159. Gerald Hoffman
160. Pamela Johnson
161. Marsha Juarez
162. Lauren Keane
163. Brandie Keaveny
164. Adrienne Korbel
165. Melissa Kroeger
166.
167. Lindsay

Lewandoski
168. Laramie Littig
169. Amber Lockwood
170. Joseph Lodico
171. Elizabeth Lopez
172. Amber Lunde
173.
174.
175.
176. Vita Marinesi
177.
178. Heather Martin
179. Natalie Martinez
180. Marjorie Mayen
181.
182. Melissa Medina
183. Brian Mendoza
184. Heidi Meyers
185. Kellie Mills
186.
187. Wendy Murphy
188. Oscar Nava
189. Margaret Neill
190.
191.
192. Numila Palmer
193. Karly Pecorella

21

194. Lalita Platfoot
195. Sheila Pourhashem
196. Kealy Prouty
197.
198. Elizabeth Rackliffe
199. Jennifer Rambo
200. Jolene Reish
201. Meaghan Rice
202. Katherine

Richardson
203. Dana Riggs
204. Bethany Riley
205. Stephanie Rutledge
206.
207. Caren Sebok
208.
209.
210. Katherine Sheets
211.
212. Nicole Shellman
213. Suzanne Shubert
214. Francesca Shuruk

215. Karla Sierra
Scott Smith
216.
217. Amy Symons
218. Nicole Tavolazzi
219. Kelly Taylor
220.
221. Claudette Toland

JoAnn Thomas

222.
223.
224. Katharine Wardell
225.
226. Samantha Webster
227. Nichi Whitaker
228. Angela Wilson
229. Cary Zarzan
230. Jean Zelt

22

