BEFORE THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
GILROY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
SANTA CLARA COUNTY, CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

BILLY AGUILAR, et al.,

OAH No. 2011031403

Respondents.

CORRECTED PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Melissa G. Crowell, State of California, Office of
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter, on April 29, 2011, in Gilroy, California.

James R. Lynch, Attorney at Law, GCR LLP represented the Gilroy Unified School

District.

Michelle A. Welsh, Attorney at Law, Stoner, Welsh & Schmidt, represented all
respondents with the exception of Joy Urtnowski. There was no appearance by or on behalf
of respondent Urtnowski.

The matter was submitted for decision on April 29, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

3.

Deborah A. Flores, Ph.D., filed the accusation in her official capacity as

Superintendent of the Gilroy Unified School District.

All respondents are certificated employees of the District. A list of the

Respondents is attached as Exhibit 1.

On March 10, 2011, the Board of Trustees of the Gilroy Unified School

District adopted Resolution Number 10/11-36, in which the board resolved to reduce
particular kinds of services no later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year. The
board directed the superintendent or her designee to send notice to affected certificated
employees.

4.

On March 11, 2011, written notice was served on respondents that their
services would not be required for the 2011-2012 school year. Each respondent filed a

timely request for hearing. An accusation was served on all respondents. Each respondent
filed a timely notice of defense.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

In its resolution, the board took action to reduce or eliminate the following

particular kinds of services for the school year:

5.

6.

Services

Kindergarten – 8th Grade Teachers
District Librarian (Gilroy High School)
Teacher – Independent Study Program
9th to 12th Grade Teachers – Vocational Education (ROP Funded)

FTE1 Reduction

31.00
. 40
.40
1.20

33.00

Total

7.

Superintendent Flores testified that her recommendation and the board’s PKS

resolution were caused by the financial circumstances facing the district. This is the third
year of significant budgetary cuts in the district. At present, the district faces a $61 million
budget shortfall for the 2011-2012 school year, and that number may increase depending on
the level of state funding received this year. Superintendent Flores considered all attrition
(resignations, retirements, and non-reelects) and released all temporary teachers before she
made the recommendation to reduce positions. Had she not done so, she would have
recommended a much larger number for reduction. The district has made other significant
cost-saving changes including reducing the school year by five days, imposing furloughs,
and increasing class sizes.

Challenges to Skipping

8.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the governing

board of the district resolved to deviate from terminating employees in the order of seniority, i.e.,
the board resolved to skip over teachers with a particular qualification and terminate more senior
teachers who do not possess that qualification. A district may skip a junior employee only if
employees with more seniority do not possess the special training and experience necessary to
teach a specific course or course of study (specific course).

9.
follows:

The board’s skipping criteria (attached to the resolution as Exhibit A) are as

1. Any employee who possesses a BCLAD (Spanish) or
equivalent authorization, whose experience includes teaching

1 Full-time equivalent positions.

2

dual immersion classes in English/Spanish for the District in the
2010-2011 school year, and who is expected to continue
teaching such classes for the District in the 2011-2012 school
year.

2. Any employee who possesses a single subject credential or
subject matter authorization, authorizing the teaching of Math,
whose experience includes teaching Math for the District in the
2010-2011 school year, and who is expected to continue
teaching such classes for the District in the 2011-2012 school
year.

3. Any employee who possesses a single subject credential or
subject matter authorization, authorizing the teaching of Science
(any form), whose experience includes teaching Science for the
District in the 2010-2011 school year, and who is expected to
continue teaching such classes for the District in the 2011-2012
school year.

4. Any employee who possesses an Educational Specialist
credential, whose experience includes teaching Special
Education classes for the District in the 2010-2011 school year,
and who is expected to continue teaching such classes for the
District in the 2011-2012 school year.

5. Any employee who possesses a certificate of completion of a
Gifted & Talented Education (GATE) program offered by an
accredited institution of higher education, whose experience
includes teaching in GATE courses of study for the District in
the 2010-2011 school year, and who is expected to continue
teaching such classes for the District in 2011-2012 school year.

6. An employee who the Superintendent determines to retain
because he/she possesses special skills, training, and/or
education that is needed to teach a specific course or course of
study in the 2011-2012 school year, that more senior employees
do not possess.

In addition, the resolution contains the following language:

The Superintendent or designee is authorized to determine
which employees qualify to be “skipped” for the Reduction in
Force and to determine the manner in which the foregoing
criteria shall be applied to each employee.

3

10.

The first skipping criterion relates to the district’s dual immersion program.

The District has a very successful dual-immersion program at two of its elementary schools
(Las Animas and Rod Kelley) where students are taught all subjects in two languages. A
BCLAD is required to teach these classes. In applying the skipping criterion, Superintendent
Flores identified 13 teachers to be skipped based on assignments to the dual immersion
program, and did not issue March 15 notices to them.

11.

At hearing, the district conceded that four probationary teachers were
incorrectly identified as falling with the first skipping criterion. One teacher, Sarah
Sathianation, teaches in the dual immersion program but only in English. She is therefore
not within the skipping criterion. Three teachers, Deanna Macias-Cortez, Concepcion
Mendoza, and Stephanie Davis, do not teach in the dual immersion program. These teachers
are therefore not within the skipping criterion.

12.

The District also has a successful GATE program at various schools in the
district. The district is looking to create a GATE program with teachers who are highly
trained and experienced in working with GATE students so as to develop consistency in the
program and stability in the program. Based on the fifth skipping criterion, the districted
elected to skip two GATE teachers at Brownell Middle School, Amy Carman and Jackie
Stevens.

13.

At hearing, the superintendent admitted that she had erred when she skipped

Amy Carman, as Carman does not contain a current GATE certification.

14.

Jackie Stevens does have a current GATE certification and otherwise meets

the requirements of the GATE skipping criterion. Stevens is a probationary employee with a
seniority date of August 13, 2009.

15.

There are three other permanent employees in the district who are senior to

Stevens (they share the seniority date of August 16, 2007) who were not skipped. (Tabitha
Romero, Desiree Almanzor Cataluna, and Crystal Ann Lozano.) In order to skip Stevens, the
district must show that none of these teachers possess special training or experience that
Stevens has which is necessary to teach GATE. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1); Alexander
v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567.) The district failed to meet this burden.
Crystal Ann Lozano obtained a GATE certification from the district in 2008. She taught
third grade GATE students in the district for school years 2007-2008, and 2008-2009. The
district has not shown that Lozano does not possess the same training and experience as does
Stevens. The district has thus not established cause to skip Stevens pursuant to Education
Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

16.

The district did not issue a March 15 notice to Perlene Lake. Lake holds a

multiple subject credential, and Supplemental Authorizations in English and Business. Her
seniority date is August 13, 2009. Lake is a probationary employee of the district, and is
assigned to the Opportunity Program at Brownell Middle School. Teachers in the
Opportunity Program work with difficult students, students who have disciplinary problems

4

and students who are being expelled. Lake will be assigned to the Opportunity Program next
year.2

17.

Superintendent Flores proposes to skip Lake based on the sixth skipping

criterion, namely that Lake possesses special training and experience that other more senior
teachers do not possess which are necessary to teach in the Opportunity Program.
Superintendent Flores testified that the district is retaining Lake because she has three years
of experience in the Opportunity Program at Brownell. Superintendent Flores admitted,
however, that another teacher who is returning from leave for the 2011-2012 school will be
assigned to the Opportunity Program. This teacher has no training or experience in the
Opportunity Program. Based on this evidence, the district has failed to establish that the
experience Lake has is necessary to teach in the Opportunity Program. The district has
therefore failed to establish cause to skip Lake.

18.

The district did not issue a March 15 notice to Marwa Yousofzoy. Yousofzoy

is a permanent employee of the district. She holds a multiple subject credential, and has a
seniority date of August 29, 2007. Yousofzoy is a Facilitator at Eliot Elementary School. As
a Facilitator, Yousofzoy is not assigned a classroom. Instead, she models and instructs
teachers on the district’s elementary school educational initiatives, of which there are six
components. She also facilitates discussions between the principals and teachers both at
Eliot and other elementary schools in the district. Yousofzoy will be assigned this position
for ensuing school year.

19.

Superintendent Flores proposes to skip Yousofzoy based on the sixth skipping
criterion, namely that she possesses special training and skills that other more senior teachers
do not possess which are necessary for a Facilitator.

It was not established that Yousofzoy has undergone special training that teachers
more senior to her do not have. The training referenced by Superintendent Flores (Sixth
Street School in Victorville, and Whole Grain) were trainings that were available to all
district employees, and were taken by many of the respondents. Yousofzoy has experience
in the Facilitator position, however, which other teachers more senior to her do not have.
This position provides her with special experience other than that of a classroom teacher. As
such, it is concluded that the district has therefore established cause to skip this teacher.

20.

As set forth above, the district has invalidly skipped seven multiple subject

teachers. The appropriate remedy, which will be ordered, is to direct the district to take the
necessary steps to identify the most senior teacher who was prejudiced by the decision skip
each of these teachers. It there is such a teacher, the district may not lay off that teacher.
(See Alexander v. Board of Trustees, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at p. 576.)

2 The seniority list is in error when it recites that Lake will be assigned to teach

English in the 2011-2012 school year.

5

Seniority Date/Tie-Breaking Matters

21.

The resolution also contains criteria (attached to the resolution as Exhibit B) to

be used to determine the order of termination of certificated employees with the same first
date of paid service. These criteria are commonly referred to as the tie-breaking criteria.
They are as follows:

Criterion
Possession of credential(s) authorizing services for the
District

Subject matter authorizations, including supplemental
authorizations, on credentials authorizing service for the
District
Column placement on salary schedule
Service on a school site level committee:
“SSC” - School Site Council
“DSLT” – District Site Leadership Team
Service on a District Level Committee
Service as a BTSA Mentor Teacher
Possession of Bilingual Cross Cultural Language
Development Certificate

Further, the resolution provides:

Points
3 for each professional clear
2 for each preliminary
1 for each for any other
credential
1 per authorization

1 per applicable column
1 per SSC
1 per DSLT

1 per District Level Committee
3
1

Employees with a greater number of points shall be considered
more senior than employees with a fewer number of points, for
purposes of determining order of layoff and order of
reemployment.

If application of the foregoing criteria fails to resolve a tie
among two or more employees, among the employees who
remain tied the employee with the earliest date of issuance of a
preliminary or professional clear credential shall be considered
the more senior employee. As among employees who remain
tied who have never obtained a preliminary or professional clear
credential, the employee with the earliest date of issuance of an
intern credential shall be considered the more senior employee.
As among employees who remain tied who have never obtained
an intern, preliminary, or professional clear credential, the
employee with the earliest date of issuance of an emergency or
pre-intern credential, or short-tem staff permit shall be
considered the more senior employee.

6

The Superintendent is authorized to determine the number of
tiebreaking points to be awarded to each employee and to
determine the manner in which the tiebreaking criteria shall be
applied to each employee.

If application of all of the foregoing criteria fails to resolve a tie
among two or more employees, the Superintendent or designee
will use a device or program that randomly selects numbers.
The employee with the highest number will be the most senior
among those remaining tied, with other employees being
appropriately ranked in descending numerical order.

22.

The district was required to apply these criteria to a group of teachers who

share the seniority date of August 16, 2007. The parties stipulated at hearing that the points
which had been allotted to respondent Nathan Lober should be increased to 11, which makes
him tied with Robert McClelland under the Primary Tiebreaker criteria. McClelland retains
the most senior position in the group however, following application of the Supplemental
Tiebreaker criteria. The change was made on the district’s seniority list in evidence. The
district shall make this change on its records as well.

23.

Kimberly Larner is a permanent employee of the district. She holds a multiple

subject credential and the district has given her a seniority date of August 16, 2007. Larner
correctly requests that her seniority date be changed to August 24, 2006.

During the 2006-2007 school year, Larner was employed by the district to teach

Migrant Education Support, a credentialed position. While she was initially hired as a day-
to-day substitute, her position was converted to long-term substitute. During the school year
Larner worked a total of 171 days, which is more than 75 percent of the 180-day school year.
Her first date of paid service that year was August 24, 2006.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44918, subdivision (a), a probationary teacher is
entitled to have one year of prior service under a temporary contract counted as one year of
probationary service if the teacher worked at least 75 percent of the regular days of the
school year in a certificated position. This provision provides:

Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary employee,
who serves during one school year for at least 75 percent of the
number of days the regular schools of the district were
maintained in that school year and has performed the duties
normally required of a certificated employee of the school
district, shall be deemed to have served a complete school year
as a probationary employee, if employed as a probationary
employee for the following school year.

7

Respondent Larner meets all the requirements of Education Code section 44918,

subdivision (a), and she is entitled to have her prior year of service counted as one year of
probationary service. This correspondingly affects her seniority date with the district, which
should be August 24, 2006, not August 16, 2007. This now makes Larner senior to all
multiple subject teachers with a seniority date of August 16, 2007.

24.

Debra Hopf is a probationary employee of the district. She holds a

preliminary multiple subject credential, and the district has assigned her a seniority date of
January 14, 2008. Respondent Hopf argues that her seniority date should be August 20,
2007.

Respondent Hopf testified that she has worked as a substitute for the district since

1999. During the 2007-2008 school year she was employed as a substitute teacher with an
Emergency Credential. She apparently worked in that capacity until she was given a
probationary contract on January 14, 2008. As January 14, 2008, is her first date of paid
service to the district in a probationary position, the district has given her the correct
seniority date. (Ed. Code, § 44845.) There is no provision in the law which requires the
district to advance her seniority date to August 20, 2007, based on her employment as a
substitute teacher. It is a matter within the discretion of the district. (Ed. Code, § 44914.) It
was not established that the district abused its discretion in assigning respondent Hopf a
seniority date in accordance with her first date of paid service to the district in a probationary
position.

Seniority/Bumping Matters

25.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), the district may

not terminate the services of a permanent employee while any probationary employee or
other employee with less seniority is retained to render a service which the permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render. In identifying the teachers to be given the
March 15 notices, the district determined that no respondent was entitled to bump a more
junior teacher who was being retained.

26.

The district did not issue a March 15 notice to Kyra Lewis-Pevere. Lewis-

Pevere holds a Single Subject Intern Credential (Social Science) and is a probationary
employee of the district with a seniority date of August 16, 2007. Lewis-Pervere’s current
teaching assignment is Language Arts CORE at Brownell Middle School. The district is not
purporting to skip Lewis-Pervere. It appears that the district simply erred in failing to issue a
her a March 15 notice.

It is not disputed that any respondent with a multiple subject credential is credentialed

and competent to teach Language Arts CORE. There are numerous respondents, including
but not limited to Heather Elyse Gold, who are senior to Lewis-Pervere. The most senior
multiple subject teacher who is prejudiced by this error may not be given a final notice.

8

27.

The district did not issue a March 15 notice to three probationary employees

who teach at the district’s continuation high school, Mt. Madonna Continuation High School.
These teachers hold single subject credentials and teach English (Cynthia Gonzalez), Math
(Rashonda Butler) and Science (Daniel Kaplan). The district has proposed to skip Ms. Butler
under the second skipping criterion (possession of a single subject math credential, currently
teaching Math and is expected to teach Math in the 2011-2012 school year). The district
proposes to skip Mr. Kaplan under the third skipping criterion (possession of a single subject
Science credential, experience teaching Science in the district this year, and is expected to
teach Science in the next school year). The district has not offered a basis to skip Ms.
Gonzalez.

28.

All respondents are willing to be assigned to teach at Mt. Madonna

Continuation High School. They seek to bump into the position held by Ms. Gonzales.

Superintendent Flores testified that respondents are not credentialed and competent to
teach at the continuation high school as these teachers do not have a single subject credential.
Pursuant to Education Code section 44865, as interpreted by the court in Bledsoe v. Biggs
Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.3d 127, respondent teachers are permitted to be
assigned to teach at a continuation high school, with their consent, even though his or her
credential would not otherwise be sufficient. (See also California Teachers’ Assn. v.
Governing Board (1983) 141 Cal.App.3d 606.) The Court in Bledsoe is clear that it is the
district’s responsibility to consider this potential reassignment when it determined which
teachers were to be given a March 15 notice. The effect of this error is that a probationary
teacher is being retained where there are more senior teachers who are credentialed and
competent to teach in her position. The most senior teacher who is prejudiced by this error
may not be given a final notice.

29.

Respondent Billy Aguilar holds a multiple subject credential and his seniority
date is January 15, 2008. He is a permanent employee of the district and teaches Sixth Grade
CORE (Math/Science) at Brownell Middle School. Aguilar is bilingual in English and
Spanish. He is working toward obtaining a BCLAD, but has one more examination to
complete. The examination is scheduled for the first week in May.

Respondent Aguilar asserts that because he is so close to obtaining a BCLAD that he

should be retained to teach in the dual immersion program over more junior teachers who
possess a BCLAD and were skipped. Respondent Aguilar also asserts that he should be
retained over Maria Hossain, who is junior to Aguilar, with a seniority date of August 31,
2009. Hossain holds a multiple subject credential, a Supplemental Authorization in Spanish,
and an emergency BCLAD, which is valid until December 2011. Each of Aguilar’s
contentions is found to be unpersuasive. These junior teachers were properly skipped
pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

30.

All respondents have indicated their willingness to be assigned to teach at

Gilroy High School. They seek to bump Bria DeLorenzo, a probationary employee who is
assigned to On-Campus Suspension at the high school. DeLorenzo has a Single Subject

9

Intern Credential in Physical Education and has a seniority date of August 16, 2010.
Superintendent Flores testified that teachers with a multiple subject credential cannot serve in
this assignment because the students involved in On-Campus Suspension ranges in ages from
grades 9 through 12. A teacher with a multiple subject credential is not authorized to teach
students above grade 9.

Attrition

Other Matters

31.

Respondents argue that the district has over-noticed the layoffs. In their view

in reducing the 33 FTE positions, the district must take into account all retirements,
resignations, and nonrelects and then only issue notices to teachers holding the
corresponding number of remaining positions. The contention is without merit.
Superintendent Flores took into consideration all known attrition before she recommended to
the board that it should reduce services by 33 FTE positions. She has thus complied with the
requirements of Education Code section 44949 and 44955. (San Jose Teachers Association
v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 327.)

32.

Respondents contend that the proposed reduction in services will be

detrimental to the District, and that it therefore cannot be found, as required by Education
Code section 44949, that “the charges sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of
the schools and the pupils thereof.” It is true that service reductions will likely be
detrimental to students in the District, but the District is required to operate in a fiscally
sound manner. Without fiscal integrity, the District cannot adequately serve its schools or its
pupils. In circumstances such as these, where a District is facing a multi-million dollar loss
of funding, and in the absence of proof that the District acted in an arbitrary or capricious
manner, it is necessarily concluded that the service reductions are related to the welfare of
the schools and pupils.

33.

All contentions made by respondents not specifically addressed above are found

to be without merit and are rejected.

34.

Except as set forth above, no permanent or probationary employee with less

seniority is being retained to render a service which any respondent is certificated and
competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and

44955 have been provided as required. The District established jurisdiction for this
proceeding as to each Respondent.

10

3.

4.

5.

2.

Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to

reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction of
particular kinds of services.

As set forth in Finding 22, the district shall change the seniority status of

respondent Nathan Lober based on the application of the tie-breaking criteria.

As set forth in Finding 23, the district must change the seniority date of

respondent Kimberly Larner to August 24, 2006.

By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 11, 13, 15, 17, 20, 26 and 28,

the district violated Education Code section 44955 with respect to retaining nine junior
certificated employees. The district shall identify whether any employee has been
prejudiced by the district’s invalid actions. If employees have been prejudiced, there is no
cause to provide notice to the nine most senior of them.

6.

Except as set forth above, cause exists because of the reduction of particular
kinds of services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents
their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year. The cause relates solely to
the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code
section 44949.

ORDER

1.

The District shall make corrections to its Seniority List and other records as

necessary to conform to Legal Conclusions 3 and 4.

2.

Prior to issuing the final layoff notices to certificated employees, the district
shall identify whether any employees were prejudiced by prejudiced by the district invalid
retention of nine junior certificated employees. If there are such employees, the district may
not issue a layoff notice to the nine most senior employees.

3.

Except as set forth above, notice may be given to the remaining respondents

that their services will not be required for the 201-2012 school year because of the reduction
of particular kinds of services.

DATED: ________________________

______________________________
MELISSA G. CROWELL
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

11

