BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
BASSETT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

OAH Case No. 2011030383

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
OF THE BASSETT UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Daniel Juárez, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings,

heard this matter on April 26, 2011, in La Puente, California.

Law Offices of Margaret A. Chidester & Associates, and Margaret A. Chidester, Esq.,

represented the Bassett Unified School District (BUSD).

Schwartz, Steinsapir, Dohrmann & Sommers, and Amy M. Cu, Esq., and Michael R.
Feinberg, Esq., represented the certificated employees of the Bassett Unified School District
listed in Appendix A (referred to herein as Respondents).

After a day of hearing, the ALJ granted a continuance to May 3, 2011, to allow the
parties to proffer closing argument by written brief. The parties filed closing briefs timely.
Each brief was marked for identification.

The matter was deemed submitted for decision on May 3, 2011.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (e), the continuance extended
the statutory deadlines for a period of time equal to the continuance. That is, the continuance
extended the time the ALJ had to issue his Proposed Decision and for BUSD to take action
thereafter.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Dr. Sarah Brown (Brown), BUSD Assistant Superintendent of Human

Resources, filed the Accusations in her official capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of BUSD.

1.

2.

3(a). On March 2, 2011, upon the recommendation of the BUSD Superintendent,

the BUSD Governing Board (Governing Board) determined that it was in the best interests of

1

the school district and the welfare of the students thereof to reduce or discontinue certain
particular kinds of services within BUSD. The Governing Board adopted Resolution 12-11
to, among other things, identify the particular kinds of services to be reduced or discontinued
by full-time equivalent (FTE) positions, and direct the Superintendent to notice those
certificated employees that would reduce the number of certificated positions identified. The
Governing Board further authorized the Superintendent to issue additional notices, as
deemed necessary, so that other certificated employees whose rights might be affected by the
resolution would have an opportunity to be heard at the instant hearing.

3(b). The Governing Board also described with sufficient specificity the criteria it
intended to use to exempt certain certificated employees from layoff. The criteria included
particular credentials, competence, assignment, and expertise or certification. Respondents
did not contest the Governing Board’s exemption criteria, or the Governing Board’s
application of those criteria to BUSD’s certificated personnel.

3(c). Lastly, the Governing Board resolved that the order of termination of
certificated employees who first rendered service in a probationary position on the same date
(seniority tie breaking) would be by lot, as agreed to by BUSD and the Bassett Teachers
Association (the teachers’ union).

4.

On March 4, 2011, pursuant to Resolution 12-11, the Superintendent’s

designee, Brown, notified the Governing Board and Respondents, in writing, that
Respondents’ services would no longer be required for the 2011-2012 school year and stated
the reasons therefor. Brown further informed each Respondent of his or her right to request a
hearing, among other things.

In response to the written notice, Respondents timely requested a hearing to

determine if there is cause to not reemploy him or her for the 2011-2012 school year.

BUSD served the Accusation and other required documents timely on each

All jurisdictional requirements were met.

Resolution 12-11 reduces or discontinues the following services for the 2011-

5.

6.

7.

Respondent.

8.
2012 school year:

SERVICES

17 elementary K-8 multiple subject classroom teachers

1 Small Learning Communities lead teacher

1.2 high school mathematics classroom teacher

2.2 high school English classroom teachers

2

POSITIONS (FTE)

17.0 FTE

1.0 FTE

1.2 FTE

2.2 FTE

1 high school history/social science teacher

0.6 high school Spanish language classroom teacher
1 classroom OH1 special education teacher
1 classroom RSP2 special education teacher

1 high school physical education classroom teacher

1.2 high school science classroom teachers

0.2 high school health teacher

2 2010-2011 site administrators who will be released
from administrative positions effective 6-30-2011

2 assistant principals

1 assistant superintendent

These reductions total 32.4 FTE positions.

1.0 FTE

0.6 FTE

1.0 FTE

1.0 FTE

1.0 FTE

1.2 FTE

0.2 FTE

2.0 FTE

2.0 FTE

1.0 FTE

9.

At hearing, BUSD made the following changes to the FTE quantities at issue
in this proceeding. BUSD amended the 1.0 FTE Small Learning Communities lead teacher
position to 0.6 FTE. BUSD amended the 1.2 FTE high school mathematics classroom
teacher positions to 1.0 FTE. It amended the 2.2 FTE high school English classroom teacher
positions to 2.0 FTE. BUSD amended the 1.2 FTE high school science classroom teacher
position to 1.0 FTE. Lastly, it amended the 2.0 FTE assistant principal positions to 1.0 FTE.
Respondents had no objections.

10.
30.4 FTE.

The total FTE positions at issue in this proceeding after the amendments are

11.

The services set forth in Factual Finding 8 are particular kinds of services that

may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.

12.

The Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds

of services set forth in Factual Finding 8 was not arbitrary or capricious; it constituted a
proper exercise of discretion.

13.

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the

welfare of BUSD and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of BUSD, as
determined by the Governing Board.

1 OH means orthopaedically handicapped.

2 RSP means resource specialist program.

3

14.

The recommendation that Respondents be terminated from employment was

not related to their performance as teachers.

15.

Respondents argued there was no evidence that BUSD should layoff

Respondents Maribel Ayon, Eloise Gomez, Ignacio Acero, Thomas Covington, Wendy
Bowers, Maria Herrera, and Chona de la Rosa Santos. BUSD presented no evidence to the
contrary. The evidence supported Respondents’ argument. There is no cause to layoff these
seven Respondents, and thus the Accusations as to each of them should be dismissed.

16.

Respondents argued that the Governing Board’s identification of “elementary

K-8 multiple subject classroom teachers” in Resolution 12-11 was not a particular kind of
service within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. Respondents argued that
“elementary” does not encompass the middle school classroom teachers and BUSD created
an “illogical” and “confusing” nomenclature by using the word and not distinguishing
elementary school classroom teachers from middle school classroom teachers. Respondents
pointed out that in previous resolutions, the Governing Board had included a separate middle
school category of services and cited Karbach v. Board of Education of Lawndale School
District (1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 355 for the proposition that services to be reduced in layoff
proceedings must be stated with specificity to properly afford employees due process.

17.

BUSD argued that the Governing Board adequately identified the kindergarten

through eighth grade multiple subject classroom teachers. In Brown’s testimony, she
explained that some of BUSD’s elementary schools contain grades kindergarten through
eighth, and a BUSD middle school contains grades sixth through eighth. She asserted that,
by its wording, the Governing Board intended to reduce instruction (teachers with multiple
subject credentials) in grades kindergarten through eighth.

18.

There was no evidence that the wording of “elementary K-8 multiple subject

classroom teachers” confused Respondents in any way. There was no evidence that the
particular kind of service, as described, impeded the rights of Respondents to defend against
the Accusations and otherwise participate in the instant administrative hearing.

19.

Respondents argued that, as some Respondents teach a sixth, extra period,
BUSD should eliminate the extra period, and combine the FTE portions from those extra
periods to develop the equivalent of at least one FTE. Respondents analyzed this assertion in
terms of four math teachers at Bassett High School. Respondents believe that if BUSD
would do this, it could eliminate the need to reduce 1.0 FTE of a high school mathematics
classroom teacher. Respondents’ argument on this issue was unpersuasive.

20.

Brown explained that these sixth periods are offered on an as-needed basis and

are not necessarily continuing.

21.

BUSD argued that these sixth period assignments may be terminated by the

Governing Board at any time, pursuant to Education Code section 44923, and thus, sixth
period assignments are not subject to the jurisdiction of a layoff proceeding.

4

22.

Respondents argued that the tiebreak criteria referenced in Resolution 12-11, a

lottery (Factual Finding 3(c)), violates the Education Code.

23.

Exhibit B to Resolution 12-11 sets forth the tie break criteria (the lottery) to be

used. It states that “as between certificated employees who first rendered service in a
probationary position to the District on the same date, the order of termination of said
employees shall be determined by reference to the collective bargaining agreement between
[BUSD] and Bassett Teachers Association as follows: ... Those unit members whose first
date of service tot [sic] the district is the same, shall have their seniority established by lot.
The district shall conduct the lottery in a fair, equitable, and reasonable manner in
consultation with the association, and with association representation present.”

24.

Article XIV of the collective bargaining agreement (CBA) between BUSD and
the Bassett Teachers Association contains the same wording as quoted immediately above in
Factual Finding 23, regarding establishing seniority by lot and conducting a fair, equitable
lottery with union representation present. Article XIV is entitled “Transfer and
Reassignment Procedures.”

25.

A lottery was held to break seniority ties in this matter. In addition to the

teachers involved in those tie breaks, a teachers’ union representative was present at the time
that the lottery took place. There was no evidence that any teacher or teachers’ union
representative objected to the use of a lottery or the lottery tie break process itself.

26.

BUSD argued that the lottery is in accordance with the Education Code. An
analysis of the pertinent statute and Respondents’ arguments support BUSD’s contentions.

27.

Respondents argued that, of the site administrators selected for layoff, the

Superintendent should have identified for layoff at least one of the two site administrators
with the least seniority. Respondents argued that by failing to do so, BUSD allows a more
senior site administrator to unnecessarily “bump” Respondent Sharon Quirarte out of her
position and make her subject to layoff.

28.

BUSD argued that the Superintendent may determine to release an
administrator without cause, and so his reasoning as to the two site administrators he selected
is irrelevant to, and outside the jurisdiction of, this proceeding. BUSD’s argument was
successful.

29.

Respondents argued that BUSD cannot meet the mandated services of the OH
program with the proposed reductions. Respondents relied on the testimony of Respondent
Nicole Klymkiw (Respondent Klymkiw), an OH special education classroom teacher, who
asserted that she does not believe BUSD can meet its obligations in this area. Respondent
Klymkiw holds no administrative position within BUSD, nor did she establish that her
position within BUSD provides her with sufficient knowledge and expertise to opine as she
did.

5

30.

Brown testified that BUSD would indeed meet the mandated services of the
OH program and all other mandated program services despite the proposed reductions and
eliminations. The preponderance of the evidence supported Brown’s assertions.

31.

Respondents argued that BUSD improperly noticed Respondent Linda

Doerner (Respondent Doerner) because it proposes to lay her off as a 1.0 FTE English high
school teacher, even though she teaches one period of a college preparatory program called
Advancement Via Individual Determination (AVID). Respondents argue that AVID is not
an English course and that BUSD should retain Respondent Doerner to the extent of her
AVID partial assignment. Respondents highlighted the 2010-2011 BUSD Master Schedule
that shows Respondent Doerner’s four periods of English and one period of AVID. BUSD’s
seniority list shows Respondent Doerner’s assignment solely as English. Respondent
Doerner did not testify. There was insufficient evidence to establish Respondents’ argument.

32.

BUSD identified Respondent Christopher Fitch (Respondent Fitch) as the
Small Learning Communities (SLC) lead teacher that it proposes to lay off by 0.6 FTE.
Respondents argued Respondent Fitch was the SLC coordinator and not the SLC lead
teacher, and thus should not be laid off. Respondent Fitch explained that the other SLC lead
teachers report to him “indirectly” and that he coordinates the program, dealing with the day-
to-day operations of the program. There were no documents identifying Respondent Fitch as
SLC coordinator or lead teacher, but Respondent Fitch testified that he is, in fact, the SLC
coordinator and was surprised that he was identified as the lead teacher for purposes of
layoff. His testimony asserting he was the SLC coordinator was persuasive.

33(a). Respondents argued in their closing brief that there are five other SLC lead

teachers: Harriet Sherry, with a seniority date of September 1, 1991; William Steward, with
a seniority date of August 27, 2001; Tom Covington, with a seniority date of September 8,
2003; Wendy Bowers, with a seniority date of June 27, 2005; and Respondent Denise
Strickland (Respondent Strickland), with a seniority date of June 28, 2005.3 There was,
however, insufficient evidence to establish whether these five are indeed SLC lead teachers.

33(b). Respondent Fitch has a seniority date of September 1, 2002. Of the five SLC
lead teachers, only William Steward and Harriet Sherry have more seniority than Respondent
Fitch.

34.

Brown agreed Respondent Fitch has administrative and coordinating

responsibilities regarding SLC, but understood, based on information she elicited from other
administrators, that Respondent Fitch was an SLC lead teacher. BUSD argued that at worst,
the layoff should be affirmed based on the Education Code section that allows school
districts to proceed with layoffs despite non-substantive procedural errors. However, the
error here misidentifies Respondent Fitch and is not a non-substantive procedural error
because it is prejudicial to him. The evidence supported Respondent Fitch’s argument.

3 Wendy Bowers and Tom Covington were served with Accusations in this matter,

but William Steward and Harriet Sherry were not.

6

35.

Respondent Tamara Henderson (Respondent Henderson) argued that her

seniority date should be amended because BUSD misclassified her as a temporary employee
when it hired her on December 10, 2004. Respondent Henderson explained that BUSD
initially hired her to replace an English teacher who she understood at the time was on a
leave of absence. Respondent Henderson asserted that she later understood the replaced
English teacher had resigned. Consequently, the appropriate classification for Respondent
Henderson, if she was indeed hired to replace a teacher who had resigned, is as a
probationary employee. A BUSD Personnel Action Approval form proffered by Respondent
Henderson shows her hiring was to replace a teacher; it does not state whether the replaced
teacher had resigned or was on a leave of absence. The form states “Temporary Contract,”
with a start date and ending date (December 10, 2004, and June 30, 2005, respectively).
There was no persuasive evidence to support Respondent Henderson’s assertion that she
replaced a teacher who had resigned.

36.

BUSD categorizes Respondent Klymkiw as having probationary status as of

August 25, 2010. Respondent Klymkiw argued that her seniority date of August 25, 2010, is
incorrect and should be June 18, 2010. As noted in Factual Finding 29, Respondent
Klymkiw teaches in the OH (orthopaedically handicapped) program. She presented evidence
that BUSD paid Respondent Klymkiw for employment services rendered in June 2010.
Starting on June 18, 2010, she taught students in the OH program, during the extended
school year. Extended school year (ESY) is a portion of the school year that is extended for
special education students beyond the dates of the regular school year. ESY is not the same
as summer school and in argument, Respondents pointed to the regulatory definition of ESY
to support their argument. (See Legal Conclusion 10.) The evidence established that
Respondent Klymkiw’s first date of paid service was June 18, 2010. While she may have
been first hired in a temporary position (Factual Finding 37), BUSD acknowledged that she
attained probationary status in the summer of 2010. Her first date of paid service in a
probationary position is June 18, 2010. Based on the seniority list in evidence, there is no
other OH teacher less senior than Respondent Klymkiw. The next OH teacher closest to
Respondent Klymkiw possesses a seniority date of June 12, 2009. Therefore, the change in
Respondent Klymkiw’s seniority date does not alter her layoff.

37.

Respondent Klymkiw’s temporary employment contract with BUSD shows a
start date of September 1, 2010. That date is distinct from what either party asserted, and is
therefore unreliable for the purpose of establishing her first date of paid service.

38.

The testimony of other Respondents was either insufficient in evidence,

unpersuasive, or lacked merit, and was not credited.

39.

No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to render a

service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.

7

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

The parties met all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code

section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are
made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

3.

The services identified in Resolution 12-11 are particular kinds of services that

the Governing Board can reduce or discontinue under Education Code section 44955. The
Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was not arbitrary
or capricious, but was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of BUSD’s schools and pupils within
the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

4.

Respondents’ arguments regarding BUSD’s use of “elementary K-8 multiple

subject classroom teachers” were unpersuasive. In Karbach v. Board of Education of the
Lawndale School District (1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 355, the case law cited by Respondents, the
Second District Court of Appeal ruled that the statutory provisions relating to layoff intend
“to insure that before the March 15 date the affected employee be informed of facts upon
which he can reasonably assess the probability he will not be reemployed.” (Karbach, supra,
39 Cal.App.3d 355, 362.) The wording used by the Governing Board was incomplete by
referencing “elementary” school teachers, but it correctly identified grades kindergarten
through eighth and multiple subject classroom teachers. Any teacher with a multiple subject
credential teaching in grades kindergarten through eighth grade was reasonably placed on
notice. There was no evidence that the wording confused Respondents or impeded their
rights to appear at hearing, defend against the Accusation, and present a defense to layoff.
Respondents were not denied due process. Citing Burgess v. Board of Education of the
Norwalk-La Mirada Unified School District (1974) 41 Cal.App.3d 571, Respondents also
argued that the designation at issue is not a particular kind of service within the meaning of
Education Code section 44955. In that case, the Second District Court of Appeal ruled that
“‘[p]articular kind of service,’ . . . must . . . be read as referring to a kind of service that a
school district may discontinue and not merely reduce.” (Burgess, supra, 41 Cal.App.3d
571, 580; see also Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689, 695-696, and
Campbell Elementary Teachers Association, Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 811.)
BUSD’s designation meets this definition and thus “elementary K-8 multiple subject
classroom teachers” is a service that was sufficiently identified by the Governing Board for
purposes of layoff. (Degener v. Governing Board, supra, 67 Cal.App.3d at 695-696;
Campbell Elementary Teachers Association, Inc. v. Abbott, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at 811.)

8

5.

Respondents’ argument that BUSD should combine the FTE portions of

teachers’ sixth periods was unsuccessful because nothing in the Education Code requires
BUSD to do so. These sixth periods are additional assignments that are given to teachers on
an as-needed basis, and may be taken away similarly. (Educ. Code, § 44923.) As BUSD
argued, it is unclear whether these sixth periods will be needed or offered in the ensuing
school year. Given these facts, Respondents’ argument cannot succeed.

6.

Respondents’ argument regarding the use of a lottery to break seniority ties

was unpersuasive. The Legislature mandates that, “[a]s between employees who first
rendered paid service to the district on the same date, the governing board shall determine the
order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students thereof.”
(Educ. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) It cannot be concluded here that a lottery to break
seniority ties fails to meet the needs of the school district or its students. Respondents
provided no persuasive legal authority to support its argument. Their citing of Board of
Education of the Round Valley Unified School District v. Round Valley Teachers Association
(1996) 13 Cal.4th 269, was misplaced. In that case, the California Supreme Court found that
the Education Code preempted any procedural protections bargained for and attained in the
collective bargaining agreement between the school district and its teachers. The State
Supreme Court dealt with whether probationary employees could exercise greater procedural
protections regarding reelection, as secured through collective bargaining, than those
provided for by the Education Code. (Board of Education of the Round Valley Unified
School District, supra, 13 Cal.4th 269, 271-274.) Of relevance here, the California Supreme
Court found that having greater procedural protections than provided for in the statute was a
distinction between the bargaining agreement and the Education Code that constituted a
conflict between the two. (Round Valley, supra, 13 Cal.4th at 284-285.) In the instant
matter, it was not established that the lottery is in conflict with the pertinent Education Code
provision. Thus, the factual analysis in Round Valley is distinguishable. Respondents
additionally argued that the lottery provision of the CBA deals only with transfers and
reassignment procedures, and not layoff procedures. Respondents’ argument is belied by the
fact that the impacted teachers and a representative of the teachers’ union were present at the
lottery and there was no evidence that anyone objected to the process as inapplicable to
determining seniority tie breaks, or to any other aspect of the lottery.

7.

Respondents’ argument that the Superintendent should select to layoff site

administrators in order of seniority is not supported by the Education Code or any persuasive
case law. Cause is not required to release an administrator. (Educ. Code, § 44951.) As the
Superintendent may use his discretion to decide which administrators to select for release,
there is no persuasive authority to require as Respondents suggest.

8.

There was insufficient evidence to conclude, as Respondents argued, that

Respondent Doerner should be retained to the extent of her partial assignment in AVID. As
Respondent Doerner did not testify, and the seniority list identifies her assignment only as
English, it could not be determined by a preponderance of the evidence (despite the Master
Schedule) that Respondent Doerner has a partial assignment in AVID and that AVID, as
Respondent Doerner teaches it, does not constitute an English class.

9

9.

Respondent Fitch’s argument was successful. The evidence established that
Respondent Fitch has coordinating responsibilities beyond that of a lead teacher. Saliently,
there was no evidence, other than the testimony of Brown, that Respondent Fitch was solely
a lead teacher. Brown’s testimony on this was not persuasive, as she explained she gathered
this information from others; her explanation as to how she came to conclude that
Respondent Fitch was a lead teacher was weak in its basis. Respondent Fitch was credible
that he was the SLC coordinator and that the other lead teachers report to him, albeit
indirectly. As such, he is not the lead teacher and does not fit the description of the particular
service the Governing Board seeks to reduce. BUSD argued that the error in description was
a non-substantive procedural error, and that pursuant to Education Code section 44949,
subdivision (c)(3), the layoff of Respondent Fitch should be affirmed nonetheless. Education
Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3) provides that “Nonsubstantive procedural errors
committed by the school district or governing board of the school district shall not constitute
cause for dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.” The error here is
prejudicial toward Respondent Fitch, as it was not proven that he is an SLC lead teacher
subject to layoff. Therefore, Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3) is not
applicable. Respondent Fitch should be retained and his Accusation dismissed.

10.

Respondent Klymkiw’s argument was successful in that her seniority date

should be amended to reflect June 18, 2010, as her first date of paid service with BUSD. The
Legislature mandates that “[e]very probationary or permanent employee . . . shall be deemed
to have been employed on the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a
probationary position.” (Educ. Code, § 44845.) BUSD identified Respondent Klymkiw as a
probationary employee as of the summer of 2010. The evidence established that BUSD paid
her for teaching in the OH program during the extended school year, not summer school.
The regulatory definition of ESY confirms that ESY is not equivalent to summer school, but
part of the “regular academic year.” (See Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 3043, subd. (a).) BUSD
paid her for her teaching services in June 2010, and thus, her testimony that she began on
June 18, 2010, was credited. Respondent Klymkiw’s seniority date should be amended to
June 18, 2010.

11. With the exception of Respondent Fitch, BUSD properly identified the
certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Governing Board
directed to be reduced or discontinued.

12.

Any other arguments presented by Respondents were lacking in evidence or

were otherwise unpersuasive and thus, not credited.

13. With the exception of Respondent Fitch, BUSD established cause to not

reemploy Respondents for the 2011-2012 school year.

14.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services

that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

10

15.

Cause exists to sustain BUSD’s action to reduce or discontinue the full-time
equivalent positions set forth in BUSD’s Resolution 12-11 for the 2011-2012 school year,
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, as set forth in Factual Findings 1-39,
and Legal Conclusions 1-14.

ORDER

1.

2.

3.

The Accusations served on Respondents listed in Appendix B are sustained.

Notice shall be given to Respondents listed in Appendix B that their services

will be terminated at the close of the 2010-2011 school year.

The Accusations served on Respondents Maribel Ayon, Eloise Gomez,

Ignacio Acero, Thomas Covington, Wendy Bowers, Maria Herrera, Christopher Fitch, and
Chona de la Rosa Santos are dismissed.

4.

BUSD shall amend Respondent Nicole Klymkiw’s seniority date to June 18,

2010.

Dated: May 10, 2011

____________________________
DANIEL JUAREZ
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

11

Appendix A
Respondents In Case Number 2011030383

Acero, Ignacio
Ayon, Maribel
Bowers, Wendy
Castellanos, Marta
Chavez, Vanessa
Chorpenning, Rick
Covington, Thomas
Doerner, Lynda
Fernandez, Teresa
Fitch, Christopher
Flores, Marisa
Garcia, Maria Teresa
Gomez, Eloise
Gonzalez, Elena
Gurba, Elizabeth
Henderson, Tamara
Herrera, Maria
Klymkiw, Nicole
Larson, Jacqueline

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20. Macias-Puente, Nicole
21. McCandliss, William
22. Medeiros, Cynthia
23. Mordon, Shirley
Nieto, Guadalupe
24.
Oh, Stacy
25.
Pagano, Shondale
26.
Park, Stella
27.
Quirarte, Sharon
28.
Reyes, Isabel
29.
Rios, Berenice
30.
Santos, Chona de la Rosa
31.
Schlitt, Audrey
32.
Soto, Rosalba
33.
Strickland, Denise
34.
Torres, Luz
35.
Truong, Van
36.

12

Appendix B
Respondents Whose Accusations Are Sustained In Case Number 2011030383

Castellanos, Marta
Chavez, Vanessa
Chorpenning, Rick
Doerner, Lynda
Fernandez, Teresa
Flores, Marisa
Garcia, Maria Teresa
Gonzalez, Elena
Gurba, Elizabeth
Henderson, Tamara
Klymkiw, Nicole
Larson, Jacqueline

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13. Macias-Puente, Nicole
14. McCandliss, William
15. Medeiros, Cynthia
16. Mordon, Shirley
Nieto, Guadalupe
17.
Oh, Stacy
18.
Pagano, Shondale
19.
Park, Stella
20.
Quirarte, Sharon
21.
Reyes, Isabel
22.
Rios, Berenice
23.
Schlitt, Audrey
24.
Soto, Rosalba
25.
Strickland, Denise
26.
Torres, Luz
27.
Truong, Van
28.

13

