BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
FULLERTON JOINT UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

Anna Sanders, and other
certificated employees of the
Fullerton Joint Union High School District,

Respondents.

OAH Case No. 2011030241

PROPOSED DECISION

Mark Harman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard this

matter on April 19, 2011, in Fullerton, California.

Alexandria M. Davidson and Natasha B. Axelrod, Attorneys at Law, represented
Edward D. Atkinson (Atkinson), Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources of the Fullerton
Joint Union High School District (District).

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented Tatjana Antunovich, Eduardo Avendano,

Danielle Carlisle, Soon-ya Gordon, Teresa Mormont, Ben Nguyen, Anna Sanders, and
Christina Owens, collectively called Respondents.

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and has

given Respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2011-2012 school year
under Education Code1 sections 44949 and 44955. Respondents requested a hearing for a
determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

Prior to the hearing, the District rescinded its “Preliminary Notice Not To Reemploy”

issued to Mary Kerr. At the hearing, the District stipulated to allow Anna Sanders and
Christina Owens to participate as respondents in this proceeding.

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing. The record was closed and

the matter was submitted for decision on April 19, 2011.

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

George J. Giokaris, Ed.D., is the Superintendent of the District. Assistant

Superintendent Atkinson and his staff were responsible for the technical aspects of this
reduction in force proceeding. Assistant Superintendent Atkinson filed the Accusation in his
official capacity.

2.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

3.

On March 8, 2011, the Board of Trustees of the District (Board) adopted a
Resolution entitled “Amendment to Resolution 2010/11 #49 Resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the Fullerton Joint Union High School District of Orange County, California,
Regarding a Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of Service” (the Resolution),
reducing or discontinuing the following services for the 2011-2012 school year:

Subject Area

FTE2 Reduction

1 Agriculture teacher
1 Art teacher
1 Chinese teacher Assignment Instructional Coach
2 French teachers
1 Latin teacher
2 Math teachers
3 Opportunity teachers
2 Psychologists
1 Biology teacher
3 Spanish teachers

Total

1.00
1.00
1.00
0.40
0.40
2.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
2.60

14.40

4.

Superintendent Giokaris thereafter provided a written “Preliminary Notice Not
To Reemploy” (preliminary notice) to 17 certificated employees, including Respondents. The
preliminary notice states that it had been recommended to the Board, and the Board had
determined, to give a preliminary notice to each of these employees that their services would
not be required for the 2011-2012 school year due to the Board’s decision to discontinue certain
particular kinds of services. Each Respondent was served with a preliminary notice on or
before March 15, 2011. The preliminary notice describes the particular kinds of services to be
reduced pursuant to the Resolution, as set forth in factual finding number 3, ante. The
preliminary notice also notifies each employee of his or her right to request a hearing to
determine if there is cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing school year, and that

2 Full-time equivalent position.

2

6.

7.

8.

a written request for a hearing must be filed on or before March 16, 2011. The Respondents,
with the exception of Christina Owens, filed timely their requests for a hearing in this matter.

5.

On March 21, 2011, the District filed and served the Accusation and other

required documents on Respondents, except for Christina Owens, who had not timely filed a
request for hearing. Respondents, with the exception of Anna Sanders, thereafter timely filed
notices of defense, seeking a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them
for the 2011-2012 school year.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.

The Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth in factual

finding number 3 because of the uncertainty surrounding future funding and because the
District is overstaffed in certain areas. The decision to reduce the particular kinds of services is
neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.

9.

The reduction of services set forth in factual finding number 3 is related to the
welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of
certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board.

10.

In determining the number of final layoff notices to issue, the District expects to
take into account any retirements and resignations to reduce the number of actual layoff notices.

11.

The Resolution includes criteria for breaking seniority ties for employees who
share the same first date of paid service in a probationary position (seniority date); however, it
was not necessary for the District to use the tie-breaking criteria to establish relative seniority
among these employees, because of the variations in these employees’ particular assignments
and credentials, and the particular kinds of services being reduced. No Respondent raised an
issue as to the validity of the tie-breaking criteria.

12.

The District operates a variety of alternative or continuation education programs

at one school site. This campus is divided into two high schools: La Sierra and La Vista. La
Sierra High School (La Sierra) is an alternative high school serving the educational needs of
high school age students and adults. There are several different programs offered at La Sierra.
One of these is “Opportunities,” which is designed to help students in grades 9-11, who, for a
variety of reasons, including attendance and academic problems, have struggled and have not
been successful in comprehensive junior high schools. The program’s goals are to keep these
students on track and moving forward, and eventually, for students to earn a high school
diploma, either by re-entering a comprehensive high school or by completing graduation
requirements through La Sierra High School. The “Opportunities” program offers a shortened

3

school day and instruction in small, self-contained classrooms, where core subjects are taught
and individualized attention can be provided to students who have special needs. Teachers in
these classrooms generally possess clear multiple subject credentials (CMS), which allows them
to teach the core subjects in a self-contained classroom. Another alternative program is called
Academics, Behavior Modification, and Counseling (ABC).

13.

La Vista High School (La Vista) is a continuation high school. It also offers a

variety of programs that include individualized attention or specially designed courses of study.
For example, a credit acceleration program helps students to obtain the credits they will need
for high school graduation, or other credentials. This program may involve a non-traditional
means of teaching that allows students to achieve at their own pace and in their own way.
Some La Vista programs do not lead to graduation, but may help students transition into a
career or an occupation or another educational setting. The District concedes it has not made
distinctions between what it calls “subsets” of the alternative program, although they are not all
the same. For example, “Opportunities” is different from independent studies. Even ABC is
seen as a different program than “Opportunities.”

14.

Tatjana Antunovich (Antunovich) is a full-time teacher who has a seniority date

of August 24, 2007. She possesses a clear single subject credential in health sciences and a
CMS. Antunovich teaches ABC students for three periods at La Sierra and, for the past two
years, she has taught health classes for two periods at La Vista. Her ABC classes are comprised
of students who have been expelled from different comprehensive junior high schools;
however, their expulsions have been suspended, and they are allowed to attend the ABC class
for a period of time to give them an opportunity “to prove themselves.” She distinguishes these
two different classes, so when she received her preliminary notice and saw that that the
“Opportunities” program was being reduced by 3 FTE, she assumed that she would lose her
three periods of ABC, but she did not believe she would be subject to lay off for the two periods
of health classes. Antunovich does not consider herself a full-time “Opportunities” teacher;
although the District’s seniority list identifies her assignment as “Opp:ABC” teacher, it does not
identify her assignment as a health teacher.

15a. Danielle Carlisle (Carlisle) possesses a professional CMS and has a seniority
date of September 12, 2006. She is in her fifth year of teaching at La Sierra, but her classes,
comprised of ninth and tenth grade “Opportunities” students, are physically located on the
Fullerton High School campus. Carlisle maintains that two certificated employees with less
seniority are being retained to provide services that she is credentialed and competent to
provide, and therefore, she should be allowed to “bump” into one of these positions. Janet
Buzan (Buzan) provides services in the “learning laboratory” at La Vista. One of Buzan’s
duties is to issue credits for subjects that La Vista does not teach. Carlisle maintains that she is
senior to Buzan, because she believes Buzan served as an hourly employee in the District prior
to the 2008-2009 school year, and only began teaching full-time with a first date of paid service
in a probationary position in the fall of 2008. Laurie Ruhnke (Ruhnke) is another employee
who teaches full-time in the Opportunities/ICE program. Ruhnke apparently was classified by

4

the District as an hourly employee, even though she was working full-time teaching English
language development classes. Carlisle maintains that Ruhnke, like Buzan, has a seniority date
in 2008, but the District established that it had a practice of hiring certificated employees, such
as Ruhnke and Buzan, as hourly employees to teach in their alternative programs, and that this
practice had been a error which was rectified in preparation for this layoff proceeding.

15b. Both Buzan and Ruhnke are long-time employees of the District. Buzan has

worked in adult education positions and a variety of other positions since at least 1991. Since
the District has not conducted a reduction in force proceeding since the early 1980’s, the
seniority list had to be carefully reviewed, and some of the information needed adjustment.
Assistant Superintendent Atkinson testified that he spent a considerable amount of time in the
fall of 2010 reviewing Buzan’s and Ruhnke’s extensive personnel files and evaluating their
employment histories. As a result, he considered the nature of the services they provided, and
determined that the District had misclassified them as hourly employees for many years.
Atkinson concluded that both of these employees had been acting as certificated probationary
employees for the majority of those years. Atkinson’s review established that Buzan’s first date
of paid service in a probationary position is August 27, 1991, and Ruhnke’s is August 28, 2000.
Therefore, Carlisle has less seniority than Buzan or Ruhnke, and thus, Carlisle is unable to
bump into their positions.

16.

The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to Respondents

Tatjana Antunovich, Eduardo Avendano, Danielle Carlisle, Soon-ya Gordon, Teresa Mormont,
Ben Nguyen, Anna Sanders, or Christina Owens, to render a service which these Respondents
are certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and

44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 6.

2.

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are determined to be particular
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3
and 7.

3.

Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction of the particular
kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause relates solely to the welfare
of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 16.

4a.

The Education Code appears to distinguish between opportunity schools and
continuation schools, at least in some contexts. (See §§ 53, 41601, subd. (a) [for computing
average daily attendance], 44865, subds. (e), (f), & (g) [for determining necessary teaching
credential], & 51745). One of the purposes of the reduction in force procedure is to provide a

5

basis on which a certificated employee can assess the probability of nonretention or
reemployment. The description or definition of services to be reduced in a reduction in force
proceeding should be as specific as possible to achieve this purpose. (See Ozsogomonyan,
Teacher Layoffs in California: An Update (1979) 30 Hastings L.J., 1727, 1740.)
The District argues that, even if the description is inadequate, this is a non-substantive
procedural error that has not prejudiced anyone. Since the District determines the particular
kinds of services it intends to reduce, it must be capable of providing Respondents an adequate
description of these kinds of services, or else the whole process is defeated. Inadequate notice
is not merely a procedural error.

4b.

Antunovich has established that the District failed to specifically reduce or

discontinue her two periods of health classes in this proceeding. The Resolution’s description
of “Opportunities” teachers is general, not specific. Atkinson testified that the description
refers more to the umbrella of a school site, where particular services are performed, and not to
a department or category of services performed at this site. The alternative school setting
encompasses many different programs: there are even two different high schools with two very
different sets of students operating at this site. Antunovich performs services for both of these
high schools. The District adequately described services that Antunovich performs in the ABC
program, but it plainly failed to provide Antunovich with reasonable notice that she was subject
to layoff for the health courses she teaches at La Vista. Antunovich must be retained for .4 FTE
to teach health classes, or for reassignment.

5.

Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondents Tatjana Antunovich (0.60

FTE layoff), Eduardo Avendano, Danielle Carlisle, Soon-ya Gordon, Teresa Mormont, Ben
Nguyen, Anna Sanders, and Christina Owens, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through
16, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 4.

The Accusation is sustained with respect to Respondents Tatjana Antunovich (0.60 FTE
layoff), Eduardo Avendano, Danielle Carlisle, Soon-ya Gordon, Teresa Mormont, Ben Nguyen,
Anna Sanders, and Christina Owens, and the District may notify them that their services will
not be needed during the 2011-2012 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of
services.

Dated: May ___, 2011

_________________________________
MARK HARMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

ORDER

6

