BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
LENNOX SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of
Certificated Staff of the Lennox School
District (55.07 Full Time Equivalent
Positions),

Respondents.

OAH No. 2011031033

PROPOSED DECISION

David B. Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 28, 2011, at the Lennox School
District office in Lennox, California.

Salvador O. Holguin, attorney at law, of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo

represented the Lennox School District (District). Lillian Kae, attorney at law, of Trygstad,
Schwab & Trygstad represented all Respondents, set forth in Attachment A on page 12.
Respondents indicated with “*” were present at the hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard. The record

remained open for receipt of briefs and for a telephonic status conference. The District’s
brief was received May 4, 2011, and marked for identification as Exhibit 23. Respondents’
brief was received May 4, 2011, and marked for identification as Exhibit C.

In a telephonic status conference on May 5, 2011, the District moved for a
continuance of 15 days to lodge the transcript from the hearing and to submit a final brief.
Respondents do not object to the motion. The motion was granted. The matter was
continued for 15 days from May 5, 2011. The District lodged the transcript, which is marked
for identification as Exhibit 24. The District’s Reply Brief was received May 10, 2011, and
marked for identification as Exhibit 25. Under Education Code section 44949, subdivision
(e), due to the continuance of 15 days, all dates prescribed in Education Code section 44949,
subdivision (c), and section 44955, subdivision (c), are extended by 15 days.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. Complainant Dr. Frederick Navarro filed the Accusation while acting in his

official capacity as the Superintendent of the District.

1

2. Respondents are certificated employees of the District. The District serves
approximately 7000 students in grades from preschool through grade 12 at seven schools and
a preschool program.

3. On March 8, 2011, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted
Resolution No. 10-23 to reduce and discontinue the following particular kinds of services
provided by the District no later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year:

Service

Full Time Equivalent (FTE) Positions

Reduce Elementary Counselor Services

Reduce K-5 Instructional Services

Discontinue Middle School Academic Counselor Services

Reduce Middle School Physical Education Instructional Services

Reduce Middle School Social Studies Instructional Services

Discontinue High School Athletic Director Services

Discontinue BTSA Coordinator Services

Discontinue Director of School Readiness Services

Discontinue Education Technology Coach Services

Discontinue EL Committee Liaison Services

Discontinue Family Services Counselor Services

Discontinue Literacy Coach Services

Discontinue Math/Student Assessment Resource Teacher Services

Discontinue Pre-School Literacy/Parent Coordinator Services

Discontinue School Readiness Center Early Childhood Counselor Services

Discontinue School Readiness Literacy Coach/Parent Coordinator Services

Discontinue Special Education Program Specialist Services

Discontinue Special Education School Readiness Instructional Services

Discontinue Speech Supervisor Services

Discontinue Staff Development Specialist (SDS) Services

Discontinue Weingart ELD Intervention Specialist Services

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS:

0.20

20.0

0.34

1.0

2.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

2.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

2.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.53

15.0

1.0

55.07

2

4. Resolution 10-23 also included a provision that the District would retain
certificated employees, regardless of seniority, “who have authorization to teach English
Learner (“EL”) students, as determined by the California Commission on Teacher
Credentialing, and the special training and experience that comes therewith.”
(Exhibit 1.) This is commonly referred to as “skipping.” Other than information in the
seniority list (Exhibit 15) and the layoff implementation chart (Exhibit 19), there was no
evidence identifying the specific teachers which the District proposed to skip or of their
special training and experience. Nor was there any evidence or argument from Respondents
that the skipping process was improperly performed.

5. The Board further determined that the reduction in services necessitated a decrease

in the number of certificated employees at the close of the 2010-2011 school year by a
corresponding number of FTE positions, and directed Dr. Navarro to notify the appropriate
employees to implement the Board’s determination. Dr. Navarro delegated this task to Cesar
Morales, Ed.D., Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources. The main reason for the
reduction was expected budget shortfalls due to the State budget.

6. On or before March 15, 2011, the District gave notice (preliminary layoff notice)

to each certificated staff member identified as related to the services to be reduced or
eliminated of the potential elimination of his/her position for the 2011-2012 school year.
Some certificated staff members who received the preliminary layoff notices requested a
hearing, and are referred to as Respondents. Respondents are probationary or permanent
certificated employees of the District. On March 24, 2011, the District served an Accusation
on each Respondent. (Although the District also served “precautionary” layoff notices on
temporary employees assigned to categorical programs who had also been notified that they
were nonreelected for the 2011-2012 school year, no teachers receiving the precautionary
notices requested a hearing.)

7. Prior to the hearing, the District learned that funding was available for a position

previously identified to be discontiued (Weingart ELD Intervention Funding Specialist), and
the Board passed Resolution No. 10-29 to decrease the number of FTE positions for layoff
by 1.0 FTE. As a result, the District rescinded the preliminary layoff notice to, and
Accusation against, Respondent Rosalinda Barajas. The District also determined that a more
junior employee had been retained for a particular position for which a senior employee was
competent and credentialed to perform. As a result, the District rescinded the preliminary
layoff notice to, and Accusation against, Respondent Jessica Gomez. The District also
determined that, due to attrition after March 15, 2011, fewer layoffs are necessary. As a
result, the District rescinded the preliminary layoff notice to Thelma Gonzales (who did not
request a hearing), and rescinded the preliminary layoff notice to, and Accusation against,
Respondent Joshua Aleman.

8. Respondents timely filed Notices of Defense to determine if there was cause for

not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year. In addition, a Joint Notice of Defense
was filed for Respondents (Exhibit 11).

3

9. The services set forth in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services (PKS)

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section
44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified PKS was neither
arbitrary nor capricious, and constituted a proper exercise of discretion.

10. The reduction or discontinuation of PKS was related solely to the welfare of the
District and its pupils. It was not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals
whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.

11. The Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements and requests

for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary preliminary layoff notices to be
delivered to its employees.

12. The Board also passed a resolution (Resolution No. 10-22) determining the order
of seniority for employees who shared the same date of first paid service to the District (tie-
breaking criteria). These criteria, to be applied in descending order, include, among other
things, consideration of credential status, authorization to teach English Language Learners,
breadth of credential, certifications, subject matter of credential, number of years of service,
degrees and semester credits. There was no specific evidence or argument from Respondents
that the tie-breaking process was improperly performed.1

13. The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority dates,

current assignments, permanency description and credential and certificate information.
(Exhibit 15.)

14. At the hearing, counsel stipulated to make the following changes to the seniority

list:

a. Tenured employee Elizabeth Franco, seniority #273 on Exhibit 15:
seniority date was changed from August 11, 2003, to January 6, 2003. Tie-
breaking criteria were used to place her prior to Norma Garcia-Paredes,
seniority #267, relative to other employees with that same date.

b. Tenured employee Erica Delgado, seniority #291 on Exhibit 15: seniority
date was changed from August 3, 2005, to August 1, 2003. Tie-breaking
criteria were used to place her after Paula Angulo-Poe, seniority #271, relative
to other employees with that same date.

c. Probationary employee Ann Ngo, seniority #342 on Exhibit 15: added a
Single Subject credential in Social Studies, and CLAD certification.

1 Although Respondents’ Brief (Exhibit A) states it will address, among other things, the
contention that the tie breaker formula was unfair, there is no other mention of the subject in the
Brief.

4

d. Probationary employee Jesus Rius, seniority #330 on Exhibit 15: seniority
date was changed from August 13, 2009, to August 20, 2008. Mr. Rius
becomes a tenured employee. Tie-breaking criteria were used to place him
after Cindy Alberty, seniority #322, relative to other employees with that same
date.

e. Tenured employee Yvonne Rodriguez, seniority #302 on Exhibit 15: She
holds a Clear, not Preliminary, multi-subject credential and a CLAD
certificate. Her seniority date will remain as August 11, 2006. However, the
District will examine its records to determine whether Ms. Rodriguez’s service
as a long-term substitute, from August 11, 2005, to February 2006, combined
with her service as a temporary teacher from then until the conclusion of that
school year, amount to more than 75 percent of the school days and should
result in an adjustment of her seniority date to August 11, 2005. The District
is entitled to rely upon the information it had as of the time the Board passed
the resolution, and the ALJ will rely upon this stipulation. Ms. Rodriguez may
submit additional information when it is obtained, and the District may
consider it before determining if her seniority date will be adjusted and if she
will be issued a final notice.

f. Tenured employee Jaime Reichbach, seniority #263, seniority date August
12, 2002, on salary step 10, has greater seniority than tenured employee Oliver
Lo, seniority #264, seniority date August 12, 2002, on salary step 8.

g. Tenured employee Flor Calderon, seniority #272, seniority date August
11, 2003, on salary step 9, has greater seniority than tenured employee Monica
Flores, seniority #274, seniority date August 11, 2003, on salary step 5.

15. The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the least

senior employees currently assigned in the services being reduced. The District then
determined whether the senior employees held credentials in another area and were entitled
to displace, or “bump,” other employees. In determining who would be laid off for each kind
of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by the known
vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.

16. No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform any

services which any Respondent was certificated and competent to render.

17. Respondents raised several contentions in their Joint Notice of Defense (Exhibit
11), in their Brief (Exhibit A), or at the hearing, some of which are discussed herein. These
contentions include improper reduction in teaching in general; improper skipping by the
District; failure to permit employees to bump into another position; and failure to assign
correct seniority dates. Except as specifically set forth herein, these contentions were not
supported by sufficient evidence or the law and, therefore, are rejected.

5

18. With regard to attrition, Assistant Superintendent Morales testified that, prior to
March 15, 2011, the District was aware of the retirement of Deborah Waynesmith (seniority
#34), and accounted for that retirement on the Layoff Implementation Chart. (Exhibit 19,
page 4, row 4.) Respondents contend that the District improperly accounted for other, later
attrition in determining which teachers might be retained and which were to receive
preliminary layoff notices.

19. After March 15, the District became aware of further attrition, and Dr. Morales

reconfigured the Layoff Implementation Chart accordingly. More specifically, with the post-
March 15 resignation of Stephanie Policare, the District was able to rescind the preliminary
layoff notice sent to Thelma Gonzalez. (Exhibit 19, page 5, row 4; see Factual Finding 7.)
With the post-March 15 retirement of Cynthia Durieux, the District was able to rescind the
preliminary layoff notice sent to Joshua Aleman. This latter reconfiguration of the Layoff
Implementation Chart is challenged by Respondents, and requires further explanation.

20. Prior to learning of Ms. Durieux’s retirement, Dr. Morales determined that
Alexander Reinbold (seniority #212) could bump Josh Aleman (seniority #321). Ms.
Reinbold serves in a Staff Development Specialist (SDS) position being discontinued under
the resolution. Due to her greater seniority and her credential, Ms. Reinbold would have
been able to bump into Mr. Aleman’s position teaching 9th grade Algebra I. Therefore, the
District served a preliminary layoff notice on Mr. Aleman. However, after factoring in the
retirement of Ms. Durieux, Dr. Morales reconfigured the Layoff Implementation Chart and
determined that Ms. Reinbold, due to her seniority and credentials, would be able to bump
into Ms. Durieux’s position teaching 2nd grade. (Exhibit 19, page 4, row 5.) Under this
reconfiguration, Mr. Aleman was no longer bumped by Ms. Reinbold. Rather, Mr. Aleman
would now be bumped by Kathy Cordova (seniority #284) (Exhibit 19, page 8, row 2), but
he would then, in turn, bump into the position of Ann Ngo (seniority #341) teaching high
school Geometry Lab/Algebra Lab. (Exhibit 19, page 9, row 3.) As with the other bumps
throughout the Layoff Implementation Chart, Dr. Morales considered the affected
employees’ seniority and if they were certificated and competent to render the service
involved. As testified by Dr. Morales, this reconfiguration does not affect the preliminary
layoff notice given to Angelica Trujillo, the Respondent with the greatest seniority (see more
in Factual Findings 21 and 22).

21. Respondents contend that, rather than undertaking the reconfiguration noted in

Factual Findings 19 and 20, the District should have factored in Ms. Durieux’s retirement by
rescinding the preliminary layoff notice sent to Angelica Trujillo (seniority #258) (Exhibit
19, page 6, row 1.) This contention is based on the facts that Ms. Trujillo is the Respondent
with the most seniority; her position in K-5 Instructional Service is being reduced under the
Resolution; and her seniority and credentials would allow her to bump into the teaching
position of Ms. Durieux.

22. However, the District, relying upon the Layoff Implementation Chart, contends
that Ms. Trujillo should be laid off. (Exhibit 19, page 6, row 1.) In this manner, the District
contends that even though it had no legal obligation to consider post-March 15 attrition, it

6

has done so in a manner that assures Respondents and other teachers of their seniority and
bumping rights. Specifically, Ms. Reinbold (seniority #212), whose position is being
eliminated, is retained by the District, and Ms. Trujillo (seniority #258), with less seniority,
is subject to layoff. The District also contends that Respondents’ analysis is an improper
attempt to take laid-off employees’ rights for later reappointment (see, for example, sections
44956 and 44957) and require the District to accommodate those rights before and during the
layoff, as opposed to after the layoff and in conjunction with reappointment.

23. The ALJ has reviewed the case law relating to attrition and order of termination,

including Degener v. Governing Bd. of Wiseburn School Dist. (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689;
Lewin v. Board of Trustees of Pasadena Unified School Dist. (1976) 62 Cal.App.3d 977; and
San Jose Teachers Assn v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627. Generally, the case law
establishes that, where layoffs flow from reduction or elimination of particular kinds of
services, attrition must be considered to the extent it is known before the preliminary layoff
notices are served but does not have to be considered between that time and the hearing.
Other cases such as Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Bd. (1981) 116
Cal.App.3d 831, relating more specifically to layoffs due to decline in average daily
attendance, have also been reviewed, but are of less help, as the obligation to consider
attrition is different than when layoffs are based on reduction of particular kinds of services
such as with this District. Although these cases all confirm the effects of attrition on the
layoff process, none answers the specific question at issue to address the manner in which the
attrition is to be handled.

24. Reductions in teaching staff must proceed according to seniority principles. “The

statute specifically protects tenure rights and seniority. Layoffs must begin with the most
recently hired. Furthermore, tenured employees who are competent and properly
credentialed must be reassigned to replace junior employees . . . .” (Duax v. Kern
Community College Dist. (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 563, quoting from Vassallo v. Lowrey
(1986) 178 Cal.App.3d 1210, 1214.) (Although the statute discussed in Duax related to
community college employees, it contained the same relevant language as found in
Education Code section 44955.2) Under the applicable statutes, seniority is the principle
controlling the order of layoffs and reemployment. (Cousins v. Weaverville Elementary
School Dist. (1994) 24 Cal.App.4th 1846.) The purpose of the authority, under section
44955, subdivision (b), to permit a more senior teacher to bump into a position of a more
junior teacher is to give preference to a qualified employee based upon their relative
seniority. (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 342-
343.)

25. The District acted within its discretion in reconfiguring the Layoff
Implementation Chart as it did. The ability of teachers to bump into a position held by
another teacher with less seniority is a right established in section 44955 as part of the very
same statute that sets forth the process to be followed by a school district in implementing
layoffs. Although not required to consider post-March 15 attrition, the District did so in the

2 All citations are to the Education Code.

7

same manner as if it was made aware of that attrition before March 15. Respondents’
contention looks at the situation of Ms. Trujillo in somewhat of a vacuum, limiting the scope
of analysis to her and Ms. Durieux. The District’s actions, however, were broader,
examining, in order: the effects of the bump by Ms. Reinbold (who has more seniority than
Ms. Trujillo) into Ms. Durieux’s position; the lack of a position for Ms. Trujillo to bump
into; Ms. Cordova’s bump of Mr. Aleman; and Mr. Aleman’s bump of Ms. Ngo. This
process properly considered Ms. Trujillo’s bumping rights; however, by the time the District
analyzed Ms. Trujillo’s bumping rights, Ms. Durieux’s position had already been taken by
someone more senior to Ms. Trujillo and there was no other position into which she could
bump. The evidence established that the process utilized by the District was not arbitrary or
capricious and was related to the welfare of the District’s schools and the pupils thereof.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. Section 44949, subdivision (a), states in pertinent part:

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing

board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year for the reasons
specified in Section 44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given written
notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.”

Section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), states in pertinent part:

“The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge who shall prepare a
proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. . . .
Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or governing board of the
school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the charges unless the errors are prej-
udicial errors.”

2. Section 44955 provides, in pertinent part:

“(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for causes other
than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive,
and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as
specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive.

“(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not

later than the beginning of the following school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing
board may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the

8

school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or
any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render.

“As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the

same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of
needs of the district and the students thereof. . . .

“(c) . . . services of such employees shall be terminated in the reverse order in which

they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with Sections 44844 and
44845. In the event that a permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices and a
right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for
the ensuing school year.

“The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner

that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications
entitle them to render. . . .

“(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a

certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons:

“(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific

course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential with a
specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or
course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not
possess.”

3. Sections 44949 and 44955 establish jurisdiction for this proceeding. The notice

and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and 44945 were met. (Factual
Findings 1 through 8.)

4. A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

5. The District must be solvent to provide educational services, and cost savings are
necessary to resolve projected District budget reductions, to insure that its schools provide,
and students receive, required instruction in an effective and efficient manner. Such
financial circumstances can dictate a reduction in certificated staff, and “section 44955 is the
only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.” (San Jose

9

Teachers Assn. v. Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at p. 639.) The Board’s decision to reduce
services in light of its budget does address the welfare of students, and was a proper exercise
of the Board’s discretion. Respondents did not establish that the proposed reductions in
services would violate any statutory or regulatory requirement governing the District.

6. Boards of education hold significant discretion in determining the need to reduce

or discontinue particular kinds of services, which is not open to second-guessing in this
proceeding. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees, supra, 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) Such policy-
making decisions are not subject to arguments as to the wisdom of their enactment, their
necessity, or the motivations for the decisions. (California Teachers Assn. v. Huff (1992) 5
Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.) Such decisions and action must be reasonable under the
circumstances, with the understanding that “such a standard may permit a difference of
opinion.” (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Bd., supra, 116 Cal.App.3d at
p. 845.)

Numerous cases stand for the proposition that the process of implementing layoffs

is a very flexible one and that school districts retain great flexibility in carrying out the
process. (E.g., Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d
796.)

7. Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to
the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. Cause for the reduction or
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils
within the meaning of section 44949.

8. A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a

continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.) A school district may
give junior teachers retention priority over senior teachers to teach a specific course, or
“skip” the junior over the more senior, if the junior teachers possess special training and
experience which their more senior counterparts lack. (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High
School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v.
Governing Bd., supra, 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)

9. Stipulations were reached in instances where the seniority list was incorrect, and

the District agreed to reconfigure the seniority list, as set forth in Factual Finding 14. Except
as set forth in Factual Finding 7, where the Accusation will be dismissed to three
Respondents, as of the time of the hearing this did not have an effect on the order of layoff.
It may affect possible rehiring rights, which are not subject to the jurisdiction of this hearing
and are covered in other statutory provisions such as sections 44956 and 44957.

10

10. None of the errors in the seniority list, which are corrected by stipulation, are
prejudicial to Respondents in the context of this proceeding. Therefore, they are deemed
“nonsubstantive procedural errors” under section 44949, subdivision (c), and are not cause
for dismissing the charges.

11. No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform any

services which any Respondent was certificated and competent to render.

12. Cause exists within the meaning of section 44955 for reducing or terminating

Respondents’ employment for the 2011-2012 school year, as set forth in Factual Findings 1
through 25.

WHEREFORE, THE FOLLOWING ORDERS are hereby made:

ORDERS

1. The Accusations served on Respondents Joshua Aleman, Rosalinda Barajas and

Jessica Gomez are dismissed.

2. The Accusations served on all other Respondents are sustained. Notice may be

given to those Respondents within the time period required by statute that their services will
be reduced or terminated for the 2011-2012 school year.

DATED: May 10, 2011.

___________________________
DAVID B. ROSENMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

11

ATTACHMENT A (“*” indicates present at the hearing.)

List of Respondents

1. Barroso, Claudia

2. Calderon, Flor

3. Delgado, Erica

4. Flores, Monica

5. Franco, Elizabeth

7. Lo, Oliver

8. Martin, Susana

*

*

*

*

*

*

9. McCutchan, Quinn

10. Michael, Rodney

11. Montano, Anell

12. Ngo, Ann

13. Rius, Jesus

15. Trujillo, Angelica

16. Zaragoza, Gabriela

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

6. Garcia-Paredes, Norma *

14. Rodriguez, Yvonne

12

