BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
CUPERTINO UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

JAMIE BUTCHER, et al.,

OAH No. 2011030627

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Ruth S. Astle, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of
California, heard this matter on April 6, May 6, and May 10, 2011, in Cupertino, California.

Jonathan A. Pearl, Attorney at Law, represented the Cupertino Union School

District.

Christopher Schumb, Attorney at Law, represented respondents.

The matter was submitted on May 10, 2011.

SUMMARY

The Superintendent of Cupertino Union School District determined to reduce or

discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers and other certificated
employees for budgetary reasons. The decision was not related to the competency or
dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.

1

A list of employees to whom the district proposes to serve final notices is attached1 as

Attachment 1.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Phil Quon made the accusation in his official capacity as the Superintendent of

the Cupertino Union School District (District).

At the hearing the District rescinded March 15 Notices for Jamie Butcher,

Rebecca DeSagan, Amanda Driscoll, Melissa Maisen, Diana Parsons, Maureen Riccomini,
Rebecca Regosin, Chantel Dangler, Deborah Lopez, Elizabeth Westagate, Catherine Baken,
Tejaswini Ranade, and Stephanie Watkins. The district agreed to change the seniority dates
and status of Sarah Della Majorie to August 20, 2008/Probationary 2, Ashley Failing to
January 5, 2009/Probationary 2, Alexis Sharpe to January 29, 2009/Probationary 2, and Sara
Somers to January 5, 2009/Probationary 2.

3.

On February 23, 2010, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 10-11-19
directing notices be given to certificated employees that their services will not be required for
the 2011/2012 school year. The resolution reduces or eliminates 92.13 FTE of particular
kinds of services for the 2011/2012 school year. A copy of the resolution is attached as
Attachment 2.

4.

On March 15, 2010, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 the

Superintendent gave written notice to respondents of his recommendation that notice be
given to them that their services would not be required for the ensuing school year. The
written notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation.

5.

All respondents2 filed timely requests for a hearing. The Superintendent or his
designee filed and served the Accusation against respondents, who requested a hearing. The
Accusation with required accompanying documents and a blank Notice of Defense were
timely served on respondents. All respondents who were served with an Accusation and
appeared at the hearing either personally or through their attorney participated in the hearing.

All jurisdictional requirements have been met.

Subsequent to adoption of the Board’s Resolution, the District identified

vacancies in school year 2010-2011 due to retirements, release of temporary teachers, and
resignations. In consideration of such attrition the District did and/or will rescind a
corresponding number of notices.

1.

2.

6.

7.

1 At the hearing the district rescinded a number of notices as set forth in Factual Find-

ing 2.

2 A list of respondent’s as modified was entered into evidence as Exhibit “A.”

2

8.

On February 23, 2010, the Governing Board of the District adopted Resolution

No. 10-11-16, as the criteria for establishing the order of termination among respondents
who have the same first date of paid service for the District. This resolution complies with
the requirements of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b).

9.

No issues remain concerning the application of the tie-breaking criteria.

10.

The District hires temporary teachers. In general, the District has fewer

temporary employees than it has employees on leave. Some of the employees are on leave
because they are assigned to categorically funded positions. It is acceptable for the District
to hire temporary teachers to replace those employees who are on leave from their regular
positions because they are assigned to categorically funded positions. The district argued
that the teachers who were hired as Classroom Size Reduction (CSR) teachers are in
categorically funded positions and therefore can be counted to balance teachers on leave with
temporary teachers. That argument is not persuasive. The CSR teachers are not on leave
from any regular positions. Further, there was no competent evidence presented to establish
that these teachers are paid out of separate categorical funds.

11.

A temporary employee is specifically defined in Education Code section
44920 as a certificated teacher who is employed for up to one school year to replace a
certificated employee on leave. If that temporary employee is reemployed for the following
school year to fill a vacant position, that teacher is no longer temporary.

a.

Freda Wong was offered a temporary contract on April 27, 2007, to begin
August 20, 2007. The Status line on the offer of Certificated Employment had an “x” to
indicate temporary contract. Ms. Wong testified that she did not read the offer carefully and
did not understand the consequences of being hired as a temporary teacher. She discovered
that a temporary teacher could be terminated from employment at any time when she met
with her principal for her first evaluation. Ms. Wong further testified that she would not
have taken the position if she had known since she had been offered another position at a
different school district. Ms. Wong signed a contract on July 23, 2007, to begin teaching
August 20, 2007. The contract specifically stated that: “You are hereby classified by this
Board as a Temporary employee subject to acceptance of this offer.” Again, Ms. Wong
testified that she did not read the contract carefully. Ms. Wong was properly classified as a
temporary teacher. She had an obligation to carefully read the contract and ask questions if
she had any.

b.

Freda Wong and Staci Yee claim that they should be classified as probationary
since the district was “out of balance” when they were hired between the employees on leave
and the employees with temporary contracts. The teachers argue that at the time they were
hired as temporary employees the district was briefly out-of-balance between teachers on
leave and temporary teachers. Further, the teachers argued that certain employees other than
the CSR teacher should not be counted as teachers on leave. The district has made a good
faith effort to balance the number of teachers on leave with the number of temporary
teachers. The number of teachers on leave and the length of a teacher’s leave changes

3

constantly throughout the year. At one time the district believed it was out of balance and
converted a number of temporary teachers to probationary teachers. The teachers chosen for
this conversion were those that had been in service to the district for the longest time. This
was a reasonable action taken by the district. Ms. Wong and Ms. Yee contend that they
should have been hired as probationary teachers instead of having the district balance the
leaves with temporary teachers by converting the teacher with longer service to the district
from temporary to probationary. This argument is not persuasive. First, it was not
established that the district was out of balance for any significant amount time, if at all; and
second, it would be an unreasonable burden on the district if they had to determine the
“balance” on a particular date when a temporary teacher was hired. Ms. Wong and Ms. Yee
are properly classified as temporary.

12. Mahzaz Pirani claims that her first date of paid service should be changed to

August 19, 2009, since she was expected to attend a parent meet-and-greet. She was not paid
for attending this function. Attending such a function does not constitute the first date of
paid service for the District pursuant to Education Code section 44845. Her first date of paid
service for the district will remain August 20, 2009.

13.

All other teachers not specifically noted here were correctly categorized as

temporary or have the proper seniority date.

14.

Other than set forth in the Findings above, no certificated employee junior to

respondents will be retained to perform the services that a more senior employee is
certificated and competent to render.

15.

The reduction or discontinuance of services is related to the welfare of the

District and its pupils.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections

44949 and 44955 were met.

2.

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees at the Cupertino
Union School District due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services
pursuant to Education Code section 44955. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

3.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services

which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

4

ORDER

1.

Notice may be given to respondents in accordance with the Legal Conclusions

above, that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year because of the
reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services.

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

2.

3.

forth in Factual Finding 2.

The district shall change the seniority dates and status of the respondents as set

Dated: _____________________

______________________________
RUTH S. ASTLE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

