BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
BORREGO SPRINGS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

STEPHEN CLEMENTS
TAMARA DUKE
AMY FULLER
MARIO GONZALEZ
JUSTINE McKUNE
MONICA ROBLES
NAARA VALDEZ (Precautionary Notice),

Respondents

OAH No. 2011031172

PROPOSED DECISION

Roy W. Hewitt, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Borrego Springs, California on
April 20, 2011.

Clifford D. Weiler, Esq. of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo

represented the Borrego Springs Unified School District (the District).

All of the respondents were present throughout the hearing and were
represented by California Teachers Association staff attorney Robert E. Lindquist,
Esq.

The matter was submitted on April 20, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Carmen Garcia (Superintendent) made and filed the Accusation dated

March 25, 2011, while acting in her official capacity as Superintendent of the district.

Respondents are certificated District employees.

1.

2.

3.

On March 11, 2011, the District’s Governing Board (Board) adopted

Resolution No. 1011-6, determining that it would be necessary to reduce or
discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of the current school year. The
Board determined that the particular kinds of services that must be reduced for the
2011-2012 school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE) positions:

Particular Kind of Service (PKS)

Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)

5th Grade Over-flow Teaching Services
Music Teaching Services
K-5th Grade Teaching Services
Grades 6-8 Teaching Services
Grades 9-12 Teaching Services

Total FTE’s

0.48
1.00
2.00
1.17
1.83

6.48

The services listed above are particular kinds of services, which may be

reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.

4.

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services listed in
Finding 3, above, is neither arbitrary nor capricious; rather, it is due to substantial
decreases in the operating budget, and is, therefore, a proper exercise of the Board’s
discretion. The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of
the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of
certificated employees as determined by the Board. No particular kinds of services
were lowered to levels less than those levels mandated by state or federal law.

5.

The Superintendent and District considered all positively assured

attrition, including resignations, retirements and requests for transfer, in determining
the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.

6.

On March 14, 2011, the Superintendent timely notified respondents,
pursuant to California Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, of the District’s
intent not to reemploy them for the upcoming school year. Accordingly, respondents
received written notice, on or before March 15, 2011, notifying them that the Board
had recommended they not be re-employed in the upcoming, 2011-2012, school year.

7.

On March 25, 2011, respondents were served with a copy of the

Accusation, a blank Notice of Defense, a Notice of Hearing and other related
materials.

8.

Respondents timely requested a hearing and the instant hearing ensued.

9.
instant hearing.

Each respondent was properly noticed of the date, time and place of the

2

10.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

11.

Respondents have been selected for notice of layoff pursuant to their
seniority date, which is based on the first day of paid service of each respondent in a
probationary position. Respondents were ranked for layoff in the inverse order of
their seniority dates.

12.

Respondent Amy Fuller (Fuller) asserted that she has the same
seniority date as Antonina Efferbeck (Efferbeck); therefore, when criteria for
breaking seniority ties are applied she should have been retained over Efferbeck.
Fuller’s assertion is unavailing. Fuller misunderstood the process. The decision to
retain Efferbeck over Fuller was based on a “bumping” analysis, not a tie breaking
analysis. Fuller is working for the District teaching Introduction to Spanish and
Computer Skills. Efferbeck is working for the District teaching English Language
Development, English 9, AVID, and Computer Application. Fuller was identified for
layoff because she was teaching Spanish, a PKS that was being discontinued in the
District. Consequently, the tie break criteria would only come into play if Fuller
possessed the credentials and competency to “bump” Efferbeck. The criteria
necessary for “bumping” purposes was set forth in Board resolution 1011-6 as
follows:

(a) possession, current filing and issuance no later

than March 15, 2011 by the California Commission on
Teacher Credentialing, of a preliminary or clear
credential for the subject matter into which the employee
would bump for the 2011-2012 school year or into which
that employee would be reemployed, and

(b) active teaching service in the subject matter

into which the individual would bump or into which that
employee would be reemployed (said active teaching
service including at least one full complete school year
of service within this school district other than as a
substitute employee, within the last five school years,
i.e., 2006-2007and more recently; service which at the
beginning of this current school year and is continuing
this school year shall be considered for purposes as a full
year of service), and

(c) highly qualified status within the meaning of

the No Child Left Behind Act (if appropriate for the
position into which the individual would bump or into
which that employee would be reemployed), and

3

(d) if required by the position into which the
employee would bump for the 2011-2012 school year or
for the position into which that employee would be
reemployed, an appropriate EL authorization other than
an emergency authorization.

Fuller testified that she is not currently qualified to teach AVID and
that she has not taught English in the District for at least one full complete school
year, within the last five school years (she had taught English for two years in Big
Bear). For these two reasons, considered jointly and severally, Fuller does not meet
the “bumping” criteria necessary to “bump” into Efferbeck’s teaching position.
Consequently, Efferbeck was properly retained while Fuller was noticed for layoff.

13.

Respondent Clements testified that he was concerned about the fact that

the music program will no longer exist in the District if he, the only music teacher, is
laid off. While his concern is understandable, it is not within the jurisdiction of the
Office of Administrative Hearings to second guess the wisdom of the District’s choice
of programs to cut or eliminate as long as the District can continue to operate
pursuant to Federal and State minimum education requirements. Discontinuation of
the music program does not violate any Federal or State educational requirements and
is not fraudulent or so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of
discretion as a matter of law. Accordingly, the District’s decision to cut the music
program was an appropriate exercise of the District’s discretion.

14.

No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to

perform any services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949

and 44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections
were satisfied.

2.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board
of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

3.

Pursuant to section 44995, a senior teacher whose position is

discontinued has the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is
certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior employee may displace or

4

“bump” a junior employee who is filling that position. (Lacy v. Richmond Unified
School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469

The District has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to
determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in
an economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle
him/her to be assigned to another position. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist.,
supra. at 136-137.)

4.

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not

tied in with any statistical computation. It is within the governing authority’s
discretion to determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be
reduced or discontinued as long as the District does not reduce a service below the
level required by law. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627,
635-636.) A school district has wide discretion in setting its budget and a layoff
decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or so palpably unreasonable and
arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of law. (California Sch.
Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 318, 322.)

5.

6.

7.

8.

The services listed in Factual Finding 3 are each determined to be a

particular kind of service within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.

Based on the Factual Findings, considered in their entirety, cause exists

to reduce the number of certified employees of the District for budgetary reasons.

Cause to reduce or discontinue services relates solely to the welfare of

the District and its pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

Cause exits to give all named respondents, except for respondent Naara

Valdex, who was served with a “precautionary notice,” notice that their services are
not needed for the ensuing, 2011-2012, school year.

5

ADVISORY DETERMINATION

The following advisory determination is made:

Prior to May 15, 2011, notice shall be given to the following respondents that

their services will not be required for the ensuing school year due to the budget deficit
and the resulting need to reduce and/or discontinue certain services: Stephen
Clements; Tamara Duke; Amy Fuller; Mario Gonzalez; Justine McKune; and Monica
Robles.

The accusation is dismissed as to respondent Naara Valdez and the layoff

notice is rescinded.

DATED: April 26, 2011.

_____________________________

ROY W. HEWITT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

