BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
TWIN RIVERS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

OAH No. 2011020092 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE TWIN RIVERS UNIFIED 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
 
                                                            Respondents. 

 
 
 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Marilyn A. Woollard, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter in Sacramento, California, on 
April 12 and 13, 2011. 
 

Loni Y. Chhen, and Shanna R. Gartenlaub, Attorneys at Law, appeared on 

behalf of the Twin Rivers Unified School District (District).  Patty Smart, Associate 
Superintendent of Human Resources, was also present. 
 

Respondents are certificated employees who were issued preliminary layoff 

notices by the District. Respondents‟ names are listed in the attached Exhibit A. 
 

Margaret Geddes and Brandon Brazil, Jr., Attorneys at Law, appeared on 

behalf of respondents listed in the attached Exhibit B. 
 
 
Oral and documentary evidence was presented and the parties offered oral 
closing arguments.  The record remained open for additional briefing, which was 
received on April 21, 2011.  The District‟s brief was marked as Exhibit 20 for 
identification; respondents‟ brief with request for official notice was marked as 
Exhibit Q for identification.  The District did not object to the request for official 
notice.  Official notice is taken of Commission on Teacher Credentialing credential 
records for the Early Childhood Educator (ECE) respondents identified in Factual 
Finding 40, which are marked and admitted as Respondents‟ Exhibit Q.  The matter 
was submitted for decision. 
 

1 

On May 4, 2011, an Order Regarding ECE Respondents was issued directing 

the parties to provide their response to the hypothetical question of whether these 
respondents would have received preliminary layoff notices if it is determined that 
they are permanent certificated employees.  On May 5, 2011, these responses and 
oppositions were received, considered and marked for identification respectively as 
Exhibits 20 and R.  

 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

2. 

3. 

1. 

Frank S. Porter is the District‟s Superintendent.  Patty Smart is the 

The Twin Rivers Unified School District (District) began operations 

 
 
nearly three years ago, on July 1, 2008.  The District was created when four districts 
were merged following the approval of a measure to do so in November 2007.  The 
consolidation combined three former elementary school districts (Rio Linda Union, 
North Sacramento, and Del Paso Heights) and one former high school district (Grant 
Joint Union).  The District now serves approximately 27,000 preschool through adult 
education students in northern Sacramento County. 
 
 
District‟s Associate Superintendent for Human Resources.  The actions of Mr. Porter, 
Ms. Smart, their designees, and the District Governing Board were taken in their 
official capacities. 
 
 
Board Resolutions:  On March 1, 2011, in response to the 
Superintendent‟s recommendations, the District‟s Governing Board (Board) adopted 
Resolution No. 230, “Regarding Discontinuation of or Reduction in Particular Kinds 
of Services” (PKS).  Pursuant to this resolution, the Board determined that it will be 
necessary to reduce or eliminate 130.47 full time equivalent (FTE) certificated 
positions effective no later than the start of the 2011-2012 school year.  The Board 
directed the Superintendent to issue all legally required notices to effectuate this 
resolution.  The Board passed Resolution No. 235, “Determination of Seniority 
Among Certificated Employees with Same First Paid Date of Service,” establishing 
criteria to be used to implement the reduction in force in the event that certificated 
employees had the same seniority date based upon their first day of paid service with 
the District (hereafter, Tie Break Resolution).  The Board adopted three additional 
resolutions which authorized: the reorganization, reassignment and release of 
certificated administrative employees (Resolution 231); the release and non-reelection 
of temporary certificated employees (Resolution No. 232); and the non-reelection of 
probationary employees (Resolution No. 233). 
 
 
On March 12, 2011, the Board increased the number of FTE to be reduced or 
eliminated by 25.5 FTE, following the Superintendent‟s recommendation to do so.  
The Board adopted amendments to Resolution No. 230 (hereafter, the PKS 
Resolution) to reflect the need to reduce or eliminate a total of 155.97 FTE for the 
2011-2012 school year, and again directed the Superintendent to issue all legally 

 

2 

required notices to effectuate this resolution.  As amended, the PKS Resolution 
identified the following “particular kinds of services” to be reduced or eliminated for 
the 2011-2012 school year:1 

Number of Full-Time  
Equivalent Positions  

Early Childhood Education Services 

   1.0        16.0 

Services 

Administrative Services 

Instructional Support  

Elementary Counseling 

Academic Counseling 

Library Services 

 

 

 

Math Instruction 

Social Science Instruction 

 

 

 

 

Life Science Instruction 

  

Biology Instruction 

 

Spanish Instruction 

 

Industrial Arts Instruction 

Physical Education Services  

    

   6.5 

  

English Instruction 

 

  

 12.2  

Physical Science Instruction  

   

   6.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   6.32 

 44.05 

   8.8 

   4.0 

   9.0 

   6.0 

  

   5.2 

   5.0 

   2.0 

   0.5   

   1.0 

Visual and Performing Arts Instruction 

               1.0  

Adult Education Instruction   

               7.0 

  17.0 

 

Alternative Education Instruction 

    

   5.4 

                                                 

1  Crossed-out numbers reflect the FTEs recommended for reduction in the 

original resolution.  Underlined numbers reflect new reductions. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

4. 

Respondents are permanent or probationary certificated employees of 

 
Respondents 
 
 
the District.  Between March 8 and March 14, 2011, the District served written notice 
on 143 certificated employees that the Superintendent had recommended to the Board 
that notice be given to them pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 
that their services would be reduced or not be required for the 2011-2012 school 
year.2  Each written notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation and noted 
that the Board had passed Resolution No. 230 reducing the certificated staff by the 
FTE positions outlined above.  The names of these employees were appended to the 
PKS Resolution.3 
 
 
Of the certificated employees who were provided a preliminary layoff 
notice, 99 filed a request for hearing.  The remaining certificated employees did not 
request a hearing and waived their right to a hearing.  (Educ. Code, § 44949, subd. 
(b).)4 
 
 
Accusation in this matter, seeking authority to issue final layoff notices to 
respondents pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955 and the PKS Resolution.  The 
District served the Accusation and accompanying documents on the 99 certificated 
employees who timely filed a request for hearing.  The names of these employees are 
listed in the attached Exhibit A.  
 

Associate Superintendent Patty L. Smart made and signed the 

5. 

6. 

7. 

There were 24 certificated employees served with the Accusation who 
did not file a Notice of Defense.  Each of these employees waived his or her right to a 
hearing, and may be laid off by the District.  (Educ. Code, § 44949, subd. (b); Gov. 
Code §11506, subd. (c).)   
 

                                                 
 
California Education Code.  

2 Unless otherwise indicated, all undesignated statutory references are to the 

3 The PKS Resolution identified 147 employees.  The preliminary notices of 

 
four of these employees were rescinded before the Board adopted the amendments to 
the PKS Resolution.  As indicated in the testimony of Associate Superintendent 
Smart, the difference between the 155.9 FTE positions to be reduced and the 143 
preliminary notices sent to certificated employees was attributable to vacancies and 
known retirements or resignations which the District took into consideration before 
issuing preliminary layoff notices.   

4 There was one late request for a hearing filed by Levi Henson; however, the 

 
District rescinded Mr. Henson‟s preliminary notice.  

 

4 

8. 

The names of the 76 respondents represented by Ms. Geddes are listed 
 
in the attached Exhibit B.  Of these respondents, 75 timely filed a Notice of Defense. 
In addition, Ms. Geddes represents certificated employee Che Baro (seniority date 
1/7/08), who filed a request for a hearing but did not file a Notice of Defense.  Mr. 
Baro asserted that he did not receive the Accusation packet.  At the hearing, the 
District agreed to grant Mr. Baro a hearing despite his failure to file a Notice of 
Defense.  (Gov. Code, 11506, subd. (c).) Consequently, Mr. Baro was authorized to 
proceed as a respondent in this matter.  
 
 
matter for an evidentiary hearing before an Administrative Law Judge of the Office of 
Administrative Hearings, an independent adjudicative agency of the State of 
California, pursuant to Government Code section 11500, et seq. 
 

After receipt of respondents‟ Notice of Defense, the District set the 

9. 

10.  All jurisdictional requirements have been met.  Respondents do not 

contend that there are any procedural defects with the Board‟s notice of the reduction 
in force mandated by its PKS Resolution.  
 
Implementation of the PKS Resolution 
 

11. 

Bumping and Skipping:  As set forth in section 44955, subdivisions (b) 
and (c), economic layoffs are generally to be carried out on the basis of seniority.  A 
teacher with more seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment than a 
junior teacher.  The District has an affirmative obligation to reassign senior teachers 
who are losing their positions into positions held by junior teachers if the senior 
teacher has both the credentials and competence to occupy such positions.  The 
displacement of a junior teacher is known as “bumping.”  The seniority rule is not 
absolute, and a junior teacher with a needed credential or skills may be retained even 
if a more senior teacher is terminated.  “Skipping” a less senior employee from 
inclusion in a layoff proceeding is authorized by statute.  In order to depart from a 
seniority-based economic layoff, section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), requires that the 
District must demonstrate “a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or 
course of study… and that the certificated employee (to be skipped) has special 
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study…which 
others with more seniority do not possess.” 

12. 

 
The PKS Resolution provided that the reduction of employees should 
proceed in the inverse order of seniority, except that it would be necessary to retain 
the services of the three categories of certificated employees regardless of seniority, 
unless a more senior employee also had these credentials, competencies and 
experience: 
 
 
 
   

a.   certificated employees with special education certifications  
      who are currently using those certifications;  

 
 

 

5 

 
 
 

 
 
 

13. 

Seniority List:  The District maintains a Certificated Seniority List 

Since its creation in June 2008, the District has been faced with the substantial 

c.    certificated employees with necessary certifications to teach  
      at the secondary level such that the District may maintain its 
      current academic departments at legally required levels. 

b.   certificated employees whose position requires a Bilingual  
      Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development (BCLAD)  
      Certificate for their position; and, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which it used to implement the PKS Resolution.  The Seniority List contains 
employees‟ seniority dates (first date of paid service), status as tenured, probationary 
or temporary, their FTE and current assignments. 
 
 
task of gathering and combining personnel data from four predecessor districts for 
certificated employees who are now District employees.  For the past three years, 
under the direction of Associate Superintendent Smart, the District‟s Human 
Resources Department has worked to ensure the accuracy of the information it 
maintains in its official files for certificated employees, including seniority dates, 
certificates and supplementary authorizations.  The success of the District‟s efforts at 
this task has been tested in two previous layoff hearings.  In preparation for this layoff 
proceeding, in December 2010, the District sent notice to certificated staff which 
identified their seniority dates and credentials on file and requested that any changes 
or corrections be made by the end of January 2011.  The notice indicated that, if there 
was no response, the District would assume that the information on file was accurate.  
The District received some responses and made appropriate corrections.  As 
acknowledged by respondents‟ counsel, the District has been largely successful in 
ensuring the accuracy and completeness of respondents‟ information as reflected in 
the seniority list. Other than as indicated in this Decision, the information contained 
in the District‟s Certificated Seniority List is reliable. 
 
 
were responsible for implementation of the technical aspects of the layoff.  The 
District used the seniority list, Resolution No. 230, and all pertinent information from 
each employee‟s personnel file, to develop a proposed layoff list of the least senior 
employees currently assigned to the various PKS services being reduced. 
 
 
The Board‟s Tie-Break Resolution identified criteria to be used to 
determine relative seniority between certificated employees who share the same 
seniority date as reflected in the District‟s Seniority List.  In order of importance, 
these criteria are: credentialing, experience, competence, advance degrees, school 
improvement grant participation, specialized training based on position need (AVID, 
Improving Teacher Quality, Independent Study Compliance, Project Lead the Way, 
Sierra North Arts Project), Training and Strategic School Funding for Resolutions 
Pilot Participation.  The District had no occasion to use these tie-break criteria to 

Ms. Smart and District Director of Certificated Personnel Michelle Abrams 

14. 

 

6 

15. 

The specific individuals who received preliminary layoff notices for the 

determine which employees should receive preliminary layoff notices.  As indicated 
in Factual Findings 19 and 50, the District did use the tie break criteria during the 
hearing and in response to the Order Regarding ECE Respondents. 
 
 
current reduction in force were identified by Ms. Abrams, who reviewed the PKS 
Resolution, prepared seniority lists that were specific to each site, subject, and PKS 
being reduced or eliminated, and determined which certificated employees were the 
least senior within the PKS area.  Once the least senior employees were identified, 
Ms. Abrams reviewed the credentials held by the identified employees to determine if 
they were authorized to teach in a different area and displace or bump more junior 
employees.  Certificated human resource analyst Layle Bojanski assisted in this 
process by researching whether specific credentials held by senior employees 
identified for layoff authorized them to bump junior employees.  
 
 
process of ensuring that there was a position available for each senior employee 
affected by the PKS Resolution who was certificated and competent to bump into a 
position held by a junior employee.  If senior employees were not able to bump junior 
employees, they were issued the preliminary layoff notice. If a bump was possible, 
the junior employees would receive the preliminary layoff notice.  Ms. Abrams 
testified that if an employee to be bumped had less than a full FTE position (i.e., a 0.4 
FTE), the District would take that partial FTE plus the whole FTE of the next least 
senior person.  This action was based on the District‟s practice to take full FTEs.  On 
the bumping chart this would appear as if one individual was bumping two less senior 
employees.  The practice could result in issuing preliminary notices to more 
employees within a particular PKS than required by the PKS Resolution.  For 
example, eight preliminary notices were issued to accomplish a 6 FTE reduction in 
Math Instruction.  After the rescissions discussed in Factual Finding 17, there were 
only 4 full time positions, or 3.6 FTE reduced in Math Instruction. 
 

Ms. Abrams developed a “bumping chart” to demonstrate the District‟s 

 

16.  Ms. Smart testified that there may have been some junior employees 

skipped for layoff over senior employees.  Specifically, as authorized by the PKS 
Resolution, if a junior employee held a special education credential or a bilingual 
credential, they were skipped.  The PKS Resolution did not require the reduction or 
elimination of either special education or bilingual services for the 2011-2012 school 
year.  Ms. Abrams clarified that one employee was skipped based upon her special 
education credential (Patricia Wood, Sept. 1, 1993) and that there may have been 
junior employees skipped based upon the BCLAD credential. There were no skips 
based upon subsection (c) in Finding No. 10.   

There was no evidence or argument that the District inappropriately skipped 

individuals in the areas authorized by the PKS Resolution. 

 

 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Rescinded Layoff Notices:  During the hearing, the District rescinded 

Levi Henson    
Cynthia Corral  
Adrienne Ruggles  
Colleen Kinder  
Andrea Cottrell  
Carly Starrh    
Tangelica Crates  
Rebekah Hanson  
Diane Roberts  

[single subject PE]; 
[single subject PE] 
[single subject PE]  
[single subject PE]  
[SA English]  
[SA English] 
[Single subject English]  
[single subject English] 
[single subject English] 
[SA English] 
[single subject Math]  
[single subject Math]   
[single subject Math] 
[single subject Math] 
[single subject English] 
[Indus. Arts des. subject] 
[single subject English] 
[single subject English] 5 

(8/11/08) 
1. 
(8/11/08) 
2. 
(8/11/08) 
3. 
(9/14/09) 
4. 
(8/01/07) 
5. 
(8/01/07) 
6. 
(8/15/07) 
7. 
(8/15/07) 
8. 
(10/22/07)  
9. 
(10/24/07)  
10.  Michelle Bricker  
(8/09/07) 
11.  Daniel Grubbs  
12. 
(8/09/07) 
Jasmin Patel    
13.  Geoffrey Flissinger   (8/15/07)  
Carrie-Anna McCoy  (9/24/07)  
14. 
(8/15/07)  
Clay Schubert  
15. 
(1/02/02)  
Steven Shields  
16. 
(8/15/07) 
17. 
Rebecca Troxler  
(8/15/07)   
18.  Xavier Young  

17. 
 
22 layoff notices. 
 
On April 12, 2011, at the beginning of the hearing, the District announced that 
 
it rescinded the preliminary layoff notices issued to 18 certificated employees, whose 
seniority dates and credentials or supplementary authorizations (SA) are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rescinded the layoff notices of three certificated employees (Carly Starrh, Diane 
Roberts, and Michelle Bricker) who were less senior than respondent Autumn Sharp 
(8/01/07), who has a supplementary authorization in English. To cure this error, the 
District rescinded three additional preliminary layoff notices issued to: 
 
 
 
  
 
 
In addition, the District acknowledged its failure to issue a preliminary 
notice to Jasmin Garcia (8/13/07), who holds a multiple subject teaching credential.   
 

(2/05/07) 
(8/01/07) 
Etelvina Carrazana   (8/23/06) 

19. 
20.  Megan Wooden  
21. 

[single subject English] 
[single subject English] 
[SA English] 

18.  On April 13, 2011, the District acknowledged that it had prematurely 

Tessa McGarr  

19. 

 
 
 

5 Because the preliminary notices of some employees who did not file a Notice 

                                                 
 
of Defense were rescinded, not all of the employees whose preliminary notices were 
rescinded are respondents.   

 

8 

20. 

To cure this oversight, the District rescinded the preliminary layoff notice to 

21.  No mandated services were eliminated.  Although the entire elementary 

 
the next most senior employee (rescission 22).  It looked to the next most senior 
employee and discovered three employees who shared an August 17, 2006 seniority 
date.  The three employees were: Susan Bridge, Michael Espino, and Gina Ripley.  
The District used the Tie Break Criteria from Resolution 235, and determined that the 
layoff notice to Susan Bridge would be rescinded.  All three employees hold the same 
multiple subject credentials.  The tie was broken using the next tie-break criterion of 
experience.  The records established that Ms. Bridge is the most experienced 
employee with 16 years experience, followed by Ms. Ripley (10 years) and Mr. 
Espino (8 years).  Respondents did not dispute that the Tie Break criteria were 
appropriately applied to reach this conclusion. 
 
 
Testimony of Associate Superintendent of Business Support Services 
Robert Ball and Associate Superintendent Smart established that the PKS reductions 
and eliminations were necessary for the District to remain solvent in light of shortfalls 
in revenue sources, which resulted in some school closures and program changes. 
 
 
counseling program was eliminated (8.8 FTE), there is no requirement that these 
services be provided.  Library Services are being reduced 9.0 FTE, but the District 
will maintain certificated personnel in its library services program for the 2011-2012 
school year. 
 
Respondents’ Specific Challenges 
 
 
layoff notice based upon the 5 FTE PKS reduction in her assigned area of Life 
Science Instruction, where she taught seventh grade.  Ms. Sharp is a permanent 
employee with a seniority date of August 1, 2007.  She holds a multiple subject 
credential, with supplementary authorizations in English and science.  Ms. Sharp was 
initially able to bump into an Instructional Support position, which was slated for a 
44.05 PKS reduction.  She was then bumped out by a more senior employee (Deanne 
Castaneda; 8/23/99). 
 
 
Respondents request an order rescinding the preliminary layoff notice issued 
to Autumn Sharp based upon the District‟s rescission of notices, described in Factual 
Findings 17 and 18, to less senior employees who have either a single subject 
credential in English or a multiple subject credential with supplemental authorization 
in English.  Respondents also request that the preliminary notices of two other most 
senior respondents with these credentials or authorizations be rescinded.  Respondents 
contend that, although the District partially cured its error as explained in Finding 18, 
there were three other employees with less seniority than Ms. Sharp who have 
credentials in English whose notices were rescinded (Mr. Schubert, Ms. Cottrell and 
Mr. Young) while her notice was not rescinded. 
 

Autumn Sharp Rescission Error:  Autumn Sharp received a preliminary 

22. 

 

9 

24. 

23. 

The District‟s willingness to promptly rescind preliminary layoff 

Thus, the District rescinded 10 preliminary notices of certificated employees 

In its April 21, 2012, closing brief, the District stated that it had 
 
reviewed Ms. Sharp‟s credentials in light of its rescissions and now agrees it is 
appropriate to rescind her preliminary layoff notice.  The District disputes that it must 
rescind two additional preliminary notices and asserts that its rescission error has been 
cured as explained in Factual Finding 18. 
 
 
notices and to cure errors in those rescissions is commendable.  The method chosen to 
correct this particular error is somewhat confusing.  The District initially rescinded 
nine teachers with English credentials or authorizations like Ms. Sharp.  Seven of 
these rescissions were for employees who have less seniority than Ms. Sharp.  Two 
employees -- Ms. Cottrell and Ms. Starrh -- share a seniority date with Ms. Sharp.  
The District conceded that it had prematurely rescinded the notices of Ms. Starrh, Ms. 
Roberts, and Ms. Bricker. To cure this error, the District rescinded three additional 
notices, but did not rescind Ms. Sharp‟s preliminary notice.  Two of these new 
rescissions were issued to teachers who have more seniority than Ms. Sharp.  The 
third teacher, Ms. Wooden, also shares a seniority date with Ms. Sharp. 
 
 
with English credentials or supplementary authorizations who either have less 
seniority than Ms. Sharp (Ms. Crates, Ms. Hanson, Ms. Roberts, Ms. Bricker, Mr. 
Schubert, Ms. Troxler, Mr. Young) or who share Ms. Sharp‟s seniority date (Ms. 
Starrh, Ms. Cottrell, and Ms. Wooden).  In its attempts to cure this error during the 
hearing, the District did not rescind the notice to Ms. Sharp and it did not use its Tie-
Break Resolution to resolve the seniority tie between Ms. Sharp, Ms. Starrh, Ms. 
Cottrell, and Ms. Wooden.  Because the District now agrees that Ms. Sharp‟s notice 
will be rescinded, the harm resulting from District‟s initial error of prematurely 
rescinding notices of employees junior to Ms. Sharp is cured.  Based on this 
rescission, no junior employee is being retained to perform a service that Ms. Sharp is 
certificated and competent to perform.  It is unnecessary to rescind two additional 
preliminary notices. 
 
 
directing the District to correct its practice of excess bumping; specifically, of taking 
a full FTE where bumping only requires a partial FTE.  This argument is based upon 
Ms. Abrams‟ testimony that it is the District‟s practice to take a full FTE, even if only 
a partial FTE is needed. (Factual Finding 15.)  Respondents contend that this practice 
violates section 44955, subdivision (b), which states that the District is only allowed 
to layoff a “corresponding number of employees” relating to its PKS reduction in 
force. 
 
 
layoff notices, that the number of such notices to be issued is within the Board‟s 
discretion, and that respondents are confusing the number of employees receiving 
notices with the number of positions being reduced.  To calculate the number of PKS 

The District asserts that it has issued an appropriate number of preliminary 

Number of Preliminary Notices:  Respondents request an order 

25. 

 

10 

26. 

The District‟s position is correct. As the appellate court determined in San 

positions needed, the District must consider a variety of factors including partial 
FTEs. 
 
 
Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636, a board‟s 
decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service “is not tied in with any 
statistical computation, such as reduction in the number of students,” and it is within 
its “discretion to determine the amount by which it will reduce a particular service.”  
The manner in which the District implemented the PKS resolution did not exceed its 
authority under the PKS Resolution.  As indicated in Factual Findings 3 and 4, after 
considering multiple factors, the District only issued 142 preliminary notices for a 
PKS reduction of 155.9 FTE. 
 
 
Public Agency Retirement Services (PARS) Attrition:  Respondents 
request an order that the District rescind approximately 62 additional preliminary 
notices of the most senior employees based on early retirements of certificated 
employees under the Public Agency Retirement Services Retirement Plan as reflected 
on the PARS Enrollment List for Twin Rivers, dated March 2, 2011.  The Enrollment 
List identifies the names of the employees, their positions and their school sites.  The 
List also contains a column titled “Not replacing” with an “x” next to the names of 
some employees.  Respondents contend these are assured retirements that were 
known to the District before the issuance of the preliminary notices but were not 
considered in issuing preliminary layoff notices.  In respondents‟ view, it is 
unnecessary to await further Board action on these retirements before the District 
must act in response to this attrition. 
 
 
consider positively assured attrition and not potential attrition, like the PARS 
program.  The District acknowledges that additional rescissions may result from this 
program, but asserts it is not required to make early rescissions. 
 
 
confirmed the number of District retirement applications it had received.  After 
receiving this information, the District had to verify that all certificated employees 
who applied for PARS were qualified for this retirement.  The District completed its 
verification process on March 15, 2011, after determining that all certificated 
employee applicants were qualified, and submitted this information to PARS.  PARS 
then completed a fiscal analysis regarding the cost of the program and submitted this 
information to the District on March 17, 2011.  The District was then required to do 
further analysis, which it completed March 18, 2011. The District prepared a 
recommendation for the Board, which approved the financial feasibility of moving 
forward with the PARS program at its March 26, 2011 meeting.  The Board will act 
on the retirements on April 26, 2011, by approving the actual retirees.   
 

The District contends that in a PKS reduction in force it is only required to 

27.  Ms. Smart testified that on March 11, 2011, the PARS program 

 

11 

28. 

In layoffs based upon a reduction or discontinuance of PKS, the 

The number of certificated retirements verified was 62, approximately 32 of 

 
which are from classroom teachers.  Five of these total positions will not be refilled.  
The District is currently analyzing in what subject areas the retirements have created 
vacancies. According to Ms. Abrams, it is possible that some of the PARS-created 
vacancies will be filled from certificated employees deemed “surplus” at a specific 
site, but who were not laid off.  As a result, it is possible that the number of 
preliminary notices that will be rescinded based upon the PARS program will not 
necessarily correspond to the number of PARS retirement vacancies. 
 
 
District is not required to consider positively assured attrition that occurs between the 
date of the preliminary layoff notices and the final layoff notices. (San Jose Teachers 
Assoc. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 636.)  In determining the number of 
individuals who would receive preliminary layoff notices in this case, the District 
considered known attrition and it has rescinded preliminary layoff notices based on 
known retirements.  The District‟s position regarding PARS-created retirement 
vacancies is correct.  While the Board was aware of PARS early retirement 
applications before the preliminary notices were issued, it did not approve the 
financial feasibility of actually proceeding with these retirements until after the 
preliminary layoff notices were issued.  Consequently, the PARS retirements were not 
“positively assured” by the deadline for issuance of preliminary notices.  The District 
is not obliged to make additional rescissions based on retirements that, while highly 
probably, had not ripened into “known attrition.”6 
 
Alicia Caddell and Kenneth Hobbs:  Respondents contend that Alicia 
 
Caddell should be retained for the 2011-2012 school year because she is certificated 
and competent to teach the classes assigned to Kenneth Hobbs, a less senior employee 
who the District failed to notice for layoff.  Specifically, respondents assert that the 
District did not meet its burden to skip Mr. Hobbs from layoff as required by section 
44955, subdivision (d).  The District asserts that it did not improperly “skip” Mr. 
Hobbs, but rather properly determined that Ms. Caddell does not have the appropriate 
credential to bump Mr. Hobbs and teach the more advanced computer courses to 
which he has been assigned. 
 
 
30.  Ms. Caddell was issued a preliminary layoff notice as part of the 5.4 
PKS reduction to the District‟s Alternative Education Instruction program, which is 
located at Nova Community Day School (Nova), Vista Nueva Career and Technology 
High School (Vista Nueva), Pacific High School, and Keema Independent Study.  Ms. 
Caddell is a permanent employee with a seniority date of August 15, 2007.  She holds 

29. 

6 As indicated in Ms. Abrams‟ testimony, the District has already made some 

                                                 
 
rescissions based upon information gleaned from the PARS program; for example, 
many of the rescissions issued in English during the layoff hearing were attributable 
to PARS openings in this subject area. 

 

12 

31. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 Kenneth Hobbs, Jr., is a probationary employee (Prob. 1) with a seniority date 

accounting, business communications, business English,  
business mathematics, business management, business marketing,  
computer concepts and applications, consumer education, data  
processing, economics, general office occupations, keyboarding,  
marketing, shorthand, typewriting, and word processing. . .  
(Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5 [CCR], § 80005, subd. (a)(3). [Italics added.] 

a single subject teaching credential in business and a CLAD.  Because she has a 
single subject credential, Ms. Caddell is authorized to teach any subject in alternative 
education with her consent.  The District Seniority Lists identifies Ms. Caddell‟s 
current assignment as “teacher-computers” at Nova. 
 
 
of August 20, 2010.  The District Seniority Lists indicates that Mr. Hobbs holds a 
Designated Subject Career Technical Education (CTE) credential in “Info Tech, 
Finance and Business.”  Mr. Hobbs is currently assigned to Foothills High School 
with a .2 FTE as “Teacher – Academy Planning” and a .6 FTE as “Teacher – 
ROP/Academy Planning.”  Mr. Hobbs was not issued a preliminary layoff notice. 
 
 
Pursuant to regulations promulgated by the California Commission on 
Teacher Credentials (Commission), Ms. Caddell‟s single subject business credential 
authorizes her to teach the following “subjects which fall within the broad subject 
area” of business: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This regulation also gives the District, as the “employing agency,” the right to 
 
assign Ms. Caddell to teach a subject not listed above if it “has determined its subject-
matter content is directly related to the broad subject area.” (Id.)  
 
 
Nova where she is assigned to teach U.S. and World History to seventh through 
eleventh grade students.  She also teaches one section of computer applications to 
Nova‟s seventh and ninth graders.  Ms. Caddell did not know Mr. Hobbs‟s specific 
assignment at Foothills High School this year; however, she believes she is 
credentialed and competent to teach in the program to which he is assigned. 
 
Ms. Caddell testified about her experience in teaching computer concepts and 
 
applications.  She has taught web design and virtual enterprise, which includes many 
information technology courses like web design, graphic arts and video production.  
Ms. Caddell is also responsible for the digital yearbook for alternative education 
students, and she has been both the assistant coordinator and the coordinator of the 
California Partnership Academy (Academy), a business and technology academy in 
the school district.  The Academy is a technology program for many different 
subjects.  Ms. Caddell was a business and technology teacher, in the topic of 
agriculture, for high school students for two years before becoming employed by the 

32.  Ms. Caddell testified that she currently teaches at both Vista Nueva and 

 

13 

33. 

In identifying individuals for layoff, the District determined that Ms. 

District.  Within this program, students worked through academic and technology 
courses related to agriculture.  
 
 
Caddell could not bump into Mr. Hobbs‟ teaching position.  As explained by Ms. 
Bojanski, Ms. Caddell could not bump into the courses Mr. Hobbs is currently 
teaching at the Academy of Design and Technology at Foothills High School because 
these courses are “much more advanced” than what Ms. Caddell‟s single subject 
business credential would allow.  The State gives school districts flexibility to employ 
single subject teachers with a business credential to teach in the Regional 
Occupational Programs (ROP), which are now called Career Technical Education 
(CTE) Programs.  Despite this flexibility, the District must still ensure that the 
materials being taught in the class are actually covered by the teacher‟s single subject 
credential.  Ms. Bojanski concluded that Ms. Caddell has an appropriate credential to 
teach a CTE class.  However, Mr. Hobbs‟ CTE credential authorizes him to teach 
courses that are much more complex than the “computer concepts and applications” 
Ms. Caddell can teach; it is specific to the career of information technology.  Ms. 
Caddell would need actual experience working in the information technology sector 
to qualify to teach the advanced courses authorized by Mr. Hobbs‟ CTE credential.  
 
 
that outlines subject areas in which holders of the CTE credential in information 
technology may teach. 7  This publication specifically provides that the holder of a 
CTE credential for the sector “information technology” may teach in a variety of 
computer related subjects, including programming, software operations, system 
operation, electronics, applications, and maintenance and repair.  She also relied on 
course descriptions for Mr. Hobbs‟ classes.  
 
 
District‟s computer database system that contains master schedule data for each 
school‟s teachers, Mr. Hobbs is assigned to teach two ROP (CTE) courses at Foothill:  
ROP Multimedia (RYR600) and ROP Computer Graphics (RYA602).  In pertinent 
part, the course description for ROP Multimedia provides: “Visual Design is a year-
long, project based curriculum that develops skills in design and print production 
using Adobe tools.  You can use the curriculum in graphic design education or in 
more general career and technical education.  Visual Design develops key digital 
communication skills such as design, project management, and graphic and print 
technology…”  In pertinent part, the description for ROP Computer Graphics 

34.  Mr. Hobbs did not testify.  As indicated in a printout from AERIES, the 

Ms. Bojanski reached her conclusion by reference to the Commissions‟ leaflet 

7 Ms. Bojanski testified that the District obtains credential information for its 

                                                 
 
certificated employees from the County of Sacramento and occasionally has to 
interpret what is reported.  Regarding Mr. Hobbs‟ credential, Ms. Bojanski assumed 
that “Subject Info Tech.” meant “information technology” as reflected in the 
Commission‟s leaflet.  

 

14 

36. 

CCR Section 80005 authorizes Ms. Caddell to teach computer concepts 

 35.  The course descriptions provided by the District fail to demonstrate that 

provides:  “Digital Design is a year-long, project based curriculum that develops 
skills in web design and production using Adobe web tools. You can use the 
curriculum in web design education or in more general career and technical 
education. Digital Design develops key digital communication skills such as design, 
project management, and web technology…”  Both courses align with various 
technology standards and prepare students for certification.  
 
 
they are of a level beyond Ms. Caddell‟s teaching authorization and experience.  
While Mr. Hobbs‟ CTE credential authorizes him to teach more advanced computer 
courses, the evidence did not establish that these courses are of an advanced level that 
involves more complex computer subject matter.  Rather, the courses are designed to 
guide students in computer applications using Adobe tools. 
 
 
and applications.  The District has an affirmative obligation to reassign senior 
teachers to areas where they are credentialed and competent to serve.  This obligation 
must be interpreted in light of the discretion CCR section 80005 gives the District to 
assign Ms. Caddell to teach a subject not expressly listed, “if the employing agency 
[District] has determined its subject-matter content is directly related to the broad 
subject area.”  (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80005, subd. (a)(3).)  Beyond the bare course 
descriptions for Mr. Hobbs‟ classes, the District provided no evidence about the 
actual content of the courses taught by Mr. Hobbs or their level of complexity.  There 
was no evidence that the District analyzed Ms. Caddell‟s actual experience in 
teaching computer concepts and applications before determining that she could not 
bump. 
 
 
Ms. Caddell‟s testimony established that she is authorized to teach computer 
concepts and applications and that she is currently teaching a computer course in the 
alternative education program.  It also established that she has several years of 
teaching experience in web design, graphic arts, and video production, has developed 
on-line year books and has directed a business and technology academy.  Ms. Caddell 
has experience guiding students through year-long project based curriculums with 
coursework in both academics and technology.  Ms. Caddell established that she is 
credentialed and competent to bump Mr. Hobbs under section 44955, subdivision (b).  
Accordingly, the Accusation against Ms. Caddell will be dismissed. 
 
 
8.8 FTE in the District‟s Elementary Counseling program and the reduction of 4.0 
FTE in its secondary Academic Counseling program.  Following the layoff, there will 
be no elementary counseling positions; however, an unknown number of positions 
remain in Academic Counseling. 
 

Terry Press-Dawson:   The PKS Resolution requires the elimination of 

37. 

Mr. Dawson is a licensed Marriage and Family Therapist (MFT) who holds a 

clear administrative services credential, a life standard pupil personnel services 

 

15 

Mr. Dawson testified to his belief that the District should retain him as an 

credential and a life standard elementary teaching credential.  Mr. Dawson was hired 
by the District as an elementary school counselor, based upon his pupil personnel 
credential.  His seniority date is October 15, 2001.  He is assigned to Harmon Johnson 
Elementary School.  Mr. Dawson received a preliminary layoff notice as part of the 
Districts‟ elimination of the elementary counseling program.  In identifying 
individuals for layoff, the District determined that Mr. Dawson could not bump into 
another position within the District.  
 
 
employee in some capacity, either by having him bump a junior employee due to his 
seniority or by reclassifying his position.  Mr. Dawson explained that he has 
generated funds for the District via a seven-year grant for the Healthy Start Program, 
which he began at Johnson and which is in its third year of implementation.  Mr. 
Dawson acts as and is considered by community members to be Healthy Start‟s 
Program Director; however, this is not his position as a certificated employee for the 
District.  The thrust of Mr. Dawson‟s testimony was that the Healthy Start program 
provides valuable counseling services to District students and their families; that if the 
program is not implemented these grant funds can be reclaimed by the California 
Department of Education; and that the grant funds are sufficient to pay his salary as 
Healthy Start Program Director for several years.  Further, Mr. Dawson emphasized 
that he is the only counselor who is able to obtain other money for the District 
through Medi-Cal Administrative Reimbursements, and that he has been able to 
obtain and expand counseling services to District students because his licensure 
allows him to supervised MFT and other counseling interns while they obtain 
required practice hours.  Mr. Dawson asserted that his reclassification as the Healthy 
Start Program Director, rather than layoff, would be in the best interest of the schools 
as well as the District.  Mr. Dawson did not claim that there was a junior employee 
who he was certificated and competent to bump. 
 
 
providing and expanding counseling services to students in the District, he did not 
establish that he had a right to bump a less senior employee.  The District now has 
access to the information and supporting documentation Mr. Dawson provided about 
the Healthy Start Program grant funds and his role in the Program.  The District may 
chose to act on the information Mr. Dawson provided regarding the benefits of the 
Healthy Start Program and the risk that it may lose this grant funding if continuity of 
program leadership is not secured.  These matters are within the District‟s sound 
discretion. 
 
 
Education Instruction by 17 FTE.  The District determined that approximately six or 
seven fee-based adult education programs would continue during the 2011-2012 
school year.  The fee-based programs retained were those that were 70 percent self-
sustaining.  The District has broad discretion to reduce or eliminate adult education 
classes, which are supported by unrestricted, formerly categorical Tier III funding.  

38.  Although Mr. Dawson‟s testimony demonstrated great commitment to 

Adult Education PKS; Veslas Orvin:   The District reduced Adult 

39. 

 

16 

As explained by Assistant Superintendent Ball, almost all of the District‟s Tier III 
programs including Adult Education have had their funds shifted to the District‟s 
general funds to maintain K-12 teaching positions.   

In closing argument, respondents requested an order that the District be 
directed to assess and reassign adult education teacher Veslas Orvin to any position 
for which she may be able to teach in adult education services that are being retained, 
and specifically to teach any form of medical or pharmaceutical services.  The District 
replied that no evidence was provided at the hearing about Ms. Orvin‟s situation that 
would support such an order. 
 
 
Ms. Orvin is a permanent certificated employee with a seniority date of 
October 1, 1999.  She holds a designated subjects vocational education credential, in 
English as a second language and therapeutic services.  Ms. Abrams testified that she 
prepared a specific seniority list for adult education as a starting point for identifying 
employees to receive preliminary layoff notices.  There are 23 permanent and 
probationary employees on this list.8  This seniority list reflects that Ms. Orvin is the 
seventh most-senior permanent certificated employee in this PKS and that there are 
16 less senior permanent and probationary employees below her on this list.  While 
less senior employees on this list are currently assigned to “allied health” and to 
“ESOL [English Speakers of Other Languages]” each of these individuals also 
received a preliminary layoff notice.  The District determined that Ms. Orvin was not 
able to bump into a position held by a more junior employee, either in Adult 
Education or in the regular program.  Ms. Orvin did not testify at hearing and there is 
no evidence regarding into what position she believes she is certificated and 
competent to bump.  There is insufficient evidence to address respondents‟ request. 
 
Early Childhood Education  
 
 
employees who had formerly worked in preschool/early childhood education (ECE) 
programs at the Rio Linda, North Sacramento, and Del Paso Heights elementary 
school districts.  At the time of the merger, there were eight Early Childhood 
Development Center (ECDC) Preschool Permit Teachers from the Rio Linda 
predecessor district who had been designated by Rio Linda as “classified” employees.  
This ECE group included respondents Julie Bradford, Kimberly Gunter, Maria 
Heasley, and Miscelle Ward (referred to as the „ECE respondents‟).9  Preschool 
                                                 
 
employees, presumably subject to Resolution No. 232 (release and non-reelection of 
temporary certificated employees). 

8 The adult education seniority list also references two “- 75% temporary” 

40.  On July 1, 2008, when the District came into existence, it absorbed 

9 The ECE group also included non-respondents Vicki O‟Connor, Nancy 

Adams, Pam Van Parys, and Charlotte Godinez.  Ms. O‟Connor, Ms. Van Parys and 
Ms. Godinez each have seniority dates of March 1, 2004, are currently classified as 

 

 

17 

41.  Nearly two years later, in late June 2010, CSEA, TRUE, and the 

instructors who entered the District from the two other elementary school districts had 
been designated as “certificated” employees by those districts.  Classified employees 
are represented by the California School Employees Association (CSEA).  Within the 
District, certificated employees are represented by the Twin Rivers United Educators 
(TRUE). 
 
 
District entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU).  Pursuant to this 
MOU, effective July 1, 2010, the ECE group was assigned to the certificated 
bargaining unit.  In pertinent part, the MOU provides that these employees “will bring 
their Preschool Instructor classification seniority with them and will be merged into 
the certificated seniority lists using said seniority.”  The MOU further provides that 
these employees: (1) “will serve a probationary period for a period of two years of 
employment from July 2010-July 2012,” and (2) that they will “receive permanent 
status starting the third year after completing two years of successful teaching under 
probationary status.”  
 
42.  District‟s ECE Services program provides primary instruction to 
 
children ages three to five years old.  Pursuant to the PKS Resolution, the ECE 
Services program will be reduced by 16 FTE positions; an unknown number of ECE 
positions will remain after the layoff.  Under the MOU, each of the ECE respondents 
is a probationary certificated employee in “Prob. 1” status.  These respondents 
received preliminary layoff notices and were unable to bump permanent certificated 
employees under section 44955, subdivision (b), which provides in pertinent part that: 
“[e]xcept as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee 
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary 
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service 
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.” 
 
 
For this layoff proceeding, the District determined that the ECE respondents 
were able to bump back into their former positions as “classified” employees.  Ms. 
Bradford testified that there are 13 certificated ECE employees who have less 
seniority than she, but who are permanent and did not receive preliminary layoff 
notices, and that the classified bump will return her to a para-educator position with 
decreased wages, hours and benefits. 
 
 
(Commission) is the agency responsible for issuing teaching credentials.  Employees 
holding such credentials are “certificated employees” subject to the protections of 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  The Commission issues six levels of 
“Child Development Permits” (CDPs) for service in child care and development 

Certificated Status:  The Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

43. 

                                                                                                                                                 
Probationary 1 employees assigned to ECE positions, and were not noticed for layoff.  
Ms. Adams has resigned.   

 

18 

programs,” which are defined as “any state licensed center-based child care and 
development program operated by a person, association, organization or school 
district legally authorized to conduct such programs.” (CCR, §§ 80109, 80105, subd. 
(b).) 10  A permit authorizing such services constitutes a “credential” under the 
Education Code and implementing regulations.  The Education Code expressly 
provides that a “credential” includes a credential, certificate, life document, life 
diploma, permit, certificate of clearance, or waiver issued by the commission. [Italics 
supplied.] (Educ. Code, § 44002; see also CCR, § 80001, subd. (e).).)  Section 44001 
provides that a “position requiring certification qualifications” includes “every type of 
service for which certification qualifications are established by or pursuant to 
Sections 44000 to 44012 to, inclusive, . . .”   Section 8366 provides that “each person 
employed by a public or private agency . . . in a position requiring a child 
development permit for the supervision and instruction of children, . . . or in the 
supervision of the child development program, shall be deemed to be employed in a 
position requiring certification qualifications.” 
 
 
The Commission governs the rights of certificated employees to obtain and to 
retain the credentials necessary to their status as “certificated employees.”  As part of 
this function, the Commission establishes the requirements for and issues permits to 
individuals to work in child care and child development programs.  (CCR, §§ 80111-
80114.)  The Commission has plenary authority to discipline holders of “permits 
authorizing service in children‟s centers or child development programs,” and it must 
do so according to “the laws and regulations that govern the denial, private 
admonition, public reproval, suspension or revocation of a credential.” (CCR, §  
80116.) 
 
 
Section 45104 provides that “every position not defined by this code as 
a position requiring certification qualifications and not specifically exempted from the 
classified service according to the provisions of Section 45103 or 45256 shall be 
classified as required by those sections and shall be a part of the classified service.”  
Section 45256, subdivision (b)(1), specifically provides that “positions which require 
certification qualifications” are “exempt from the classified service.”  
 
 
require “certification qualifications” from the Commission since they began work as 
preschool instructors at Rio Linda.  Since the 2008-2009 school year, the ECE 
                                                 
 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing which authorizes service in the care, 
development and instruction of children in a child care and development program.”  
(CCR, §  80105, subd. (a).) The six CDP permit levels are:  Assistant Permit, 
Associate Teacher Permit, Teacher Permit, Master Teacher Permit, Site Supervisor 
Permit and Program Director Permit.  (CCR, § 80109.)  
 
 

10 „Child Development Permits‟ are defined as “any permit issued by the 

Each of the ECE Respondents has been assigned to positions that 

45. 

44. 

 

19 

respondents have continued to provide ECE services to the District pursuant to 
credentials issued by the Commission.  The District has acknowledged their seniority 
dates, which reflect respondent‟s first date of paid probationary service. Their 
seniority dates and credentials are, as follows.  
 

a.    Julie Bradford has a seniority date of August 9, 2004.  Ms. 
Bradford is an Early Childhood Development Preschool Site 
Supervisor assigned to Kohler Preschool.  She holds a Child 
Development Site Supervisor Permit issued by the Commission 
on February 29, 2008, and she held a CDP Associate Teacher  
Permit when she began working in Rio Linda as a preschool  
instructor in 2004.   

b.    Kimberly Gunter has a seniority date of August 13, 2007.   
Ms. Gunter is an Early Childhood Development Preschool Site 
Supervisor assigned to Oakdale.  She holds the following credentials 
issued by the Commission: a Child Development Teacher Permit, 
issued February 1, 2007 (CCR, § 80112, subd. (c); expiration date  
February 1, 2012), and a Child Development Site Supervisor  
Permit, issued February 18,  2011.  

c.    Maria del Carmen Heasley has a seniority date of August 11, 2008.   
Ms. Heasley is an Early Childhood Development Teacher assigned to  
Oakdale.  She holds a Child Development Teacher Permit issued by the 
Commission on July 16, 2008. 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

d.    Miscelle Ward has a seniority date of August 11, 2008.  Ms. Ward 
is an Early Childhood Development Teacher assigned to Kohler.  She  
holds a Child Development Teacher Permit issued by the Commission  
on September 10, 2007. 

46.  As a matter of law, the ECE respondents became “certificated 

 
 
 
employees” on the date of their first paid probationary service as preschool/ECE 
instructors pursuant to section 44845.11 (See, San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen 
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 719.)  The error in designating these respondents as 
“classified” rather than “certificated” employees was continued by the District until 
the adoption of the MOU.  The consequences of this misclassification error are 
perpetuated by the MOU provision denying permanent status and requiring ECE 
respondents to complete a two-year probation beginning with the 2010-2011 school 

11 Section 44845 provides:  “Every probationary or permanent employee 

                                                 
 
employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on the date 
upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.” 

 

 

 

 

20 

47. 

Contentions:  ECE respondents request an order that they be credited 

The District does not dispute that ECE respondents were assigned as preschool 

year.  ECE respondents will not be permanent certificated employees until the 
commencement of the 2012-2013 school years. 
 
 
with certificated “seniority and permanency rights” based upon their first date of paid 
probationary service to the Rio Linda District as preschool instructors assigned to 
positions that required them to hold the qualifications of certificated employees. They 
argue that Section 44064 mandates that classified employees assigned to perform 
certificated duties retain all accrued “rights and benefits at the time of the 
assignment,” including both “seniority and permanency rights.” In their view, their 
rights to retain permanent status under 44064 cannot be waived by contract or 
collective bargaining. 
 
 
teachers at Rio Linda in classified positions and that the District continued to assign 
them to classified positions after it began operations.  It interprets section 44064 to 
require classified employees who are assigned to certificated positions to complete a 
mandatory two-year probation period required of all certificated employees as set 
forth in section 44929.21, subdivision (b).12  The District contends that the ECE 
respondents were appropriately issued preliminary layoff notices because they are still 
serving the two-year probationary period required by the MOU and must be laid off 
prior to any permanent certificated employee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
12 Pursuant to section 44929.21, subdivision (b), in a district of 250 students or 
 
more, a certificated employee is required to complete two consecutive school years in 
a probationary status.  If the employee is reelect for the next school year, the 
employee “shall . . . become a permanent employee of the district” effective at the 
commencement of the succeeding school year.  If  the school board fails to notify the 
probationary certificated employee of its decision to reelect or not reelect him/her for 
the next school year on or before March 15 of the employee‟s second complete 
consecutive school year in a position requiring certification qualifications, the 
“employee shall be deemed reelected for the next succeeding school year.” (Id.) 
 

If an employee of a school district . . . employed in a position  
in the classified service is assigned to a position in the same  
district requiring certification qualifications, the employee shall 
 
retain all sick leave, vacation, and other rights and benefits  
accumulated by the employee at the time he or she is assigned to 
a position requiring certification qualifications. All seniority  
and permanency rights shall be secured to the employee during  
the period of   time he or she occupies a position in the certificated  
service. The employee‟s return to the classified service at any time  

Education Code section 44064, in pertinent part, provides:  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48. 

 

21 

 
 

49. 

shall be treated as if there had not been an interruption in his or her  
classified service.  

 
 
 
The District‟s assertion that “the plain language” of section 44064 
 
requires a classified employee who switches to a certificated position to serve a 
probationary period in certificated service is not persuasive.  Respondents‟ position is 
persuasive for several reasons.  First, section 44064 is part of a series of statutes that 
govern the interchange between certificated and classified positions.  Section 44060 
outlines several purposes of Article 3, Chapter 1, in which it is found, one of which is 
“. . . to provide an interchange of qualified personnel between the certificated and 
classified services of the public school systems; and to secure rights and benefits to 
employees moving between the two services, all to the end of assuring better 
educational systems for the students of the public school systems.”  Read in the 
context of Article 3, it is apparent that section 44064 protects the accrued rights of 
classified employees who venture into certificated positions by enabling them to do so 
without fear of losing crucial rights and benefits, such as permanent status.  
Substantially similar language is used in section 44063, relating to the retention of 
rights and benefits by certificated employees assigned to positions in the classified 
service.  In both instances, interchanging employees who return to their originating 
positions “shall be treated as if there had not been an interruption in his or her” 
classified or certificated service.  These twin provisions encourage employees with 
accrued rights and benefits to risk accepting new positions where their status is not 
assured “all to the end of assuring better educational systems for the students of the 
public school systems.” 
 
 
Second, the ECE respondents did not voluntarily switch from classified 
service to certificated service as contemplated by section 44064.  Rather, ECE 
respondents were misclassified for years during a time when they were certificated 
employees as a matter of law.  Based on this ongoing misclassification, the two-year 
period of probation under section 44929.21 cannot be indefinitely deferred until the 
mistake is discovered.  To do so compounds an error not of respondents‟ making.  
Rather, the probationary period commenced on the first day of respondents‟ paid 
service in a certificated position, as required by section 44845. 
 

Third, the ECE respondents did not waive their right to the protections of the 
Education Code.  The parties presented evidence regarding the protracted period of 
negotiations which eventually led to the execution of the MOU.  Throughout this 
period, ECE respondents argued that their permanent status should be retained.  After 
the MOU was executed by the unions and the District, the ECE respondents were 
provided a single choice: to sign offers of certificated probationary employment or to 
exercise their bumping rights into their former classified positions.  Ms. Bradford and 
the ECE respondents signed contracts for probationary employment.   

 
The ECE respondents‟ rights to retain their permanent status as certificated 

employees cannot be waived by collective bargaining.  Education Code 44924 

 

22 

provides that, with exceptions that are not applicable, “any contract or agreement, 
express or implied, made by any employee to waive the benefits of this chapter or any 
part thereof is null and void.”13  The courts have indicated that public policy 
considerations counsel liberal enforcement of section 44924, and that this is “in 
keeping with the legislative policy of insuring „uniformity of treatment‟ of teachers 
by governing boards.” (United Teachers- L.A. v. Los Angeles Unified School Dist. 
(1994) 24 Cal. App. 4th 1510, 1520, rehearing and review denied.)  In this case, the 
gross disparity in treatment between the preschool teachers from other feeder districts 
and the ECE group has resulted in an ongoing disparity in their employment security 
and status. 
 

50. 

Remedy:  The District shall correct its records to reflect that 

respondents Julie Bradford, Kimberly Gunter, Maria Heasley, and Miscelle Ward are 
permanent certificated employees.  As a certificated employee with a seniority date of 
August 9, 2004, respondent Julie Bradford became a permanent employee at the 
commencement of the 2006-2007 school year.  As a certificated employee with a 
seniority date of August 13, 2007, respondent Kimberly Gunter became a permanent 
employee at the commencement of the 2009-2010 school year.  As certificated 
employees with a seniority dates of August 11, 2008, respondents Maria Heasley and 
Miscelle Ward became permanent employees at the commencement of the 2010-2011 
school year. 
 

On May 5, 2011, the District filed its Position in response to the May 4, 2011, 

Order Re: Early Childhood Educator Respondents.  While reasserting its argument 
that the ECE respondents are probationary certificated employees, the District 
provided its analysis of whether it would have issued layoff notices to these 
respondents if they are determined to be permanent employees. 
 

The District would not have issued preliminary layoff notices to either Julie 
Bradford or Kimberly Gunter based on their seniority dates, because there are two 
less senior permanent certificated employees who were not issued preliminary layoff 
notices (Priscilla Contreras, 9/29/08 and Leanne Rae, 10/13/08).  The Accusations 
against Ms. Bradford and Ms. Gunter will be dismissed. 
 

The parties disagree about whether the Accusations of Maria Heasley and  

Miscelle Ward should be dismissed.  Respondents assert that the Accusations against 
all ECE respondents must be rescinded if they are permanent certificated employees 
because there were 13 other ECE employees who did not receive layoff notices.  The 
District asserts that it would have issued preliminary layoff notices to both Ms. 
Heasley and Ms. Ward, even as permanent employees.  It notes that there are three 
                                                 

13 The exceptions are as provided in sections 44937 (waiver of hearing in a 

dismissal or suspension proceeding) and 44956 (rights of terminated permanent 
employee). 
 

 

23 

other permanent certificated ECE employees with the same August 11, 2008 seniority 
dates as Ms. Heasley and Ms. Ward who did not receive layoff notices.  The District 
used its Tie Break Criteria from Resolution 235, and determined the order of seniority 
based upon relative years of experience.   
 

         a.    Cynthia Torrez    
b.    Roberta Coker 
 
 
c.     Christine Verner 
 
 
d.    Miscelle Ward 
 
 
 
e.    Maria Heasley 
 

11 years experience 
  7 years experience 
  4 years experience 
  3 years experience   
  3 years experience 

Because Ms. Ward and Ms. Heasley have the least experience, they would still have 
received notice.  Respondents objected to the District‟s application of the experience 
criteria as unsupported by the record.   
 
 
The District‟s analysis is correct.  The District used the same experience 
criteria when it rescinded the notice issued to Susan Bridge (Factual Finding 19.) The 
Accusations against Ms. Ward and Ms. Heasley will not be dismissed but their 
records will be corrected to reflect their status as permanent certificated employees.  
 
 
addressed above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 
 

51.  Any other assertions raised by respondents at hearing which are not 

52. 

Except as stated above, no more junior employees are being retained to 

render services that more senior respondents are certificated and competent to 
perform. 
 

53. 

The District‟s reductions and discontinuances of particular kinds of  

services relate solely to the welfare of its schools and pupils. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education Code section 44949 provides, in pertinent part, as follows: 

 
       

 

 

 

(a)   No later than March 15 and before an employee is given  
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not  
be required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in  
Section 44955, the governing board and the employee shall be  
given written notice by the superintendent of the district or his  
or her designee, or in the case of a district which has no  
superintendent by the clerk or secretary of the governing board,  
that it has been recommended that the notice be given to the  
employee, and stating the reasons therefor. 
 

24 

 
 
2. 
part that: 
 

 [¶]. . .[¶] 
(b)   The employee may request a hearing to determine if there  
is cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. . . 
If an employee fails to request a hearing on or before the date  
specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his or her  
waiver of his or her right to a hearing. The notice provided for  
in subdivision (a) shall advise the employee of the provisions of  
this subdivision. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides in pertinent 

(b)   Whenever in any school year . . . a particular kind of service  
is to be reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the  
following school  year, . . . and when in the opinion of the governing  
board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any  
of these conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees  
in the district, the governing board may terminate the services of not  
more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated employees  
of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the  
school year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of  
no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this  
section while any probationary employee, or any other employee with  
less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent  
employee is certificated and competent to render. . .  

3. 

The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 

 
 
evidence that the proposed reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and 
the preliminary notice of layoff served on respondents are factually and legally 
appropriate. 
 

4. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

and particularly Factual Findings 1 through 10, all notice and jurisdictional 
requirements set forth in sections 44944 and 44945 were met.  The notices sent to 
respondents indicated the statutory basis for the reduction of services and, therefore, 
were sufficiently detailed to provide them due process.  (San Jose Teachers 
Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers 
v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  The description of services to be 
reduced, both in the Board Resolutions and in the notices, adequately describe 
particular kinds of services.  (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.  
See, also, Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 

5. 

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular  

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another 
manner. (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California 

 

25 

Teachers Association v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 
Cal.App.3d 32.)  A school board may reduce services within the meaning of the 
statute either by determining that a certain type of service shall not be performed at all 
or by reducing the number of district employees who perform such services.  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 
Cal.App.3d 167.) 
 

6. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

7. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

As set forth in Factual Findings 17 through 19 and 23, the District 

the services identified in the PKS/Conforming Resolutions are particular kinds of 
services that may be reduced or discontinued under sections 44949 and 44955.  The 
Board‟s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary 
nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the District‟s schools and 
pupils within the meaning of section 44949. 
 
 
rescinded preliminary layoff notices issued to 23 certificated employees.  
Accordingly, the Accusations against the following respondent are dismissed: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(8/11/08) 
Cynthia Corral  
(8/11/08) 
Adrienne Ruggles  
(9/14/09) 
Colleen Kinder  
(8/01/07) 
Andrea Cottrell  
(8/15/07) 
Tangelica Crates  
(10/24/07)  
Michelle Bricker  
Daniel Grubbs  
(8/09/07) 
Carrie-Anna McCoy  (9/24/07)  
(8/15/07)  
Clay Schubert  
(2/05/07) 
Tessa McGarr  
(8/01/07) 
Megan Wooden  
(8/17/06)  
Susan Bridge   
(8/01/07)  
Autumn Sharpe  

  
 
 
 
and particularly Factual Findings 29 through 36, the Accusation against respondent 
Alicia Caddell is dismissed. 
 
 
and particularly Factual Findings 41 through 50, the District shall correct its 
personnel records and certificated seniority list to reflect that respondents Julie 
Bradford, Kimberly Gunter, Maria Heasley, and Miscelle Ward are permanent 
certificated employees.  The Accusations against respondents Julie Bradford and 
Kimberly Gunter are dismissed. 
 

As set forth in the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

As set forth in the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8. 

9. 

 
 

 
 

 

26 

10.  As set forth in the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

except as is noted above, the District has established that no employees junior to 
respondents are being retained to perform the services which respondents are 
competent and certificated to render. 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

1.  

The Accusations against the following respondents are hereby 

dismissed, based on Legal Conclusion 7: 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 

 

(8/11/08) 
Cynthia Corral  
(8/11/08) 
Adrienne Ruggles  
(9/14/09) 
Colleen Kinder  
(8/01/07) 
Andrea Cottrell  
(8/15/07) 
Tangelica Crates  
(10/24/07)  
Michelle Bricker  
Daniel Grubbs  
(8/09/07) 
Carrie-Anna McCoy  (9/24/07)  
(8/15/07)  
Clay Schubert  
(2/05/07) 
Tessa McGarr  
(8/01/07) 
Megan Wooden  
(8/17/06)  
Susan Bridge   
(8/01/07)  
Autumn Sharpe  

 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 

The Accusation against Alicia Caddell is hereby dismissed, based on 

3. 

Based on Legal Conclusion 9, the District shall correct its personnel 

Legal Conclusion 8. 
 
 
records and certificated seniority list to reflect that respondents Julie Bradford, 
Kimberly Gunter, Maria Heasley, and Miscelle Ward are permanent certificated 
employees.  The Accusations against respondents Julie Bradford and Kimberly 
Gunter are dismissed. 
  

4. 

The District may give notice to the remaining respondents that it will 

not require their services for the 2011-2012 school year.  Notice shall be given in 
inverse order of seniority. 

 
 
DATED:  May 5, 2011 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

     ___________________________ 
MARILYN A. WOOLLARD 

    

                  Administrative Law Judge 
                  Office of Administrative Hearings 

27 

 

 

EXHIBIT A 
RESPONDENTS SERVED WITH ACCUSATIONS 
 

 

LAST 
AMPARO 
BALLARD 
BANKS 
BARO 
BAXTER 
BETSCHART 
BRADFORD 
BRICKER 
BRIDGE 
BROWN 
BUNCH 
BUTTS 
CADDELL 
CAMMACK 
CARPENTER 
CARRAZANA 
CASTELLANOS 
CASTELLANOS 
CATANIA 
CISNEROS 
CLARK 
CORRAL 
COTTRELL 
CRATES 
CROSS 
CUCU 
DAHL TRUJILLO 
DEANE-HANSON 
DIXON 
EARLEY 
ESPINO 
FREEMAN 
GREEN 
GRIFFITH 
GRUBBS 

28 

 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 

FIRST 
MICHAEL 
JILL 
GENEVIEVE 
CHE' 
GEORGE 
BRAD 
JULIE 
MICHELLE 
SUSAN 
JEFFREY 
SANDRA 
TIMOTHY 
ALICIA 
STEVEN 
CHRISTINA 
ETELVINA 
MARY 
PAUL 
ANDREA 
MARGIE 
ANNIE 
CYNTHIA 
ANDREA 
TANGELICA 
CALEN 
MARIA 
KARA 
DESIRE 
CARL 
CONSTANCE 
MICHAEL 
LINDE 
KATHRYN 
EFFIE 
DANIEL 

36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 

GUNTER 
HAMILTON 
HANSEN 
HANSON 
HARBACK 
HARRIS-HODNETT 
HEASLEY 
HENDERSON 
HUDDLESTON 
HUEZO 
JACOBS 
JENSEN 
JENSEN 
JOHNSON 
KILCULLEN 
KINDER 
KLEINLE 
LINGENFELTER 
LOPEZ 
LUND 
LYMAN 
LYONS 
MACIAS 
MARTIN 
MCCARTHY 
MCCOY 
MCGARR 
MICHELMAN 
MYERS 
NESTA 
NEWBERRY 
ORVIN 
PANCARO 
PEARSON 
PERDIGONE 
POLSON 
PRENTICE 
PRESS-DAWSON 
PRICE 
RANAGAN 
RANSFORD 

KIMBERLY 
NATALIE 
STACY 
REBEKAH 
KENDRA 
BRANDY 
MARIA 
ELIZABETH 
MATTHEW 
JESSICA 
TARA 
LYNN 
STEVEN 
JANAE 
ANNA 
COLLEEN 
JUSTIN 
MYSTI 
STELLA 
MERLYN 
JOHN 
KARI 
ALBERTO 
JOLIE 
KATHLEEN 
CARRIE-ANNA 
TESSA 
MARY 
RENEE 
DONATO 
JESSICA 
VESLAV 
RICHARD 
CARRIE 
AMY 
MARYANN 
SUSAN 
TERRY 
CONNIE 
RON 
KELLY 

 

29 

77 
78 
79 
80 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 

REID 
RIERSON 
RODMAN 
RODRIGUEZ 
RUGGLES 
SALAZAR 
SCHUBERT 
SHARMA 
SHARP 
SHIBATA 
SMITH 
STARRH 
STINSON 
TOLLE 
TROXLER 
VANG 
VOIGT 
WARD 
WILKINS 
WOODARD 
WOODEN 
WRIGHT 
YOUNG 

KAREN 
MARGARET 
LAURA 
JOSE 
ADRIENNE 
TANIA 
CLAY 
PRITIKA 
AUTUMN 
GAYLE 
NICHOLE 
CARLY 
ANNA 
SARA 
REBECCA 
CHENG 
HEATHER 
MISCELLE 
OLIVIA 
ERIC 
MEGAN 
ROSE 
JONATHAN 

 

 

30 

EXHIBIT B 
REPRESENTED RESPONDENTS  

1  AMPARO 
2  BALLARD 
3  BANKS (aka: Johnsen) 
4  BARO 
5  BAXTER 
6  BRADFORD 
7  BRICKER - rescinded 4/12/11 
8  BRIDGE - rescinded 4/13/11 
9  BROWN 
10  CADDELL 
11  CAMMACK 
12  CARPENTER 
13  CASTELLANOS 
14  CASTELLANOS 
15  CATANIA (aka: Stephenson) 
16  CISNEROS 
17  CLARK 
18  CORRAL - rescinded 4/12/11 
19  COTTRELL - rescinded 4/12/11 
20  CRATES - rescinded 4/12/11 
21  CROSS 
22  CUCU 
23  DAHL TRUJILLO 
24  DEANE-HANSON 
25  DIXON 
26  EARLEY 
27  ESPINO 
28  GREEN 
29  GRIFFITH 
30  GRUBBS - - rescinded 4/12/11 
31  GUNTER 
32  HANSEN 
33  HARBACK 
34  HARRIS-HODNETT 
35  HEASLEY 
36  HUDDLESTON 
37  JACOBS 
38  JENSEN 
39  JENSEN 
40  JOHNSON 
41  KILCULLEN 
42  KINDER - rescinded 4/12/11 
43  KLEINLE 
44  LINGENFELTER 
45  LOPEZ 
46  LYMAN 

 

MICHAEL 
JILL 
GENEVIEVE 
CHE 
GEORGE 
JULIE 
MICHELLE 
SUSAN 
JEFFREY 
ALICIA 
STEVEN 
CHRISTINA 
MARY 
PAUL 
ANDREA 
MARGIE 
ANNIE 
CYNTHIA 
ANDREA 
TANGELICA (TANGIE) 
CALEN 
MARIA 
KARA 
DESIRE 
CARL 
CONSTANCE 
MICHAEL 
KATHRYN 
EFFIE 
DANIEL 
KIMBERLY 
STACY 
KENDRA 
BRANDY 
MARIA 
MATTHEW 
TARA 
LYNN 
STEVEN 
JANAE 
ANNA 
COLLEEN 
JUSTIN 
MYSTI M. 
STELLA 
JOHN 

 

31 

47  LYONS 
48  MCCARTHY 
49  MCCOY - rescinded 4/12/11 
50  MCGARR - rescinded 4/13/11 
51  MICHELMAN 
52  MYERS 
53  ORVIN 
54  PANCARO 
55  PEARSON-NELSON 
56  POLSON 
57  PRENTICE 
58  PRESS-DAWSON 
59  PRICE 
60  REID 
61  RIERSON 
62  RODMAN 
63  RODRIGUEZ 
64  RUGGLES - rescinded 4/12/11 
65  SALAZAR 
66  SCHUBERT - rescinded 4/12/11 
67  SHARMA   
68  SHARP 
69  SHIBATA 
70  SMITH 
71  TOLLE 
72  VANG 
73  VOIGT 
74  WARD 
75  WILKINS 
76  WOODEN -- rescinded 4/13/11 

KARI 
KATHLEEN 
CARRIE-ANNA 
TESSA 
MARY 
RENEE 
VESLAV 
RICHARD 
CARRIE 
MARYANN 
SUSAN 
TERRY 
CONNIE 
KAREN 
MARGARET (Meg) 
LAURA 
JOSE 
ADRIENNE 
TANIA 
CLAY 
PRITIKA 
AUTUMN 
GAYLE KIM 
NICHOLE 
SARA 
CHENG 
HEATHER 
MISCELLE 
OLIVIA 
MEGAN 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

32 

