BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
SAN JUAN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
OF THE SAN JUAN UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT,1

OAH No. 2011010189

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Dian M. Vorters, Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 11 through 14, 2011, in Carmichael,
California.

Linda C. T. Simlick, General Counsel, San Juan Unified School District (SJUSD),

represented the Board of Education, San Juan Unified School District. Larry Graser,
Director, Human Resources, Kent Kern, Senior Director of Facilities, and Deann Carlson,
Analyst, were also present.

Michael N. McCallum, Attorney at Law,2 represented all respondent teachers. Sandra

Galindo, Assistant Executive Director of the San Juan Teachers Association and Robin
Thompson, Paralegal, were also present.

Dennis Pedersen, Executive Director for the San Juan Professional Educators
Coalition (SJPEC), as a non-attorney advocate, represented Teresa Heath, Vice Principal of
Adult Education and Susan Kerhoulas, Vice Principal at Del Campo High School.

1 List of Certificated Employees of the San Juan Unified School District who the

Superintendent served with an Accusation. (Attachment A.)

2 Michael N. McCallum, Attorney at Law, 5820 Landis Avenue, Suite 3, Carmichael,

California 95608.

1

Evidence was received and the record was left open for an offer of proof on behalf of
Joseph Pallen (respondent) to be received by April 15, 2011, and the parties’ written closing
briefs to be received by April 29, 2011, at 4:00 p.m. On April 15, 2011, OAH received from
the Law Office of Michael N. McCallum, Joseph Pallen’s Offer of Proof. This item was
marked as Exhibit FF and admitted in evidence. The District’s closing brief was received on
April 29, 2011, was marked as Exhibit 40, and admitted in evidence. Respondent teachers’
closing brief was received on April 29, 2011, was marked as Exhibit GG, and admitted in
evidence. Respondent administrators’ closing statement was received on April 27, 2011, was
marked as Exhibit AA2, and admitted in evidence, over the District’s objection. The record
was closed on April 29, 2011.

Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Dr. Pat Jaurequi, is the Superintendent of the San Juan Unified School District

(SJUSD). Ruth G. Peshkoff, is the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources (HR).
They performed their duties solely in their official capacities.

2.

Before March 8, 2011, the Superintendent determined that funding for the

2011-2012 school year would be reduced, thereby necessitating the reduction or elimination
of certain particular kinds of services (PKS). The Superintendent’s recommendation to
eliminate and reduce teaching services was made solely for the welfare of students.

3.

On February 8, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2553, providing for

the reduction or elimination of PKS, resulting in the reduction or elimination of 357.19
certificated positions. Areas identified for reduction or elimination included K-12 classroom
instruction, administration, adult education, nursing, and counseling.

4.

Also on February 8, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2554, specifying
criteria to be used in determining the order of termination of certificated employees who first
rendered paid service as a probationary teachers on the same date (tie-breaking criteria). The
tie-breaking criteria are attached as Attachment C.

5.

On March 8, 2011, the Board adopted a revised Resolution No. 2553,

providing for the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services, resulting in the
reduction or elimination of 364.79 certificated positions.3 The revised PKS list is attached as
Attachment B. The revised resolution also authorized application of competency and
skipping criteria as more fully set forth below.

3 The additional 7.6 FTE consist of a Program Specialist position at 1.0 FTE and

Nurse positions at 6.6 FTE.

2

6.

On March 9, 2011, the Superintendent served on persons affected by the

reduction and elimination of PKS a “Preliminary Notice of Recommendation That Service
Will Not Be Required” for the ensuing 2011–2012 school year (Layoff Notice or Notice).
The Notice stated that the Superintendent had recommended to the Board that notice be
given to respondents pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that their
services would not be required for the ensuing school year. The Notice advised that the
Board had passed a Resolution reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of services in order
to reduce certificated staff, and included copies of the Resolutions identifying the PKS to be
reduced or eliminated.

7.

Respondents, with the exception of two teachers represented by counsel,

timely requested a hearing to determine if there was cause for not re-employing them for the
ensuing school year.4

8.

The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each of the employees

who requested a hearing. The Accusations, required accompanying documents, and blank
Notices of Defense were timely served on those employees. Respondents timely filed
Notices of Defense to the Accusations.

Larry Graser, Director of Human Resources

9.

Larry Graser is the Director of HR for the District. He testified that the

District is experiencing budget constraints that have necessitated a reduction in force of
certificated employees and/or an elimination of PKS before the start of the 2011-2012 school
year. In implementing the layoff, no certificated employee was retained to render any
service for which there was a more senior employee who was competent and certificated to
render the service. In the event that two or more certificated employees first rendered paid
service as probationary teachers on the same date, tie-breaking criteria were employed. Mr.
Graser explained the process by which the District implemented the layoff including
provision of notice, verification of personnel records, competency criteria, skipping, tie-
breaking, and bumping, as set forth more fully below.

10

Verification of Personnel Records. The District gave employees an

opportunity to verify their personnel data. On or about November 29, 2010, the HR
Department sent letters by first class mail to every employee with their personnel data

4 Respondents Christina Cova and Evie Pierce did not timely request a hearing.

However, both Ms. Cova and Ms. Pierce timely filed a “Supplemental Notice of Defense”
through counsel. The District objected to and moved to strike their Notice of Defense at the
pre-hearing conference held April 1, 2011. After argument, the ALJ ordered, on due process
grounds, that both teachers be permitted to participate in the Layoff hearing.

3

including credentials, status, and seniority date. The letter requested that employees review
the data, correct any errors, sign, date and return the letter to HR by December 15, 2010. HR
staff reviewed all responses, verified data, and made valid corrections. On or about February
4, 2011, the District sent an e-mail to all employees inviting them to review the final
seniority lists at either the SJUSD District Office or at the San Juan Teachers’ Association
Office, both in Carmichael. Mr. Graser stated that the purpose of this verification was to
ensure that the District was working with accurate data for implementation of potential
layoffs.5 Despite these efforts, not all corrections were returned or made known to the
District as requested. Evidence of additional information was presented at hearing and is
discussed below.

Stipulated Rescissions

11.

At hearing, the District agreed to rescind layoff notices issued to the following
certificated employees: Amber Betzler, Mitchell Crowden, Susan Reardon, Josh Costa (.30
FTE), Kara Macomber, and Michele Senini.6

Employment Status and Seniority Date Stipulations

12.

Employment Status. The Education Code permits certificated employees to be

classified in one of four ways: permanent, probationary, substitute, or temporary.
(Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High School Dist. (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911, 916.)
“A certificated employee is classified as permanent, i.e., acquires tenure, if after having been
employed for two complete successive school years in a position requiring certification
qualifications, he or she is reelected for the following year.” (Ed. Code, § 44929.21, subd.
(b).) “Regardless of the number of years that the employee may have served in a temporary
status in a position with certificated qualifications, the employee must serve one year as a
probationary employee before acquiring permanent status. (Schnee v. Alameda Unified
School Dist. (2004) 125 Cal.App.4th 555, 564.) Substitute and temporary employees fill the
short range needs of a school district and generally may be summarily released. (Bakersfield
Elem. School Dist. v. Bakersfield City School Dist. et al. (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260,
1278.)

13.

Seniority Dates. Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a
school district. Layoffs of certificated employees classified as probationary or permanent
take place in accordance with seniority. If a school district seeks to terminate employment
for economic reasons (such as a decline in daily attendance or discontinuance of services),
probationary and permanent employees are entitled to certain procedural protections pursuant

5 Neither day-to-day or long-term substitute teachers were included on the seniority

lists.

6 Ms. Betzler won the tie-breaker at hearing. Ms. Reardon was omitted from the

District’s closing brief. However, at hearing, the District agreed to rescind her notice.

4

to Education Code section 44949. No permanent employee may be laid off if a probationary
employee, or any other employee of less seniority, occupies a position the permanent
employee is certificated and competent to fill. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) Also, “a
probationary employee, may ‘bump’ another probationary employee with less seniority.”
(California Teachers Assoc. et al., v. Vallejo City Unified School Distr. (2007) 149
Cal.App.4th 135, 145.) Seniority is determined as of the date the employee “first rendered
paid service in a probationary position.” (Ed. Code, § 44845.) “Temporary employees,
therefore, do not accrue seniority, and so must be released before probationary employees.”
(California Teachers Assoc. et al., v. Vallejo, supra, 149 Cal.App.4th at p. 145.)

14.

Stipulations Related to Seniority Dates. At hearing, the District took into

account additional information received from respondents. The District stipulated to earlier
seniority dates for several certificated employees. Respondents agreed to the following
corrections to their seniority dates:

Employee
Buckmaster, Christine
Verigin, Hannah
Tupper, Cara
Jones, Elisha
Matt, Amy
Ju-Nolan, Amy
Smith, Robert
Delzer, Shannon
Madden, David
Martinez, Paquito
Teachout, Christine
Utley, Patricia
Winney, Gayle
Oates, Melissa
D’angelo, Janine
Fischer, Sarah
Garrett, Marcia
Stahle, Joan
McAllister, Michael7

Competency Criteria

Incorrect Hire Date
November 19, 2010
January 20, 2011
January 20, 2009
September 15, 2008
August 14, 2008
September 7, 2006
August 15, 2007
August 18, 2005
August 18, 2005
August 18, 2005
August 18, 2005
August 18, 2005
August 31, 2004
September 16, 2004
August 20, 2004
August 31, 2004
August 31, 2004
August 30, 2004
August 19, 2002

Correct Hire date
October 29, 2010
October 11, 2010
December 2, 2008
August 27, 2008
August 13, 2008
August 16, 2006
August 31, 2006
August 17, 2005
August 17, 2005
August 17, 2005
August 17, 2005
August 17, 2005
August 19, 2004
August 19, 2004
August 19, 2004
August 18, 2004
August 18, 2004
August 18, 2004
September 27, 2001

15.

The Board, in Resolution 2553, established “competency criteria” for the

Regional Occupational Program (ROP), Career Technical Education (CTE), and Non-
ROP/CTE teachers. Mr. Graser testified that the District decided to look at recent teaching
experience to ensure that teachers are a “good match” for the positions they are bumping

7 The District agreed to adjust Mr. McAllister’s seniority date in their closing brief.

5

into. The District included “highly qualified” status to comply with “No Child Left Behind”
(NCLB) state and federal mandates. Such determinations “involve discretionary decisions
which are within the special competence of the school districts.” (Duax v. Kern Community
College Dist. (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.)

16.

Certificated and Competent. Pursuant to Resolution 2553, for the ROP or

CTE programs, a teacher is considered “certificated and competent” if that teacher:

a) Holds a valid credential issued by the State of California which is
associated with the course(s) being taught, and

b) Has taught the course(s) for at least one semester in the current school year
or either of the two preceding school years.

For Non-ROP/CTE positions, a teacher is considered “certificated and competent” if

that teacher:

a) Holds a valid credential issued by the State of California which is
associated with the courses(s) being taught AND, for course(s) identified by
NCLB as core curriculum, is NCLB Highly Qualified to teach the course(s) or

b) If there is no credential issued by the State of California associated with the
course(s) being taught, has taught the specific course(s) for at least one
semester in the current school year or either of the two preceding school years.

17.

ROP/CTE programs include courses in automotive mechanics, retail sales, and

culinary arts. According to Mr. Graser, competency standards are stricter for the ROP/CTE
program than for the regular Kindergarten through 12th (K-12) grade program because ROP
credentials can be fairly broad and the District wants to ensure experience to teach the
occupational subject. As such, a teacher with a K-12 credential who is teaching English is
considered competent to bump into a Math assignment (if highly qualified), even if the
teacher last taught Math 20 years ago. But, a teacher with an ROP credential teaching retail
sales, cannot bump into an ROP automotive assignment, even if the teacher last taught
automotive mechanics four years ago.

18.

No Child Left Behind/Highly Qualified Status. State and federal mandates
under NCLB require teachers to be “highly qualified” in specific core subjects (English,
Math, Science, Social Science, Visual and Performing Arts (VAPA)). Districts are audited
by state and federal Departments of Education and risk losing funding if found to be non-
compliant. To acquire NCLB/HQ status, a teacher must possess a valid State issued
credential in a core subject and show subject matter competency. Subject matter competency
can be established by either passing a test in that subject or having earned a Bachelors degree
in a single-subject major. If hired before July 1, 2002, HQ status can be gained through a
process called HOUSSE which stands for High Objective Uniform State Standard of

6

Evaluation. This is an approved Individual Professional Development Plan (IPDP) which
assigns points for experience, Master’s degrees, leadership roles such as department chair
positions, and training.

19.

Though NCLB was passed in 2001, this is the first year that the District has

included NCLB qualification in the layoff resolution. The District is approximately 90
percent compliant with NCLB standards and the goal is to be 100 percent NCLB compliant.
As such, teachers in the District must establish that they are NCLB/HQ to be found
competent for purposes of bumping into another position. Mr. Graser stated that the District
has made more of an effort to identify and increase the number of NCLB/HQ teachers.
However, employees not affected by the layoff who teach Core subjects and are not
NCLB/HQ will remain in those positions.

20.

Elizabeth Wallace, Cheryl Dultz, Laurel Lyda, Brooke Thomas, Jerilynn

Ferrari, Anna Del Mul, and Lucas Anderson. As of February 23, 2011, HR had not verified
HQ status for all affected certificated employees. Respondents raised the issue that the HQ
status of some senior teachers who bumped junior teachers was not established in the record.
Mr. Graser stated that he believed these teachers were HQ because they had taught in the
District for long periods and would qualify under HOUSSE provisions. During the hearing,
HR verified the HQ status of these teachers. Mr. Graser confirmed that each of them was, in
fact, NCLB/HQ. The following determinations are made regarding their ability to bump into
positions held by junior teachers:

a.
Nicole Sandoval and Elizabeth Wallace. Ms. Wallace is permanent with a
seniority date of August 25, 1978. She is on special assignment/special education.
She holds a multiple subject self-contained classroom credential and a specialist
learning handicapped credential. Mr. Graser confirmed that Ms. Wallace was HQ for
a multiple subject position based on the HOUSSE point system.8 Ms. Sandoval is a
probationary teacher with a seniority date of February 2, 2011. Ms. Sandoval teaches
second grade. Ms. Wallace is certificated and competent to bump Ms. Sandoval for
1.0 FTE in multiple subject self-contained position.

Cheryl Dultz, Judith Jordan, and Amy Day. Ms. Dultz is permanent with a
b.
seniority date of July 30, 1985. She is on special assignment providing PAR (peer
assistance and review) support at .50 FTE. She holds a multiple subject self-
contained credential, a resource specialist certificate, and a CLAD authorization. Mr.
Graser confirmed that Ms. Dultz was HQ for a multiple subject position. Amy Day is
a permanent teacher with a seniority date of August 13, 2008. She teaches Social

8 Applying the HOUSSE system to Ms. Wallace, she scored the requisite 100 points

by having taught for five years (10 points per year) and completing a Commission on
Teacher Credentialing (CTC) approved liberal studies waiver program (50 points).

7

Studies, World History, and English (Core).9 Ms. Jordan is a traveling physical
education teacher with a multiple subject self-contained credential. Ms. Dultz is
certificated and competent to bump Ms. Day for .30 FTE and Ms. Jordan for .20 FTE
in multiple subject self-contained positions.
c.
Laurel Lyda, Andrea Mager, and Angela Nodolf. Ms. Lyda is permanent with
a seniority date of August 23, 1996. She is a resource teacher/special programs. She
holds a multiple subject self-contained credential, an administrative service
certificate, and a CLAD authorization. Mr. Graser confirmed that Ms. Lyda is HQ for
a multiple subject position. Ms. Nodolf is permanent with a seniority date of August
17, 2006. She teaches World History and English Core. Ms. Mager is permanent
with a seniority date of September 5, 2006. She teaches Social Studies and English
Core. Ms. Lyda is certificated and competent to bump Ms. Nodolf for .30 FTE and
Ms. Mager for .70 FTE in multiple subject self-contained positions.

Brooke Thomas and Grace Wahl. Ms. Thomas is permanent with a seniority

d.
date of August 21, 2000. She is a Vice Principal/Elementary Title I. She holds a
multiple subject self-contained credential and a CLAD authorization. Mr. Graser
confirmed that Ms. Thomas is HQ for a multiple subject position. Ms. Wahl is
permanent with a seniority date of October 20, 2005. She teaches Social Studies and
English (Core). Ms. Thomas is certificated and competent to bump Ms. Wahl for 1.0
FTE in a multiple subject self-contained position.

Jerilynn Ferrari, Ryan Gantenbein, Natalie Hanson, and Robert Smith. Ms.
e.
Ferrari is permanent with a seniority date of August 23, 1996. She teaches computer
applications/retail sales. She holds single subject credentials in Business,
Introductory Mathematics, Introductory General Science, an administrative services
certificate and is CLAD authorized. Mr. Gantenbein is permanent with a seniority
date of August 13, 2008. He serves as a traveling Elementary Classroom teacher.
Ms. Hanson is permanent with a seniority date of August 20, 2007. She teaches
World History, Geography, Economics, and American Government at the high school
level. She holds a single subject Social Science credential, an EL authorization, and
is NCLB/HQ. Mr. Smith is permanent with a seniority date of August 15, 2007. He
teaches digital imaging and business office professional functions. Mr. Graser
testified that there is no NCLB/HQ competency for technology or business areas. He
confirmed that Ms. Ferrari was HQ in the area of Economics. Ms. Ferrari is
certificated and competent to bump Mr. Gantenbein for .33 FTE Elementary
Classroom, Ms. Hanson for .20 FTE Economics, and Mr. Smith for .07 FTE Digital
Imaging.

Anna Del Mul. Ms. Del Mul is permanent with a seniority date of September

f.
14, 2007. She teaches Science and Directed Study at Lichen (K-8). She holds a

9 A Core assignment is when a teacher teaches two or more subjects with the same

group of students.

8

multiple subject credential in English and Science, has an English Learner
Authorization (ELA), and is NCLB/HQ. Several employees with greater seniority
than Ms. Del Mul hold multiple subject credentials with Science and/or English
authorizations, but are not NCLB/HQ. As such, they were not considered competent
to bump into her position. These teachers challenged the District’s inclusion of HQ
status as a competency criteria.10 It is within the District’s “special competence” to
include NCLB/HQ status as a competency standard for purposes of bumping. (see
Duax v. Kern Community College Dist. (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.)

g.
Lucas Anderson. Mr. Anderson is permanent with a seniority date of August
10, 2006. He is a teacher on Special Assignment in Psychiatric Services at Kenneth
School. He holds a multiple subject credential self-contained for which he is
NCLB/HQ, an Education Specialist Mild/Moderate, and an EL authorization. The
District identified 14.0 FTE in reductions to Teachers on Special Assignment
(TOSA). Mr. Anderson’s assignment was not targeted for elimination. Mr. Graser
stated that there is no credential for his assignment; hence, for a more senior teacher
to bump into Mr. Anderson’s assignment, the teacher would need to demonstrate
subject matter competence through recent experience. Though there were some
TOSA with greater seniority, none of them met the competency criteria to bump into
Mr. Anderson’s particular assignment.

Skipping Criteria

21.

The Board, in Resolution 2553, also established skipping criteria. “Junior

employees may be given retention priority over senior employees only if they possess special
skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.” (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd.
(d)(1); Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School Dist. (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399, 405.)
Resolution 2553 states that employees with the following special skills are to be skipped.
Those who:

a.

b.

c.

Hold a valid credential authorizing special education service other than a
Mild/Moderate Credential, Learning Handicapped Credential, Resource
Specialist Certificate, or Development Center Permit.

Hold a valid multiple subject credential and a valid BCLAD (Bilingual Cross-
cultural Language and Academic Development) in Spanish.

Have experience teaching in a Montessori classroom for at least one semester
in the current school year or either of the two preceding school years or have
Montessori training in the current school year or either of the two preceding

10 Stephanie Jones, David Madden, Sarah Swallow, Kara Borgman, Melissa Oates,

Deborah Ortmann, Cassondra Anderson, and Gerell Elliott challenged inclusion of
NCLB/HQ as a competency criteria.

9

school years. Such training must lead to certification by a program accredited
by the Montessori Accreditation Council for Teacher Education (MACTE).
On-line Montessori training does not meet this criteria.

22.

BCLAD Employees. Mr. Graser explained that the District started an

immersion program at Edison Elementary that they want to expand. The skipping criteria
allow any teacher with a multiple subject credential and a BCLAD authorization in Spanish
to be skipped. He stated that some people skipped on this basis will not be teaching at
Edison Elementary.

Hilda Fernandez. Ms. Fernandez is permanent with a seniority date of April

a.
15, 1997. She is a Vice Principal/Elementary. She holds a multiple subject credential
for General Subjects and Spanish, and is BCLAD authorized. The District targeted
5.0 Elementary Vice Principal Positions for elimination. Mr. Graser did not know if
Ms. Fernandez would be teaching next year of if she would remain an administrator.
She was skipped because of her BCLAD authorization. She did not bump any other
certificated employee. Administrators are not afforded the same protections as
teachers in economic layoffs. (Factual Finding 28.)

Maria Alvarado and Armando Galvan. Ms. Alvarado is probationary with a
b.
seniority date of August 19, 2010. She teaches Spanish I and II at Mesa Verde High
School. She holds a multiple subject self-contained credential for which she is
NCLB/HQ and a BCLAD in Spanish. Mr. Galvan is probationary with a seniority
date of August 19, 2009. He teaches Spanish I and II at El Camino High School. He
is a District Intern and holds a single subject credential in Spanish, an English Learner
authorization, and is NCLB/HQ in Spanish. Neither Ms. Alvarado nor Mr. Galvan
are currently teaching at Edison Elementary. Mr. Graser testified that the District has
not made teacher assignments for the 2011-2012 school year and he could not say
where Ms. Alvarado would be assigned next year. Though Ms. Alvarado is junior to
Mr. Galvan, the District skipped Ms. Alvarado because of her BCLAD authorization.

Mr. Galvan is properly classified as a probationary employee and is entitled to

all protections afforded probationary employees. (Ed. Code, § 44885.5; Calif.
Teachers Assoc. v. Vallejo City Unified School Dist, supra, 149 Cal.App.4th at p.
147.) “With respect to teachers having different seniority dates, ‘needs’ are
considered only in relation to the program requirements.” (Alexander v. Delano Joint
Union High School Dist. (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 574.) Both Ms. Alvarado and
Mr. Galvan are currently assigned to teach high school Spanish and both are
certificated and competent to provide this service. There was no evidence that
program requirements for this assignment have changed. There was no evidence that
either employee will be assigned to an immersion program next year or what the
needs of an expanded immersion program at Edison Elementary will be. As such,
Mr. Galvan was improperly skipped by Ms. Alvarado, a junior probationary
employee. Because a senior employee was noticed who is certificated and competent

10

to perform Ms. Alvarado’s assignment, Mr. Galvan’s notice for .87 FTE must be
rescinded.

Tie-Breaking Application

23.

The Board, in Resolution 2554, established tie-breaking criteria to be used in

the event that the layoff affected employees with the same status and seniority date. Tie-
breaking criteria were broken into three categories. Category I assigned points for
certifications and experience. Category II assigned a value based on teaching experience
within the District for service not under contract. If employees remained tied in ranking after
application of Categories I and II, Category III authorized the District to conduct a lottery.

The District properly applied tie-breaking criteria to those certificated permanent and
probationary employees who shared the following hire dates: August 15, 2007, August 13,
2008, August 14, 2008, August 20, 2009, and August 18, 2010. For employees with a start
date of August 13, 2008, after the District applied the first two tie-breaking categories, there
remained a tie between Amber Betzler and Michele Senini. The District conducted a lottery
on April 11, 2011, and Amber Betzler prevailed. As such, the District rescinded Amber
Betzler’s layoff notice.

Bumping Application

24. Mr. Graser testified that the District implemented the layoff by first identifying

the positions known to be affected by reduction or elimination. The District then identified
the most junior persons in each position up to the target FTE. The District next determined if
any of the more senior affected employees were qualified to bump into positions held by less
senior employees. Mr. Graser stated that the District sought to follow the language of the
law, referring to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b). During the bumping
process, if a more senior teacher did not hold a corresponding credential for the subject, the
District looked at whether the teacher had taught that subject in the current or two proceeding
years. The District did not consider as between equally certificated and competent teachers,
who was “best qualified” to teach a class or perform a service.

25.

Kaija Perkins-Uno and Robert Smith. Ms. Perkins-Uno is permanent with a
seniority date of August 18, 2006. She teaches Beginning and Advanced Photography, and
Art Studio (Mixed Media). She holds a single subject Art credential, an ELA authorization,
and is NCLB/HQ. Mr. Smith is permanent with a seniority date of August 15, 2007. He
teaches Digital Imaging and Business Office Professional functions. He holds a multiple
subject credential, an EL authorization, and a single subject Business credential. The Digital
Imaging course description changed after the start of the current school year. The course is
currently envisioned to encompass photography, manipulation of photographs, and video.
Mr. Graser stated that it is appropriately taught by a person with an Art credential. Ms.
Perkins-Uno appropriately bumped Mr. Smith for .23 FTE to teach Digital Imaging.

11

Special Education Employees

26.

The District has three Special Education Centers (Ralph Richardson, Laurel

Ruff, and La Vista) that offer a full program for students in special education.

Cheryl Bates and Courtney Sledge. Ms. Bates is permanent with a seniority

a.
date of August 31, 1979. She works with developmentally handicapped minors at
Ralph Richardson Special Education Center. She holds a Life Development Center
Permit that allows her to teach developmentally handicapped minors, not adults, at a
“special education center.”11 Ms. Bates’ authorization is for a 225-day (12-month)
position. This is the only 12-month position within the District and it is being
eliminated.

Courtney Sledge is a probationary teacher with a seniority date of September
24, 2007. She teaches in a nine-month assignment in a pre-school level special day
class at Citrus Heights Elementary. The class consists of young children (pre-school
and some Kindergarteners) with autism. According to Mr. Graser, Ms. Bates does not
meet the competency criteria established for purposes of bumping. She is not
NCLB/HQ to bump into a pre-school teaching position and does not possess the
proper credential to teach outside of a Special Education Center.

Mr. Graser initially testified that Ms. Bates’ permit limits her to bumping into

a 12-month assignment at a Special Education Center and no like positions exist
within the District. However, he later stated that there are teachers more junior to Ms.
Bates at Ralph Richardson Center and that there are many classes at either Laurel
Ruff or Ralph Richardson Centers that she could teach.

The District’s identification of Ms. Bates for layoff is not proper when more

junior teachers are being retained at Special Education Centers within the District.
(Ed. Code, § 44955.) Ms. Bates has almost 32 years of experience in the District and
is certificated and competent to teach developmentally handicapped minors at a
special education center, for a period of less than 12 months. Ms. Bates is senior,
certificated and competent to retain her position within the District’s Special
Education Centers relative to more junior teachers at those centers.

11 The Life Development Center Instruction Permit authorizes the holder to teach in
programs for children who are severely handicapped as defined in Education Code section
56030.5. “Severely disabled” means individuals with exceptional needs who require
intensive instruction and training in programs serving pupils with the following profound
disabilities: autism, blindness, deafness, severely orthopedic impairments, serious emotional
disturbances, severe mental retardation, and those individuals who would have been eligible
for enrollment in a developmental center for handicapped pupils. (Ed. Code, § 56030.5.)

12

Marta Kinney and William Tillery. Marta Kinney is permanent with a

b.
seniority date of March 22, 1978. She teaches adult education/high school
completion. She holds a Special Learning Handicapped credential. Mr. Tillery is
permanent with a seniority date of August 25, 2003. He teaches adult
education/handicapped at Orange Grove. He holds credentials in Fine Arts, Self-
Maintenance Skills for Adults with Disabilities, Basic Skills for Elementary and
Secondary Education, and Adaptive Arts and Crafts. Ms. Kinney is certificated and
competent to bump Mr. Tillery for 1.0 FTE.

Adult Education Employees

27.

Employees at the Orange Grove program work with adults with handicap

conditions. Some of the classes employ assistants to help work with disabled adults.
Students at the District’s Adult Education Centers have multiple handicaps to varying
degrees. Some “learning handicapped” students are able to learn life skills such as sewing.
Others are so severely disabled that “self-maintenance skills” are the focus. The District
treated Adult Education program assignments as separate from the regular program
assignments. Mr. Graser explained that adult educators have “designated subject
credentials” that are not as common as in the K-12 programs. Regular education employees
who do not possess credentials that authorize them to work with handicapped adults cannot
bump into Adult Education assignments. Adult Education administrators with appropriate
credentials were able to bump into Adult Education classroom assignments. The
commitment of the senior teachers who received notice of potential layoff was evident. In
consideration of all of the facts and circumstances, the District properly implemented the
Adult Education PKS reduction.

a.
Paige Ashley and Alexis Reid-Garcia. Ms. Ashley has a seniority date of
February 17, 1995. She is assigned to Orange Grove as a Vice Principal in Adult
Education. She holds an Administrative Services credential and an Adult Education
credential in Psychology, Functional Living/Handicapped, and Counseling. Ms.
Reid-Garcia has a seniority date of August 27, 2001. She is a permanent teacher
assigned to Orange Grove. Ms. Ashley is certificated and competent to bump Ms.
Reid-Garcia for 1.0 FTE in Adult Education.

David Wittenborn and Christine DeSoto. Mr. Wittenborn is permanent with a

b.
seniority date of September 7, 1993. He teaches special education. He holds a
Resource Specialist Certificate, a multiple subject self-contained credential
(NCLB/HQ), a single subject credential in Social Science, and a Title 5 Emotionally
Disturbed (ED) authorization, formerly severely emotionally disturbed (SED). Mr.
Graser testified that Mr. Wittenborn had completed a CTC approved Title 5 program.
Ms. DeSoto is permanent with a seniority date of October 15, 2010. She teaches an

13

ED classroom. Mr. Wittenborn is certificated and competent to bump Ms. DeSoto for
1.0 FTE in Adult Education.

William Tillery and Marta Kinney. Ms. Kinney is permanent with a seniority

c.
date of March 22, 1978. She is assigned to Adult Education, High School
Completion. She holds a specialist credential for Learning Handicapped. Mr. Tillery
is permanent with a seniority date of August 25, 2003. He is assigned to Adult
Education, Handicapped at Orange Grove School. He has a Bachelor’s Degree in Art
and holds credentials in Fine Arts, Self-Maintenance Skills for Adults with
Disabilities, Elementary/Secondary Basic Skills, and Adaptive Arts and Crafts. Some
of Mr. Tillery’s students use adaptive devices that enable them to communicate
electronically using a head pointer. Mr. Tillery is familiar with the equipment used
by his students. Ms. Kinney is certificated and competent to bump Mr. Tillery for 1.0
FTE in Adult Education.

Elizabeth Friend. Ms. Friend is permanent with a seniority date of June 18,

d.
1990. She teaches Adult Education at Sunrise Technical Center and Winterstein
Adult School. She holds a single subject credential in Art for which she is NCLB/HQ
pursuant to a stipulation of the District at hearing. She also holds a Developmental
Services credential and a multiple subject/self-contained credential. She is
certificated and competent to bump into an Art assignment pursuant to the
competency criteria established by the Board. Pursuant to Education Code section
44955, no permanent or probationary teacher with less seniority may be retained by
the District to teach Art, which Ms. Friend is qualified to teach. The District must
review its assignments for compliance with Ms. Friend’s vested right to retention.

Lynn Starks. Ms. Starks is permanent with a seniority date of August 26,

e.
1990. She teachers Adult Education/High School Completion at Winterstein School.
She holds single subject credentials in English and Art and is NCLB/HQ in both
subjects pursuant to a stipulation of the District at hearing. She is certificated and
competent to bump into an English or Art assignment pursuant to the competency
criteria established by the Board. Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, no
permanent or probationary teacher with less seniority may be retained by the District
to teach English or Art, which Ms. Starks is qualified to teach. The District must
review its assignments for compliance with Ms. Stark’s vested right to retention.

Administrative Reductions - Vice Principals Susan Kerhoulas and Teresa Heath.

28.

School administrative employees hold their administrative positions at the

pleasure of the employer. They have no statutory right or tenure in their administrative
position, as distinguished from their tenure as a teacher, and no right to due process prior to a
change in assignment. (Tucker v. Roach (1985) 163 Cal.App.3d 1051, 1053; Barthuli v.
Board of Trustees (1977) 19 Cal.3d 717, 721-722; Hentschke v. Sink (1973) 34 Cal.App.3d
19, 23.) Upon compliance with the notice requirements of Education Code section 44951, a

14

school board may, without due process and for any reason, refuse to reappoint an
administrator for the following school year. (Barton v. Governing Board (1976) 60
Cal.App.3d 476, 479.) Administrators whose assignments are being eliminated retain their
tenure as classroom teachers and have the right to bump into non-administrative positions
provided they have the appropriate credential, competence, and seniority. (see Tucker v.
Roach, supra, 163 Cal.App.3d at p. 1053.)

29.

The District determined to eliminate 8.0 FTE Vice Principals at the High

School level. Sandy Karagianes is a Vice Principal at Encina High School. Her name was
left off of the list of affected administrators. Mr. Graser did not know why her name was not
on the PKS List for High School Vice Principals. He stated that he would look into it.

30.

Susan Kerhoulas. Ms. Kerhoulas is a Vice Principal at Del Campo High

School. She is permanent with a seniority date is August 1, 2007. She holds credentials in
Pupil Personnel Services, Administration/Clear, and School Counseling. She received a
notice for 1.0 FTE. This is Ms. Kerhoulas’ fourth year with the District. She has worked as
a site administrator at Sierra Nuevo High School in a program for pregnant and expecting
students, and subsequently at La Entrada and Del Campo High Schools. She believes that
the District should bump her into another administrative position.

Mr. Graser stated that Ms. Kerhoulas is certificated and competent to bump into a
High School Vice Principal position, but not into another administrative position in which
she has not served. She lacks a teacher credential. Her pupil services for counseling
credential would allow her to bump into a counseling position, but she is junior to other
counselors subject to layoff.

31.

Teresa Heath (aka Teresa Potter). Ms. Heath is permanent with a teacher
seniority date of August 13, 1997. She has been a Vice Principal of Adult Education at
Orange Grove since 2007. She holds a Children’s Center Permit/Supervision.12 She
received a preliminary notice for 1.0 FTE. Another Adult Education Vice Principal,
Margaret Holiday, receive a preliminary notice for .50 FTE. Ms. Holiday is permanent with
a teacher seniority date of August 2, 2008. Mr. Graser stated that Ms. Holiday was retained
for .50 FTE because she had been an administrator for a longer period of time. Ms. Heath
believes that she has re-hire rights to a ECE teaching position.

On September 2, 1997, Ms. Heath signed a contract, wherein she agreed to provide

.80 FTE Adult Education and .20 FTE Early Childhood Education (ECE) services to the

12 According to the CTC, a Children’s Center Supervision Permit allows the holder

to supervise a children’s center program consisting of any number of centers and to supervise
and instruct children in such a program.

15

District. On April 25, 2000, the District sent Ms. Heath a letter seeking to confirm an earlier
“Agreement of Understanding,” from June 1999.13 The letter stated:

As of the current school year, you are classified as an Adult Education teacher
having fully transitioned from the Child Development program to the Adult
Education program. You have taught for the required 2 years in Adult Ed to
gain permanent status as an Adult Ed teacher. Effective 7/1/00, although your
calendar will reflect 8hrs per day, you will be changed to a 6hr position in
keeping with all Adult Education teachers. … Please be assured that should
you wish to return to the Child Development Department, you would be given
every consideration as openings occur. You would also be given longevity
credit for your service in Adult Education.
Ms. Heath signed the margins of the confirmation letter on April 25, 2000, apparently
consenting to its terms. Hence, as of April 2000 she had achieved tenure in Adult Education.
The letter does not change Ms. Heath’s seniority date or rights or void her ECE credential.
Education Code section 44929.26 applies to adult school and day school service. This statute
requires that service towards permanency in one program be considered as separate from
service towards permanency in the other. It does not, however, negate all experience gained
in a separate program. With respect to transitions between the two programs relative to
permanency, it states:

[S]ervice in the evening school shall not be included in computing the service
required as a prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a
permanent employee in the day school, except service in the evening school
rendered by a person rendering services in the day school who is directed or
specifically requested by the school district to render services in the evening
school either in addition to, or instead of, rendering service in the day school.

Ms. Heath’s permit/credential would allow her to bump into an ECE position, which
is not a core subject for purposes of NCLB/HQ status. The evidence is that from September
2, 1997 to approximately August 1999 (the start of the 1999-2000 school year), she worked
in a split assignment in both Adult Education and ECE. From August 1999 to 2007, she
worked in Adult Education. From 2007 to present, she worked as a Vice Principal in Adult
Education. As such, she has tenure in Adult Education and two years service in ECE. By
law, her Children’s Center Permit (credential) authorizes her to bump into an ECE position
held by a more junior employee.

32. Mr. Graser acknowledged that the District had advertised for a vacant PAR

position but had filled this opening from within the District. Mr. Graser also acknowledged
that the District has a current advertisement on its website soliciting applications for

13 The June 1999 “Agreement of Understanding” is not in evidence. It essentially

amended Ms. Heath’s employment contract by classifying her as an Adult Education teacher
only, for the 1999-2000 school year.

16

administrative positions. Applications from within and outside of the District are being
sought. A valid administrative services credential is required. According to Mr. Graser, the
administrators’ collective bargaining agreements do not grant any right to administrative
openings. However, both Ms. Heath and Ms. Kerhoulas hold valid administrative services
credentials. Both are entitled to apply for the open positions.

Temporary Employees v. Employees on Leave of Absence

33.

Education Code section 44920 governs employment of temporary employees

by the District. “The employment of such persons shall be based upon the need for
additional certificated employees during a particular semester or year because a certificated
employee has been granted leave for a semester or year, or is experiencing long-term illness,
and shall be limited, in number of persons so employed, to that need, as determined by the
governing board.” (Ed. Code, § 44920.) This section does not specify a one-to-one match.
A “temporary teacher need not be replacing a particular regular teacher on leave.”
(Bakersfield, supra, 145 Cal.App.4th at p. 1283.) Mr. Graser stated that generally, temporary
employees are replacing “a service” provided by employees on leave. Also, periodically, the
District reviews and syncs its lists by moving some temporary employees to probationary
status.
Credit for Prior Service as Long-Term Substitute or Temporary Employee

34.

Status as a temporary or substitute teacher is narrowly defined by statute.

Teachers must be “classified as probationary employees if they are not permanent and do not
fall within one of the narrowly defined classes of temporary employees.” (Ed. Code, §
44915.) Teachers serving in a substitute capacity serve as “day-to-day” or “long-term”
substitutes. “[S]ection 44918 does not make reemployment rights dependent upon one’s
formal classification as day-to-day or long-term substitute. The statute states only two
classifications, ‘temporary’ employees and ‘substitute’ employees.” (Eureka Teacher’s
Assoc. v. Board of Education (1988) 202 Cal.App.3d 469, 473.) The law respects substance
over form. (Ibid.)

35.

According to Mr. Graser, “long-term” substitutes take on “medium length

positions” replacing teachers who are absent for a minimum of “a month or two.” Shorter
time periods are considered “day-to-day” assignments. Substitute teachers usually have
assistance and planning from the regular teacher and coordinate lesson plans and materials.
A teacher is considered “temporary” or “probationary” if they are not replacing anyone.
Also, temporary teachers usually have “complete control over the classroom.”

36.

The Legislature has sought to limit the ability of school districts to classify

teachers as temporary employees. (California Teachers Assn. v. Vallejo city Unified School
Dist. (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135.) Education Code section 44918 pertains to employees
hired as substitutes and temporary employees:14

14 Education Code section 44918, subdivision (d), specifically excludes service as an

17

Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary employee, who
serves during one school year for at least 75 percent of the number of
the days the regular schools of the district were maintained in that
school year and has performed the duties normally required of a
certificated employee of the school district, shall be deemed to have
served a complete school year as a probationary employee if employed
as a probationary employee for the following school year. (Ed. Code, §
44918, subd. (a).)

Service to the District is not limited to instructional days, but includes all days upon
which a “substitute or temporary employee … performed the duties normally required of a
certificated employee.” The District calendars show that the total number of instructional
and non-instructional days was 185 days during all periods relevant to this decision.

37.

The District and San Juan Teachers Association entered into a Memorandum

of Understanding (MOU) in February 2009 that reflects the statutory mandate that temporary
employees who serve 75 percent of the regular school year and who are subsequently
appointed to probationary positions, receive a full year’s probationary credit. According to
the MOU, “the seniority date of the certificated employee shall be the first date upon which
the employee rendered paid service in the immediately preceding school year of temporary
employment.” (MOU, p. 2.) The MOU does not specifically mention service as a substitute
(long or short term), however, the statute does. Public policy requires that statutes trump
contracts, express or implied, including MOUs. “[C]ontract terms cannot supersede the
statutory protections for teachers set forth in the Education Code, including provisions
governing their classification and termination.” (California Teachers Assoc. v. Vallejo City
Unified School Dist., supra, 149 Cal.App.4th at p. 147; Bakersfield Elementary Teachers
Assoc. v. Bakersfield City School Dist., supra, 145 Cal.App.4th at p. 1275.) Teachers are
“not estopped to claim probationary status if the statutory scheme of the Education Code
compels the latter classification under the particular facts of each petitioner’s employment
situation.” (Bakersfield, supra.) Based on their “particular facts,” several teachers
challenged the seniority dates published by the District as follows:

David Burkhard. Mr. Burkhard is probationary with a seniority date of August

a.
18, 2006. He has taught ROP Automotive Technology since September 1, 2005,
which he asserted should be his seniority date. He was initially hired as a temporary
employee.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44910, “Service by a person as an
instructor in classes conducted at regional occupational centers or programs, … shall

on-call substitute replacing a teacher on a “day-to-day” basis, from the benefits of this
section. Clearly, the type of “substitute” service the statute refers to is “long-term” in nature.

18

not be included in computing the service required as a pre-requisite to attainment of,
or eligibility to, classification as a permanent employee of a school district.” There
are two exceptions outlined in this section which do not apply to Mr. Burkhard.
Clearly, ROP service does not count towards acquiring tenure or permanent status in a
District.

Education Code section 44918 applies only to a “substitute or temporary

employee” who “has performed the duties normally required of a certificated
employee of the district.” The statute applies to “certificated rather than … classified
employees, i.e. non-certificated employees or certificated employees performing jobs
not requiring certification.” (Kalamaras v. Albany Unified School Dist. (1991) 226
Cal.App.3d 1571, 1576.) Because the ROP assignment in question is not a
certificated teaching position, this statute does not apply.

However, Education Code section 44845 applies to “every probationary or

permanent employee employed after June 30, 1947” and mandates that their seniority
date be “the date upon which [an employee] first rendered paid service in a
probationary position.” The evidence is that Mr. Burkhard began as a temporary
teacher on September 1, 2005, but was later converted to probationary status. His
seniority date is properly the date upon which he achieved probationary status. The
District should confirm this date and adjust accordingly.

Larry Hawe. Mr. Hawe is probationary with a seniority date of August 18,

b.
2006. He disputes this date. He has taught ROP and Regular Automotive
Technology since August 17, 2005, which he asserted should be his seniority date.
Pursuant to Education Code section 44910, his ROP services cannot be included in
computing his eligibility towards permanency. Pursuant to Education Code section
44845, Mr. Hawe’s seniority dates is the date upon which he became a probationary
employee. The District should confirm this date and adjust accordingly.

Jason Keith. Mr. Keith is a probationary employee with a seniority date of

c.
August 15, 2007. He teaches ROP and Regular Automotive Technology at San Juan
High School. He began teaching in the District in August 2004 and has taught
continuously with the exception of the 2005-2006 school year. He believes that he
began the 2006-2007 school year on August 16, 2006, as a temporary employee.
Pursuant to Education Code section 44845, Mr. Keith’s seniority date is the date upon
which he became a probationary employee. The District should confirm this date and
adjust accordingly.

Daniel Alexander. Mr. Alexander is probationary with a seniority date of

d.
September 7, 2010. He disputes this date. He began teaching in the District on
November 7, 2008, in a split assignment (50 percent). He completed the remainder of
the 2008-2009 school year. He began the 2009-2010 school year as a substitute
teacher on or before October 9, 2009, and taught continuously through the end of the

19

school year, replacing a teacher on leave of absence. On January 14, 2010, he
became a temporary employee. He began the 2010-2011 school year on September 7,
2010 as a probationary teacher. The evidence supports a finding that Mr Alexander
worked 75 percent of the 2009-2010 school year. He missed the first 35 days of
instruction out of 185 work days, as such, he worked 81 percent of the school year.
Education Code section 44918 applies to “substitute or temporary employees,” (long-
term as opposed to day-to-day substitutes) and as such, Mr. Alexander’s seniority date
must reflect his earlier service since October 9, 2009.

Sandra Butler (aka Sandra Bianco). Ms. Butler is permanent with a seniority

e.
date of August 31, 2004. She disputes this date. She began teaching in the District on
August 23, 2004, in a third grade assignment at Howe Elementary, and taught
continuously through the remainder of the 2004-2005 school year. She received the
keys to her classroom on August 16, 2004, and attended two staff development
sessions on August 18 and 19, 2004. These sessions were six hours each and Ms.
Butler was paid to attend. Between August 23 and 24, 2004, she was paid as a
substitute teacher, replacing a teacher who did not return to service. Ms. Butler
signed her contract as a temporary teacher on August 30, 2004.

Upon signing her contract on August 30, 2004, Ms. Butler raised this issue and

recalls being told by Monique Powell in HR that “it didn’t matter.” It does matter.
“[A]ny contractual provisions purporting to waive the protections accorded
certificated employees” are overruled by the Education Code. (Bakersfield
Elementary Teachers Assoc. v. Bakersfield City School Dist., supra, 145 Cal.App.4th
at p. 1275.) Ms. Butler served more than 75 percent of the 2004-2005 school year as
a long-term substitute and temporary employee. Hence, she is deemed to have served
the complete 2004-2005 school year as probationary. (Ed. Code, § 44918.) Further,
she is deemed to have been employed upon the date she first rendered paid service in
a probationary position. (Ed. Code, § 44854.) The District must adjust Ms. Butler’s
seniority date to August 18, 2004.

Kathryn Carlson. Ms. Carlson is probationary with a seniority date of August

f.
18, 2010. She disputes this date. She began teaching in the District on October 5,
2009, and taught continuously through the end of the 2009-2010 school year,
replacing a teacher on maternity leave. This assignment was as an English teacher at
Mira Loma school. She signed a temporary contract on November 10, 2009. (see
Bakersfield, supra.) She missed the first 30 days of instruction out of 185 work days,
as such, she worked 84 percent of the school year. Pursuant to the plain language of
Education Code sections 44918 and 44845, Ms. Carlson’s seniority date must reflect
her earlier service since October 5, 2009.

Kristi Char. Ms. Char is permanent with a seniority date of September 11,

g.
2007. She disputes this date. She began teaching in the District on August 20, 2007,
and taught continuously through the end of the 2007-2008 school year, replacing a

20

teacher on maternity leave. Further, she attended teacher in-service training on
August 16, 2007, for which she was paid. Pursuant to Education Code sections 44918
and 44845, Ms. Char’s seniority date must reflect her earlier service since August 16,
2007

Celeste Freeman. Ms. Freeman is permanent with a seniority date of August

h.
16, 2007. She disputes this date. She began teaching in the District on or about
October 1, 2006, and taught continuously through the end of the 2006-2007 school
year, as a long-term substitute for a teacher on leave of absence. She signed a
temporary contract in November 20, 2006. She missed the first 30 days of instruction
out of 185 work days, as such, she worked 84 percent of the school year. Pursuant to
Education Code sections 44918 and 44845, Ms. Freeman’s seniority date must reflect
her earlier service since October 2, 2006.

Lisa Hurst. Ms. Hurst is permanent with a seniority date of September 14,

i.
2007. She teaches 4th grade at Dyer Kelly School. She presented evidence at hearing
that she began teaching in the district on September 4, 2007, as a long-term substitute.
She signed her temporary employment contract on September 13, 2007. Pursuant to
Education Code section 44845, Ms. Hurst’s seniority date must reflect her first date of
paid service to the District on September 4, 2007.
j.
Larry Patterson, Jr. Mr. Patterson is permanent with a seniority date of
August 31, 2004. He disputes this date. He began teaching in the District on August
23, 2004, as a substitute replacing a teacher who was pending retirement. He has
taught continuously since that date. He signed his temporary contract on August 31,
2004. He testified that the principal told him that the classroom was his. Pursuant to
Education Code section 44845, Mr. Patterson’s seniority date must reflect his first
date of paid service to the District on August 23, 2004.

k.
Michael McAllister. Mr. McAllister is permanent with a seniority date of
August 19, 2002. He disputes this date. He holds a single subject credential in music,
an English Learner (EL) authorization, and is NCLB/HQ in Arts/Music. He has
taught music at Casa Roble High School for nine years. He recalls starting on
September 4, 2001, the Tuesday after Labor Day, and completing the 2001-2002
school year. He signed a temporary contract on or about January 18, 2002, to
complete the school year. He was re-hired for the 2002-2003 school year. Pursuant
the District’s closing brief, they have stipulated to a seniority date of August 21,
2001.

Jill Stewart. Ms. Stewart is probationary with a seniority date of August 19,

l.
2010. She disputes this date. She first taught in the District from September 28,
2009, to October 25, 2009, as a long-term substitute. From October 30, 2009, to
February 1, 2010, she worked under a part-time temporary contract at Orangevale
Elementary. From February 1, 2010, to the end of the 2009-2010 school year, she
taught six to seven classes a day, five days a week, as a traveling teacher at Cottage

21

and Sierra Oaks. Ms. Stewart missed 27 out of 185 work days during the 2009-2010
school year. As such, she worked 85 percent of the school year. Pursuant to the
express language of Education Code sections 44918 and 44845, Ms. Stewart’s
seniority date must reflect her earlier service to the District since September 28, 2009.

Donna Ward. Ms. Ward is probationary with a seniority date of August 21,
m.
2003. She disputes this date. She began teaching in the District on September 24,
2001, as a temporary ROP teacher. In August 2004, she was made probationary. For
the last three years her assignment has been ROP Culinary Arts for .40 FTE and ROP
Retail Sales for .60 FTE. Pursuant to Education Code section 44845, Mr. Ward’s
seniority date is the date upon which she became a probationary employee. The
District should confirm this date and adjust accordingly.

n.
Nicole Sandoval. Ms. Sandoval is probationary with a seniority date of
February 1, 2011. She disputes this date. She began teaching in the District on
October 19, 2010, as a long-term substitute replacing a teacher on leave of absence.
On November 16, 2010, she signed a temporary contract. She became probationary
on February 1, 2011. Pursuant to Education Code sections 44918 and 44845, Ms.
Sandoval’s seniority date must reflect her earlier service to the District since October
19, 2010.

38.

Alice Dodge. Ms. Dodge is probationary with a seniority date of August 19,
2010. She disputes this date. She began teaching in the District on October 20, 2008, and
taught continuously through the end of the 2008-2009 school year, as a .60 FTE (three days
per week) temporary employee. She started the 2009-2010 school year on September 28,
2009, and taught one day per week, continuously through the end of that school year as a .20
FTE temporary employee. She is currently assigned to a traveling Elementary/Art position at
.83 FTE. She signed a temporary contract on September 29, 2009. Ms. Dodge missed 25
days of instruction out of 185 school days during the 2009-2010 school year. As such, she
worked 86 percent of the school year. Pursuant to Education Code sections 44918 and
44845, Ms. Dodge’s seniority date must reflect her earlier service since September 28, 2009,
at .20 FTE.

Part-time Accruals

39.

Part-time teachers accrue credit toward permanent status. (Reis v. Biggs

Unified School Dist. (2005) 126 Cal.App.4th 809, 821.) Part-time employment as a
classroom teacher in a position requiring certification qualifications during the period of
probation will result in the right to permanent employment on a part-time basis. (Holbrook
v. Board of Education of Palo Alto Unified School Dist. (1951) 37 Cal.2d 316; California
Teachers Assoc. v. Santa Monica Community College Dist. (1978) 79 Cal.App.836.) The
retroactive credit provisions of Education Code section 44918 apply. “Once the temporary
gets on ‘tenure track,’ her year as a temporary counts toward the two-year probationary
period required to become a permanent employee.” (Ed. Code, § 44929.21; Kalamaras v.

22

Albany Unified School Dist. (1991) 226 Cal.app.3d 1571, 1575.) Permanent employees
possess the same employment rights that they would have had if no layoff had intervened,
but no greater rights. (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172
Cal.App.4th 334, 341.)

Julie Finney. Ms. Finney is probationary with a seniority date of August 19,

a.
2002. She initially worked full-time in the District, then took a shared assignment
teaching two days a week. She has been a probationary employee for nine years. The
District has never granted her permanency. The District has improperly classified her
as probationary. Pursuant to Education Code sections 44918 and 44929.21, Ms.
Finney is properly classified as a part-time permanent employee with a seniority date
of August 19, 2002.

Jodie Benstead. Ms. Benstead is a registered nurse in the District’s Early

b.
Development program. She is probationary with a seniority date of August 21, 2006.
She disputes her status as probationary and asserts she should be permanent. From
2006 though the end of the 2009-2010 school year she worked continuously at .50
FTE (five hours a day for three days a week). For the 2010-2011 school year, she
worked .625 FTE. Pursuant to Education Code sections 44918 and 44929.21, Ms.
Benstead’s status is properly classified as permanent for a .50 FTE nursing position.

Judith Jordan. Ms. Jordan is probationary with a seniority date of August 14,

c.
2008. She disputes her status as probationary. This is her third year teaching in the
District. She teaches a split assignment consisting of .20 as a traveling teacher, and
.45 as a physical education/“kick start” teacher. During the 2008-2009 and 2009-
2010 school years she taught in a three day/two day .50 percent teaching assignment.
Ms. Jordan holds a multiple subject/self-contained credential in Physical Education,
English, Social Science, and General Subjects, with a CLAD authorization. Pursuant
to Education Code sections 44918 and 44929.21, Ms. Jordan’s status is properly
permanent for a .50 FTE teaching position.

Other Issues Raised by Respondents

40.

Paula Lloyd, Stephanie Bauman, Bret Tujague, Jennifer Anderson, Disa

Banker, Sonia Takanikos, and Martha Velasko. Several teachers asserted that their
assignment encompassed unique standards and expertise that are not readily acquired or
available to the District. As such, they believe that their assignment should be skipped.

Ms. Lloyd teaches Independent Study/Core Subjects and visual and

a.
performing arts (VAPA) at El Sereno High School. She stated that there are no other
teachers qualified to provide VAPA instruction.

Ms Bauman teaches Physical Education at Churchill Middle School. She

b.
possesses skills and training unique to the International Baccalaureate (IB) Program.

23

This program is an international initiative that integrates social, environmental,
health, and community service focused learning. Ms. Takanikos is in the ROP
program at Winston Churchill Elementary. She too has acquired special training to be
able to teach in the IB Program. Further, she stated that the parents have invested
approximately $1,500 in her training expenses.

c.
Mr. Tujague teaches English and is the coordinator for the Advancement Via
Individual Determination (AVID) Program at Del Campo High School. Mr. Tujague
possesses special skills to administer and instruct other teachers within the
professional learning community (PLC). Ms. Anderson and Ms. Banker made the
same assertion that the training and skills that will be lost by the District require their
assignment to be maintained.

41.

It is clear from the testimony of these teachers that their programs were built at

great financial and professional expense. Further, each expressed the high personal
investment in their respective programs that we want to see in high achieving schools. The
courts have made equally clear that school districts have discretion to decide which PKS to
reduce or eliminate in an economic layoff. It is the District’s burden to demonstrate a
specific need for personnel or services such that those qualifications may be skipped in the
layoff process. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d), Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008)
170 Cal.App.4th 127, 135.) There is no evidence that any of the challenged assignments are
mandated by state or federal law. It is within the District’s discretion to identify the AVID,
VAPA, PLC, and IB program assignments for reduction. (see Duax, supra, 196 Cal.App.3d
at p. 565.)

42. Martha Velasko. Ms. Valasko has been a counselor in the District since

August 2006. She asserted that her assignment should be skipped for layoff because she is
fluent in Spanish and 30 percent of her students speak Spanish. She pointed out that special
consideration was given to teachers with a BCLAD authorization. For the reasons stated in
Factual Finding 22, this “special consideration” given to teachers must comply with program
considerations as articulated in Alexander, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d 567. The District may
properly exercise its discretion to identify counseling as a PKS for reduction or elimination
without special consideration for spoken languages.

43.

Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed

above are found to be without merit and are rejected.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Applicable laws

1.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955,
by reason of Factual Finding 1 through 8. All notices and other jurisdictional requirements

24

of sections 44949 and 44955 were met. The notices sent to respondents indicated the
statutory basis for the reduction of services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to
provide them due process. (Ed. Code, §§ 44949, subd. (a) and 44955, subd. (c); Bakersield
Elementary Teachers v. Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1272.)

2.

The services listed in Attachment B are particular kinds of services that can be
reduced or discontinued under section 44955. The description of services to be reduced, both
in the Board Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe the particular kinds of
services identified for reduction or elimination. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98
Cal.App.4th 838.)

3.

Competency criteria used by the District were legally valid. Determinations
related to whether employees are “certificated and competent” to render a particular service
“involve discretionary decisions which are within the special competence of the school
districts.” (Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.)
The District’s actions will not be overturned unless shown to be “arbitrary and capricious.”
(Fair v. Fountain Valley School Dist. (1979) 90 Cal.App.2d 180.)

4.

With the exception of the BCLAD authorization as set forth in Factual Finding

22, skipping criteria used by the District were appropriate. A school district may deviate
from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority when, “The district
demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or to
provide service authorized by a service credential with a specialization in either pupil
personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those
services, which others with more seniority do not possess.” (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd.
(d)(1); Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 137.) However,
use of a BCLAD authorization must support a particular program requirement. (Alexander,
supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at p. 574.) As such, Mr. Galvan’s notice must be rescinded. (Factual
Finding 22.)

5.

The “manifest intent of the Legislature is that discontinuance of a position
must result in termination of the most junior qualified employee.” (Poppers v. Tamalpais
Union High school Dist. (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399, 406.) With the exception of Ms. Bates
(Factual Finding 26), and Ms. Friend and Ms. Starks (Factual Finding 27), the District
appropriately employed bumping to ensure that subject to economic layoff, no permanent
employee was terminated who possessed the seniority and qualifications which would entitle
him or her to be assigned to another position. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b); Bledsoe, supra,
170 Cal.App.4th at p. 136-137.) Also, the District should review whether a position in ECE
is held by any junior employee that Ms. Heath is certificated and competent to teach.
(Factual Finding 31.)

6.

As set forth in Factual Findings 34 through 38, the seniority dates for these
respondents must be adjusted. They each first served in temporary or long-term substitute

25

positions for more than 75 percent of the year immediately preceding the year they became
probationary employees. They are now credited with an additional year of seniority by
virtue of this fact. Their seniority dates must be adjusted to reflect their first date of paid
service as temporary or long-term substitutes in the year preceding their probationary status.

7.

As set forth in Factual Finding 39, the status of these part-time respondents

must be adjusted. As part-time certificated employees, their service does accrue to establish
permanency. They are not doomed to perpetual probationary status. They have a vested
interest in their part-time employment. (Reise v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2005) 126
Cal.App.4th 809, 821; Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172
Cal.App.4th 334, 341.)

8.

Equitable Estoppel. A party may be bound by an equitable estoppel when,

“the injustice which would result from a failure to uphold an estoppel is of sufficient
dimension to justify any effect upon public interest or policy which would result from the
raising of the estoppel.” (Fullerton Union High School District v. Riles (1983) 139
Cal.App.3d 369, 379.) To apply the doctrine of equitable estoppel against a public entity,
four elements must be present. First, the party to be estopped must be apprised of the facts;
Second, he must intend that his conduct shall be acted upon, or must so act that the party
asserting the estoppel had a right to believe it was so intended; Third, the other party must be
ignorant of the true state of facts; and Fourth, he must rely upon the conduct to his injury.
(Id. at p. 378.)

The issue of estoppel as a bar to certificated employees claiming statutory protections

under the Education Code has been dealt with in numerous cases. (Factual Finding 37.)
Certificated employees are not estopped to seek redress under the Education Code, contracts
notwithstanding. Further, at least one employee, Sandra Butler, raised the issue of her
seniority date at the layoff hearing in April 2010. Finally, estoppel does not apply to the
current fact scenario. The District sent verification information to employees by first class
mail. The District asked employees to inform HR of any errors. (Factual Finding 10.)
However, there is no evidence that respondents acquiesced in the District’s final
determinations or desired for the District to act on what respondents believe to be incorrect
personnel data. What is known is that HR reviewed and verified requested corrections and
posted the final seniority lists by February 4, 2011. For any employee who was still not
satisfied with the District’s determinations prior to hearing, due process afforded them a right
to be heard and their evidence to be considered. Those employees timely requested a hearing
on the matter.

9.

Laches. The defense of laches requires unreasonable delay plus either
acquiescence in the act about which plaintiff complains or prejudice to the defendant
resulting from the delay. (California School Employees Association v. Tustin Unified School
District (2007) 148 Cal.App.4th 510, 521.) The District’s affirmative defense of laches is
not supported by the evidence. There was no unreasonable delay, as the certificated

26

employees who contested the correctness of their personnel data timely requested a hearing
at which to present their evidence.

10.

In the event of two or more teachers having first rendered paid service to the

district on the same date, Districts are required to establish criteria to “determine the order of
termination solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students thereof.” (Ed. Code, §
44955, subd. (b); Bledsoe, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th at p. 144.) As set forth in Factual Finding
23, the District’s tie-breaking criteria and application of tie-break criteria were appropriate.

11.

Cause exists for the District to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of

services listed in Attachment B at the end of the 2011-2012 school year. Cause relates solely
to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949. With
the exception of employees identified in these Legal Conclusions, no employee with less
seniority than any respondent is being retained to render a service which any respondent is
certificated and competent to render.

12.

The District shall rescind the preliminary notices of layoff to Ms. Bates and

Mr. Galvan, and any other employees after the above adjustments to seniority dates are
made, to comply with rights afforded certificated employees as a matter of law. Pursuant to
the stipulation set forth in Factual Finding 11, the District shall rescind the preliminary notice
of layoff of Amber Betzler, Mitchell Crowden, Susan Reardon, Josh Costa (.30 FTE), Kara
Macomber, Michele Senini.

13.

The District’s Governing Board may give the remaining respondents whose

preliminary notices have not been rescinded final notice before May 15, 2011, that their
services will not be required for the ensuing school year, 2011-2012.

RECOMMENDATION

Cause exists for the reduction of 364.79 full-time equivalent certificated positions at
the end of the 2010-2011 school year. After making the adjustments set forth in the Factual
Findings and Legal Conclusions, notice shall be given to the remaining respondents that their
services will be reduced or will not be required for the ensuing school year, 2011-2012,
because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services. Notice shall be
given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: May 2, 2011

___________________________

27

DIAN M. VORTERS
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

28

Attachment A (page 1)
San Juan Unified School District Respondents Service with Accusations

Alexander, Daniel
Allen, Kristen
Allenbaugh, Victoria
Amador, Jenny
Anderson, Cassondra
Anderson, Jennifer
Angelis, Susan
Applegate-Surratt, Lindsay
Armstrong, Jessica
Banker, Disa
Bates, Cheryl
Battistessa, Kimberly
Bauman, Stephanie
Beam, Nicole
Benstead, Jodie
Berkness, Heather
Betzler, Amber
Billo, Natalie
Blackwell, Jakob
Borgman, Kara
Bowman, Kevin
Brandt, Angelique
Brizzi, Chrystania
Buckmaster, Christine
Burkhard, David
Burns, Kathryn
Burnsed, Sarah Jane
Butler, Sandra
Caldwell, John
Carlson, Kathryn
Cassady, Erin
Cataldi-Price, Janice
Cater, Nikki
Chahal, Reet
Chapralis, Katina
Char, Kristi
Chi, Joannie
Cho, Mary

Galvan, Armando
Chrisman, Sara
Garcia, Nicole
Cook, Joanne
Garrett, Marcia
Costa, Josh
Glass, Charlotte
Cottingham, Elizabeth
Goltz, Linda
Cox, Heather
Goodall, Stephanie
Crowden, Mitchell
Gragg, Jeannette
Da Marto, Joseph
D'angelo, Janine
Grimm, Patricia
Daniels-Landeros, Catherine Grinstead, Susan
Grupp, Jr., Robert
Davis, Monique
Guarducci, Erin
Day, Amy
Hadzi-Antich, Diana
Deal, Greg
Hall, Darcy
Delgado, Rene
Hansen, Bruce
Delzer, Shannon
Harshbarger, Nichole
Derum, Anthony
Hawe, Larry
Desoto, Christine
Heath, Teresa
Dickstein, Mimi
Hein, Beth
Dillon, Sarah
Hermes, Kimberly
Dingman, Brandon
Hesse, Marilyn
Dismukes, Natalie
Higgins, Amanda
Disney, Whitney
Hodge, Christina
Dodge, Alice
Hodge, Erin
Doris, Adam
Hoffman, Claire
Edie, Shannon
Hoffmore, Katherine
Elliott, Gerell
Hoke, Melinda
Ellis, Bethany
Holiday, Margaret
Ellison, Amy
Holmes-Dorner, Belinda
Ewing, Melissa
Horger, Jinne
Fanchar, Brent
Hubble, Lori
Ferrari, Kiley
Hudson, Carolyn
Filger, Krista
Hudson, Christopher
Finney, Julie
Hudson, Jessica
Fischer, Sarah
Hughes, Mary
Fleming, Mark
Hurst, Lisa
Foster, Christopher
Jenkins, Tanya
Freeman, Celeste
Johnson, Debra
Friedman, Rebecca
Jones, Elisha
Friend, Elizabeth

29

Appendix A (page 2)
San Juan Unified School District Respondents Served with Accusations

Jones, Stephanie
Jordan, Judith
Ju-Nolan, Amy
Kastl, Brenda
Keith, Jason
Kellogg, Susan
Kerhoulas, Susan
Kiesner, Maxwell
Kogos, Katherine
Kozel, Allison
Kramer, Erica
Labelle, Alicia
Lampshire, Misty
Lane, Garrett
Ledesma, Maria Luz
Lewis, Lyndsay
Lieberman, Babette
Link, Kimberly
Little, Ellen
Lloyd, Paula
Locke, Tracie
Lucus, Tracy
Lyle, Laura
Lysaght, Vikki
Macklem, Stephanie
Macomber, Kara
Madden, David
Madison-Knipp, Carol
Mager, Andrea
Malone, Melissa
Markos, Kellee
Marks, Ryan
Martin, Sherry
Martinez, Kelly
Martinez, Paquito
Massetti, Christina
Matt, Amy

Rhodes, Joan
Richter, Angela
Riordan, Mary
Robertson, Melissa
Robinson, Richard
Roper, Carol
Rowland, Joanna
Roycroft, Nancy
Salazar, Monica
Sandoval, Nicole
Sato, Lori
Sayler, Kimberly
Schmelling, Marlene
Scholtes, Greta
Schreiber, Robert
Schumaker, Derek
Seley, Jennifer
Senini, Michele
Shelton, Tammi
Simin, Susan
Slofkosky, Michelle
Smiley, Jennifer
Smith, Robert
Smith, Sheena
Stahle, Joan
Starks, L. Lynn
Stewart, Jill
Stricker, Frances
Strombom, Thor
Sutherland, Molly
Swallow, Sarah
Swan, Kara
Takanikos, Sonia
Tang Leung, Gina
Tannehill, Christina
Teachout, Christine
Tillery, William

Matthews, Sara
Mc Allister, Michael
Mc Candless, Kathleen
Mc Cormick, Melissa
Mc Elhinney, Carol
Mc Kinnon, Lori
Michell, Dominika
Mickelson, Keith
Mills, Nellie
Mole, Lindsey
Moon, Chris
Moon, Elizabeth
Morgan-Voyce, Erin
Morgenstern, Jennifer
Oates, Melissa
O'Brien, Amy
O'Brien, Kristi
Olivarria-Matson, Debra
O'Neal, Megan
Orton, Vicki
Paixao, Adrienne
Pallen, Joseph
Parsley, Sabrina
Parsons, Bethany
Patterson, Brandi
Patterson, Larry
Paulsen, Melanie
Perkins-Uno, Kaija
Perry, Jonathan
Pfarr, Sarah
Pope-Mets, Kennesey
Probasco, Carrie
Probasco, Daniel
Ramey, Gerilyn
Reardon, Susan
Register, Kristen
Reid-Garcia, Alexis

30

Appendix A (page 3)
San Juan Unified School District Respondents Served with Accusations

Tillett-Downie, Cherie
Tobey, Karen
Trask, Jarrett
Tujague, Brett
Tupper, Cara
Umemoto, Heidi
Utley, Patricia
Vargas-Chavez, Gitzel
Vasquez, Jaime
Velasco, Martha
Verigin, Hannah
Wallace, Pamela S.
Walters, Carolyn
Ward, Donna
Wehe, Kathryn
Williams, Lawrence
Wilson, Aris
Winney, Gayle
Wohlford, Lindsay
Wolfe, Jennifer
Wolff, Jenna
Wong, Karis
Yassu, Brenda
Young, Aubree
Zylstra, Kathryn

31

ATTACHMENT B
San Juan Unified School District Resolution No. 2553 (Revised March 8, 2011)
Reduction or Discontinuation of Particular Kinds of Services

Administrators, Central Office Support
Administrator, Central Review
Program Specialist, Foster Youth
Program Specialist, Pupil Personnel Services

Administrators, Schools
Principal, Adult Education
Vice Principal, Adult Education
Vice Principal, Alternative Education
Vice Principal, Elementary School, Teaching & Learning, Title I
Vice Principal, High School
Vice Principal, High School, Teaching & Learning, Title I
Vice Principal, Middle School, Teaching & Learning, Title I

FTEs
1.00
1.00
1.00
Subtotal 3.00

FTEs
1.00
2.00
0.50
5.00
6.00
2.00
2.00
Subtotal 18.50

K-12 Certificated, Non-Administrative Positions
Art
Auto
Business
Computers
Counselor
Early Literacy Coaches
English
English Learner Instructional Specialist
Foster Youth
German
Health
Home School Teacher
Independent Study
La Entrada
Math
Multiple Subject/Self Contained
Music
Nurse
Palos Verde/Via Del Campo
Physical Education
ROP - Auto
ROP - Business Office Professional

32

FTEs
10.57
0.33
0.33
0.40
23.60
3.00
5.09
4.71
1.00
0.20
0.34
2.00
2.00
4.00
5.76
177.18
10.10
6.60
1.00
11.18
2.27
0.57

ROP - Culinary Arts
ROP - Retail/Entrepreneurship
ROP - Woodworking
Science, Biology/Life/Earth/Geo
Social Science
Spanish
Special Education - Developmental Handicapped Minor Permit
Teacher
Special Education - Resource Specialist Program
Special Education - Special Day Class
Teachers on Special Assignment
Woods

Adult Education Certificated, Non-Administrative Positions
Counselor
Nurse
Teacher

0.40
1.87
1.40
4.76
4.76
2.67
1.00

5.00
9.00
14.00
0.20
Subtotal 317.29

FTEs
2.00
1.00
23.00
Subtotal 26.00

Total

364.79

33

Attachment C (page 1)
San Juan Unified School District Resolution No. 2554 - Tie-Breaking Criteria

Whereas, this board anticipates that it will be necessary to terminate the services of
certificated employees effective at the close of the school year; and

Whereas, this board has determined that as between certificated employees who first
rendered paid service as a probationary teacher to the district on the same date, certain
criteria should be used in determining the order of termination based upon the needs of the
district and the students thereof.

Now, therefore, be it found, ordered, and resolved as follows:

Each and all of the foregoing recitals are true and correct.

1.

2.

The criteria used to determine the order of termination of certificated employees who
first rendered paid service as a probationary teacher to the district on the same date,
and the weight to be given to such criteria, shall be the following:

a.

Category I – Certifications and Experience

Need: To retain teachers with: greatest flexibility of assignment based on
California credentials held; National Board Certification; and/or experience
teaching at schools identified as Title I and Program Improvement schools.

Criteria
Each full K-12 based credential (e.g., multiple subject, single subject,
pupil personnel services, school nurse, librarian)
Each foundational level base credential
Each supplemental authorization with NCLB/Highly Qualified Teacher
Other services credential (administration)
National Board Certified
Taught at a Program Improvement School during 2010-11 school year
Taught at a Title I School during the 2010-11 school year

Points

4

3
2
2
2
1
1

If there is still a tie after applying the above criteria, then Category II will be utilized.

34

Attachment C (page 2)
San Juan Unified School District Resolution No. 2554 - Tie-Breaking Criteria

b.

Category II – District Teaching Experience

Need: To recognize certificated experience in the San Juan Unified School District
under contract which is not reflected by the employees seniority date.

Experience
Each year or portion of a year of in-district experience as
a certificated employee under contract prior to the
employee’s seniority date

Value
Percentage of school
year(s) served

c.

Category III – Lottery

If any two or more certificated employees who first rendered paid service as a
probationary employee on the same date still have the same number of points after
application of points provided above, the ranking of such employees shall be
determined by a lottery conducted by the Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources
or designee.

35

