 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
ROCKLIN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
 
     OAH NO.2011020353 

 
In The Matter Of The Accusations  
Against: 
 
KATELYN ALSTOT, APRIL FETCH 
(TAYLOR), MARY GOMES, LARA 
KIKOSICKI, ROBERT KLINGENSMITH, 
DAVID LACOSTE, REGINA 
MANIBUSAN, CHAUNTE MARTIN, 
MARYANN YOUNGER,  
 
                                                   Respondent. 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Michelle L. Cannon, Attorney at Law, Kronick, Moskovitz, Tiedemann & Girard, 

Karl S. Engeman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 5, 2011, in Rocklin, California.  
 
 
represented the Rocklin Unified School District. 
 
 
respondents except April Fetch, who did not appear at the administrative hearing.1 
 

Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp, Curtis & Price, represented all of the 

The matter was submitted on April 5, 2011. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Kevin Brown is the Superintendent for the Rocklin Unified School, State of 

California, and made and filed the Accusation in his official capacity. 
 

2. 

Each of the respondents was at all times mentioned herein, and now is, a 

certificated employee of the District. 

 

                                                 

1 The notice issued to respondent Maryann Younger had been rescinded by District by 

the time the administrative hearing commenced.  

 1 

3. 

On March 7, 2011, the Governing Board of the Rocklin Unified School 

District was given written recommendation that notice be given to respondents pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that their services will not be required for the 
ensuing school year and stating the reasons therefor. 
 

4. 

On March 10, 2011, respondents were given notice of the recommendation 

pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that their services will not be 
required for the ensuing school year and stating the reasons therefor. 
 

5. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44949, respondents requested, in writing, 
a hearing to determine if there is cause for not employing them for the ensuing school year. 
 

6. 

The Governing Board resolved to reduce or eliminate a total of 25.5 full time 

equivalent (FTE) positions and specified the particular kinds of services to be reduced or 
eliminated in Board Resolution 10-11-15.  The resolution included a definition of 
“competency” for purposes of displacement (bumping) discussed in more detail below. 
 
Tie-Breaker Issue 
 

8 

7. 

On the eve of the administrative hearing, a lottery was held to break a tie 

The Governing Board, in Resolution 10-11-12, adopted tie-breaking criteria to 
determine the relative seniority of affected certificated employees with the same date of first 
paid probationary service.  The criteria and application of one portion are discussed below. 
 
 
between respondent Regina Manibusan and Michael Pappas.  Ms. Manibusan had already 
received notice that she would not be reemployed next school year when District 
administrators discovered that she was entitled to additional credit under the tie-breaking 
criteria for extracurricular work for which she was paid a stipend.  The additional point she 
received tied her with Mr. Pappas as each then had 12 points.  Ms. Manibusan lost the 
lottery.  At the administrative hearing, Ms. Manibusan asserted that District had improperly 
calculated another category of the tie-breaking criteria, that relating to experience.  The 
District criteria for tie-breaking awarded two points for 5-10 years of “[f]ull time equivalent 
of credentialed public school experience,” and three points for 11 years plus of such 
experience.  Respondent Manibusan claimed that she was entitled to three points, whereas 
she only received two. 
 
 
2000.  She was hired by the District at the beginning of the 2008-2009 school year and was 
employed at Step 9, accurately reflecting her previous eight years of teaching experience.  
School year 2009-2010 was her tenth year of teaching and she is currently in her eleventh 
year.  District interprets the tie-breaking criteria to require the completion of at least eleven 
years of teaching to earn three points and applied this interpretation to all tie breaking 
situations.  While unnecessary to the calculation, respondent Manibusan also would not have 
received three points because she did not teach a “full time equivalent” year last year as her 
teaching assignment was reduced from 1.0 FTE to .67 FTE by a previous reduction in force.   

Respondent Manibusan began teaching in southern California in September of 

9. 

 2 

In summary, the application of the District‟s tie breaking criteria to respondent Manibusan, 
and specifically the manner in which it calculated her experience points, was appropriate.  
 
Bumping Issues 
 

10. 

The District‟s Governing Board Resolution 10-11-15 included a statement that 

for purposes of potential displacement rights, “competency” shall mean “at a minimum, 
possession of a preliminary, clear, professional clear, lifetime, or other full credential, and at 
least one semester actual teaching experience in the subject area in a comparable setting (K-6 
self-contained; 7-12 departmentalized; 7-12 alternative education; specialized elementary 
music, PE, ELD or VAPA programs) within the last five years.”  The statement included that 
competency shall also mean that, where required, the teacher is qualified to teach the subject 
area under the federal No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB). 
 

11. 

 Superintendent Brown and Marjorie Crawford, another District administrator, 
testified about the rationale for the bumping criteria requiring recent experience in what they 
described as a “like setting.”  Very similar criteria were in effect last year and in previous 
years, although the Governing Board‟s lay off decision in the spring of 2009 discussed below 
included findings that the like setting criteria parenthetical examples simply listed 
elementary, secondary, and alternative education.  In other words, there was no reference to 
“self-contained” or “departmentalized” and elementary and secondary education were not 
defined by grade levels.  Superintendent Brown explained that the reason for the like setting 
criteria was to avoid having a senior teacher displace a teacher with experience in the setting, 
which he regarded as detrimental to the educational system.  Superintendent Brown 
acknowledged that the bumping criteria are used exclusively for layoffs and that they are not 
applied to new hires, reassignments and rehiring of teachers previously laid off. 
 

12.  Ms. Crawford‟s testimony did not focus on the rationale for the like setting 
criteria generally, but rather on the differences among elementary, middle school and high 
school physical education programs.  Ms. Crawford had experience as a high school physical 
education teacher, high school coach, athletic director, and athletic conference representative.  
She has also taught physical education at the middle school level and was a middle school 
principal for 16 years.  Ms. Crawford has not taught elementary physical education and has 
not been an elementary school teacher or principal.  She based her opinions about elementary 
school physical education on the training that she received for her single subject physical 
education credential authorizing her to teach physical education in grades K-12.  Ms. 
Crawford described the skills typically taught in the various settings, beginning with basic 
movement skills and athletic endeavors in elementary school to establish a foundation of 
movement leading up to games.  Itinerant teachers provide “pull out” classes for large groups 
of students.  Elementary school students do not receive formal grades for physical education 
as they do in middle and high schools.  Ms. Crawford contrasted the “secondary” physical 
education program with its emphasis on lifelong sports and physical fitness.  Most of her 
testimony in this area emphasized the unique aspects of a high school physical education 
program with access to special facilities including pools for aquatics, weight rooms for 
weight training, and gymnastics equipment.  These activities necessarily involve special 

 3 

13. 

Respondent David Lacoste first rendered paid probationary service for the 

safety considerations such as water safety and proper weight lifting and “spotting” 
techniques.  Team sports are a big part of the secondary physical education curricula, and 
students are graded on knowledge of rules and performance.  Secondary students dress for 
physical education in locker rooms supervised by teachers.  The District‟s middle school 
physical education classes are 49 minutes long whereas high school physical education 
courses are 90 minutes on alternate school days.  The District has incorporated state 
standards for physical education in its elementary, middle school and high school programs. 
 
 
District on August 22, 2006.  He holds a single subject K-12 physical education credential.  
Respondent Lacoste has taught physical education exclusively in the District‟s elementary 
schools since he was employed.  He currently teaches first to sixth graders physical 
education at two elementary schools.  The students attend two classes each week.  Each class 
is approximately 40 minutes long.  Respondent Lacoste teaches a total of approximately 
1,000 students, 600 at one elementary school and 400 at the other.  Although respondent 
Lacoste is senior to Pappas who teaches three periods of physical education at Rocklin High 
School, District maintains that respondent Lacoste may not bump Pappas because respondent 
Lacoste does not meet the District competency criteria requiring at least one semester of 
actual teaching experience in the same area “in a comparable setting” within the last five 
years.  As noted above, District distinguishes between the K-6 self-contained setting in 
which respondent Lacoste teaches and the 7-12 departmentalized setting in which Mr. 
Pappas teaches.  Respondent Lacoste is also senior to respondent Manibusan who teaches 1.0 
FTE seventh and eighth grade physical education, part of the “7-12 departmentalized” setting 
into which the competency criteria would not allow him to bump.  However, respondent 
Manibusan is herself subject to layoff.  
 
 
at the secondary level.  Respondent Lacoste focuses on cardiovascular fitness for his 
elementary school students.  He teaches activity units similar to those taught in the higher 
grades, and his units average three weeks.  Respondent Lacoste recently completed a five-
week square-dance and jazz unit followed by a two-night show for the students‟ parents.   
His students participate in team sports including volleyball, football, softball, and basketball.   
He teaches a version of badminton without a net called “speedminton.”  Respondent Lacoste 
does not give his students grades, but he is familiar with the District‟s grading software and 
does assess his students using written materials and tests.  Respondent Lacoste tests his 
students in physical fitness in the fifth grade, using the same tests as those administered to 
students in the seventh and ninth grades. 
 
 
school and high school students in organized sports.  He has coached students in grades 7-12 
a total of 19 years, including coaching volleyball at Rocklin High School for nine years.  He 
is not coaching the high school team this year because of family commitments, but he 
continues to coach club volleyball teams for middle school age children.  Respondent 
Lacoste has experience supervising boys‟ locker rooms in his capacity as a coach.  
Respondent Lacoste has also completed a master‟s degree program in recreation and has 

Respondent Lacoste contends that he is competent to teach physical education 

Respondent Lacoste also has significant experience working with middle 

15. 

14. 

 4 

worked for two communities in recreation, including aquatics.  He is familiar with proper 
swim stroke techniques, having learned them in his college courses.  Respondent Lacoste 
holds a bachelor‟s degree from Boise State University in physical education with an 
emphasis on teaching secondary physical education. 
 

16.  As noted above, the District does not apply the same competency criteria when 

considering new hires, rehiring of teachers who have been laid off, or reassignments.  The 
evidence in this matter included examples of this practice.  Michael Pappas, the employee 
junior to respondent Lacoste, also holds a single subject physical education credential as well 
as authorization to teach foundational high school level mathematics (through geometry).   
He was assigned this year to teach three periods of physical education at Rocklin High 
School, even though he has never taught physical education for the District and his only 
experience teaching physical education is one quarter of student teaching at Yuba City High 
School in the spring of 2005.  Mr. Pappas testified and established that he tried to bump a 
less senior physical education teacher last year and was unsuccessful because of the 
comparable setting competency criteria that are at issue in this proceeding.  Another teacher 
who was unable to bump into an English Language Development (ELD) position last year 
based on the same competency criteria and was given a layoff notice, was rehired to teach 
ELD this year.  A third teacher with only elementary school teaching experience for the 
District was reassigned to teach at the District‟s alternative high school. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Bumping Issue 
 

 
 
 

Bumping Disallowed Among “Settings” 

17. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b) and (c) reads: 

(b) Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all of 
the schools of a district for the first six months in which school is in 
session shall have declined below the corresponding period of either of 
the previous two school years, whenever the governing board 
determines that attendance in a district will decline in the following 
year as a result of the termination of an interdistrict tuition agreement 
as defined in Section 46304, whenever a particular kind of service is to 
be reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following 
school year, or whenever the amendment of state law requires the 
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the governing 
board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of 
these conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in the 
district, the governing board may terminate the services of not more 
than a corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the 
district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school 

 5 

year.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this 
section while any probationary employee, or any other employee with 
less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render. 

In computing a decline in average daily attendance for purposes of this 
section for a newly formed or reorganized school district, each school 
of the district shall be deemed to have been a school of the newly 
formed or reorganized district for both of the two previous school 
years. 

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on 
the same date, the governing board shall determine the order of 
termination solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students 
thereof.  Upon the request of any employee whose order of termination 
is so determined, the governing board shall furnish in writing no later 
than five days prior to the commencement of the hearing held in 
accordance with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used 
in determining the order of termination and the application of the 
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other employees in the 
group.  This requirement that the governing board provide, on request, 
a written statement of reasons for determining the order of termination 
shall not be interpreted to give affected employees any legal right or 
interest that would not exist without such a requirement. 

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the 15th 
of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and services of such 
employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in which they 
were employed, as determined by the board in accordance with the 
provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the event that a permanent 
or probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a 
hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed 
reemployed for the ensuing school year. 

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such 
a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which 
their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.  However, prior 
to assigning or reassigning any certificated employee to teach a subject 
which he or she has not previously taught, and for which he or she does 
not have a teaching credential or which is not within the employee's 
major area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the 
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter 
competency test in the appropriate subject. (Emphasis added.)  

 6 

 

 

 

 

 

18.  As noted above, District adopted criteria by which to determine if a 

District’s Criteria for Defining “Competent” 
 
 
certificated employee is competent to bump a junior certificated employee.  These criteria are 
summarized in Factual Finding 10.  Respondent Lacoste challenged the competency criteria 
as arbitrary and unreasonable (an abuse of discretion).  The most recent published appellate 
decision in this area involved a community college layoff and the interpretation of the same 
statutory language “certificated and competent” in the community college context.  In Duax 
v. Kern Community College Dist. (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, the community college 
governing board directed the Chancellor to apply as a standard of competence that “an 
employee have had experience rendering a service or teaching in a specific subject area equal 
to a total of one year's full-time assignment in that service or subject area since January of 
1971.” The college was proposing the layoff of instructors for school year 1981-1982.  The 
Duax court looked to previous decisions interpreting the same phrase in the context of 
reemployment rights of laid off certificated school employees and concluded that the 
determination of competency by a governing board involves the exercise of discretion based 
on the board‟s “special competence” to do so. (Id. at p. 564.)  The court also cited another 
line of school layoff cases for the proposition that the term “competent” as used in Education 
Code section 44956 relates to specific skills or qualifications required of the applicant. The 
Duax court concluded:  “Hence, from these authorities we conclude that a board‟s definition 
of competency is reasonable when it considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher 
threatened with layoff.” (Id. at p.565.)  
 
 
District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294.  The case involved the rehire rights of laid-off teachers and 
the statutory prohibition against imposing requirements different from those for teaches who 
continued in service.  However, in the body of the decision, the California Supreme Court 
quoted favorably from an earlier appellate case, King v. Berkeley Unified School District 
(1979) 89 Cal. App.3d 1016, in its discussion of a school district‟s role in determining 
whether a teacher is certificated and competent to render a required service.  The court, citing 
King, observed that such determinations involve discretionary decisions which are within the 
special competence of school districts. (Martin v. Kentfield School District, supra, 35 Cal.3d 
294, 299.)  The King case also involved rehiring of laid-off certificated employees.  The King 
court observed, “The application of [predecessor statute to Education Code section 44956] 
requires that someone make informed determinations whether a laid-off employee reached 
by the statute is both „certificated and competent‟ to hold a position to which he claims 
reemployment rights.” (King v. Berkeley Unified School District, supra, 89 Cal.App.3d 1016, 
1023.)  The court agreed with the trial court that such decisions necessarily involve 
discretionary decisions by a school district‟s responsible officials because they have a special 
competence to make them. (Ibid.) 
 

19.  One of the cases relied upon by the Duax court was Martin v. Kentfield School 

20. 

Relevant case law supports a school district‟s right to define the minimum 

requirements for competency for purposes of bumping, so long as the definition considers the 
skills and qualifications of the teacher.  At first glance, District‟s criteria appear to meet this 
standard.  The possession of an appropriate credential, reasonably recent experience in the 

 7 

particular subject area and NCLB highly qualified status, where required, reflect a teacher‟s 
skills and qualifications.  No particular expertise in the educational environment is necessary 
to appreciate that children learn and behave very differently in an elementary school setting 
compared to middle and high schools, and experience in one or the other setting is likely to 
enhance a teacher‟s skill in dealing with that particular group of students.  The evidence 
presented in this case, however, established that the District‟s definition of competency had 
more to do with administrative convenience than a good faith application of expertise to 
require teaching experience in a subject in a comparable setting.  The rationale for the 
comparable setting requirement provided by the Superintendent was to avoid having a senior 
teacher displace a teacher with experience in the setting, which he regarded as detrimental to 
the educational system.  The Superintendent provided no explanation for the manner in 
which he believed such displacements are detrimental.  Ms. Crawford explained the 
differences among physical education programs among elementary, middle school and high 
school programs, but even assuming her views were part of the “special competence” used 
by District to create the comparable setting criterion for competence, there was no clear 
nexus demonstrated between the programs and the development of teaching skills and 
qualifications. 
 

21.  Discretion is abused when a district‟s action exceeds the bounds of reason, all 
the circumstances before it being considered.  (Anderson Union High School District (1976) 
56 Cal. App.3d 453, 463.)  The most telling evidence that the comparable setting element 
was not supported by a fair and substantial reason was the District‟s policy not to use the 
competency criteria for rehiring and reassignments.  As the factual findings reflect, teachers 
who failed District‟s comparable setting experience criterion were suddenly competent 
simply because they were rehired after lay off proceedings or reassigned.  This suggests that 
which the Superintendent implied in his testimony: that the primary reason for denying 
bumping among the various designated settings was apparently administrative convenience.  
When it became administratively convenient to place these teachers in positions by rehiring 
or reassignment, the fact that they had no experience in the new setting was no longer an 
obstacle.  While one can understand that new hires would not normally be required to 
demonstrate teaching experience to establish “minimum” competency, the distinction 
between teachers seeking to bump and those being rehired or reassigned based on perceived 
“competency” makes little sense.  Moreover, the California Supreme Court noted in the 
Martin case that the Education Code prohibits the imposition of requirements on teachers 
seeking reemployment which do not pertain to “continuing teachers,”2 but District seeks to 
do the same thing to respondents, impose requirements on them for bumping that do not 
pertain to rehires.  To summarize, a school district may properly establish across-the-board 
minimum competency criteria rather than assess the competency of senior teachers to bump 
on an individual basis.  When such discretionary decisions are based on the application of a 
district‟s special expertise, they should be honored unless they reflect an abuse of discretion.   
Where the facts demonstrate that  a criteria were not based on such good faith application of 
expertise, and teaching competence was defined differently for senior teachers seeking to 
exercise their statutory right to bump and those being reassigned or rehired, the challenged 
                                                 

2 This is now part of Education Code section 44957, subdivision (a). 

 8 

criteria  are an abuse of discretion.  Respondent Lacoste met the other minimal requirements 
for competency and his considerable experience coaching middle and high school students 
provided him the skills and qualifications to deal with the unique learning and behavior 
characteristics of both age groups.  He is therefore certificated and competent to bump into 
physical education positions held by less senior certificated employees in the middle or high 
schools. 
 

22. 

There is another, perhaps more compelling, reason to rule against District and 

in favor of respondent Lacoste on the bumping criteria issue.  This very issue was litigated 
by the same parties in the spring of 2009 in “In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL EMPLOYED BY THE ROCKLIN UNIFIED 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, OAH Case Number. 2009030849.  In that matter, District‟s 
Governing Board adopted the Administrative Law Judge‟s Proposed Decision, including that 
portion which determined the comparable setting requirement for physical education 
instructors to be an abuse of discretion.  As a result, respondent Lacoste‟s layoff notice was 
rescinded.  Collateral estoppel, or issue preclusion, prevents relitigation of legal or factual 
issues actually argued and decided in a prior proceeding. (Castillo v. City of Los Angeles 
(1982) 92 Cal. App.4th 477, 481.)  Res Judicata and its subcategory collateral estoppel are 
viable affirmative defenses in an administrative proceeding.  In People v. Sims (1982 ) 32 
Cal.3d 468,  (Sims ), the Supreme Court established the conditions under which the results of 
an administrative proceeding would be given collateral estoppel effect.  The Supreme Court 
held that “[c]ollateral estoppel may be applied to decisions made by administrative agencies 
when an administrative agency is acting in a judicial capacity and resolves disputed issues of 
fact properly before it which the parties have had an adequate opportunity to litigate. (Sims, 
at p. 479.)  
 

23.  As the Supreme Court stated in Sims, “collateral estoppel has been found to 

bar relitigation of an issue decided at a previous proceeding if (1) the issue necessarily 
decided at the previous proceeding is identical to the one which is sought to be relitigated; 
(2) the previous proceeding resulted in a final judgment on the merits; and (3) the party 
against whom collateral estoppel is asserted was a party or in privity with a party at the prior 
[proceeding].” (Sims, at p. 484.) 
 

24.  District argued that the issue is not the same because the criteria were different 

in the earlier matter.  In the preceding matter, the District‟s comparable setting criteria 
required “at least one semester actual teaching experience in a comparable setting 
(elementary, secondary, alternative education) within the last five years.”  The comparable 
setting criteria now require: “at least one semester actual teaching experience in the subject 
area in a comparable setting (K-6 self-contained; 7-12 departmentalized; 7-12 alternative 
education; specialized elementary music, PE, ELD, or VAPA programs) within the last five 
years.” 
 
 
 
 

 9 

25. 

The earlier decision, in Factual Finding 24 concluded, based on preliminary 

factual findings very similar to those in this matter, that: 
 

In a unified school district, the imposition of a „comparable setting‟ 
requirement as a condition of competency for an elementary PE teacher 
to bump into a secondary PE teaching position is not reasonable, and 
impermissibly undercuts seniority rights.  Under these circumstances, 
the competency requirement becomes an insurmountable barrier to the 
senior employee and shifts the burden from the District to make an 
individualized showing of its need to skip a junior employee under 
section 44955, subdivision (d).  As applied to respondent PE teachers, 
this requirement is an abuse of discretion. 

26. 

The relabeling of elementary and secondary conventional teaching 

 
 
environments within the parenthetical definitions of settings does not change the nature of 
the issue to be decided in this matter.  It remains identical, insofar as respondent Lacoste is 
concerned, i.e., whether the District‟s competency criteria requiring at least a semester of 
teaching the subject in a comparable setting within the last five years constitutes an abuse of 
discretion as applied to an elementary PE teacher otherwise credentialed and competent to 
teach middle school and high school PE?  All elements having been satisfied, collateral 
estoppel bars the District from relitigating whether the application of the comparable setting 
requirement to respondent Lacoste was an abuse of discretion.  Having lost the issue in the 
earlier proceeding, District is barred from seeking a different outcome in this matter. 
 
 

ORDER 

 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 
 

2. 

The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next school 

year is an appropriate basis for a reduction in services under Education Code section 44955.  
As stated in San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, 
the reduction of particular kinds of services on the basis of financial considerations is 
authorized under that section, and, “in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a 
reduction in certificated staff, section 44955 is the only statutory authority available to school 
districts to effectuate that reduction.”  The District must be solvent to provide educational 
services, and cost savings are necessary to resolve its financial crisis.  The Board‟s decisions 
were a proper exercise of its discretion. 
 

3. 

The services eliminated or reduced are particular kinds of services that could 

be reduced or discontinued under section Education Code section 44955.  Cause exists to 
reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of 

 10 

services relates solely to the welfare of the District‟s schools and pupils within the meaning 
of Education Code section 44949. 
 

5. 

4. 

Because a less senior employee is being retained to teach a course which 

Except as noted below, final notice shall be given to respondents that their 
services will not be required for the 2011-2012 School Year because of the reduction and 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services  
 
 
respondent Lacoste is certificated and competent to teach, respondent Lacoste‟s lay-off of .50 
FTE is rescinded. 
 
 
 
Dated:  May 3, 2011 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

____________________________ 
KARL S. ENGEMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 11 

