BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
ELK GROVE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF
THE ELK GROVE UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT,

OAH No. 2011020091

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Karen J. Brandt, Administrative Law Judge, Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, in Elk Grove, California, on April 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
12, 13, and 14, 2011.

Karen M. Rezendes, Jane Harrington, and Courtenay L. Bravmann, Attorneys at Law,

represented the Elk Grove Unified School District (District).

Margaret A. Geddes, and A. Eugene Huguenin, Jr., Attorneys at Law, represented the

respondents listed on Attachment A hereto.

Evidence was received on April 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, and 14, 2011. The record was

left open to allow the parties to submit updated information. On April 19, 2011, the District
submitted: (1) a summary data layoff sheet, which was marked as Exhibit 21 and admitted
into evidence in place of the prior draft; (2) summary layoff data as of April 18, 2011, which
was marked as Exhibit 39 and admitted into evidence; (3) lists of certificated employees who
were skipped pursuant to paragraphs B and C of the Skipping Resolution, which were
marked as Exhibit 40 and admitted into evidence; (4) a list of rescissions as of April 14,
2011, which was marked as Exhibit 41 and admitted into evidence; (5) a list of additional
rescissions as of April 18, 2011, which was marked as Exhibit 42 and admitted into
evidence; and (6) a list of the precautionary notices of layoff that were rescinded, which was
marked as Exhibit 43 and admitted into evidence. Exhibit 39 (summary layoff data as of
April 18, 2011) is attached hereto as Attachment B and made a part hereof. Exhibit 42
(precautionary notices rescinded) is attached hereto as Attachment C and made a part hereof.

On April 25, 2011, respondents filed: (1) an updated Exhibit OOO, which was added
to the existing Exhibit OOO; (2) a chart of secondary science teachers who were noticed and

1

not noticed for layoff, which was marked as Exhibit SSS1; and (3) additional argument,
which was marked as Exhibit TTT. On April 25, 2011, the District filed a letter setting forth
its response to the updated Exhibit OOO and Exhibit SSS, which was marked as Exhibit 44.
The District also filed a chart regarding the math skips, which was marked as Exhibit 45, and
a chart regarding the physical science skips, which was marked as Exhibit 46. The updated
Exhibit OOO, and Exhibits SSS, TTT, 44, 45, and 46 were included in the record as
additional argument from the parties. The record closed and this matter was submitted for
decision on April 25, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

On February 22, 2011, the District’s Governing Board adopted Resolution No.

32, entitled “Resolution of Intention to Dismiss Certificated Employees due to a Reduction
of Particular Kinds of Services” (PKS Resolution). As set forth in the PKS Resolution, the
Governing Board has determined that it is necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds
of services (PKS) at the close of the 2010-2011 school year, and to terminate the
employment of certain certificated District employees as a result of this reduction or
discontinuance. In the PKS Resolution, the Governing Board directed the Superintendent to
send appropriate notices to all employees whose services will be terminated by virtue of the
reductions. The reductions are based upon the severe budget cuts that the District is facing,
and are not related to the work performance of the affected teachers.

2.

As set forth in the PKS Resolution, the particular kinds of services and

programs being reduced at the end of the 2010-2011 school year are as follows:

Services

FTE2

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Director, Instructional Support
1.0 FTE
Director, Career Technical Education and Educational Options 1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
Program Specialist, Special Education
3.0 FTE
Program Specialist, Curriculum/Professional Learning
1.0 FTE
Program Specialist, Learning Support Services
2.0 FTE
Program Specialist, Pre K
1.0 FTE
Program Specialist, Student Support and Health Services
2.0 FTE
Program Administrator, Adult and Community Education
5.0 FTE
Vice Principal – Elementary
2.0 FTE
Vice Principal – Middle School
Vice Principal – High School
6.0 FTE
Instructional Coach, Program Improvement,

1 Respondents designated the chart of secondary science teachers as “Proposed
Exhibit RRR,” but since there was already an Exhibit RRR, respondents’ chart was marked
as Exhibit SSS.

2 “FTE” stands for full-time equivalent.

2

Curriculum/Professional Learning
Instructional Coach, Pre K
Transition Specialist
Teacher – Special Education – Moderate/Severe
Teacher – Special Education – Visually Impaired
Teacher – Pre K
Elementary Teacher (K-6)
Elementary/K-6 Resource Teacher (Computer)
Elementary/K-6 Resource Teacher (P.E.)

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21. Middle School Teacher (26.4):
Social Studies
English Language Arts

Health
Driver’s Ed.

Science
Physical Education

Social Studies
English Language Arts
Science
Physical Education
Visual and Performing Arts
Business/Computer

a.
b.
c. Math
d.
e.
f. World Languages (Spanish)
g. Health
High School Teacher (46.4):
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g. Automotive
h. World Languages (Spanish 3.0, French 1.5)
i.
j.
High School (9th Grade Class Size Reduction) Teacher (9.0):
a.
b. Math
High School Small But Necessary School Teacher (2.0)
a.
b.
Alternative Education Teacher (6.4):
a.
b.
c. Math
d. World Languages (Spanish)
Library Media Teacher (Secondary)
Counselor (Secondary)
Counselor, Student Support and Health Services
Resource Teacher, Curriculum/Professional Learning
Resource Teacher, Student Support and Health Services
School Nurse
Social Worker, Student Support and Health Services

Social Studies
English Language Arts

English
Social Studies

English

3

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

19.0 FTE
.8 FTE
2.0 FTE
2.1 FTE
1.0 FTE
24.8 FTE
182.8 FTE
38.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

4.5 FTE
4.5 FTE
4.5 FTE
4.5 FTE
4.5 FTE
1.4 FTE
2.5 FTE

9.0 FTE
9.0 FTE
4.5 FTE
6.0 FTE
4.5 FTE
4.5 FTE
.4 FTE
4.5 FTE
3.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

4.5 FTE
4.5 FTE

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

2.0 FTE
3.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
.4 FTE
8.0 FTE
22.0 FTE
1.8 FTE
1.1 FTE
1.3 FTE
.5 FTE
2.0 FTE

.5 FTE
.20 FTE

2.0 FTE
.7 FTE
.9 FTE

33.
34.
35.

Psychologist, Student Support and Health Services
Psychologist, Pre K
Adult Education Teacher (19.4):
a.
ABE/ASE
b. ABE/ESL
c.
d. Adults in Correctional Facilities
Culinary Arts

(Fee Based) Preschool

Landscaping/Horticulture
Parent Education

1.
2. ABE/ASE/ESL
3. ABE/Office Skills
4.
5.
6. Health
Department of Human Assistance

1.3 FTE
.7 FTE
1.1 FTE
1.0 FTE
.9 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.3 FTE
.7 FTE
.4 FTE
1.0 FTE
CBET (ESL)
1.6 FTE
Cal-Safe Child Care & Development Services (Parent Ed) 1.2 FTE
1.0 FTE
EDD/Industries w/ Statewide Need
Resource Teacher for Adults in
Correctional Facilities (ABE/ESL)

e.
f. WIA II/English Literacy & Civics Education
g. WIA II 225 (ABE/ESL/VESL/VABE/ASE/GED)
h. NCLB: Title 1, Even Start Family Literacy
i.
j.
k.
l.

m. Resource Teacher for One Stop Career Center

1.3 FTE
1.3 FTE

443.5 FTE

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reduction

3.

On February 22, 2011, the Governing Board also adopted the following

additional resolutions: (1) Resolution No. 33 – “Resolution to Determine Tie-Breaking
Criteria” (Tie-Breaking Resolution); (2) Resolution No. 34 – “Resolution of Release and
Reassignment of Certificated Administrator(s)”; (3) Resolution No. 35 – “Resolution to
Determine Criteria for Deviation from Terminating a Certificated Employee in Order of
Seniority (‘Skipping’ Criteria)” (Skipping Resolution); and (4) Resolution No. 36 –
“Resolution for Release and Non-reelection of Certificated Long-term Substitute and
Temporary Employees.” On March 1, 2011, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No.
43, which supplemented Resolution No. 36.

4.

Prior to March 15, 2011, Glen De Graw, the Associate Superintendent for
Human Resources,3 gave written “Notices of Proposed Layoff” (Preliminary Notices) to
certain certificated employees of the District, notifying them that their “services may be

3 It was not disputed that Mr. De Graw was duly delegated and authorized by the

Superintendent of the District to issue the Preliminary Notices.

4

terminated at the close of the current school year pursuant to Education Code sections 44949
and 44955.”4

5.

The parties stipulated that all respondents: (1) were properly and timely served

with a Preliminary Notice and timely requested a hearing; (2) were properly and timely
served an Accusation, Statement to Respondent, form Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing,
and relevant statutes; and (3) timely filed a Notice of Defense.

6.

The District has rescinded some of the Preliminary Notices that it had

previously served. Attachment B lists all the certificated employees who were served with
Preliminary Notices, and the Preliminary Notices that the District rescinded as of April 18,
2011. The listed certificated employees whose Preliminary Notices have been rescinded are
no longer respondents in this matter. The listed certificated employees whose Preliminary
Notices were not rescinded by the District remain respondents.

Skipping Resolution

7.

Section 44955 sets forth legal rules that the District must follow when

determining which certificated employees to lay off. Subdivision (b), in relevant part,
provides:

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while any probationary employee, or any other
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

Pursuant to subdivision (b), a senior certificated employee who is rendering a
particular kind of service that is designated for reduction may “bump” a more junior
employee who is rendering a service that the senior employee is competent and credentialed
to render.

Subdivision (c), in relevant part, provides that a school district “shall make
assignments and reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render
any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.”

Subdivision (d)(1) permits a school district to deviate from terminating certificated

employees in order of seniority (i.e., “skip” a junior certificated employee) when the school
district “demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of
study … [and] the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to
teach that course or course of study … which others with more seniority do not possess.”

4 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise

indicated.

5

8.

In the Skipping Resolution, for the 2011-2012 school year, the Governing

Board established the following skipping criteria:

A. Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in special education

assignments

For purposes of the above-referenced criteria specific to special
education, “fully-credentialed” is defined to mean an employee
who possesses a preliminary or clear credential.

B. Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in secondary

mathematics assignments

C. Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in secondary physical

science assignments

D. Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in secondary

agricultural science assignments

For purposes of the above-referenced criteria for secondary
mathematics, secondary physical science, secondary agricultural
science assignments, “fully-credentialed” is defined to mean an
employee who possesses a preliminary, clear or internship
single subject credential (authorizing instruction in grades 7 –
12) in the specified academic subject areas.

E. Individuals fully-credentialed and in possession of

specialized training and qualifications to serve in secondary
marching band/music assignments

F. Individuals fully-credentialed, currently assigned to and in

possession of specialized, required training and
qualifications to serve in secondary Advanced Placement
(AP) assignments

G. Individuals fully-credentialed, currently assigned to and in

possession of specialized, required training and
qualifications to serve in secondary International
Baccalaureate (IB) or pre IB program assignments

H. Individuals fully-credentialed, currently assigned to and in
possession of specialized, required training, experience and
qualifications to serve in the core areas of the secondary
California Partnership Academy (CPA)/career academy
programs for CPA coordinator and academy core teacher
positions

6

9.

In determining who would receive Preliminary Notices, the Distinct did not

implement the skipping criteria set forth in paragraphs F and G of the Skipping Resolution.5
Due to teachers’ seniority dates, Preliminary Notice rescissions, and attrition, the District did
not end up skipping any junior teachers under the skipping criteria set forth in paragraphs A
and D of the Skipping Resolution. Because these skipping criteria were not implemented by
the District, there is no need to address whether they are proper under section 44955,
subdivision (d)(1). During the hearing, respondents challenged the District’s implementation
of all the other skipping criteria set forth in the Skipping Resolution.

Single Subject Credential Skips

10.

Pursuant to paragraphs B and C of the Skipping Resolution, the District did
not give Preliminary Notices to certificated employees who possess a preliminary, clear or
internship single subject credential in math or physical sciences. Credentials that qualified as
physical sciences credentials included single subject credentials in physical science,
chemistry, physics, earth science, and geosciences.

11.

Brandon Krueger, Ed.D., Director of Certificated Personnel, Human

Resources, explained that the District designated the credential areas described in paragraphs
B and C of the Skipping Resolution because it is difficult for the District to find sufficient
teachers with these credentials to fill all the District’s teaching assignments. After the
hearing ended, the District submitted lists of the junior teachers it skipped under paragraphs
B and C because they hold either single subject math or physical sciences credentials. Some
of the skipped junior single subject credential holders are currently teaching either math or a
physical science in high school. Given the District’s difficulty in finding credentialed and
qualified teachers to teach in these difficult to fill positions, it was appropriate for the District
to skip the teachers who are currently teaching math or a physical science in high school
under their single subject credential in that area.

The District also skipped junior math and physical sciences single subject credential
holders who are teaching math in middle schools, integrated science in middle schools, and
general science in high schools. Respondents challenged these skips.

12. Middle School Math Skips. Of the junior teachers that the District skipped, 11

are currently teaching math in middle schools, grades seven and eight. These 11 junior
teachers have seniority dates that range from January 7, 2009, to January 3, 2011.6

5 During closing argument, the District stated that respondent Justin Sousa was
qualified to be skipped under paragraph G of the Skipping Resolution due to his training and
qualifications to serve in the secondary pre-IB program, but that, given his seniority date, his
Preliminary Notice would be rescinded even if he were not skipped.

6 These 11 skipped middle school math teachers are: Kelly Lebsock (seniority date:
January 7, 2009); Juliet Reck (seniority date: August 11, 2009); Adrianne Avila (seniority
date: August 11, 2009); Adam Wood (seniority date: August 16, 2010); Jessica Rigsby
(seniority date: August 16, 2010); Kimberly Milan (seniority date: August 16, 2010); Casey

7

13.

There are 10 respondents with multiple subject credentials with supplementary
authorizations in math who are also currently teaching math in middle schools, grades seven
and eight. These respondents have seniority dates that range from August 24, 2004, to
August 19, 2008.7 In addition, Randall Rubiales, who has a seniority date of August 22,
2006, and holds a single subject physical education credential, with supplementary
authorizations in economics, introductory business, and introductory mathematics, is
currently teaching math in a middle school.

14. Middle School Science Skips. Of the junior teachers skipped by the District

because they possess single subject physical sciences credentials, three are currently teaching
integrated science in middle schools, grades seven and eight: Michael Weiler (seniority date:
August 16, 2010), Laura Bradford (seniority date: October 15, 2008), and Jason Allen
(seniority date: August 22, 2006).

15.

There are three respondents who are currently teaching integrated science in

middle school and, due to their seniority, would otherwise be able to bump these three
skipped teachers but for the physical sciences skip: (1) Emily Blum-Amick has a seniority
date of August 23, 2005,8 and holds a multiple subject credential with a subject matter
authorization in biological sciences; (2) Bryce Davies has a seniority date of August 22,
2006, and holds a multiple subject credential with a supplementary authorization in science;
and (3) Courtney Chow-Pun has seniority date of July 18, 2007, and holds a multiple subject
credential with subject matter authorizations in biological science and chemistry, and
supplementary authorizations in math and science.

16.

High School General Science Skips: Of the junior teachers skipped by the

District because they possess single subject physical sciences credentials, four are teaching
general science in high schools: Charles Bennett IV (seniority date: August 11, 2009),
Michael Rosales (seniority date: August 21, 2008); Gurpreet Sangha (seniority date: August
21, 2007); and Michelle Abriani (seniority date: August 20, 2007).

Behney (seniority Date: August 16, 2010); Ramneek Bajwa (seniority date: August 16,
2010); Erin Gress (seniority date: November 5, 2010); Melissa Heintz (seniority date January
3, 2011); and Garrett Lebsock (seniority date: January 3, 2011).

7 The 10 respondents are Gabrielle Bajar (seniority date: August 24, 2004); Elaine
Lee (seniority date: August 24, 2004); Nhung Le (seniority date: August 23, 2005); Loren
Runsten (seniority date: August 23, 2005); Daniel Seto (seniority date: August 23, 2005);
Cary Smallwood (seniority date: August 23, 2005); Mary Chung (seniority date: January 25,
2006); April Dorman (seniority date: August 21, 2007); Valarie Heng (seniority date: August
21, 2007); and Jeannette Deml (seniority date: August 19, 2008).

8 Ms. Blum-Amick’s seniority date was changed from August 22, 2006, to August 23,

2005, during the hearing.

8

17.

There are four respondents who are credentialed and competent to teach

general science in high school, and, due to their seniority, would otherwise be able to bump
these four skipped teachers but for the physical sciences skips: (1) Kelli Quan has a seniority
date of August 22, 2006, and holds a single subject credential in biological sciences; (2)
Kayla Martin has a seniority date of August 22, 2006, and holds a single subject credential in
biological sciences; (3) Diana Brooks has a seniority date of August 22, 2006, and holds a
single subject credential in biological sciences; and (4) Sarah Reed has a seniority date of
January 22, 2007, and holds a single subject credential in biological sciences with
supplementary authorizations in computer concepts and applications, and introductory health
science.

18.

The District has not yet assigned any of the skipped single subject math and

physical sciences credential holders to teaching assignments for the 2011-2012 school year.
At the hearing, the District conceded that it has not yet finally determined in which
assignments its retained junior teachers will be teaching next year.

19. With regard to the skipping criteria identified in paragraphs B and C of the

Skipping Resolution, respondents asserted that the District skipped junior certificated
employees solely because they possess the described credentials, and not because they are
now teaching, or have been assigned next year to teach, a specific course or course of study
that requires them to have special training and experience that the more senior respondents
do not possess. Respondents argued that the District, through its single subject math and
physical sciences credential skips, is attempting to prevent more senior respondents from
exercising their bumping rights under section 44955, subdivision (b), by skipping junior
employees who are now teaching courses that more senior respondents are credentialed and
competent to teach. According to respondents, these skips, based solely upon the possession
of credentials, and not upon the teaching of any specific courses or courses of study that
require the possession of these specific credentials, violate section 44955.

20.

During closing argument, the District asserted that the criteria for determining
whether certificated employees are “fully-credentialed” as set forth under paragraphs B and
C of the Skipping Resolution are “competency criteria.” 9 The District argued that, because
the terms “competence” as used in section 44955, subdivision (b), and “qualifications” as
used in subdivision (c) are not defined, it was within the District’s discretion to define these
terms as it did in its “competency criteria” in the Skipping Resolution. According to the
District, once it established its “competency criteria,” and determined that certain certificated
employees met these criteria by possessing the designated single subject credentials, the
District could skip these employees without first having to determine whether they met any
of the requirements of section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). As set forth below, the District’s
argument is not persuasive.

9 It is noted that the Skipping Resolution does not call the skipping criteria set forth
under paragraphs B and C “competency criteria.” District counsel designated them as such
during closing argument.

9

21.

The District cannot protect its junior teachers who hold the specifically

identified credentials from being bumped by more senior respondents simply by labeling its
skipping criteria “competency criteria.” As the court in Duax v. Kern Community College
District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 567 (Duax) explained, “The mandate is that the
governing board establish a standard of competency that relates to the skills and
qualifications of the teacher.” School districts usually establish competency criteria to
determine whether senior teachers, who have been rendering services that are designated for
reduction, can bump into the assignments of more junior teachers, when the senior teachers,
although credentialed to teach the junior teachers’ assignments, have either never or not
recently taught in such assignments. As respondents argued, the District adopted its single
subject credential skips not to assure that senior teachers have the competence to bump into
junior teachers’ assignments. Instead, the District adopted these skipping criteria to protect
the junior teachers who hold the designated credentials from being bumped from regular
classroom assignments that more senior respondents, while not possessing the designated
credentials, may nonetheless have the credentials, skills, qualifications, training and
experience to teach. The District cannot use its skipping criteria in this fashion.

22.

The issues the parties have raised in this proceeding are comparable to those
addressed in Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567 (Alexander). The
court in Alexander was asked to determine whether a school district could retain junior
teachers with Spanish-speaking skills over more senior teachers who did not possess such
bilingual skills. The court began its discussion by making clear that, “Upon determining a
need for a reduction in the number of permanent employees, a school district is required to
comply with the lay-off procedures enumerated in section 44955.” (Id. at p. 570.) As the
court explained:

Thus, the statute [section 44955] provides that seniority
determines the order of dismissals, and that as between
employees with the same first date of paid service, the order of
termination is determined on the basis of the needs of the district
and its students. Senior employees are given “bumping” rights
in that they will not be terminated if there are junior employees
retained who are rendering services which the senior employee
is certificated and competent to render. Conversely, as in this
case, a district may move upward from the bottom of the
seniority list, “skipping” over and retaining junior employees
who are certificated and competent to render services which
more senior employees are not. [Citations.]

(Id. at page 571.)

The Alexander court noted that the junior teachers in question were not teaching in

the school’s bilingual program. Instead, they were teaching courses that: (1) did not require
them to have or use their bilingual skills, and (2) more senior teachers were credentialed and
competent to teach. The court “in effect nullifie[d]” the school district’s decision to “skip the
junior teachers who possessed Spanish language skills but were not employed to teach

10

classes in the formal bilingual program.” (Alexander, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at p. 576.)
Because junior teachers were skipped solely because they possessed Spanish-speaking skills,
the court ordered that a corresponding number of the layoff notices given to the most senior
teachers without such skills be rescinded. (Ibid.) The clear implication of Alexander is that
junior teachers may only be skipped when the credentials, certifications, training or skills
they possess: (1) are required to render the teaching services they are assigned to provide,
and (2) are not possessed by more senior teachers.

23.

The District argued that Alexander should not be followed because, shortly

after it was issued, subdivision (d) was added to section 44955. While the District is correct
that subdivision (d) was added to section 44955 after Alexander was issued, subdivision (d)
did not overturn Alexander; it codified it.

24.

In Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127

(Bledsoe), the court was called upon to determine whether a school district could lay off a
more senior certificated employee when it skipped two more junior employees who were
teaching in a community day school. The court in Bledsoe determined that, even though the
more senior employee was credentialed and competent to teach in the positions that the more
junior employees occupied, the school district demonstrated that it had a specific need for the
two junior teachers to teach in the community day school, and the two junior teachers had
special training and experience necessary to teach in a community day school that the more
senior teacher did not possess. The Bledsoe court therefore found that, consistent with
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the school district could skip the two junior employees and
lay off the more senior employee.

25.

In its opinion, the Bledsoe court made clear that the determination of whether a

school district may lay off senior employees and retain more junior employees involves a
two-step analysis: (1) pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (b), the school district must first
determine whether the senior employees are credentialed and competent to render the
services that the junior employees have been retained to render; and (2) if the school district
determines that the senior employees are credentialed and competent to render these services,
the school district must then decide whether, pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1):
(i) it has a specific need for the junior employees to teach a specific course or course of
study, and (ii) the junior employees have special training and experience necessary to teach
that course or course of study that the more senior employees do not possess.

26.

In adopting skipping criteria that allow all certificated employees who possess

the designated single subject credentials to be skipped without concern as to whether the
skipped employees are assigned to teach in positions that mandate these particular
credentials, the District is seeking to short-circuit the analysis required under section 44955.
As the Alexander court made clear, the District cannot issue competency criteria that are
divorced from the courses that the affected teachers are assigned to teach. As is evident from
Bledsoe, the District cannot retain junior employees to render services that more senior
employees are credentialed and competent to render based solely upon the junior employees’
possession of designated credentials, without conducting the full analysis under section
44955, subdivision (d)(1).

11

27.

The District raised a number of arguments as to why it needs to retain teachers

with the single subject credentials described in paragraphs B and C of the Skipping
Resolution.

Teacher Preparedness and Qualifications. Associate Superintendent De

a.
Graw testified that the District seeks to retain certificated employees with
single subject credentials in math and physical sciences because it believes
that these employees are best able and most prepared to serve the District’s
students in seventh through twelfth grades. According to Mr. De Graw, he has
read published studies that found that students who are taught by teachers who
have the college credits required to obtain a single subject credential in
mathematics or physical sciences perform better on standardized tests.

Assistant Superintendent De Graw’s testimony was not persuasive.
First, the District did not offer into evidence any of the published studies to
which he referred. Second, his testimony did not address if these studies
analyzed whether more junior teachers with single subject credentials in math
and physical sciences are more effective teachers than more senior teachers
who hold other credentials or have only subject matter or supplementary
authorizations in these areas. There was compelling testimony from
respondents that, to be effective, teachers must: (1) have rigorous knowledge
of the subject matter; (2) be able to make the subject matter relevant to
students; and (3) relate to students in a way that encourages them to learn.
According to these respondents, while new teachers with single subject
credentials may possess the academic rigor necessary to teach math or
physical sciences, it often takes teachers time to develop the teaching skills
needed to make the subject matter relevant and to relate successfully to
students to promote learning.

b.
Recruiting Difficulties and Assignment Flexibility. As set forth above
(Finding 11), Dr. Krueger explained that the District designated the credential
areas described in paragraphs B and C of the Skipping Resolution because it is
difficult for the District to find sufficient teachers with these credentials to fill
all the District’s teaching assignments. According to Dr. Krueger, teachers
with single subject credentials offer the District more flexibility when making
assignments in the seventh through twelfth grades. Sharon Smith, a District
Personnel Analyst, explained the types of courses that single subject math or
physical sciences credential holders can teach when compared to teachers who
hold other credentials or only subject matter or supplementary authorizations
in math or physical sciences. From Ms. Smith’s testimony, it appeared that
some of the skipped single subject credential holders could be assigned to
teach a wider array of courses in the tenth through twelfth grades than some of
the more senior respondents with other credentials and/or subject matter or
supplementary authorizations.

12

The recruiting difficulties and assignment flexibility that Dr. Krueger

cited for including the credential skips described in paragraphs B and C of the
Skipping Resolution are understandable. The District is being forced by
unprecedented budget cuts to substantially reduce its teaching staff. These
reductions may have a lasting adverse impact on its ability to retain sufficient
credentialed staff to provide all the education services its students need and
deserve. But the desire to preserve the flexibility to make possible changes in
staffing assignments in the future cannot trump the mandate of section 44955,
subdivision (d)(1), which requires a school district to demonstrate that it has a
“specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study.”
(Emphasis added.) If the District cannot show that it now intends to assign the
skipped junior single subject credential holders to specific assignments that
more senior respondents without such credentials cannot teach, the mandate of
subdivision (d)(1) prevents the District from laying off more senior teachers
who are credentialed and competent to teach the classes that the skipped junior
single subject credential holders are now teaching.

NCLB Compliance. Ms. Smith explained that the District is currently

c.
in “program improvement status” and, as a result, is being monitored by the
state for its compliance with federal requirements under the No Child Left
Behind Act (NCLB). According to Ms. Smith, teachers who hold single
subject credentials and those with subject matter authorizations are
automatically deemed to be subject matter competent under NCLB; teachers
who hold supplementary authorizations in a subject area are not automatically
deemed to be subject matter competent under NCLB in that subject area, but
these teachers may establish subject matter competence either by taking the
CSET exam or by demonstrating that they have sufficient college credits in
that subject area. The District argued that the NCLB compliance that single
subject credential holders automatically have in their subject areas supports the
District’s decision to skip the teachers who hold the credentials described in
paragraphs B and C of the Skipping Resolution.

While it is important for the District to take appropriate steps to ensure
that its teachers comply with NCLB requirements, the District did not submit
sufficient evidence to establish that the junior single subject credential holders
that it has skipped are teaching in courses that require the NCLB subject
matter competence that only their single subject credentials can confer. The
District also did not submit sufficient evidence to establish that the more
senior respondents, who are credentialed and competent to teach these courses,
are not NCLB-compliant to do so. In addition, the District did not submit
evidence to show that it has established competency criteria that mandate
NCLB compliance.

13

28.

The 11 respondents identified in Finding 13 are credentialed and competent to
teach the middle school math courses that the 11 skipped junior teachers with single subject
math credentials identified in Finding 12 are currently teaching. The District did not
demonstrate that it currently has a specific need for the skipped middle school math teachers
to teach a specific course or course of study which requires them to have special training and
experience that the 11 respondents, who are now also teaching middle school math, do not
possess. Consequently, the District did not establish that, consistent with the requirements of
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), it may skip junior middle school math teachers with single
subject math credentials, while laying off the more senior respondents identified in Finding
13. The District must therefore rescind the Preliminary Notices given to: Gabrielle Bajar,
Elaine Lee, Nhung Le, Loren Runsten, Daniel Seto, Cary Smallwood, Mary Chung, April
Dorman, Valarie Heng, Jeannette Deml, and Randall Rubiales.

29.

The respondents identified in Finding 15 are credentialed and competent to

teach the middle school integrated science courses that the skipped junior teachers with
single subject physical sciences credentials identified in Finding 14 are currently teaching.
The District did not demonstrate that it currently has a specific need for the skipped junior
middle school integrated science teachers to teach a specific course or course of study which
requires them to have special training and experience that the identified respondents, who are
now also teaching middle school integrated science, do not possess. Consequently, the
District did not establish that, consistent with the requirements of section 44955, subdivision
(d)(1), it may skip junior middle school integrated science teachers with single subject
physical science credentials, while laying off the more senior respondents identified in
Finding 15. The District must therefore rescind the Preliminary Notices given to: Emily
Blum-Amick, Bryce Davies, and Courtney Chow-Pun.

30.

The respondents identified in Finding 17 are credentialed and competent to
teach the high school general science courses that the skipped junior teachers with single
subject physical sciences credentials identified in Finding 16 are currently teaching. The
District did not demonstrate that it currently has a specific need for the skipped junior
general science teachers to teach a specific course or course of study which requires them to
have special training and experience that the identified respondents do not possess.
Consequently, the District did not establish that, consistent with the requirements of section
44955, subdivision (d)(1), it may skip junior high school general science teachers with single
subject physical sciences credentials, while laying off the more senior respondents identified
in Finding 17. The District must therefore rescind the Preliminary Notices given to: Kelli
Quan, Kayla Martin, Diana Brooks, and Sarah Reed.

Marching Band Skips

31.

Paragraph E of the Skipping Resolution authorizes the District to skip:

Individuals fully-credentialed and in possession of specialized
training and qualifications to serve in secondary marching
band/music assignments

14

32.

Dr. Krueger testified that, in order to be skipped under paragraph E, the

certificated employee currently had to be teaching in a secondary marching band assignment.
Dr. Krueger explained that paragraph E was adopted by the Governing Board due to the
difficulty of recruiting teachers who have marching band experience. According to Dr.
Krueger, the District has award-winning marching bands that require the teaching skills of
experienced marching band directors.

33.

During closing argument, the District identified Aaron Smith and John Natelli

as the two marching band directors that it skipped pursuant to paragraph E. The District’s
seniority list indicates that Mr. Smith has a seniority date of August 16, 2010, holds a clear
single subject credential in music, and is currently teaching music at Monterrey Trail High
School. The seniority list indicates that Mr. Natelli has a seniority date of August 16, 2010,
holds a preliminary single subject credential in music, and is currently teaching a .6 FTE at
Valley High School, and a .4 FTE at Samuel Jackman Middle School. Other than the
information set forth in the seniority list about Mr. Smith and Mr. Natelli, the District did not
submit any evidence to establish that these two certificated employees have special training
and experience necessary to direct marching bands.

34.

Four respondents testified that they should also have been skipped under

paragraph E:

a.
Florin Baros has a seniority date of August 19, 2008. He holds a
preliminary single subject credential in music. He is currently teaching three
choir classes and two piano classes at Florin High School. He also teaches a
choir class at a middle school. He has not directed a marching band. He
believes that his training in music and his experience leading choirs have
provided him with sufficient skills, knowledge and ability to direct a marching
band.

Karissa Hofer has a seniority date of August 11, 2009. She holds a

b.
preliminary single subject credential in music. She is currently teaching band
and choir at Elizabeth Pinkerton Middle School. She directs the eighth-grade
marching band, and often collaborates with the Cosumnes Oaks High School
marching band. The middle school marching band that she directs has
competed in state-wide competitions.

Corey Hoggard has a seniority date of August 22, 2006. He holds a

c.
clear single subject music credential in music. He is currently teaching music
at Edward Harris, Jr. Middle School. His teaches seventh- and eighth-grade
beginner band, intermediate concert band, and choir. He is the director of the
marching band at the middle school. His middle school marching band played
at the Elk Grove Middle School Band Festival and was awarded a superior
rating. A middle school pep band that he directs performs at basketball
games, open houses, and rallies.

15

Coleen Hogge has a seniority date of August 19, 2008. She holds a

d.
preliminary single subject credential in music, with a supplementary
authorization in introductory business. She is currently teaching a music
appreciation class, a piano lab, a vocal ensemble, and concert choir at Franklin
High School. She has not directed a marching band, but she believes that her
training and experience in music qualify her to do so.

35.

During closing argument, the District agreed that both Ms. Hofer and Mr.
Hoggard possess the specialized training and qualifications needed to serve in secondary
marching band/music assignments. The District therefore concluded that both Ms. Hofer and
Mr. Hoggard should be skipped under paragraph E of the Skipping Resolution. The
District’s April 14, 2011 list of rescissions shows that the District has rescinded the
Preliminary Notices it served on Ms. Hofer and Mr. Hoggard.

36.

As set forth in Finding 25, the determination of whether a school district may

lay off more senior employees and retain more junior employees involves a two-step
analysis: (1) pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (b), the school district must first
determine whether the senior employees are credentialed and competent to render the
services that the junior employees have been retained to render; and (2) if the school district
determines that the senior employees are credentialed and competent to render these services,
pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the school district must then decide whether:
(i) it has a specific need for the junior employees to teach a specific course or course of
study, and (ii) the junior employees have special training and experience necessary to teach
that course or course of study that the more senior employees do not possess.

37.

The evidence established that the two certificated employees who were

skipped – Mr. Smith and Mr. Natelli – and the four respondents who testified – Mr. Baros,
Ms. Hofer, Ms. Hogge and Mr. Hoggard – are all credentialed and competent to serve in
secondary marching band/music assignments. Dr. Krueger’s testimony established that the
District has a specific need for certificated employees to direct marching bands. Ms. Hofer
and Mr. Hoggard established that they have the special training and experience necessary to
direct secondary marching bands. Accordingly, the District established that, pursuant to
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), Ms. Hofer and Mr. Hoggard qualify to be skipped pursuant
to paragraph E of the Skipping Resolution, and their Preliminary Notices were properly
rescinded.

38.

The District did not, however, present sufficient evidence about Mr. Smith and

Mr. Natelli to establish that these junior employees have the special training and experience
necessary to direct marching bands that Mr. Baros and Ms. Hogge, who are both more
senior, do not possess. Because of this lack of sufficient evidence, the District did not
establish that the skips of Mr. Smith and Mr. Natelli satisfy the second prong of section
44955, subdivision (d)(1). Consequently, the District may not skip Mr. Smith and Mr.
Natelli while laying off Mr. Baros and Ms. Hogge. The Preliminary Notices served on Mr.
Baros and Ms. Hogge must therefore be rescinded.

16

Career Academy Skips

39.

Paragraph H of the Skipping Resolution authorizes the District to skip:

Individuals fully-credentialed, currently assigned to and in
possession of specialized, required training, experience and
qualifications to serve in the core areas of the secondary
California Partnership Academy (CPA)/career academy
programs for CPA coordinator and academy core teacher
positions

40.

The District has established career academies in accordance with the

Education Code. Section 54690, in relevant part, provides:

(a) The Legislature hereby finds and declares that the
partnership academies program has proven to be a highly
effective state-school-private sector partnership, providing
combined academic and occupational training to high school
students who present a high risk of dropping out of school, and
motivating those students to stay in school and graduate.
Partnership academies are functioning in 45 high schools spread
throughout the state, with occupational training successfully
offered in over 15 different skill fields, including such diverse
skills as electronics, computer technology, finance, agribusiness,
graphic arts and printing, international business, and space. …

(b) The Legislature finds the partnership academies are in the
forefront of school efforts to integrate academic and vocational
education and that they can be effective in providing an
integrated learning program and high motivation toward
pursuing skilled occupational fields to students at risk of
dropping out of school and to students not motivated by the
regular educational curriculum. Further, the Legislature finds
the partnership academies can make a very positive contribution
towards meeting the needs of the state for a highly skilled and
educated work force in the 21st century.

(c) Therefore, the Legislature hereby states its intent to expand
the number of partnership academies in this state’s high schools,
hereafter to be known as California Partnership Academies; to
broaden the availability of these learning experiences to
interested students who do not meet the full criteria of “at-risk”
students; and to encourage the establishment of academies
whose occupational fields address the needs of developing
technologies….

17

41.

The California Department of Education has described career academies as

follows:

Academies incorporate many features of the high school reform
movement that includes creating a close family-like atmosphere,
integrating academic and career technical education, and
establishing viable business partnerships. Emphasis is also
placed on student achievement and positive postsecondary
outcomes. Academies have been carefully evaluated and shown
to have positive impacts on school performance. Key
components of the Academy model are:

 CURRICULUM focused on a career theme and
coordinated with related academic classes.

 VOLUNTARY student selection process that identifies

 TEAM OF TEACHERS who work together to plan and

interested ninth graders.

implement the program.

 MOTIVATIONAL ACTIVITIES with private sector
involvement to encourage academic and occupational
preparation, such as: integrated and project-based
curriculum, mentor program, classroom speakers, field
trips, and exploration of postsecondary and career
options.

 WORKPLACE LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES such

as job shadowing, student internships, and work
experience.

(www.cde.ca.gov/ci/gs/hs/cpaoverview.asp. Bolding and capitalization in the
original.)

42.

At the beginning of the hearing, the District asserted that paragraph H of the

Skipping Resolution authorized it to skip junior certificated employees who are currently
assigned to career academies and working as: (1) academy coordinators; (2) career technical
education (CTE) teachers; and (3) core academic teachers. Although the District believed
that paragraph H allowed it to skip these certificated employees, the District sent Preliminary
Notices to all the employees it asserts should be skipped under this skipping criteria.
Partway through the hearing, the District determined that it would not skip any junior core
academic teachers who are currently teaching in career academies. Because the District sent
Preliminary Notices to the junior core academic teachers that it initially intended to skip
under paragraph H, there is no reason to address the issues raised at the hearing regarding
these junior teachers.

18

43.

During the hearing, the District proposed to skip the following four academy
coordinators: (1) Susan DeHerrera; (2) Susan Hubbard; (3) Rebecca Hunter; and (4) Carlos
Garcia. The District also proposed to skip the following four CTE teachers: (1) Cristin
Smith; (2) Jennifer Moore; (3) Bryan Jilka; and (4) Jason Brennan.10 As set forth above,
after the hearing concluded, the District submitted lists of its post-hearing rescissions. These
lists show that the District has rescinded the Preliminary Notices served on Ms. DeHerrera
and Mr. Brennan. From the information provided by the District, it appears that these
rescissions were not based upon the skipping criteria set forth in paragraph H of the Skipping
Resolution. It is therefore not necessary to address these certificated employees in this
proposed decision.

44.

The parties presented the following evidence regarding the three remaining

academy coordinators that the District proposes to skip:

Susan Hubbard has a seniority date of August 16, 2010. She holds a

a.
preliminary single subject credential in business education. She is an academy
coordinator, CTE teacher, and core academic teacher in the Green Renewable
Energy Engineering Network (GREEN) Academy at Franklin High School.
Ms. Hubbard started the GREEN Academy approximately two year ago. The
purpose of the GREEN Academy is to provide students with a four-year
course of study that gives them the opportunity to explore a variety of fields
based on green and clean technology, including those in wind, solar energy,
hydroelectricity and bio fuel.

As the GREEN Academy coordinator, Ms. Hubbard works with: (1) the

administration to build the framework for the academy, including teacher
recruitment and class scheduling; (2) teachers to develop a comprehensive
project-based program, which requires coordination of curriculum, class
schedules and prep periods; (3) counselors to oversee the students’ schedules;
and (4) students to recruit, coordinate schedules, and check attendance to
ensure that at-risk students are in compliance with academy and school
requirements to earn a certificate of completion. She prepares and produces
all required reports for the District and the state. She organizes and facilitates
the eleventh-grade mentorship program, advisory panels, and field trips. She
works closely with the community to build relationships that will benefit and
enhance the academy. She organizes teacher development and training to
make sure that the academy is meeting the requirements of the CPA grant.
She work to develop relationships with businesses to work with academy
students.

10 The District submitted a declaration from Erin Goldman, but did not otherwise
argue that she was an academy coordinator or a CTE teacher who should be skipped pursuant
to paragraph H of the Skipping Resolution. The District did not present sufficient evidence
to establish that Ms. Goldman should be skipped under paragraph H of the Skipping
Resolution.

19

Ms. Hubbard teaches computer technology and general business in the

GREEN Academy. Before joining the District, she worked for 25 years in a
variety different positions in businesses, including as an in-house marketing
director and a small business owner. With her extensive business experience,
she is able to bring a wide array of workplace skills and knowledge to her
academy students.

b.
Rebecca Hunter has a seniority date of August 23, 2005. She holds a
clear single subject credential in English. For the past six years, she has been
teaching in Pleasant Grove High School’s Computer Aided Drafting/Design
and Digital Communications (CADD/COMM) Academy. For the past four
years, she has been the academy’s coordinator. The CADD/COMM Academy
is a technology-driven program with two academic pathways: Computer Aided
Drafting/Design and Digital Communications. CADD students learn the
fundamentals of both architectural and mechanical CADD, experience a
hands-on engineering lab, and create animated 3D models. Communication
students explore digital animation, video production, broadcasting, and 3D
animation.

As the CADD/COMM Academy coordinator, Ms. Hunter meets with:

(1) district personnel regarding academy certification; (2) school site staff
regarding course scheduling; and (3) counselors to ensure all academy students
are enrolled in proper classes. She recruits eighth-grade students to join the
academy. She maintains the academy’s budget. She: (1) coordinates and runs
all academy staff meetings; (2) ensures that the academy is in compliance with
all Education Code requirements; (3) ensures all academy teaching
assignments are filled; (4) facilitates the development of specialized academy
curriculum; (5) organizes extra-curricular events for students, including field
trips, guest speakers, social events, and award banquets; (6) monitors all
academy students’ grades, standardized test scores, behavior, at-risk status,
attendance, graduation requirements, and scheduling; (7) counsels academy
students and parents regarding academy issues; (8) communicates with the
District, academy staff, academy students, and academy parents regarding
academy issues; (9) prepares all mandated reporting for the academy; and (10)
develops and implements academy-specific curriculum.

Ms. Hunter has received extensive academy-related training. Of

particular note is Ms. Hunter’s involvement with the Ford Partnership for
Advanced Studies (Ford PAS) program. The Ford Motor Company has
developed the Ford PAS program to train teachers, employers, and community
leaders to help students graduate from high school, ready to go to college
and/or start careers, and better able to compete successfully in the 21st century
economy. Ms. Hunter has participated in numerous Ford PAS training, and
has been a nationally-accredited Ford PAS trainer since 2009.

20

Carlos Garcia has a seniority date of August 19, 2008. He holds a clear

c.
single subject credential in social science. He is the academy coordinator for
Florin High School’s Domestic and International Law Academy (LAW)
Academy. He is also a core academic teacher in the academy, teaching two
sections of academy world history. He has taught in the LAW Academy and
has been its coordinator since its inception in 2009. He is responsible for
developing the academy’s budget, scope and sequence, as well as conducting
recruitment for the academy. He attended the CPA Conference in fall 2009
and spring 2010. He attended Ford PAS training in April 2009, August 2009,
and Fall 2010. He has attended academy team meetings weekly at the site
level since Spring 2009, and quarterly at the District level.

45.

The parties presented the following evidence regarding the three remaining

CTE teachers that the District proposes to skip:

Cristin Smith has a seniority date of August 11, 2009. She holds a

a.
preliminary full-time designated subjects career technical education teaching
credential in hospitality, tourism, and recreation. Ms. Smith is the CTE
teacher in the Culinary Arts Academy at Cosumnes Oaks High School. The
purpose of the Culinary Arts Academy is to provide students with a four-year
sequenced curriculum that prepares them for National Restaurant Certification.
Students learn nutrition science, restaurant management, food chemistry, and
culinary skills to prepare them for employment in the hospitality, tourism and
recreation industries.

Because the Culinary Arts Academy coordinator is also the vice
principal of the school, Ms. Smith has been tasked with performing many of
the academy duties ordinarily performed by academy coordinators. Ms. Smith
wrote 40 percent of the state grant for the Culinary Arts Academy. Last year,
she was the only teacher in the academy. She is currently trying to expand the
academy and recruit more teachers to join the academy staff. She is designing
the academy’s curriculum. She monitors academy students to ensure that they
continue to meet academy requirements. She attended CPA training in March
2011. She has taught four courses in the academy this school year. She has
five years of work experience as a chef. With her industry background, she is
working to build community relationships. She believes that her experience in
business provides her with business skills that other more senior home
economics teachers do not possess.

Jennifer Moore has a seniority date of July 29, 2008. She holds a

b.
preliminary single subject credential in art. In the current school year, she is
teaching two sections of computer and graphic design, and one section of
digital art in Elk Grove High School’s Technology and Digital Arts (TDA)
Academy. This academy is designed for students interested in media
advertising and entertainment industries, and who want to learn filmmaking,
photography and digital design.

21

She attended the CPA Conference in 2010 and 2011. She attended

Ford PAS training in 2008. She attends monthly academy meetings
throughout the school year. She has significant training and experience in
graphic design and computer software. She worked as a layout designer for a
magazine and as a photographer in private industry before becoming a teacher.
She has been using the contacts she made as a photographer to arrange for
students to gain practical work experience in photography.

Bryan Jilka has a seniority date of August 23, 2005. He has clear
c.
single subject credentials in health science and physical education. Mr. Jilka is
one of the original members of the Sports Careers Academy at Laguna Creek
High School. In this academy, students learn skills in athletic training,
physical therapy, and fitness instruction. They receive a background in
anatomy and physiology, ethical and legal issues involved in medicine, and
medical terminology.

Mr. Jilka is the academy’s CTE teacher. He is currently teaching
introduction to sports medicine (a junior core CTE class), introduction to
sports therapy (a senior core CTE class), and Health B (a freshman core class
that sets the foundation for the junior and senior classes). He has spent the
past four years developing the curriculum for these classes. He has created a
fully functioning exercise physiology lab.

Mr. Jilka has also spent the past four years developing community

relationships with his academy. He has modeled the academy’s program on
Sacramento State’s exercise physiology program. He is working with the
chairs of Sacramento State’s exercise physiology and kinesiology programs.
He is teaching his junior class with a professional certified athletic trainer. He
has arranged to have physical therapists visit academy classes, and has taken
the students on field trips to fitness centers to expose them to the fitness world.

Mr. Jilka has had many years of industry experience. He has been a

fitness director at a racquet club. He has over 18 years of coaching
experience, and has coached both track and cross country. He is a certified
CPR and first aid instructor.

46.

The District described its career academies as small schools within big high
schools. The District’s evidence about the academic success of students who participate in
career academies was compelling. The District’s evidence about the special training and
experience that the identified academy coordinators and CTE teachers possess, and the
significant amount of work that these teachers perform for their career academies, was also
compelling. The District did not contest that some more senior respondents may be
credentialed and competent to perform the work that junior academy coordinators and CTE
teachers are currently performing. But, pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the
District demonstrated that it has a specific need for the identified junior academy

22

coordinators and CTE teachers to teach the specific courses of study provided to students in
its career academies. The District also demonstrated that the certificated employees
identified in Findings 44 and 45 all have the special training and experience necessary to be
academy coordinators and/or CTE teachers that more senior respondents do not possess. The
District therefore established compliance with section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).
Accordingly, the District may apply the skipping criteria set forth in paragraph H of the
Skipping Resolution to skip these certificated employees.

47.

There were three other respondents who argued that they, too, should be

deemed to meet the skipping criteria set forth in paragraph H of the Skipping Resolution11:

Jon Russell has a seniority date of August 21, 2007. He holds a clear

a.
single subject credential in health science, with a supplementary authorization
in introductory physical education. For three years prior to this school year,
Mr. Russell was assigned as the CTE teacher for the Health Tech Academy at
Valley High School. This academy provides a four-year program that
combines advanced technology, student workplace experience, and direct
contact with local health officials for students interested in a health-related
occupation.

As a CTE teacher within the Health Tech Academy, Mr. Russell taught

health courses. He developed the ninth-grade curriculum for the academy’s
health course. He was instrumental in organizing the annual Health Fair.

This year, Mr. Russell was asked by his principal, Keven MacDonald,
to pilot a program that teams him with the California GEAR-UP grant. In this
role, Mr. Russell supports key needs within several other programs and
departments at Valley High School. A portion of his current role consists of
conducting rallies and recruitment at the District’s elementary school to
promote a pathway to college and create a mentoring program. As a result of
this assignment, Mr. Russell is not currently teaching any classes in the Health
Tech Academy. But he has continued to work as an advocacy teacher for
academy students. He meets with students in his advocacy class every
Wednesday for 45 minutes and after school.

Although Mr. Russell is not currently teaching any CTE classes in the

Health Tech Academy, Mr. MacDonald confirmed that Mr. Russell is still
considered to be an integral member of the academy team, and is scheduled to

11 Derrick Milgrim testified that, prior to the current school year, he was both an

academy coordinator and CTE teacher in a career academy. After the hearing, the District
rescinded Mr. Milgrim’s Preliminary Notice. There was no indication that this rescission
was related to the skipping criteria set forth in paragraph H of the Skipping Resolution.
Consequently, it is not necessary to address the issues raised by Mr. Milgrim regarding the
career academy skip.

23

return to the academy as a CTE teacher for the next school year. Mr. Russell
continues to work to promote full enrollment in the academy. He is the
academy’s tobacco prevention coordinator. He has worked on seminars and
workshops in campaigns against drugs, and for health and fitness. He is
certified as a CPR, first aid, and AED instructor. He is the assistant activities
director and the assistant athletics director at Valley High School. Prior to
working for the District, he worked for three year at Kaiser Permanente. He
has established important links between the Health Tech Academy and Kaiser,
U.C. Davis, and the Roseville Fire Academy.

b.
Kasha Maslowski has a seniority date of August 27, 2007. She holds a
preliminary single subject credential in biological sciences (specialized), with
a supplementary authorization in introductory science. Prior to this school
year, beginning in 2007, she was the CTE teacher in the Design and
Technology Academy at Monterey Trail High School. This academy provides
students the chance to learn about computers and engineering, transportation
technology, and interior and landscape design.

Ms. Maslowski developed the curriculum for the academy’s
Enviroscapes class, which is focused on environmental engineering. She is
not teaching the Enviroscapes class in the academy this year because not
enough students signed up to take it. But more than enough students have
already signed up to take the class in the academy next year, and she is
currently scheduled to teach it.

Although Ms. Maslowski is not teaching a class in the academy this

year, she is still actively involved in the academy. In March 2011, she
participated in the annual statewide CPA conference. At one of the
conference’s break-out sessions, she was a presenter on behalf of the Design
and Technology Academy. In addition, she still works closely with the
academy coordinator, who is teaching an architectural engineering class that
builds upon her Enviroscapes class. She also attends academy articulation
meetings, during which she collaborates with other academy teachers. The
CPA funding for the academy depends upon her Enviroscapes class, since it is
the basis for the green funding the academy receives.

Ms. Maslowski participated in the Ford PAS professional development

providers’ workshop in October 2009.

c.
Margaret Souliere has a seniority date of August 21, 2007. She holds a
clear single subject credential in art. She is currently on a child-rearing leave
of absence.

Before going on a leave of absence, Ms. Souliere was a CTE teacher in

the TDA Academy for three years. She taught three academy sections per
year. The academy sections that she taught included Computers and Graphic
Design I (a CTE foundation class for all TDA ninth graders) and Computers

24

and Graphic Design II (an advanced class for eleventh- and twelfth-grade
TDA students). She attended the statewide CPA conference in November
2008 and March 2009. She attended the Ford PAS training in May 2009. She
has attended numerous meetings regarding the TDA Academy. She has
extensive educational and business experience in graphic design.

Ms. Souliere designed the foundational CTE course for ninth graders

and the advanced CTE course for eleventh and twelfth graders for the Graphic
Design Pathway in the TDA Academy. She piloted project-based learning in
the TDA Academy, and is one of the two people who designed and
implemented the project-based, industry-aligned curriculum for the academy.
According to Ms. Souliere, her industry experience “brings the reality of the
design field into the classroom” and her “industry contacts create opportunities
for TDA academy students to work on real design work beyond the confines
of the classroom.”

During the hearing, Ms. Souliere was concerned that, when she returns

to work from her child-rearing leave, she might not be assigned to be an
academy teacher. From her testimony, it appeared that Ms. Souliere was very
interested in continuing to teach in the TDA Academy.

48. Mr. Russell, Ms. Maslowski, and Ms. Souliere all demonstrated that they have

the special training and experience necessary to be CTE teachers in career academies that
more senior respondents do not possess. They therefore established that they meet the
second prong of section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). They are not, however, currently
assigned to teach career academy classes.

49.

During oral argument, the District did not dispute that Mr. Russell, Ms.

Maslowski and Ms. Souliere all have had recent experience as CTE teachers.12 The District
argued in the alternative with regard to whether Mr. Russell and Ms. Maslowski should be
included in the career academy skip. On the one hand, the District argued the term
“currently assigned” in paragraph H of the Skipping Resolution should be respected. On the
other hand, the District recognized that both Mr. Russell and Ms. Maslowski have provided
valuable CTE services to students in their academies, are still actively involved with their
academies in areas other than classroom teaching, are expected to teach academy classes
during the next school year if they are not laid off, and are not currently teaching academy
classes due to no fault of their own. From its closing argument, it appeared that the District
would not object if the skipping criteria set forth in paragraph H were interpreted to allow the
District to skip Mr. Russell and Ms. Maslowski. In fact, the District included Mr. Russell on

12 The District did not specifically discuss Ms. Souliere in its closing argument. It

did, however, submit a declaration from Ms. Souliere, which details her training and
experience as a CTE teacher in the TDA Academy. Given this declaration, this proposed
decision assumes that all the arguments that the District made in its closing argument
regarding Mr. Russell and Ms. Maslowski also apply to Ms. Souliere.

25

its list of academy coordinators and CTE teachers to be skipped, with an asterisk next to his
name noting that he is not currently teaching in an academy.

50.

Paragraph H states that, in order to be skipped, certificated employees must be

“currently assigned to” career academies. But paragraph H does not explicitly state that
certificated employees must currently be teaching classes in a career academy to qualify for
the skip. The determination of whether a teacher should be included in the skip set forth in
paragraph H should not be based upon the fortuity of their current year’s class assignments.
Both Mr. Russell and Ms. Maslowski established that they are still considered to be CTE
teachers in their academies, and are currently actively involved in aspects of academy work
other than teaching academy classes. The “currently assigned” language set forth in
paragraph H should not be read so narrowly as to preclude Mr. Russell and Ms. Maslowski
from being skipped. Mr. Russell and Ms. Maslowski both established that they comply with
the prerequisites of section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). They should therefore be deemed to
fall within the skipping criteria set forth in paragraph H of the Skipping Resolution.

51. Ms. Souliere also demonstrated that she has the special training and experience

necessary to be a CTE teacher in a career academy that more senior respondents do not
possess. She therefore established that she meets the second prong of section 44955,
subdivision (d)(1). She also is not currently assigned to teach career academy classes this
school year. From the evidence, it appeared that the only reason that she is not currently
teaching in a career academy is because she is on a child-rearing leave. The provisions of
paragraph H of the Skipping Resolution should not be interpreted and applied so narrowly as
preclude Ms. Souliere from being included in the career academy skip. If the District plans
to assign Ms. Souliere to be a CTE teacher in a career academy in the 2011-2012 school
year, it may include Ms. Souliere within the skipping criteria set forth in paragraph H of the
Skipping Resolution.

52.

The academy coordinators and CTE teachers that the District seeks to skip

under paragraph H of the Skipping Resolution are not teaching full time in career academies.
They are teaching both academy classes and non-academy classes. The District argued that,
even though the academy coordinators and CTE teachers are not teaching full time in career
academies, they should nonetheless be fully skipped. According to the District, these
certificated employees would not stay with the District and perform all the work they do for
the academies if they were skipped only for that portion of their FTE’s during which they are
employed teaching academy classes or performing academy services.

53.

The District’s argument is not persuasive. The authority to deviate from

terminating certificated employees in order of seniority set forth in section 44955,
subdivision (d)(1), is an exception to the mandate of subdivision (b) that “the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a
service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.” As an
exception, the provisions of subdivision (d)(1) must be read narrowly and applied only under
the limited circumstances to which they apply. There was no showing that District has a
specific need for the academy coordinators and CTE teachers to teach their non-academy

26

courses, or that they have special training and experience necessary to teach their non-
academy courses that more senior respondents do not possess. As such, the District cannot
skip these academy coordinators and CTE teachers under section 44955, subdivision (d)(1),
for any FTE’s during which they are not actually assigned to teach career academy courses
or otherwise perform work for career academies.

54.

In sum, the District may skip Susan Hubbard, Carlos Garcia, Rebecca Hunter,

Cristin Smith, Jennifer Moore, Bryan Jilka, Jon Russell, Kasha Maslowski, and Margaret
Souliere under paragraph H of the Skipping Resolution. The skips of these certificated
employees shall be only for the number of FTE’s during which they are actually assigned to
teach career academy courses or otherwise perform work for career academies during the
2011-2012 school year. The District may therefore rescind the Preliminary Notices given to
these respondents by the percentage of FTE’s they are assigned to teach courses in or
otherwise perform work for career academies in the 2011-2012 school year.

55.

All the other assertions and arguments made by respondents with regard to

career academy assignments and paragraph H of the Skipping Resolution that are not
addressed above are found to be without merit and are rejected.

Individual Seniority Date, Tie-Breaking and PKS Issues

56.

The District maintains a certificated seniority list that contains the name,

seniority date, position, site, FTE, credential, credential subject, English language
authorization, and tenure status of each District probationary and permanent certificated
employee. On November 15, 2010, December 15, 2010, and January 21, 2011, the District
sent emails to all certificated employees asking them to verify that the information about
them on the seniority list was current and accurate. The emails included information about
how the employees could access the seniority list, locate their names, and request that
information about them be updated and/or corrected. Attached to these emails were
“Request to Change Seniority List Employment Information” forms (request to change
forms), which certificated employees could fill out and return to the appropriate personnel
analysts to update and correct the information included about them on the seniority list. The
District received responses from employees to its emails. The District’s personnel analysts
reviewed all the information that was submitted, and the seniority list was corrected and
updated upon verification of that information.

57.

The District’s November 15, 2010 email asked all certificated employees to:

(1) update and/or correct the information that the District had about their: (a) legal name; (b)
seniority date; (c) number of degrees (bachelor’s, masters, and doctorate); (d) credentials; (e)
certificates; (f) licensure; and (g) currently assigned position(s); (2) complete the request to
change forms; and (3) return the completed forms to the appropriate personnel analyst by
December 6, 2010. The December 15, 2010 email provided the same information, and asked
certificated employees to return completed request to change forms by January 7, 2011. The
January 21, 2011 email provided the same information and asked certificated employees to
return completed request to change forms by January 28, 2011. According to the District, it
informed all certificated employees that they had to submit their updated and corrected

27

information to their assigned personnel analysts no later than March 15, 2011, in order for
that information to be considered for the purposes of this layoff.

58.

A reduction in force the size of this one is a massive undertaking for a school
district. To successfully effectuate a teacher layoff, a school distinct must comply with the
very strict and tight deadlines set forth in the Education Code. (§§44949, 44955.) It was
appropriate for the District to impose a March 15, 2011 deadline by which certificated
employees had to submit all their updated and corrected information.

59.

During the hearing, a number of certificated employees raised individual

issues and concerns regarding their seniority dates, the points they were awarded during tie-
breaking, and the reduction of their particular PKS. To the extent these certificated
employees are still respondents in this case, their concerns are addressed below.13

Individual Seniority Date Issues

section 44845, which provides:

60.

The seniority date of certificated employees is determined in accordance with

Every probationary or permanent employee employed after June
30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on the date
upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary
position.

61.

Daniel Seto. The District’s seniority list reflects that Mr. Seto has a seniority

date of August 23, 2005. At the hearing, Mr. Seto contended that his seniority date should be
changed to June 20, 2005. According to Mr. Seto, on June 20 and 21, 2005, he attended two
pre-service training days. He believed that he was required to attend these two days. He was
paid a stipend of $125 for his time. Mr. Seto submitted a copy of the agenda for the two pre-
service training days. The agenda labels this time as a “retreat.” At this retreat, topics
including “Describing & Building Our Team,” “Mapping Our Context,” “Envisioning Our
School’s Future,” and “Department Team Planning,” were discussed.

Mr. Seto testified that between June 21 and August 23, 2005, he went to his school on

one day to meet parents. According to Mr. Seto, he was paid for this one day. Mr. Seto
submitted a document that showed that on August 17, 2005, he was paid a stipend of $100.

13 This proposed decision does not address the issues and concerns raised during the

hearing by certificated employees whose Preliminary Notices have since been rescinded,
because they are no longer respondents in this matter. This proposed decision also does not
address the testimony of respondents whose issues and concerns were resolved by the
District during the hearing. (For examples, during the hearing, the District agreed with: (1)
Rebecca Drake that one point would be added to the tie-breaking matrix for her master’s
degree; and (2) Emily Blum-Amick that her seniority date would be changed from August
22, 2006, to August 23, 2005.)

28

The District argued that Mr. Seto’s seniority date should not be changed from August
23, 2005, to June 20, 2005, based upon the two pre-service days and one parent-meeting day
for which he was paid stipends. According to the District, it does not consider a teacher’s
attendance on these types of days to be the rendering of paid service in a probationary
position. The District contended that while new teachers may feel compelled to attend pre-
service training, their attendance is not mandatory. The District argued further that it applies
its policy consistently for all teachers: it pays teachers only stipends for attendance at pre-
service training, and does not adjust any teachers’ seniority dates based upon their pre-
service training attendance.

Many factors are often considered when determining whether attendance during pre-

service training days constitutes the first date of paid probationary service, including
whether: (1) the pre-service training days are recognized as part of the negotiated school year
in a collective bargaining agreement; (2) pre-service training attendance is mandatory or
voluntary; and (3) certificated employees receive regular pay, a stipend, or some other form
of compensation. The consistent application of these factors across all certificated
employees is also an important consideration, because seniority establishes the relationship
among all certificated employees. (Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v.
Bakersfield City School District (2006) 145 Cal. App. 4th 1260, 1293, n. 20.)

In this case, there was no evidence about whether there may be a collective
bargaining agreement that contains language relevant to attendance at or payment for pre-
service training days. There was conflicting evidence about whether attendance at pre-
service training days was mandatory. But it was clear from the evidence that Mr. Seto was
paid a stipend, and not his regular pay, for attending the two pre-service training days and the
parent-meeting day. It is important for the District to maintain and apply a consistent policy
to ensure that all employees are treated equitably and fairly. When all the evidence is
considered, Mr. Seto did not establish that his seniority date should be changed.

62.

Laura (Lolly) Jones. The District’s seniority list reflects that Laura (Lolly)
Jones is a first-grade teacher with a seniority date of August 18, 2005. At the hearing, Ms.
Jones testified that August 18, 2005, was not the first day she rendered paid service to the
District in a probationary position. According to Ms. Jones, when she began working for the
District, she took over for a teacher who was retiring. Ms. Jones testified that, for reasons
that she could not explain relating to retirement, the retiring teacher had to work two days at
the beginning of the 2005-2006 school year. Ms. Jones stated that she worked the same two
days as a substitute in the retiring teacher’s classroom. Ms. Jones requested that her seniority
date be changed to August 16, 2005. Ms. Jones did not submit any documents to
substantiate her request to change her seniority date. Consequently Ms. Jones did not
provide adequate support for an earlier seniority date.14

14 Ms. Jones also requested changes to her credentials noted on the seniority list,

bumping chart, and tie-breaking matrix. These issues are addressed below.

29

63. Melinda Morris. The seniority list reflects that Ms. Morris has a seniority date
of September 16, 2005. She holds a multiple subject credential with a CLAD, and is a first-
grade teacher. At the hearing, Ms. Morris testified that September 16, 2005, was not the first
day she rendered paid service to the District in a probationary position. According to Ms.
Morris, on July 20 through 22, 2005, she attended pre-service days, for which she was paid,
and then worked as a substitute teacher from July 25 through August 19, 2005, until she went
off track. While she was off track, she received a 2005/06 Probationary Employment
Agreement, dated August 17, 2005, which reflected that she would begin work as a
probationary employee on September 16, 2005.

Ms. Morris submitted timesheets, which showed that, from July 20 through August

19, 2005, she was paid as a substitute for a teacher who was on leave. Ms. Morris also
submitted salary information which showed that she began receiving pay as a probationary
employee on September 16, 2005.

Ms. Morris did not submit sufficient information to establish that her first date of paid

service in a probationary position with the District should be changed from September 16,
2005, to July 20, 2005. Her request for a change to her seniority date must therefore be
denied.

64.

Joseph Candelaria. The seniority list reflects that Joseph Candelaria has a

seniority date of August 21, 2007. Mr. Candelaria has a preliminary single subject credential
in physical education, with supplementary authorizations in dance and drama/theater. He is
currently teaching visual and performing arts and dance at Franklin High School.

At the hearing, Mr. Candelaria contended that his seniority date should be changed to

August 21, 2006. According to Mr. Candelaria, during the 2006-2007 school year, he
worked full time as a long-term substitute, under a provisional internship permit, in the same
position that he now holds. Mr. Candelaria submitted a memo written by Charlotte Phinizy,
the principal of Franklin High School, which requested that Mr. Candelaria’s seniority date
be changed. In relevant part, Ms. Phinizy’s memo states that:

[Mr. Candelaria] began work on Monday, August 21, 2006, by
attending a new teacher orientation from 1:00 pm to 4:00 pm in
the afternoon. On Tuesday, August 22, 2006, he started his
classroom preparation during preservice days attended by all
teachers. During the 2006-2007 school year, he was paid as a
.8333 FTE long-term substitute teaching in the same subject
area that he currently teaches.

The District did not submit any evidence or argument in opposition to Mr.

Candelaria’s request to change his seniority date.

Section 44918, subdivision (a) provides:

30

Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary employee,
who serves during one school year for at least 75 percent of the
number of days the regular schools of the district were
maintained in that school year and has performed the duties
normally required of a certificated employee of the school
district, shall be deemed to have served a complete school year
as a probationary employee if employed as a probationary
employee for the following school year.15

Mr. Candelaria presented sufficient evidence to establish that he served as a long-term

substitute for at least 75 percent of the 2006-2007 school year, performing the duties
normally required of a certificated employee. Because he was employed as a probationary
employee for the 2007-2008 school year, pursuant to section 44918, he should be deemed to
have served a complete school year as a probationary employee in the 2006-2007 school
year. There was no evidence submitted about whether Mr. Candelaria was regularly paid on
August 21, 2006. Because a review of the seniority list reveals that the vast majority of
teachers who started in August 2006 have a seniority date of August 22, 2006, Mr.
Candelaria’s seniority date should be changed to August, 22, 2006.

65.

Denise Lester. The District classifies Ms. Lester as a temporary employee. At

the hearing, Ms. Lester contended that she did not sign a temporary contract before she
began working as a pre-school teacher in the 2003-2004 school year, and that she should
therefore have been considered to be a probationary employee as of her first workday, in
accordance with the rationale of Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High School
District (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911 (Kavanaugh). Ms. Lester’s contention was addressed in last
year’s layoff decision and denied. This year, Ms. Lester submitted additional documents to
support her contention that she began working before she signed her temporary contract.

Ms. Lester’s temporary contract for the 2003-2004 school year includes an August 19,

2003 start date. Although her temporary contract is not dated, Ms. Lester testified that she
signed it on August 20, 2003, her birthday, but that she began working on August 14, 2003.
Ms. Lester submitted an agenda of the pre-service training provided on August 14, 15, and
18, 2003, and a printout of a “warrant detail screen.” The warrant detail screen indicates that
Ms. Lester was paid on September 10, 2003, for services that she rendered during the period
ending August 31, 2003. There is no information on the warrant detail screen to indicate on
which days in August 2003 Ms. Lester worked. The warrant detail screen does not establish
that Ms. Lester either worked or was paid for work prior to August 19, 2003, the start date of
her temporary contract. Consequently, Ms. Lester did not establish that she should have
been classified as a probationary employee on August 14, 2003. Her request for a change in
her seniority date and employment status must therefore be denied.

15 Section 44918, subdivision (d), provides:

Those employees classified as substitutes, and who are employed to
serve in an on-call status to replace absent regular employees on a day-
to-day basis shall not be entitled to the benefits of this section.

31

66.

Tina Donate. The seniority list reflects that Ms. Donate has a seniority date of

July 20, 2005. She holds a multiple subject credential and is a first-grade teacher. Ms.
Donate raised two contentions. First she contended that her seniority date should be adjusted
to July 16, 2005, because she attended three days of pre-service training on July 16, 17, and
18, 2005. Ms. Donate did not submit any documentation to substantiate whether or how she
was paid for having attended this pre-service training. Due to this lack of documentation,
and for the same reasons set forth above with regard to Mr. Seto, her request must be denied.

67. Ms. Donate also contended that her seniority date should be changed from July

20, 2005, to July 16, 2004, as a result of her long-term substitution work in the 2004-2005
school year. Ms. Donate testified that she attended pre-service training on July 16, 2004, and
then began working as a long-term substitute on July 21, 2004. She submitted
documentation that substantiates that she worked as a long-term substitute for more than 75
percent of the 2004-2005 school year. That documentation shows that: (1) from July 21
through November 30, 2004, she had a 1.0 FTE as a long-term substitute for a first-grade
teacher who was on maternity leave; and (2) from December 1, 2004, through June 30, 2005,
she had a .40 FTE as a long-term substitute for the first-grade teacher, and a .40 FTE as a
long-term substitute for a kindergarten teacher. Ms. Donate asserted that, under section
44918, this time should be tacked onto her seniority.

The District argued that long-term substitute work cannot be tacked onto a certificated

employee’s seniority if the employee did not consistently serve in a single long-term
substitute assignment for more than 75 percent of the school year.

The District’s argument is not persuasive.16 Section 44918 (Finding 64) applies to

Ms. Donate. That section does not require that a long-term substitute must consistently serve
in a single long-term substitute assignment during the year to obtain the section’s tacking
benefits. Ms. Donate served as a long-term substitute for more 75 percent of the 2004-2005
school year. She was then hired as a probationary employee for the 2005-2006 school year.
Accordingly, she is entitled to the tacking required under section 44918.

Because Ms. Donate did not establish that she was regularly paid for her pre-service

training, and for the same reasons as set forth above with regard to Mr. Seto (Finding 61),
Ms. Donate cannot be given seniority credit for her pre-service days in July 2004. But,
pursuant to section 44918, Ms. Donate’s seniority date must be changed to July 21, 2004.

68.

Paul Cannelora. The District’s seniority list reflects that Mr. Cannelora has a

seniority date of July 1, 2001. He has a pupil personnel services credential in school

16 In Centinela Valley Secondary Teachers Association v. Centinela Valley Union
High School District (1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 35, the court disallowed combining long-term
substitute service for more than one teacher under section 13336.5, the predecessor to section
44918. Section 44918 does not prohibit combining more than one long-term position to
reach the 75 percent requirement.

32

counseling. He currently works as a counselor at two middle schools. Mr. Cannelora
contended that his seniority date should be changed to July 1, 1999.

Mr. Cannelora testified that: (1) for three months beginning in September 1999, he

worked for the District as a day-to-day substitute teacher; (2) from December 1999 until the
end of the 1999-2000 school year, he worked in a long-term assignment as a middle school
counselor; and (3) he worked 100 percent of the 2000-2001 school year as a long-term
substitute.

In support of these contentions, Mr. Cannelora submitted his W-2’s for 1999, 2000

and 2001. He also submitted printouts from the District dated December 10, 1999,
November 10, 1999, and October 8, 1999. Mr. Cannelora argued that he could not have
received the amount of pay reflected on these documents unless he was employed full time
by the District.

The District argued that Mr. Cannelora could not tack any time onto his seniority
because he did not serve consistently in a single temporary or long-term assignment for more
than 75 percent of the school year. As set forth in Finding 67, this argument is not
persuasive.

But Mr. Cannelora did not submit documentation to substantiate: (1) in what

assignments or positions he was employed during the 1999-2000 and 2000-2001 school
years: (2) whether these assignments were as a temporary employee or long-term substitute;
or (3) what percentage of the school year he spent working in these assignments. Mr.
Cannelora’s pay documents, standing alone, are not sufficient to demonstrate that he is
entitled to the tacking set forth in section 44918. Because Mr. Cannelora did not submit
sufficient substantiation to support his request for a seniority date change, his request must
be denied.

69.

Kathy Wilson. The District’s seniority list reflects that Ms. Wilson has a July
15, 2009 seniority date. At the hearing, Ms. Wilson contended that her seniority date should
be changed to August 3, 2006, when she attended training before starting in a temporary
position as a preschool/headstart teacher.

Ms. Wilson submitted copies of her agreements with the District: (1) a 2006/07

Temporary Employment Agreement to work as a preschool/headstart teacher beginning on
August 22, 2006, which Ms. Wilson signed on June 14, 2006; (2) a 2007/08 Temporary
Employment Agreement to work as a preschool/headstart teacher beginning on August 21,
2007, which Ms. Wilson signed on June 6, 2007; (3) a 2008/09 Temporary Employment
Agreement to work as a fourth-grade teacher beginning on July 16, 2008, which Ms. Wilson
signed on July 10, 2008; (4) a 2009/10 Temporary Employment Agreement to work as a
first-grade teacher beginning on July 15, 2009, which Ms. Wilson signed on July 14, 2009;
and (5) a 2010/11 Probationary Employment Agreement to work as a K-12 Program
Improvement Instructional Coach beginning on August 16, 2010, which Ms. Wilson signed
on September 8, 2010. All of Ms. Wilson’s temporary agreements provide that she was
“being hired pursuant to Education Code section 44909 either to fill a categorically funded

33

position [herself] or to replace another certificated employee who has been assigned to a
categorically funded position.”

Given the dates when Ms. Wilson signed her temporary agreements and when she

started working under these agreements, Ms. Wilson did not establish that, under
Kavanaugh, she should be deemed to be a probationary employee as of August 3, 2006, or
any date earlier than July 15, 2009. Given her July 15, 2009 seniority date, it appears that the
District has already tacked her last year of temporary service onto her seniority in accordance
with section 44918. Consequently, Ms. Wilson did not establish that her seniority date
should be changed.17

Individual Tie-Breaking Issues

70.

The Tie-Breaking Resolution sets forth the following tie-breaking criteria for

the District to implement when it was necessary to determine the order of termination of
certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the same day:

The following rating system shall be applied in determining the
order of termination of certificated employees:

A. Multiple and Single Subject and specified services

Credentials: Ratings: + 1 per credential

B. Supplemental and Subject Matter Authorizations that

authorize the employee to teach a subject matter different
from that authorized on the underlying credential: Rating +
1 per authorization

C. Earned degrees beyond the BA/BS level: Rating: + 1 per

degree beyond the BA/BS level

D. Earned English Language Authorization: Rating: + 1 per

authorization.

[¶] …[¶]
In the event that common day hires have equal qualifications
based on the application of the above criteria, the District will
then break ties by utilizing a lottery.

(Bolding in original.)

71.

The District applied the tie-breaking criteria set forth in the Tie-Breaking
Resolution to certificated employees who had the same seniority dates, and created a tie-

17 Ms. Wilson also requested changes to her credentials noted on the seniority list,

bumping chart, and tie-breaking matrix. These issues are addressed below.

34

breaking matrix of the results. During the hearing, certain respondents disputed the number
of points they were given as reflected on the tie-breaking matrix.

72.

Doncella Logan. Doncella Logan has a seniority date of July 20, 2005.

Because a number of certificated employees subject to this reduction in force have this same
seniority date, the District applied the tie-breaking criteria set forth in the Tie-Breaking
Resolution to Ms. Logan and these other employees.

Ms. Logan holds a multiple subject credential, a CLAD, and a reading certificate.

She is currently teaching third grade at Union House Elementary School.

During the tie-breaking process, Ms. Logan was awarded two points – one for her

multiple subject credential and one for her CLAD. Ms. Logan was not awarded any points
for her reading certificate. At the hearing, Ms. Logan asserted that she should have been
awarded one point during the tie-breaking process for her reading certificate. The California
Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) states that the reading certificate was “created
to develop deeper preparation in the teaching of reading and to provide essential help in
reading to students in California’s public school.”

Ms. Logan’s reading certificate is evidence that she has attained knowledge, skills and
abilities to provide valuable reading services to the students in her class. But paragraph B of
the Tie-Breaking Resolution provides that points will be awarded for “Supplemental and
Subject Matter Authorizations that authorize the employee to teach a subject matter different
from that authorized on the underlying credential.” Ms. Logan’s reading certificate does not
authorize her to teach a subject matter different from that authorized on her multiple subject
credential. Dr. Krueger testified that the tie-breaking criteria were discussed with the
teachers’ union before they were adopted by the Governing Board, and were consistently
applied to all certificated employees. Ms. Logan did not establish that the Governing
Board’s tie-breaking criteria were arbitrary or capricious. Consequently, Ms. Logan did not
establish that she should be awarded an additional tie-breaking point for her reading
certificate.

73. Matthew Gipson. Matthew Gipson has a seniority date of August 19, 2003.
He is a resource teacher at Franklin Elementary School. On March 14, 2011, Mr. Gipson
emailed to the District information that he had received from the CTC, which indicated that,
on February 28, 2011, the CTC awarded him a multiple subject credential, with
supplementary authorizations in introductory English and science, and an ELA.

On the tie-breaking matrix, Mr. Gipson received four points for credentials. Given

this many points, it appears that Mr. Gipson’s updated information was utilized when the tie-
breaking criteria were applied to employees with his seniority date. But his updated
information is not reflected on either the seniority list or the bumping chart: The seniority list
reflects only a multiple subject credential and a CLAD, and the bumping chart reflects only a
multiple subject credential.

35

Because Mr. Gipson notified the District of his supplementary authorizations before

March 15, 2011, these authorizations should be added to the seniority list and bumping chart.
Before issuing final layoff notices, the District should determine whether, as a result of his
supplementary authorizations, Mr. Gipson has any right to bump a more junior employee,
and, if so, rescind his Preliminary Notice.

74.

Laura (Lolly) Jones. At the hearing, Ms. Jones submitted a printout from the
CTC, which shows that, on February 12, 2011, the CTC issued her single subject credentials
in English and social science. On the seniority list, Ms. Jones is listed as having a multiple
subject credential and a CLAD. The bumping chart reflects that she has a multiple subject
credential. The tie-breaking matrix indicates that she was awarded three points for
credentials, but it is not clear from the matrix for which credentials these three points were
awarded.18

Ms. Jones testified that she began working with the CTC in January 2011 to obtain

her single subject credentials. According to Ms. Jones, the CTC initially recognized her
social science credential in February 2011, but not her English credential. On March 24,
2011, the CTC finally acknowledged both of her credentials. On the printout that the CTC
issued, both single subject credentials are noted as having been issued on February 12, 2011.

Ms. Jones testified that she talked to a District personnel analyst while her request for

the two single subject credentials was pending before the CTC, but was informed that the
District would not recognize her credentials until all the final CTC paperwork was submitted.
On March 24, 2011, Ms. Jones received the final paperwork from the CTC by email. On
March 25, 2011, Ms. Jones emailed this final paperwork to the District personnel analyst,
who acknowledged receipt of the paperwork that same day. At the hearing, Ms. Jones
asserted that the only reason that she did not submit the paperwork about her credentials to
the District before March 15, 2011, was due to the CTC’s errors and delays. She argued that
both her single subject credentials should be recognized during this reduction in force.

Ms. Jones’s argument was not persuasive. From the information that Ms. Jones

submitted, it appears that she requested that the CTC issue single subject credentials to her
based upon the education, experience and training that she received in Texas before she

18 If the information used for tie-breaking purposes was only that included on the
seniority list, it appears that Ms. Jones should have received two points (one for her multiple
subject credential and one for her CLAD). If the information used for tie-breaking purposes
included her single subject credentials, it appears that Ms. Jones should have received four
points (one for her multiple subject credential, one for her CLAD, and two for her single
subject credentials). It was not clear from the evidence why Ms. Jones received three points.
Because Ms. Jones is the only person on the tie-breaking matrix with an August 18, 2005
seniority date, it appears that the addition of her single subject credentials would not be
relevant for the purposes of tie-breaking, since there are no other certificated employees with
whom she is tied.

36

started with the District in 2005. There was no testimony to explain why she waited until
January 2011 to seek single subject credentials from the CTC.

The evidence relating to Ms. Jones is similar to that presented to the court in

Campbell Elementary School Teachers Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796
(Campbell). The teacher in Campbell had two credentials, a counseling credential and a
teaching credential. In 1972, she brought both credentials to the county board of education
for recording. Due to a clerical error, the county board of education only recorded the
counseling credential, but not the teaching credential. The teacher learned of this error on
May 12, 1975, the day her district’s governing board issued its final notice of termination to
her. The teacher recorded her teaching credential on May 13, 1975, and brought it to her
district’s governing board. The court ruled that the governing board did not have to consider
the teacher’s late-filed credential. As the court explained, the “governing board is not to be
held responsible for the fact that [the teacher] recorded her credential after all notices had
been sent, a hearing held, and a decision rendered.” (Id. at p. 815.)

While it is unfortunate that the CTC may have made mistakes and delayed in issuing
the single subject credentials to Ms. Jones, the CTC’s errors and delays cannot be imposed
on the District. Ms. Jones did not establish that the District should be ordered to take her
single subject credentials into consideration for purposes of this layoff. The District should,
however, update its seniority list, tie-breaking matrix, and bumping chart to ensure that Ms.
Jones’s single subject credentials will be considered for purposes of her reemployment
rights.

75.

Cheryl Villavicencio. Ms. Villavicencio has a July 20, 2005 seniority date.
The seniority list reflects that she has a multiple subject credential with a CLAD, and is a
fourth-grade teacher. Only her multiple subject credential is reflected on the bumping chart.
The tie-breaking matrix reflects that she was awarded two points for her credentials.

On July 20, 2008, Ms. Villavicencio received a master’s degree in teaching with a
specialization in best practices. She notified the District of her master’s degree when she
received it. For the past three years, she has been receiving additional salary as a result of
her master’s degree. She did not notify the District that her master’s degree was not included
as one of her degrees either this year or during last year’s reduction in force. She testified
that she believed that the District has had the information about her master’s degree for so
long, that she did not ask the District to include it during this layoff process.

The November 15, 2010, December 15, 2010, and January 21, 2011 emails asked

certificated employees to verify the information that the District maintained regarding their
“# of Degrees: (BA – Bachelor’s; MA – Master’s; DOC – Doctorate).” (Finding 56.) There
was no evidence that, in response to any of these emails, Ms. Villavicencio checked whether
the District’s Human Resources Department had her master’s degree on file for purposes of
this layoff. Ms. Villavicencio did not demonstrate that she exercised sufficient diligence to
ensure that the District would consider her master’s degree when making its layoff
determinations this year. As a result, she did not establish that the District should be ordered
to take her master’s degree into consideration for purposes of this layoff. The District

37

should, however, update its seniority list, tie-breaking matrix, and bumping chart to ensure
that Ms. Villavicencio’s master’s degree will be considered for purposes of her
reemployment rights.

76. Melissa Bryant. Ms. Bryant has a seniority date of August 19, 2003. The
seniority list reflects that she has a multiple subject credential with a CLAD, and that she is a
first-grade teacher. Only her multiple subject credential is reflected on the bumping chart.
The tie-breaking matrix reflects that she was awarded two points for her credentials.

Like Ms. Villavicencio, Ms. Bryant has a master’s degree in teaching with a

specialization in best practices. She received her master’s degree on July 20, 2008, and
notified the District around that time. Due to her master’s degree, the District began paying
her additional salary beginning in the 2008-2009 school year.

Ms. Bryant testified that she was not aware until March 14, 2011, when she received

her Preliminary Notice, that the District’s Human Resources Department did not have her
master’s degree on record. At the time, she was on maternity leave. That day, she obtained
her academic transcript, which reflected the receipt of her master’s degree. She gave her
transcript to the District a few days later.

While Ms. Bryant may have been on maternity leave when she received her
Preliminary Notice on March 14, 2011, there was no evidence to explain why she did not
respond to the emails the District sent on November 15, 2010, December 15, 2010, and
January 21, 2011. (Finding 56.) Ms. Bryant did not demonstrate that she exercised
sufficient diligence to ensure that the District would consider her master’s degree when
making its layoff determinations this year. Consequently, she did not establish that the
District should be ordered to take her master’s degree into consideration for purposes of this
layoff. The District should, however, update its seniority list, tie-breaking matrix, and
bumping chart to ensure that Ms. Bryant’s master’s degree will be considered for purposes of
her reemployment rights.

77.

Kathy Wilson. Ms. Wilson holds a child development program director permit,

a certificate of eligibility for an administrative services credential, a multiple subject
credential with a supplementary authorization in English, and a CLAD. At the hearing, Ms.
Wilson asserted that the District did not take into consideration her supplementary
authorization in English during this layoff. She asserted that the CTC made a mistake and
did not issue her supplementary authorization until March 16, 2011. She asked that her
supplementary authorization be considered for purposes of this layoff.

The seniority list does not include Ms. Wilson’s supplementary authorization in
English. On the tie-breaking matrix, she was awarded four points for credentials. If her
supplementary authorization had been taken into consideration, it appears that she would
have received five points. The bumping chart includes her child development program
director permit and her multiple subject credential, but not her supplementary authorization.

38

Ms. Wilson did not submit evidence to show if and when she may have notified the

District about her supplementary English authorization. Consequently, she failed to establish
that the District should be ordered to take her supplementary authorization into consideration
for purposes of this layoff. The District should, however, update its seniority list, tie-
breaking matrix, and bumping chart to ensure that Ms. Wilson’s supplementary authorization
will be considered for purposes of her reemployment rights.

78.

Up to and during the hearing, the District continued to receive, review, and

verify information relating to certificated employees’ seniority dates, credentials, and status,
and to update the certificated seniority list as appropriate. At the hearing, the District
confirmed that it would continue to receive and review any additional information relating to
seniority dates, credentials, and status that certificated employees or their counsel may
submit.

Individual PKS Issues

79.

Christopher Coates. Mr. Coates has a seniority date of August 21, 2007. He

holds a single subject credential in art. He teaches art and digital photography in middle
school. At the hearing, Mr. Coates contended that the District acted improperly by
identifying in the PKS resolution a single visual and performing arts category for reduction
by 4.5 FTE. According to Mr. Coates, by including within one category all the District’s
reductions in music, visual arts, and performing arts, and then skipping marching band
directors under paragraph E of the Skipping Resolution, the District has placed certificated
employees with visual and performing arts credentials at an unfair disadvantage.

Mr. Coates’s argument was not persuasive. Courts have allowed school districts
significant leeway in describing the particular kinds of services identified for reduction. (See,
e.g., San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638 [finding that
“classroom teaching” at the elementary level is a particular kind of service].) The term
“visual and performing arts” as used in the PKS Resolution adequately apprised respondents
of the particular kinds of services being reduced. Although it includes within its scope more
than one credential area, it is not overly broad or unreasonable. The evidence did not
establish that the Governing Board abused its discretion by listing visual and performing arts
as a single particular kind of service for reduction.

80.

Erica Wellington and Loretta Burdeaux. Ms. Wellington has a seniority date

of August 6, 2001. Ms. Burdeaux has a seniority date of August 22, 2006. Both Ms.
Wellington and Ms. Burdeaux are counselors. Ms. Wellington eloquently described the
broad scope of services that counselors provide to students and families in distress and need.
Both Ms. Wellington and Ms. Burdeaux decried the deep cuts that the District is making in
counseling services, and questioned whether the number of counselors who will be left after
the reductions will be sufficient to meet the significant demands placed upon counselors in
the District.

Ms. Wellington and Ms. Burdeaux raised important concerns and questions. But the

District has been forced by severe budget cuts to make difficult choices about what it will cut

39

and what it can save. There was no showing that the District will not be able to meet any
state or federal requirements for counseling services after making the proposed reductions.
Consequently, Ms. Wellington and Ms. Burdeaux did not show that the District has abused
its discretion by reducing counseling services.

81.

Frances Mosley. Ms. Mosley has a seniority date of August 23, 2005. She
holds a single subject credential in physical education, and teaches physical education in
middle school. Ms. Mosley contended that the District served more Preliminary Notices than
were warranted given the number of FTE’s set forth in the PKS Resolution for reduction.

While Ms. Mosley’s concern is understandable, the evidence did not establish that the
District acted improperly by serving too many Preliminary Notices. There were complex and
controversial issues raised in this proceeding. It was reasonable for the District to issue the
number of Preliminary Notices that it did to ensure that, after all the issues were decided, it
would be able to achieve the budget cuts that have been mandated by the state. The District
has already issued a significant number of rescissions. During the hearing, it promised to
continue issuing appropriate rescissions as soon as it was prudent to do so.

82.

Adult Education. Eric Goude has a seniority date of July 21, 1997. He holds a

clear designated subjects vocational education teaching credential in the authorized subjects
of ornamental nursery operation, floriculture and floristry, crop production, agriculture
mechanics, agriculture business management and marketing, and landscaping. He provides
adult education services at the Rio Cosumnes Correctional Center. Pursuant to the PKS
Resolution, adult education is being reduced by 19.4 FTE.

Mr. Goude asserted that he and other senior adult education teachers are credentialed

and competent to teach subjects taught by more junior teachers in grades kindergarten
through 12, and should therefore be allowed to bump these more junior teachers.

Mr. Goude’s assertion was not persuasive. The Education Code creates two distinct

teacher categories: day school (K-12) and evening school (adult education), and provides that
service in one category may not be counted toward service in the other. (§§ 44929.25 and
44929.26.) As such, service in adult education does not count towards seniority in K-12.
(See Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167; Kamin v. Governing Board
(1977) 72 Cal.App.3d 1014.) Mr. Goude’s contention that he and other senior adult
education teachers should be allowed to bump more junior K-12 teachers must therefore be
rejected.

83.

Precautionary Layoff Notices. Before March 15, 2011, the District sent

Precautionary Notices of Layoff (Precautionary Notices) to certain certificated employees
who, pursuant to Education Code section 44909, are currently either serving in categorically
funded positions or filling in behind other certificated employees who have been assigned to
categorically funded positions. In the Precautionary Notices, the District asserted that these
certificated employees were temporary teachers, but were being provided with notice in the
event that they were deemed to have layoff rights. On April 14, 2011, the District rescinded

40

all the Precautionary Notices that it had served upon these teachers.19 Attachment C lists the
certificated employees whose Precautionary Notices have been rescinded. As a result of the
rescissions, these employees are no longer respondents in this matter. Consequently, there is
no reason to address in this proposed decision any issues relating to the status of these
certificated employees.

84.

Positively Assured Attrition. The District maintains lists of certificated

personnel who have informed the District that they will be resigning or retiring, and their
effective dates of resignation or retirement. In determining which certificated employees
should received layoff notices, the District took into consideration resignations, retirements
and any other positively assured attrition about which it had received notice before March
15, 2011. At the hearing, the District provided assurances that it will continue to consider all
additional positively assured attrition about which it receives information up to the beginning
of the 2011-2012 school year. There was no evidence presented at the hearing to indicate
that the District has failed to properly take into consideration any positively assured attrition
in this matter.

85.

There was no evidence that the District proposes to eliminate any services that

are mandated by state or federal laws or regulations.

86.

Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not addressed

above are found to be without merit and are rejected.

87.

No junior employees are being retained to render services that more senior

respondents are certificated and competent to perform, except where the District
demonstrated compliance with section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

88.

The District’s reductions of particular kinds of services and certificated staff

relate solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth

in sections 44949 and 44955.

2.

The services identified in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of services
that may be reduced or discontinued under section 44955. The Governing Board’s decision
to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was
a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of services relates
solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

19 The District’s rescission of the Precautionary Notices has no effect upon any
temporary release letters that the District may have served upon these certificated employees.

41

3.

As set forth in Findings 28, 29, and 30, because the District did not establish

compliance with section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), when it skipped certain junior certificated
employees with single subject math and physical sciences credentials, the District should
rescind the Preliminary Notices served on the following respondents: Gabrielle Bajar, Elaine
Lee, Nhung Le, Loren Runsten, Daniel Seto, Cary Smallwood, Mary Chung, April Dorman,
Valarie Heng, Jeannette Deml, Randall Rubiales, Emily Blum-Amick, Bryce Davies,
Courtney Chow-Pun, Kelli Quan, Kayla Martin, Diana Brooks, and Sarah Reed.

4.

As set forth in Finding 38, because the District did not establish compliance

with section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), when it skipped Aaron Smith and John Natelli under
paragraph E (marching band director skip) of the Skipping Resolution, the Preliminary
Notices served on respondents Florin Baros and Coleen Hogge should be rescinded.

5.

As set forth in Finding 54, because the District established compliance with

section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the District may apply the skipping criteria set forth in
paragraph H (career academy skip) of the Skipping Resolution to skip respondents Susan
Hubbard, Carlos Garcia, Rebecca Hunter, Cristin Smith, Jennifer Moore, Bryan Jilka, Jon
Russell, Kasha Maslowski, and Margaret Souliere. The skips of these certificated employees
should be only for the number of FTE’s during which they are actually assigned to teach
career academy courses or otherwise perform work for career academies during the 2011-
2012 school year. The District may therefore rescind the Preliminary Notices given to these
respondents by the percentage of FTE’s they are assigned to teach courses in or otherwise
perform work for career academies in the 2011-2012 school year.

6.

7.

8.

As set forth in Finding 64, pursuant to section 44918, the seniority date of

respondent Joseph Candelaria should be changed to August, 22, 2006.

As set forth in Finding 67, pursuant to section 44918, the seniority date of

respondent Tina Donate should be changed to July 21, 2004.

As set forth in Finding 73, because respondent Matthew Gipson notified the

District of his supplementary authorizations in introductory English and science before
March 15, 2011, these authorizations should be added to the seniority list and bumping chart.
Before issuing final layoff notices, the District should determine whether, as a result of his
supplementary authorizations, Mr. Gipson has any right to bump a more junior employee,
and, if so, rescind his Preliminary Notice.

9.

Respondents Daniel Seto, Laura (Lolly) Jones, and Melinda Morris did not

establish that their seniority dates should be changed under section 44845. (Findings 61, 61,
and 63.)

10.

Respondent Denise Lester did not establish that she should be deemed to be a

probationary employee under the rationale set forth in Kavanaugh. (Finding 65.)

11.

Respondent Kathy Wilson did not establish that she should be given an earlier

seniority date under the rationale of Kavanaugh. (Finding 69.)

42

12.

Respondent Paul Cannelora did not establish that his seniority date should be

changed under section 44918. (Finding 68.)

13.

Respondent Doncella Logan did not establish that she should be given an

additional tie-breaking point for her reading certificate. (Finding 72.)

14.

Respondents Laura (Lolly) Jones, Cheryl Villavicencio, Melissa Bryant, and

Kathy Wilson did not establish that, for purposes of this layoff, the District should be
required to take into consideration any credentials, supplementary authorizations, or master’s
degrees about which they did not notify the District prior to March 15, 2011. (Findings 74,
75, 76 and 77.)

15.

Respondents Christopher Coates, Erica Wellington, Loretta Burdeaux, and

Frances Mosley did not establish that the Governing Board or the District acted arbitrarily or
capriciously, or abused its discretion when identifying particular kinds of services for
reduction or serving Preliminary Notices. (Findings 79 through 81.)

16.

Respondent Eric Goude did not establish that respondents who were teaching

in adult education should be allowed to bump certificated employees teaching in grades
kindergarten through 12. (Finding 82.)

17.

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 3 through 8, the District correctly

identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the
Governing Board directed be reduced or discontinued in the PKS Resolution.

18.

No more junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform

services that a more senior respondent is certificated and competent to render, except where
the District demonstrated compliance with section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

19.

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 3 through 8, cause exists to give

notice to respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2011-
2012 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.

Cause exists for the reduction of 443.5 full-time equivalent certificated

positions at the end of the 2010-2011 school year.

2.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 3, the District shall rescind the Preliminary
Notices given to Gabrielle Bajar, Elaine Lee, Nhung Le, Loren Runsten, Daniel Seto, Cary
Smallwood, Mary Chung, April Dorman, Valarie Heng, Jeannette Deml, Randall Rubiales,
Emily Blum-Amick, Bryce Davies, Courtney Chow-Pun, Kelli Quan, Kayla Martin, Diana
Brooks, and Sarah Reed.

43

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 4, the District shall rescind the Preliminary

Notices given to Florin Baros and Coleen Hogge.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 5, the District may apply the skipping criteria

set forth in paragraph H (career academy skips) of the Skipping Resolution to skip
respondents Susan Hubbard, Carlos Garcia, Rebecca Hunter, Cristin Smith, Jennifer Moore,
Bryan Jilka, Jon Russell, Kasha Maslowski, and Margaret Souliere. The skips of these
certificated employees shall be only for the number of FTE’s during which they are actually
assigned to teach career academy courses or otherwise perform work for career academies
during the 2011-2012 school year. The District may rescind the Preliminary Notices given to
these respondents by the percentage of FTE’s they are assigned to teach courses in or
otherwise perform work for career academies in the 2011-2012 school year.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 6, the seniority date of respondent Joseph

Candelaria shall be changed to August, 22, 2006.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 7, the seniority date of respondent Tina

Donate shall be changed to July 21, 2004.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 8, respondent Matthew Gipson’s

supplementary authorizations in introductory English and science shall be added to the
seniority list and bumping chart. Before issuing final layoff notices, the District shall
determine whether, as a result of his supplementary authorizations, Mr. Gipson has any right
to bump a more junior employee, and, if so, shall rescind his Preliminary Notice.

8.

Other than as set forth in Recommendations 2 through 7, notice may be given

to respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2011-2012
school year. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: May 2, 2011

_____________________________
KAREN J. BRANDT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

44

