BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
PALOS VERDES PENINSULA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTIFICATED TEACHERS OF THE
PALOS VERDES PENINSULA UNIFIED
SCHOOL DISTRICT

Respondents.

OAH No. 2011031130

PROPOSED DECISION

Jennifer M. Russell, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Palos Verdes on April 19, 2011.

Sharon J. Ormond, Attorney at Law, represented Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified

School District (District).

Kent Morizawa, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Jessica J. Ashenden,

Paula H. Borstel, Curtis B. Chin, Sara L. Exner, Carla P. Ferrera, Lindsay Anne Gillman,
Julie Anne Gingras, Kristy M. Giraud, Bryan D. Godhold, Adam D. Hamler, Brian S.
Helmrich, Heidi J. Johannsen, Wendy Ann Keller, Phillip D. King, Suzanne M. Kipp,
Allison Lehault, Michael B. Lehault, Christine M. Lopez, Ashley E. Maxwell, Amerika
M. Mc Hugh, Livia A. McMullen, Andrea M. Pellicane, William J. Peterman, Jennifer L.
Stoddart, Dana N. Tyson, Jacqueline A. Valerio, Karla Jeanne Vestal, Lilia Li Wang, and
Adam D. Wolven, all of whom, with the exception of Ms. Exner, were present at the
hearing.

Respondent Jessica F. Silberling appeared in propria persona.

Evidence was received by stipulation, testimony, and documents. The record was

closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 19, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Walker Williams is the District’s Superintendent. William Franchini is
the District’s Director of Human Resources. Their actions were taken in their official
capacity. Mr. Williams made and filed the Accusations.

2.

Respondents in this proceeding are certificated employees of the District.

3.

On March 1, 2011, the District provided written notice to respondents

pursuant to Education Code1 sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be
required for the 2011-2012 school year. Each written notice set forth the reasons for the
District’s decision and noted that 57.385 full time equivalent (FTE) positions would be
reduced or discontinued.

4.

On March 9, 2011, the District filed and thereafter served the Accusations
and related documents on respondents. Each respondent appearing in this matter filed a
Notice of Defense requesting a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for
not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.2 All prehearing jurisdictional
requirements were met.

5.

On February 24, 2011, the Board of Education (Board) of the District

adopted Resolution No. 12-2010/11 (Resolution) reducing the following particular kinds
of services (PKS) for the 2011-2012 school year:

K-5 Elementary Teaching Services

23.985 FTE

Secondary Art Teaching Services

Secondary English Teaching Services

Secondary Math Teaching Services

1.60 FTE

4.00 FTE

2.60 FTE

Secondary Physical Education Teaching Services

1.60 FTE

Secondary Physical Science Teaching Services

1.00 FTE

Secondary Life Science Teaching Services

.60 FTE

Secondary Social Studies Teaching Services

2.60 FTE

Secondary Chinese Teaching Services

1.00 FTE

Secondary Japanese Teaching Services

Secondary Latin Teaching Services

Secondary Spanish Teaching Services

Secondary French Teaching Services

.20 FTE

.20 FTE

1.20 FTE

.40 FTE

otherwise.

1

2

All statutory citations are to the Education Code, unless indicated

The District waived objections to several untimely Notices of Defense.

2

Adaptive Physical Education Teaching Services

.60 FTE

Special Education Teaching Services

Counseling Services

Nursing Services

Psychologist Services

Speech Therapist Services

4.00 FTE

7.00 FTE

1.00 FTE

1.00 FTE

2.80 FTE

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS:

57.385 FTE

6.

The Resolution exempts from layoff the services of certificated employees

possessing credentials authorizing them to teach English Learner (“EL”) students. The
Resolution states the following:

[T]his Board has determined that due to the population of English language
learners with specialized educational needs within the District, a specific and
compelling need exists to employ and retain certificated employees who have
authorization to teach English Learner (“EL”) students, as determined by the
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, and the special training and
experience that come therewith[.]

[C]ompliance with the provisions of the No Child Left Behind Act and the
Williams Settlement require that EL students be served by certificated employees
with appropriate EL authorizations. Thus, each failure to staff a classroom
containing one or more EL students with a certificated employee possessing an
appropriate EL authorization is a “mis-assignment” subject to sanction by the
County Superintendent of Schools[.]

7.

a.

The Resolution authorizes the Superintendent or his designee to

deviate from terminating certificated employees in order of seniority (“skip”) to retain a
less senior employee possessing special training and experience to teach High School
Drama.

[D]ue to the specific need of the District to hire and retain teachers who possess
special training and experience to teach High School Drama, the Superintendent
or designee is authorized to deviate from terminating certificated employees in
order of seniority in instances where the less senior employee possesses special
training and experience to teach High School Drama and will be assigned to teach
Drama in the 2011-2012 school year.

3

b.

Mr. Fanchini testified that Seth Cohen, number 576 on the

District’s seniority list, is a “Drama skip.” Mr. Cohen’s undisputed assigned first date of
paid service is August 26, 2008. His undergraduate degree is in film and he has
completed continuing education courses in theatre education. He holds a clear single
subject credential in English. Mr. Cohen has experience in production, set design and
cinematography. His active involvement in more than 25 stage productions and musicals
since the summer of 1977 makes him a recognizable figure in the field. His professional
affiliations include a board membership with the Drama Association of California. No
other senior English teacher in the District possesses similar specialized expertise to
manage and oversee the District’s drama program.

c.

The District properly skipped Seth Cohen pursuant to section

44955, subdivision (d) (1), set forth in Legal Conclusion 2. The manner in which the
District chose to skip over its certificated employees to implement its layoffs was neither
arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of its discretion.

8.

The Resolution establishes tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative

seniority of certified employees with the same date of first rendered paid service to the
district. The criteria, which are set forth in Attachment 1 to the Resolution, provide that
the order of layoff shall be determined according to the following criteria:

1.

Possession of credentials, in order of priority:

Clear professional, standard, life, or general teaching credential;

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Preliminary credential;

Intern credential;

(e)

Waivers.

Short-term staff permit (STSP), provisional internship credential
(PIP);

2.

Breath of clear and preliminary credentials and authorizations, permitting
assignment in the widest range of teaching or service areas, in order of
priority:

Multiple credentials, with the employee possessing the greatest

(a)
number having greater seniority;

A single credential with specific subject matter authorization(s),

(b)
with the employee possessing the greatest number having greater
seniority;

4

A single credential with introductory subject matter

(c)
authorization(s), with the employee possessing the greatest number having
greater seniority;

A single credential with specific supplemental authorization(s),

(d)
with the employee possessing the greatest number having greater
seniority;

A single credential with introductory supplemental

(e)
authorization(s), with the employee possessing the greatest number having
greater seniority;

(f)

A single credential.

3.

Possession of a clear or preliminary credential or subject matter
authorization to teach or serve in the following areas, in order of priority:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(l)

(n)

(o)

Speech and Language

RSP and SDC

RSP

SDC

Math

Sciences-including Health

Foreign Languages

Computer Applications/Business

Fine Arts (Music, Art, Humanities)

English-including Speech

(m)

Early Childhood Education Specialist

Middle Subjects

Librarian

Pupil Personnel Services, Nursing

5

Social Studies/Social Science-including Psychology and Sociology

Physical Education

Home Economics

Administrative Services

Designated Subjects Vocational Education

4.

Possession of a clear or preliminary authorization to teach English
Language Learners, in order of priority:

Bilingual Cross Cultural Language and Academic Development
(BCLAD), Bilingual Certified of Competence (BCC), or Bilingual
Specialist Credential (BCS) certification;

Cross Cultural Language and Academic Development (CLAD),
Language Development Specialist Certificate;

Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English (SDAIE)
certification pursuant to SB 1969 or SB 395.

Number of verified years of certificated employee experience as
determined by actual step placement on the Palos Verdes Peninsula
Unified School District Certificated Salary Schedule(s), with the employee
possessing the greatest number of years having greater seniority.

Academic degrees from an accredited institution of higher education, in
order of priority:

Possession of a Doctorate Degree, earliest date prevails;

Possession of a Masters Degree, earliest date prevails;

Two bachelors degrees, earliest date prevails;

A single bachelors degree, earliest date prevails.

Number of undergraduate majors and minors, as indicated on employees’
transcripts from accredited institutions of higher education, in order of
priority:

5.

6.

7.

(p)

(q)

(r)

(s)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(a)

(b)

Double majors;

Single major and two minors;

6

Single major and single minor;

(c)

(d)

Single major.

8.

9.

10.

Number of total semester credits earned at an accredited institution of
higher education after earning a Bachelors Degree, with the employee
possessing the greatest number of credits having greater seniority.

Number of total semester credits earned at an accredited institution of
higher education within the Bachelors Degree, with the employee
possessing the greatest number of credits having greater seniority.

Assuming that the preceding paragraphs do not resolve all ties between
employees having the same seniority date, the tie will be broken by
drawing of lots with the employee drawing the highest number being
regarded as most senior.

9.

The services set forth in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.

10.

The Board took action to reduce the services set forth in Factual Finding 5
because of uncertainty surrounding future State funding. The decision to reduce services
was not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals whose services are
proposed to be reduced or eliminated. The decision to reduce the particular kinds of
services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s
discretion.

11. Mr. Franchini was responsible for implementation of the technical aspects

of Board’s Resolution. He reviewed information in multiple personnel files as well as
data from the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing to compile a tentative
seniority list containing seniority dates, current assignments, and credentials and
certifications. He distributed the list to certificated employees within the District for
them to verify, update or correct pertinent information.

12.

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and

“bumping” list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services
being reduced. The District then determined whether more senior employees affected by
the layoffs held credentials in another area and were entitled to “bump” other less senior
employees. In determining who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the
District counted the number of reductions not covered by the known vacancies, and
determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority. The District then
checked the credentials of affected individuals and determined whether they could
“bump” other employees.

7

13.

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations,

retirements and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of layoff notices to
be delivered to employees by March 15, 2011.

14.

The District rescinded layoff notices to Sabrina R. Besson, Guy Russell

Gardner, Christina K. Hambel, Laura Christina Kawasaki, Leslie A. Rowe, and
Christopher A. Wilson.

15.

Amerika McHugh, number 561 on the District’s seniority list, has an

undisputed August 1, 2008 seniority date. She contends that the District failed to apply
the tie-breaker criterion of possession of a clear or preliminary credential authorization to
serve in Administrative Services to exempt her from the District’s layoffs. Ms. McHugh
holds a Certificate of Eligibility stating that she “has completed the college or university
program and all other requirements for the preliminary Administrative Services
Credential and is authorized to seek employment in an administrative position.”3
Although authorized to do so, Ms. McHugh is not currently employed in an
administrative position. As a consequence, she holds only a Certificate of Eligibility and
not, by contrast, a Preliminary Administrative Services Credential that would trigger an
application of the above mentioned tie-breaker criterion. The District properly identified
Ms. McHugh as an employee subject to layoff.

16.

a.

Michael Lehault, number 569 on the District’s seniority list, and

Allison Lehault, number 575 on the District’s seniority list, dispute their assigned August
26, 2008 seniority date. The District originally hired both Lehaults on August 28, 2002.
After five years of service, the Lehaults requested leave from the District to relocate to
New Jersey to teach in a public school so that they could “fulfill [their] financial
obligations of a mortgage and other bills.” They contend that Mr. Francini advised them
that a District policy prohibited them from retaining their employment with the District
while simultaneously teaching elsewhere. They further contend that the District’s policy
was implemented in a discriminatory manner to permit others to take leave to teach at
private schools, but prevented them from taking leave to teach at another public school.
They contend that such discriminatory implementation of District policy forced their
resignation from the District in June 2007.

b.

On August 26, 2008, the District re-employed the Lehaults and
restored their tenure status, but not their original August 28, 2002 seniority date. The
Lehaults contend they are entitled to their original August 28, 2002 seniority date, which
would result in a change of their relative seniority on the District’s seniority list. The
District asserts that the Lehaults are precluded from challenging their assigned August

3

The Commission On Teacher Credentialing’s Administrative Services Credential

for Administrators Prepared in California indicates that “California has a two-tier credential
structure. A five-year preliminary credential is the first credential issued after an individual
meets basic requirements. A clear credential is issued when all credential requirements have been
completed.” There are five requirements, including actual verified employment in an
administrative position, which a candidate must satisfy for the Five-Year preliminary Credential.

8

26, 2008 seniority date because they unsuccessfully raised the same issue in a prior layoff
proceeding.

c.

In the prior layoff proceeding, the Lehaults relied on section 44931

to support their argument that they were entitled to a restoration of their original August
28, 2002 seniority date. The Administrative Law Judge found the Lehaults’ reliance on
section 44931 misplaced because their seniority date after re-employment is determined
by section 44848, which does not restore a re-hired employee’s original date of
employment. The Lehaults additionally argued that they should have been allowed to
take a leave of absence, rather than resign. The Administrative Law Judge found this
contention “was not established by the evidence.” The Administrative Law Judge
determined that the “District properly assigned a seniority date of August 26, 2008 to
Michael Lehault and Allison Lehault, which was their first day of paid service after their
reemployment.” See In the Matter of the Accusation Against Certain Certificated
Employees of the Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified School District, No. 2010030325
(April 26, 2010). On May 3, 2010, the Board adopted the Administrative Law Judge’s
Proposed Decision. The Administrative Law Judge’s factual findings and legal
conclusions in the prior layoff proceedings were either not challenged in court or no
evidence of any such challenge were introduced. For reasons set forth in Legal
Conclusions 6 and 7, the Lehaults’ challenge to their assigned August 26, 2008 seniority
date is rejected. The District correctly identified Michael Lehault and Alison Lehault as
employees subject to layoff.

17.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Section 44949 provides in pertinent part as follows:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the
governing board that his or her services will not be required for the
ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section 44955, the governing
board and the employee shall be given written notice by the
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the
reasons therefore.

2.

Section 44955 provides in pertinent part as follows:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for
causes other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and
Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, and no probationary employee shall
be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as specified in
Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive.

9

(b) Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all of the
schools district for the first six months in which school is in session shall
have declined . . . , whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced
or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year, .
. . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall
have become necessary by reason of any of these conditions to decrease
the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board
may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of
the certificated employees of
the district, permanent as well as
the close of the school year. Except as otherwise
probationary, at
provided by statute,
the services of no permanent employee may be
terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render
a service which said permanent employee is certified and competent to
render.

[¶] . . . [¶]

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on
the same date,
the governing board shall determine the order of
termination solely on the basis on needs of the district and the students
thereof. Upon the request of any employee whose order of termination is
so determined, the governing board shall furnish . . . a statement of the
specific criteria used in determining the order of termination and the
application of the criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group . . . .

(c) [S]ervices of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the
order in which they were employed, as determined by the board in
accordance with Sections 44844 and 44845. In the event that a permanent
or probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing
as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed
for the ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a
manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which their
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. . . .

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the
following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrated a specific need for personnel to teach a
specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee
has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or

10

course of study or to provide those services, which others with more
seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.

3.
44955 were met.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and

4.

The services set fort in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955. The
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and
pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

5.

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section

44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students
shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce service’ by
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees
are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees
91976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

6.

Collateral estoppel precludes re-litigation of issues argued and decided in
prior proceedings. (Zapata v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1991) 2 Cal.App.4th 108.)
The following five threshold requirements must be satisfied to establish collateral
estoppel: (a) the issue sought to be precluded from relitigation must be identical to that
decided in a former proceeding, (b) the issue must have been actually litigated in the
former proceeding, (c) the issue must have been necessarily decided in the former
proceeding, (d) the decision in the former proceeding must have been final and on the
merits, and (e) the party against whom preclusion is sought must be the same as, or in
privity with, the party to the former proceeding.

Collateral estoppel is applicable to administrative agency decisions when the
agency acts in a judicial capacity resolving disputed issues of facts presented for its
adjudication. The agency adjudicatory proceeding should be conducted in an impartial
manner and afford the parties an opportunity to examine and cross-examine witnesses
under oath and to offer evidence and argument. A record of the proceedings should be
maintained. (People v. Sims (1992) 32 Cal.3d 468.)

7.

The issue of the Lehaults’ assigned August 26, 2008 seniority date is the
“identical” issue previously decided in In the Matter of the Accusation Against Certain
Certificated Employees of the Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified School District, No.
2010030325 (April 26, 2010). The Administrative Law Judge determined that the
“District properly assigned a seniority date of August 26, 2008 to Michael Lehault and
Allison Lehault, which was their first day of paid service after their reemployment.” The

11

issue was unquestionably “actually litigated.” Judicial economy does not permit the
Lehaults to proffer now, in the present proceedings, in piece meal fashion, purported
evidence of discriminatory application of an alleged District policy in support of their
challenge to their assigned August 26, 2008 seniority date. Enforcing repose requires
resolving all issues and controversies surrounding their assigned August 26, 2008
seniority date once, not more than once.

The issue was “necessarily decided” because the assigned August 26, 2008

seniority date was the basis upon which relative seniority was determined for
implementation of the District’s layoffs, which in turn was determined to be a lawful
exercise of the District’s discretion. The Administrative Law Judge’s decision in In the
Matter of the Accusation Against Certain Certificated Employees of the Palos Verdes
Peninsula Unified School District, No. 2010030325 (April 26, 2010) was “final” in the
absence of any subsequent judicial review in accordance with the provisions of the Code
of Civil Procedure. The decision was “on the merits” of the assigned August 26, 2008
seniority date. Michael Lehault and Allison Lehault, the parties against whom preclusion
is sought, were the same parities who actually litigated the assigned August 26, 2008
seniority date issue in In the Matter of the Accusation Against Certain Certificated
Employees of the Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified School District, No. 2010030325
(April 26, 2010).

The threshold requirements for application of collateral estoppel are met in this

case. No public policy consideration precludes application of collateral estoppel herein.
Each time the District wishes to layoff permanent and probationary employees it must do
so according to the strict requirements of the Education Code. Moreover, in determining
whether they are properly identified in any future layoffs, the Lehaults have a continuing
right of assurance that their relative position on the District’s seniority list is correct. The
Lehaults cannot, however, re-litigate over and over their assigned August 26, 2008
seniority date.4

8.

Cause exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44945 to reduce the number

of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or discontinuation of the
particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 5. The District properly identified
the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board
directed be reduced or discontinued.

The Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified School District may give notice to
respondents Jessica J. Ashenden, Paula H. Borstel, Curtis B. Chin, Sara L. Exner, Carla
P. Ferrera, Lindsay Anne Gillman, Julie Anne Gingras, Kristy M. Giraud, Bryan D.
Godhold, Adam D. Hamler, Brian S. Helmrich, Heidi J. Johannsen, Wendy Ann Keller,

4

Nothing in this Legal Conclusion precludes the District from assigning a
new and different seniority date to the Lehaults should they again resign and the District
again re-employs them at another time.

ORDER

12

Phillip D. King, Suzanne M. Kipp, Allison Lehault, Michael B. Lehault, Christine M.
Lopez, Ashley E. Maxwell, Amerika M. Mc Hugh, Livia A. McMullen, Andrea M.
Pellicane, William J. Peterman, Jessica F. Silberling, Jennifer L. Stoddart, Dana N.
Tyson, Jacqueline A. Valerio, Karla Jeanne Vestal, Lilia Li Wang, and Adam D. Wolven,
that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year.

Dated: May 6, 2011

__________________________
JENNIFER M. RUSSELL
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

13

