BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF
SAN CARLOS ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SAN MATEO, CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

COLYN FISCHER and DUSTYN
WOROPAY,

OAH No. 2011031444

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Melissa G. Crowell, State of California, Office of

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in San Carlos, California on April 28, 2011.

Tami Essis Culkar, Attorney at Law, Dannis Woliver Kelley, represented complainant

Kelly Price, Assistant Superintendent of Personnel and Chief Business Official, San Carlos
Elementary School District.

Bill Empey, Chapter Service Consultant, California Teachers Association,
represented respondents Colyn Fischer and Dustyn Woropay, who were present.

The matter was submitted for decision on April 28, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Kelly Price made the accusation in her official capacity as Assistant

Superintendent of Personnel and Chief Business Official, San Carlos Elementary School
District.

2.

Respondents Colyn Fischer and Dustyn Woropay are certificated employees of

the district.

3.

On March 15, 2011, Assistant Superintendent Price gave written notice to
certificated employees, including respondents, of the recommendation that their services
would be reduced or eliminated for the 2011-2012 school year. Each notice set forth the
reasons for the recommendation.

4.

Respondents, and another certificated employee whose notice has been

rescinded, filed timely requests for a hearing to determine if there is cause for reducing their

1

services for the 2011-2012 school year. An accusation was served on each respondent, and
each filed a notice of defense. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements for respondents
have been met.

5.

On March 10, 2011, the Governing Board of the San Carlos Elementary

School District adopted Resolution No. 13;10/11. The Board resolved to reduce or
discontinue the following services for the 2011-2012 school year:

Services

FTE1 Reduction

Middle School 5-8 Core
Middle School Computer Elective
Middle School Orchestra
Middle School Math

2.00
0.20
0.60
0.20

Total

3.00 FTE

6.

Since the resolution was issued, the district has determined that it will reduce

Middle School Orchestra by only 0.20 FTE.

7.

Assistant Superintendent Price’s recommendation and the Board’s resolution
were required by the district’s financial circumstances. The district is facing a $2.35 million
budget shortfall. The shortfall may be reduced or eliminated if a May 2011 parcel tax
measure passes and/or by sufficient state revenues, a matter which has yet to be determined
for the ensuing school year.

8.

The services set forth above are particular kinds of services that may be

reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. None of the
reductions is for a mandated service.

Respondent Fischer

9.

Respondent Fischer holds a Preliminary Single Subject Credential in Music

with an EL authorization. He has a seniority date of August 21, 2009, and is a probationary
employee of the district. Respondent holds a 0.60 FTE position, and teaches Orchestra at
Central Middle School. By reason of the 0.20 FTE reduction in Middle School Orchestra,
respondent’s Fisher’s position will be reduced to 0.4 FTE. No probationary certificated
employee with less seniority than respondent is being retained to provide a service which he
is credentialed and competent to render.

10.

Respondent Fischer currently teaches three sections of Orchestra. He believes
it will be detrimental to the advancement of his Orchestra students if his services are reduced
to two sections, thereby requiring mixing students with varying levels of ability and perhaps

1 Full-time equivalent reduction.

2

not permitting all interested students the opportunity to participate in Orchestra. The wisdom
of the board’s decision to reduce Orchestra by one section is not a proper challenge to the
validity of this layoff proceeding.

Respondent Woropay

11.

Respondent Woropay holds a Preliminary Single Subject Credential in Social

Sciences with an EL authorization. He has a seniority date of January 20, 2009, and is a
probationary employee of the district. Respondent holds a 1.0 FTE position, and he teaches
Social Studies, History, Computers and Physical Education at Central Middle School. By
reason of the 0.20 FTE reduction in Middle School Computers, respondent Fisher’s position
will be reduced to 0.8 FTE. No probationary certificated employee with less seniority than
respondent is being retained to provide a service which he is credentialed and competent to
render.

12.

Respondent Woropay does not believe that the reduction in services makes

sense in light of the numbers of students entering middle school. The wisdom of the board’s
decision to reduce services is not a proper challenge to the validity of this layoff proceeding.

Conclusion

district and of its pupils.

13.

The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

All of the jurisdictional requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and

44955 have been met in this proceeding.

Because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services set forth

in Finding 5, cause exists pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to
respondents that their services will be reduced for the 2011-2012 school year. This cause
solely relates to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of
Education Code section 44949.

3

RECOMMENDATION

Notice may be given to respondents Colyn Fischer and Dustyn Woropay, that their

services will be reduced for the 2011-2012 school year.

DATED: May 3, 2011

_____________________________
MELISSA G. CROWELL
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

4

