BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF  
EUREKA UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No.  2011030177 
 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE EUREKA UNION 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
                                                  Respondents. 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

 
 
Administrative Law Judge Linda A. Cabatic, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Granite Bay, California on April 7, 2011. 
 
 
(District). 
 

Terry Filliman, Attorney at Law represented the Eureka Union School District 

Ernest H. Tuttle IV, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Linda Godshall and 

Evidence was received, the record was closed and the matter was submitted for 

Christy Goldthwaite (Respondents). 
 
 
decision on April 7, 2011. 
 
 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Rich L. Schrichfield is the Interim Superintendent and the Assistant 

Superintendent for Human Resources for the District.  The District provides education to 
approximately 3,400 students from pre-kindergarten through the eighth grade. 
 

2. 

Mr. Schrichfield stated a reduction of $2.5 million was recommended for the 
next school year because of budgetary constraints and declining enrollment in the District.  
The District has also undergone budget reductions for the past three years. 
 

3. 

On March 8, 2011, the Board of Education (Board) of the District adopted 

Resolution No. 10-11-20, entitled “Reduction/Elimination of Particular Kinds of Certificated 
Services” (PKS Resolution).  Pursuant to the PKS Resolution, the Board determined that it 
was necessary for the District to eliminate or reduce certain particular kinds of services 

1 

(PKS) and to terminate not later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year the 
employment of a corresponding number of probationary and/or permanent certificated 
employees.  In the PKS Resolution, the Board directed the Superintendent or his designee to 
send appropriate notices to all employees to be affected by virtue of the PKS reductions and 
eliminations.  The Board also directed the Superintendent or his designee to make such 
assignments and reassignments of certificated employees following implementation of the 
reduction or elimination of the PKS so as to ensure that each remaining certificated employee 
is assigned to a position for which he or she is properly credentialed to perform pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955. 
 

4. 

The PKS Resolution identified the following particular kinds of services for 

Grade K-8 Instructional Services: 
1. 
 

Self-Contained Classroom Teachers 
And Self-Contained Core Teachers 

Certificated Support Services: 
1.  

Speech Language Pathologist 

 

 

 

10.0 FTE1 

     .7 FTE 

A 
 
 

reduction or elimination: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL: 

10.7  FTE 

5. 

The PKS Resolution set forth the District’s competency criteria as follows: 

 
 
 
 
 

That “competency” for the purposes of Education Code sections 44955, 44956 
and 44957 shall be met based upon (1) current possession of a preliminary or  
clear credential for the subject matter, grade level or pupil personnel services  
to which the employee will be assigned at the beginning of the 2010-2011  
school year. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6. 

The PKS Resolution also prohibited “partial bumping” situations.  It stated: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1  “FTE” stands for full-time equivalent. 

For scheduling needs, the Board prohibits the following “partial bumping”  
situations.  A senior teacher with a multiple subject credential whose  
assignment is being reduced below full-time may consent to bump a full-time    
classroom grades 7-8 assignment including a core assignment provided the  
teacher is also credentialed to teach the elective class if the assignment   
includes an elective, but may not bump a portion of the assignment.  A senior  
teacher with an English credential may bump a two-hour English course at  
Cavitt Middle School, but may not bump only one of the two hours.  The  
Board finds that allowing a more senior teacher to “bump” into a portion of an  
elementary classroom teaching assignment forcing the class to be taught by  

 

2 

two or more teachers who did not plan a “team teaching” assignment is not  
educationally  sound.  As a result, senior teachers who are otherwise qualified  
may not bump into a portion of an elementary classroom teaching assignment.  
A qualified full-time middle school teacher who is proposed for being bumped 
less than full-time or faces less that full-time elimination of his/her position  
may consent to bump full-time into an elementary classroom teaching    
assignment.  Part-time certificated employees may not bump a greater    
percentage full-time equivalent position than he/she currently holds. 

7. 

The PKS Resolution also set forth the following skipping criteria: 

The Superintendent is authorized to deviate from terminating in order of  
seniority for certificated employees currently assigned to the below listed  
program based upon their unique training, qualification and skills related to the 
required responsibilities for the course/job: 

A. 
 
 
 
 

Reading Lab Teachers (Caro McKillop, Shawna Lukasko and Beth  
Furdek) based upon their unique responsibilities to plan and evaluate  
the District reading program and mentor teachers in teaching reading  
and language arts and requirement for the position to hold a Reading  
Specialist Credential of [sic] a Masters degree in reading. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8. 

On February 8, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 10-11-15, which set 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

As between certificated general education K-8 employees who first rendered  
paid service to the district on the same date, the Board of Education  
determines that the order of termination shall be determined based solely upon  
the needs of the District and its students in accordance with the following  
criteria.  The criteria are listed in priority order with number one the highest  
priority.  Each criteria next in order shall be applied only if the preceding  
criteria does not resolve all ties. 

forth the Criteria for Resolving Seniority Ties In Case of Certificated Layoffs: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

If a tie still exists, possession of a current English Language  
Development Certificate (BCLAD or CLAD or SDAIE or SB 1969)  
wins; 

If a tie still exists, possession of a second preliminary or clear  
credential wins; 

Possession of a current valid preliminary or clear credential wins; 

If a tie still exists, possession of a clear credential wins; 

2. 
 
 

3. 
 

1. 

4. 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

3 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

5. 
 
 

6. 
 
 
 
 

7. 
 
 

If a tie still exists, the employees shall be ranked in order by total years  
of public school teaching experience including experience outside this  
district.  The most years of experience shall be ranked highest; 

If a tie still exists, the tie will be broken by lottery.  In the lottery the  
employee drawing the lowest number shall be retained.   If necessary,  
additional employees shall be retained in rank order of the lowest  
number drawn.  An officer of EUTA will be present to witness the  
drawing. 

If it becomes necessary to resolve a tie between employees who lost at  
any level 1-4 above, the tie shall be broken by the use of the lottery  
process described in level 5 [sic]2. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9. 

Indeed, on March 29, 2010, the District and the Eureka Union Teachers’ Association 

As of March 8, 2011, the Board then considered all positively assured attrition 
including resignations, retirements, and other permanent vacancies for 2011-2012 known at 
that time in determining the needed services to be reduced or eliminated. 
 
 
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) which offered the State Teachers 
Retirement System Two-Year Retirement Incentive Program during the fall of 2010-2011, 
effective July 1, 2011.  The intent of this MOU is to offer a retirement incentive program that 
would support senior staff in retirement, reduce the number of teachers being noticed for 
layoff and financially benefit the school district in this difficult budget period and this MOU 
remains in force only during the 2010-11 school year. 
 
 
school teachers.  These retirements, however, did not reduce the need to reduce the number 
of teachers in self-contained classrooms and self-contained core teachers. 
 

The Board has accepted the resignations for purposes of retirement of two middle 

10.  On or about May 12, 2009, the Board revised the duty statement for a Reading 

 

Education and Experience: 

Lab Teacher to more clearly outline the duties as they are currently performed and define 
qualification requirements for those holding such position.  In this revision, the Board 
adopted the following education and experience requirements: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
2   The lottery is actually described in level 6. 

Bachelor’s Degree with valid California Teaching Credential  
authorizing service in assigned grade and subject, and  

Reading Specialist Credential, or  
Master’s Degree with Reading/Early Literacy emphasis or, 

1. 
 

2. 
3. 

 
 

 
 

 

4 

 

4. 

Miller Unruh Reading Specialist Credential 

 
 

11.  On or about March 9, 2011, Mr. Schrichfield, sent Notices of 
Recommendation That Services Will Not Be Required to the certificated employees 
identified for the layoff.  The layoff notices included the PKS Resolution and informed the 
certificated employees of their right to request a hearing.  In response to the layoff notices, 
the District received four requests for hearing.  On March 18, 2011, Mr. Schrichfield sent 
letters to the certificated employees who requested a layoff hearing, serving upon them the 
Accusation, Statement to Respondent, form Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing and 
relevant statutes, and informing them of their right to file a notice of defense if they desired a 
hearing. 
 

12.  On or about March 21 and 24, 2011, Notices of Defenses were served on 

behalf of respondents Godshall and Goldthwaite who desired a hearing, both of whom are 
respondents to this hearing. 
 

13. 

Respondents Godshall and Goldthwaite are self-contained classroom or core 

teachers who are being laid off pursuant to section A.1. of the PKS Resolution and their 
issues with respect to this layoff are identical. 
 

14. 

Respondent Godshall testified that she successfully passed the Reading Instruction 

Respondents Godshall and Goldthwaite both have Professional Clear Multiple 
Subjects and Cross-cultural Language and Academic teaching credentials.  No evidence was 
presented that either or both respondents satisfy the “Education and Experience” 
requirements for the position of Reading Lab Teacher. 
 
 
Competence Assessment (RICA) in 2001 and obtained her Multiple Subject credential prior 
to being hired. 
 
 
Respondent Godshall teaches kindergarten at Maidu Elementary School.  She stated 
she works with kindergartners until their release at 1:15 p.m. and then from approximately 
1:30 p.m. to 2:15 p.m. on Tuesdays through Fridays, she participates in the Response to 
Intervention (RTI) program and also the What I Need Now (WINN) program.  These 
programs allow her to work with third graders on reading issues, such as comprehension, 
interpreting, and phonics.  She informally and continually tests and assesses the third graders 
in reading.  She also plans the curriculum for these third graders in conjunction with the third 
grade teachers.  She stated she performs and is capable of performing many of the duties and 
responsibilities being performed by Reading Lab Teachers and should not be laid off.   
 

15.  While respondent Godshall has the units to obtain her credential, she does not 

have a Reading Specialist Credential, or a Master’s Degree with Reading/Early Literacy 
emphasis, or a Miller Unruh Reading Specialist credential.  As previously noted, no evidence 
was presented to demonstrate that Ms. Goldthwaite possesses a Reading Specialist 
Credential, or a Master’s Degree with Reading/Early Literacy emphasis, or a Miller Unruh 
Reading Specialist credential. 

5 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set for the in Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955.  The notices sent to respondents indicated the statutory basis for 
the reduction of services and therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due 
process.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 632; Santa 
Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842.)  The 
description of the kinds of services to be reduced, both in the Board Resolution and in the 
notices, adequately describes the particular kinds of services.  (Zalac v. Ferndale USD 
(2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 855.  See also Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 
Cal.App.3d 689.) 
 

2. 

The issue here is whether respondents, who do not satisfy the requisite 

“Education and Experience” requirements of a Reading Lab Teacher, have the right to 
“bump” junior teachers who possess the requisite credentials.  They do not.  (Findings 8, 12 
and 13.) 
 

3. 

The District has the discretion to determine the education and experience 

requirements necessary to teach a particular assignment.  The evidence did not establish that 
the District acted arbitrarily or capriciously, or abused its discretion when it revised the 
Reading Lab Teacher job description to include additional education and experience 
requirements.  At the time Resolution Nos. 10-11-20 and 10-11-15 were issued, neither 
respondent had in their possession, or have in their possession, the requisite credentials to be 
a Reading Lab Teacher.  (Findings 8, 11, 12, 13, and 14; Legal Conclusion 3 and 4.) 
 

4.  While respondents Linda Godshall and Christy Goldthwaite have rendered 

valuable services to the District, cause exists under Education Code section 44949 and 44955 
to provide final Notices to respondents Linda Godshall and Christy Goldthwaite that their 
services will not be required in the ensuing school year.  Respondents do not have the 
requiste credentials which would allow them to bump junior teachers that have the requisite 
credentials.  (Findings 8, 11, 12, 13, and 14; Legal Conclusion 3 and 4.) 
 
 
 
 
// 
 
 
 
 
// 
 
 
 
 

6 

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice shall be given to respondents Godshall and Goldthwaite that their services will 

 
 
not be required for the 2011-2012 school year because of the need to reduce or eliminate 
particular kinds of services. 
 
 
 
Dated:  April 12, 2011 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
LINDA A. CABATIC 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

7 

