BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
POMONA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Accusations Against:

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE
POMONA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,

OAH No. 2011030183

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Eric Sawyer, Administrative Law Judge, Office of

Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 19-20, 2011, in Pomona.

Howard A. Friedman, Esq., and L. Carlos Villegas, Esq., Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost

LLP, represented the Pomona Unified School District (District).

The Respondents in this matter are the 143 individuals listed in exhibit 7, attachment

A. Respondents Mary Ellen Storm and Katherine Rogers were present and represented
themselves. Respondent Deborah Kerr had previously requested a continuance, which was
denied for reasons stated on the record, and she was not present. However, she was given
leave to submit evidence and argument in writing.

Joshua Adams, Esq., and Eli Naduris-Weissman, Esq., Rothner, Segall & Greenstone,

represented the 137 Respondents identified in exhibit A.

The hearing concluded on April 20, 2011, but the record remained open so that the

parties could present closing arguments, and so Respondent Kerr could present her
information. The following items were timely received and marked as indicated: the
District’s closing brief was marked as exhibit 8; the closing brief for the Respondents
represented by counsel was marked as exhibit F; the argument and evidence submitted by
Respondent Kerr was marked as exhibit G; the District’s response to Respondent Kerr’s
materials was marked as exhibit 9. The record was closed and the matter was submitted for
decision upon receipt of the last of the aforementioned documents on May 3, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

The Accusation was made and filed by Richard Martinez in his official

capacity as Superintendent of the District.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

1.

2.

3.

On February 22, 2011, pursuant to the recommendation of the Superintendent,
the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted Resolution No. 13 (2010-11) in which it
determined that particular kinds of services may be reduced or discontinued at the close of
the 2010-2011 school year. The Board resolved to reduce or eliminate 272.5 full-time
equivalent positions (FTE) in certain services or programs performed by probationary or
permanent certificated employees specifically delineated as follows:

SERVICES

Counselor-High School………………………………………………….
Counselor-Middle School……………………………………………….
Intervention Specialist…………………………………………………..
School Psychologist……………………………………………………..
School Site Specialist…………………………………………………...
Teacher-Adult School-Academics……………………………………..
Teacher-Adult School-Adults with Disabilities………………………..
Teacher-Adult School-Career Technical Education…………………
Teacher-Adult School-Older Adults……………………………………
Teacher-Adult School-Parent Education……………………………..
Teacher-Child Development……………………………………………
Teacher-Elementary…………………………………………………….
Teacher-Elementary-Physical Education……………………………..
Teacher on Assignment…………………………………………………
Teacher-Resource……………………………………………………….
Teacher-Resource-Bilingual…………………………………………….
Teacher-Secondary-English…………………………………………….
Teacher-Secondary-Health……………………………………………..
Teacher-Secondary-Technology Proficiency………………………….
Teacher-Secondary-Math……………………………………………….
Teacher-Secondary-Physical Education……………………………….
Teacher-Secondary-Science-Life………………………………………
Teacher-Secondary-Social Science……………………………………
Teacher-Special Education (K-12 Mild/Moderate)……………………
Teacher Specialist-Academic Coach………………………………….
Teacher Specialist-Child Development……………………………….

FTE

2.0
1.0
7.0
1.0
4.0
25.0
17.0
15.0
4.0
6.0
60.0
73.0
12.0
6.5
2.0
4.0
2.0
2.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
4.0
12.0
1.0

TOTAL FTEs Reduced or Discontinued

272.5

4.

In its resolution, the Board directed the Superintendent or his designee to serve

notices of termination in accordance with and in the manner prescribed by Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955.1

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

2

5.

The Board also adopted criteria to be used in determining the order of

termination of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the District in a
probationary position on the same date. The Board resolved that the order of termination of
said employees shall be determined by reference to certain tiebreaker criteria and to points
assigned to each category of tiebreaker criteria. The Board further resolved that such criteria
are determined to best serve the needs of the District and its students.

6.

On or about March 7, 2011, pursuant to the resolution and the provisions of

sections 44949 and 44955, the Superintendent gave written notice to Respondents that he had
recommended to the Board that notice be given to Respondents that their services will not be
required for the 2011-2012 school year. Respondents requested a hearing to determine if
there is cause for not employing them for the ensuing school year.

7.

On or about March 24, 2011, the District filed and timely served an

Accusation, Resolution No. 13, a Statement to Respondent, a blank Notice of Defense,
Request for Discovery, and pertinent sections of the Government and Education Codes upon
Respondents, who filed timely Notices of Defense.

8.

During the hearing, the District rescinded the layoff notices issued to

Respondents Claudia DeLeon, Nancy Fegert, Wendy Garcia, Zarjii Myint, Sally Olivas,
Mary Otto, Yvonne Reaza, and Richard Snyder.

9.

Respondent Michael Barbera testified that he did not receive a preliminary
layoff notice until April 15, 2011. Respondent Mary Lee Johnson testified that she never
received a preliminary layoff notice. As a result, these Respondents contend that their
preliminary layoff notices should be rescinded. The District had their correct addresses on
record. It was established through the testimony of Darren Knowles, Director of Personnel
Services for the District, that preliminary layoff notices were timely deposited in the US
mail, certified with return receipt requested, addressed to the Respondents’ addresses of
record. Although these two Respondents did not receive their preliminary layoff notices at or
about the time they were sent, they each timely submitted Notices of Defense and were
present during the hearing. Under these circumstances, Respondent Barbera and Johnson’s
argument is rejected, because they were properly served with their preliminary layoff notices
for purposes of the Education Code.2

2 Section 44949, subdivision (d), provides that a preliminary layoff notice is properly
served when deposited in United States registered mail. Section 70 allows school districts to
use certified mail in lieu of registered mail. Districts are only required to deposit the
preliminary notice in the mail on or before March 15th, and addressed to the last known
address of the employee. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 C.A.3d 627, 633.) In
this case, the District timely deposited the two preliminary layoff notices in question by an
acceptable manner of mail and properly addressed. Nothing more was required.

3

10.

Respondent Rossy Guzman never received a preliminary layoff notice.

Although the District had timely deposited her preliminary notice in US certified mail, with
the proper street address and city, the District omitted her apartment number. Respondent
Guzman’s correct address of record with the District includes her apartment number. She had
previously notified District staff that her apartment number was an important part of her
address of record after another document was not received by her for the same reason. Out of
an abundance of caution, Respondent Guzman inquired of her union representative when she
had not received the preliminary notice on and after the March 15th deadline. Because the
union representative advised her that she was on the list of certificated staff subject to layoff,
she timely presented a request for hearing and later a notice of defense in response to the
Accusation she received. She was also present at the hearing, during which time the ALJ
dismissed the Accusation against her for lack of jurisdiction. Unlike the situations involving
Respondents Barbera and Johnson, the District failed to correctly address Respondent
Guzman’s preliminary layoff notice, and therefore failed to serve it in conformity with the
Education Code.3

11.

The services or programs set forth in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of

services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955. The
determination of the Board to reduce or discontinue these services or programs is within the
sound discretion of the District and is not arbitrary or capricious. The reduction or
discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has
become necessary to decrease the number of certifcated employees as determined by the
Board.

12.

The District has considered personnel changes due to attrition, retirements, and

the releases of temporary employees in making its determination to issue layoff notices.

13.

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority

dates, current assignments and locations, credentials, and authorizations. The District then
identified the most junior employees working in a particular kind of service being reduced or
discontinued and determined which employees would receive layoff notices.

///

///

///

///

3 The failure to correctly address her preliminary layoff notice was not a

nonsubstantive procedural error pursuant to section 44949, subdivision (c)(3). The
requirement of section 44949, subdivision (a), to send a preliminary layoff notice by no later
than March 15th is jurisdictional. The failure to properly deliver the preliminary notice to
Respondent Guzman constitutes a failure to abide by a jurisdictional requirement.

4

14.

During the hearing, the District made the following seniority list changes:

Certificated Employee

New Seniority Date

Eduardo Blanquel
Leonora Calvin
Donna Caspio
James Dinh
Vijava Marathe
Lupe Marin
Yolanda Marin
Marylin Mendieta
Thelma Newsom-Cox
Eliza Porras
Patricia Zepeda
Judith Wahnon

September 2, 2003
April 16, 2001
April 13, 2009
September 6, 2005
September 2, 2003
September 7, 2004
December 6, 2006
October 2, 2004
April 19, 2005
October 1, 2001
September 6, 2005
September 1, 1999

15.

The District concedes that Respondent Hamsa El-Hassaad should be

recognized as having a Level I Education Specialist Instruction credential.

The Administrator Respondents

16.

The following three respondents are District Administrators who contest their

layoffs: Dr. Mary Ellen Storm, Katherine Rogers, and Dr. Deborah Kerr.

17.

Respondent Storm contends she should not be laid off because her current
position, Adult Education Coordinator, was not listed in Resolution No. 13 as a particular
kind of service being reduced or eliminated. Respondent Storm was timely served with a
Notice of Reassignment, removing her from her administrative position.4 Because she retains
certain rights to certificated employment as a teacher, the District also served Respondent
Storm with a preliminary layoff notice. Since Respondent Storm was initially hired into the
District as an administrator, her date of seniority is calculated differently from other
certificated employees initially hired by the District in teaching positions.5 Therefore, the
District correctly gave Respondent Storm a seniority date in 2008, which is three years

4 Pursuant to section 44951, an administrator can be removed from her administrative

position by simply receiving a Notice of Reassignment by March 15th. Generally, an
administrator attains no tenure in her administrative position and serves at the pleasure of the
governing board. An administrator therefore has no right to a hearing regarding their
reassignment from an administrative position. (Hentschke v. Sink (1973) 34 Cal.App.3d 19,
22.)

5 Pursuant to section 44956.5, an administrator hired into a school district initially as

an administrator is entitled to a maximum of three years of seniority for the total period of
time served as an administrator.

5

before she was reassigned from her administrative position. She maintains a multiple subject
teaching credential, which would allow her to teach elementary classes. But her seniority
date subjects her to layoff by virtue of the reduced elementary class positions. Respondent
Storm did not establish that she can bump another certificated employee. She is subject to
layoff.

18.

Respondent Rogers has a situation similar to Dr. Storm. Respondent Rogers

was initially hired into the District as an administrator. She was timely given a Notice of
Reassignment from her administrative position. Pursuant to the Education Code provisions
pertaining to administrators, she only accrued three years of seniority. Since she too is
credentialed to teach elementary school, she is also subject to layoff as an elementary school
teacher based on her seniority date. She did not establish a basis to bump another certificated
employee. She is subject to layoff.

19.

Respondent Kerr complains about the District’s personnel practices regarding
the hiring and reassignment of administrators. However, she has no standing in this matter to
contest her timely Notice of Reassignment from her administrative position (see footnote 4
above). Respondent Kerr was initially hired into the District as an administrator. Pursuant to
the Education Code provisions pertaining to administrators, she only accrued three years of
seniority dating back to 2008. Respondent Kerr has a credential allowing her to teach in an
adult school. She did not establish a basis to bump another certificated employee. Based on
her seniority date, the District properly determined that she is subject to layoff as an adult
school teacher.

Seniority Date Disputes

20.

Respondent Elsa Cabral disputes her assigned seniority date of November 6,

2006. She testified that her correct seniority date should be the first day of school in
September 2006. She began that school year as a substitute teacher, replacing another teacher
who was on maternity leave until November 3, 2006. Respondent Cabral was advised that
she was serving in a substitute teaching capacity at that time. Thus, the District’s assignment
of her then did not run afoul of Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High School
District (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911. Whether or not Respondent Cabral was advised at the time in
question that she was replacing another teacher on an approved leave is not relevant for
purposes of determining whether her substitute assignment was proper. The important issue
for purposes of Kavanaugh is that she was notified of her substitute assignment, and that
such assignment was valid. Respondent Cabral established no basis to change her seniority
date.

21.

Respondent April Shivers requests her seniority date be changed from
September 7, 2010, to a new date in 2008. However, her assignment was as an adult
education teacher, which has a different method of accruing seniority.6 Because Respondent

6 Section 44929.5 provides that an adult school teacher is considered full-time for
purposes of accruing seniority when she has worked at least 60 percent of the hours per week

6

Shivers did not work the requisite 18 hours per week for the time period in question, she was
not eligible to accrue seniority. Although she later became a probationary employee in 2010,
as demonstrated by her seniority date, she is not able to “tack on” her prior teaching
experience, because she did not establish that she worked 75 percent of the regular school
days in session, as required by section 44918.

22.

Respondent Zoia Sproesser requests her seniority date be changed from

September 1, 2002, to a new date in September 1998. She is also an adult school teacher. She
established that in the years prior to 2002, she worked sporadic hours, ranging from 9-10
hours per week to 60 hours per month. However, she did not established that she consistently
worked the requisite 18 hours per week so as to be properly considered a full-time employee
entitled to accrue seniority before her given seniority date.

23.

Respondent Lauren Crabtree testified that her seniority date of January 7,
2008, should be revised to November 12, 2007. In its closing brief, the District agreed,
without explanation, to make that revision. Respondent Crabtree’s new seniority date is
therefore November 12, 2007.

24.

Respondent Leslie Romero testified that her seniority date of February 1,
2007, should be revised to September 25, 2006. In its closing brief, the District agreed,
without explanation, to revise Respondent Crabtree’s seniority date to an earlier date of
September 19, 2006. Respondent Romero’s new seniority date is therefore September 19,
2006.

25.

In exhibit A of its closing brief, the District revised the seniority dates of the
following Respondents who neither testified nor whom stipulations were announced on the
record during the hearing:

Certificated Employee

New Seniority Date

Elizabeth Arboleta
Nancy Brower
Suzanne Diaz
Arturo Farin
Irma Loyola
Cheryl Moore
Bonnie Pless
Jenny Sylvia

October 17, 1990
September 8, 2002
September 6, 2001
February 2, 2000
September 8, 2004
October 2, 2004
September 2, 2003
October 30, 2007

26.

It was not established that any of the changes described in Factual Findings

14-25 will otherwise effect the layoffs of the involved individuals.

the school district considers full-time for permanent employees. In this case, the District
considers an adult school teacher to be full-time when they work at least 18 hours per week.

7

27.

In three instances, the District acknowledged that it failed to provide

preliminary layoff notices to more junior certificated employees for positions that more
senior employees are certificated and competent to render. In response, the District rescinded
the preliminary layoff notices of Respondents DeLeon, Fegert and Olivas, who are the most
senior Respondents in the subject areas of the involved junior employees.

28.

Taking into account the changes described above, no junior certificated

employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services that a more senior employee is
certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The party asserting a claim or making charges in an administrative hearing
generally has the burden of proof. (Brown v. City of Los Angeles (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th
155.) For example, in administrative hearings dealing with personnel matters, the burden of
proof is ordinarily on the agency prosecuting the charges (Parker v. City of Fountain Valley
(1981) 127 Cal.App.3d 99, 113); in personnel matters concerning the dismissal of a teacher
for cause, the burden of proof is similarly on the discharging school district (Gardner v.
Commission on Prof. Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035). As no other law or statute
requires otherwise, the standard of proof in this case requires proof to a preponderance of the
evidence. (Evid. Code, § 115.)

All notice and jurisdictional requirements of Education Code sections 44949

and 44955 were met.

The services identified in Resolution No. 13 are particular kinds of services

that can be reduced or discontinued pursuant to section 44955. The Board’s decision to
reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a
proper exercise of its discretion. Services will not be reduced below mandated levels. Cause
for the reduction or discontinuation of those particular services relates solely to the welfare
of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949. (Factual Findings 1-
11.)

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due

to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. (Factual Findings 1-11.)

(A) The remedy for the District’s failure to provide a preliminary layoff notice

to the three junior employees is to rescind the layoff notices corresponding to the senior
respondent in the same subject area, as opposed to rescinding the layoff notices of all senior
respondents in the same subject area. That is because application of the so-called “domino
theory” is not supported by relevant legal authority. In fact, it has been noted that the proper
remedy for such a situation is for a “corresponding number of the most senior employees”
who did receive a layoff notice to have their notices withdrawn. (Alexander v. Delano Joint
Union High School District (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 576.) One noted legal scholar on
school district layoff cases in California disapproves of applying the domino theory in cases

2.

3.

4.

5.

8

of good-faith errors by districts. (Ozsogomonyan, Teacher Layoffs in California: An Update,
(1979) 30 Hastings Law Journal 1727, 1754-1759.) Finally, the approach approved by the
Alexander court has been generally accepted by ALJs of the Office of Administrative
Hearings in cases of good faith errors by school districts.

(B) In this case, there is no evidence suggesting that the District’s failure to

provide the three preliminary layoff notices in question was the result of anything other than
inadvertence. Because the three involved junior certificated employees were not respondents
in this case, the appropriate remedy was for the District to rescind the preliminary layoff
notices of the most senior certificated respondent in each subject area, which the District did
during the hearing. However, the dismissal of the Accusation against Respondent Guzman
for failure to properly serve her preliminary layoff notice by the March 15th deadline does
not require any remedy vis a vie the other Respondents, because Respondent Guzman was
already a party to this matter and her position therefore was already accounted for in the
District’s layoff. In any event, Respondents do not contest the District’s actions with regard
to these four Respondents. (Factual Findings 1-27.)

6.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services
that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. (Factual Findings 1-28.)

ORDER

1.

The Accusations against Respondents Claudia DeLeon, Nancy Fegert, Wendy

Garcia, Zarjii Myint, Sally Olivas, Mary Otto, Yvonne Reaza, Richard Snyder, and Rossy
Guzman are dismissed. The District shall not give them final layoff notices for the next
school year.

2.

The Accusations are sustained as against the remaining Respondents. The

Board may give a final notice of layoff to those Respondents. Notice shall be given to those
Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year, and such
notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

Dated: May 4, 2011

________________________________
ERIC SAWYER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

9

