BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
WILLIAM S. HART UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

OAH Case No. 2011030578

In the Matter of the Layoff of:

Karla Arriaran-Rodriguez and other
certificated employees of the William
S. Hart Union High School District,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Nancy Beezy Micon, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings,

heard this matter on April 27, 2011, in Santa Clarita, California.

Littler, Mendelson, by Adam J. Fiss, Attorney at Law, represented Robert Challinor

(Challinor), the Superintendent for the William S. Hart Union High School District (District).
Attorney Fiss was assisted by attorney Lauren Robinson.

Hathaway, Perrett, Webster, Powers, Chrisman & Gutierrez, by Robert A. Bartosh,
Attorney at Law, represented Karla Arriaran-Rodriguez, Shannon Ford, Araksia Kaladjian,
Iyashema Redd, and Justine Saunders. Respondents Karla Arriaran-Rodriguez, Shannon Ford,
Iyashema Redd, and Justine Saunders were present at the hearing. Respondent Araksia
Kaladjian was not present at the hearing. Respondent Denise Parsons was not represented, and
did not appear at the hearing.

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and has

given Respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2011-2012 school year.
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not
reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

The hearing in this matter was initially scheduled for April 14, 2011. On April 6, 2011,

Presiding Administrative Law Judge Michael A. Scarlett granted a continuance, thereby
extending by 13 days the deadlines set forth in Education Code1 sections 44949, subdivision
(c), and 44955, subdivision (c). (§ 44949, subd. (e).)

Evidence was received by way of stipulation, testimony and exhibits. The record was

closed, and the matter submitted for decision at the conclusion of the hearing on April 26, 2011.

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

1.

2.

3.

6.

7.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Superintendent Challinor filed the Accusation while acting in his official

capacity as the Superintendent of the District.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

On March 2, 2011, the Governing Board of the District (Governing Board)

adopted Resolution Number 10/11-26, reducing or discontinuing the following services for the
2011-2012 school year:

Service

Counselors
Psychologists

FTE2 Reduction

3.2
2.0

4.

Superintendent Challinor thereafter provided written notice to the Governing

Board and to Respondents that he recommended the termination of Respondents’ services for
the 2011-2012 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

5.

On or about March 11, 2011, the District provided notice to Respondents that

their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year due to the reduction of
particular kinds of services. Each written notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation.
Each notice also notified the employee of his or her right to request a hearing to determine if
there is cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing school year, and that a written
request for a hearing was due by March 21, 2011.

Respondents filed timely requests for hearing.

One certificated employee, Bridgett Martinez (0.2 FTE), did not request a

hearing. She thereby waived her right to a hearing and cannot contest the recommendation of
her non-reemployment by the District. (§ 44949, subd. (b).)

8.

On or about March 23, 2011, the District filed and served the Accusation and

other required documents on Respondents. Respondents thereafter filed timely notices of
defense, seeking a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the
2011-2012 school year.

2 Full-time equivalent position.

2

9.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

10.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of
services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code
section 44955.

11.

The District seeks to reduce projected spending due to the uncertainty

associated with State funding and potential reductions in such funds. The Governing Board’s
decision to reduce or discontinue the services set forth in factual finding number 3 is not
arbitrary or capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion in light of
such potential loss of revenue.

12.

The reduction of services set forth in factual finding number 3, in the context of
potential revenue losses and the need to provide services if such losses materialize, is related to
the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of
certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board. The decision to reduce services
was not related to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose services are
proposed to be reduced or eliminated.

13.

The Governing Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements

and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be
delivered to its employees.

14.

On March 2, 2011, the Governing Board adopted Resolution 10/11-27, setting

forth its tie-breaking criteria for employees with the same seniority date. The Resolution
provides that the order of termination will be based solely on the basis of the needs of the
District and its students. A priority system was established for various credentials,
certificates, experience, training and coursework. Among employees who shared a date of
first paid service, the higher the priority achieved, the higher the seniority. The criteria are
reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of certificated employees.

15.

a.

Respondent Justine Paige Saunders (Saunders), who was known as

Justine P. Girellini when she was first hired by the District, is a counselor at Valencia High
School (1.0 FTE). She disputes her seniority date of August 13, 2007. Saunders interviewed
for the counselor position with the District in March 2007. At the time, Saunders worked as a
counselor at a private high school, which did not require that its counselors be credentialed.
Saunders informed the District that she planned to obtain her credential before the start of the
2007-2008 school year. The District hired Saunders, contingent upon her obtaining the
required credential. Saunders took the California Basic Education Skills Test (CBEST
examination), required for the credential, on Saturday, August 11, 2007. She then obtained an
Internship Pupil Personnel Services Credential in school counseling, valid between August 13,
2007 and September 1, 2009. Saunders also obtained a Temporary County Certificate, which

3

was effective August 13, 2007. On September 18, 2007, Saunders signed a contract for
temporary certificated employment with the District, which stated that the period of Saunders’
temporary employment began on August 13, 2007. Saunders was asked to report with the other
counselors at Valencia High School on August 3, 2007, before school was in session, in order
to prepare for the upcoming school year. Saunders understood, however, when she reported for
work with the other counselors, that she would not be paid for reporting to work before the start
of the school year. Saunders was not required to report for work on that date. Saunders
testified that she reported for work on August 3, 2007 because she wanted to prepare for the
school year at the same time as the other counselors. Saunders testified that she was “okay with
it” (i.e. not getting paid for reporting before the start of the school year).

15.

b.

It was argued that the seniority date for Saunders should be August 3,

2007 because she is paid annually, and her work as a counselor for the 2007-2008 school year
began on August 3, 2007. The seniority date of a certificated employee is defined as the date
the employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary capacity.” (§ 44845.) A school
district cannot pay an employee for certificated services if the employee does not possess a
valid credential. (§ 45034.) It is undisputed that Saunders did not receive her credential until
August 13, 2007. Her first date of paid service as a probationary counselor for the District is
therefore August 13, 2007. Since Respondent Saunders was not a certificated employee before
August 13, 2007, her work before that date may not be credited toward her seniority as a
certificated employee.

16.

a.

Respondent Iyashema Redd (Redd) is a counselor at Valencia High

School (1.0 FTE). She disputes her seniority date of August 8, 2007.3 It is undisputed that
Redd had previously been identified for layoff in a reduction in force action and, at that time,
the District had assigned her the seniority date of August 1, 2007, which reflected the date
Redd’s contract with the District commenced. Robert C. Gapper (Gapper), Assistant
Superintendent, Human Resources and Student Services, explained that the District changed
its previous practice so that seniority dates would reflect the first date the employee was paid
for service to the District. Gapper consulted a District payroll document, which indicated to
Gapper that Redd was first paid for services on August 8, 2011.4 Redd challenges the
accuracy of the payroll document.

///

3

4

Redd was given a layoff notice as a precautionary matter, in the event

Saunders prevailed in arguing that her seniority date should be adjusted to an earlier date.

The District currently requires certificated employees to verify the dates they

are present and working versus the dates they are absent each month. This was not the
District practice in 2007. Redd never verified the document, or source documents, relied
upon by Gapper in arriving at Redd’s first date of paid service.

4

16.

b.

Redd convincingly testified that she began her employment with the

District on August 1, 2007. Redd explained that she was assigned as an “1802 split
counselor” between two high schools, Sequoia and Bowman. She recalls being directed by
Lori Andrews, the administrator for Sequoia Charter School, to report to work on
Wednesday, August 1, 2007. Andrews wanted Redd to report early so Redd would have an
opportunity to learn the protocols of the school, as well as other technical information and
student background data.5 Redd remembers that Andrews was not present when Redd
reported for work and that District office personnel instructed Redd to instead report to
Bowman High School. Redd followed their directions and began her work with the District
that day. Redd has a distinct recollection of beginning work for the District on August 1,
2007, she was a credible witness who testified in a straightforward manner, and her testimony
was not contradicted by the District. Gapper’s conclusion, based upon the unverified
document, lacks sufficient support and foundation to overcome Redd’s credible testimony
concerning the first date she rendered paid service for the District. Redd was hired to render
services as a high school counselor, and she was certificated on or before August 1, 2007.
The work she performed on August 1, 2007, for which she was paid, was part of the
counseling services she was hired to perform. Redd established that, instead of a seniority
date of August 8, 2007, her seniority date should be August 1, 2007.

17.

The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to any Respondent to

render a service which Respondents are certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and

44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 9.

2.

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are determined to be particular
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3
and 10.

3.

Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction of the particular
kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause relates solely to the welfare
of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 12.

///

5

The District has a practice of requiring its high school counselors to start work in

advance of the school year in order to prepare for the school year in advance of student
attendance. Counselors are paid on an annual basis; their contracts require that they work ten
days more than the number of days in the school year. The additional work days are typically
before the start of the school year.

5

4.

Respondents contend that any precautionary layoff notices should be dismissed
to the extent they are in excess of the 5.2 FTE reduction authorized by Resolution No. 10/11-
26. This contention is not persuasive. The purpose of the initial notice of non-reemployment
is to notify employees of the probability that their services will not be required for the
ensuing school year so that they may consider looking elsewhere for employment.
(Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 653.) In order to ensure that
all employees who potentially may be affected by a layoff receive proper notice, it is
sometimes necessary for a school district to notice more employees than will actually be laid
off. In this matter, only one employee, Redd, was given a precautionary layoff notice. The
District served the notice to Redd in order to ensure that 3.2 counselors will be laid off, in
accordance with the Board’s resolution, in the event Saunders prevailed in changing her
seniority date. There is no evidence the District will eliminate more positions than those
authorized in Resolution No. 10/11-26, or that any harm was caused by over-noticing as to one
person. No persuasive authority or argument was presented in support of Respondents’
contention. The District acted appropriately to ensure the Board’s resolution was followed.

5.

The seniority date of a certificated employee is defined as the date the employee
“first rendered paid service in a probationary capacity.” (§ 44845.) These words must be given
their plain and commonsense meaning in order to effectuate the legislative intent. (Hughes v.
Board of Architectural Examiners (1998) 17 Cal.4th 763, 775; California Teachers Assn. v.
Governing Bd. of Rialto Unified School District (1997) 14 Cal.4th 627, 632-633; Steketee v.
Lintz, Williams & Rothberg (1985) 38 Cal.3d 46, 51-52.) The statute requires crediting a
certificated employee with the seniority date on which he or she was first paid to render
service in a probationary capacity. The statute does not expressly require a particular salary
rate or schedule, a particular type of service in a probationary capacity, or that the service be
“mandatory,” in order for the paid service to be credited for seniority purposes.

Respondent Justine Saunders rendered her first day of paid counseling service

for the District in a probationary capacity on August 13, 2007. Section 45034 prohibits a
school district from paying a person employed in a position requiring a credential if the
employee does not hold a proper credential. Saunders obtained her credential on August 13,
2007. Since Respondent Saunders was not certificated to be employed as a counselor before
August 13, 2007, this is the earliest date she may be credited toward her seniority as a counselor
with the District.

Respondent Iyashema Redd rendered her first day of paid counseling services for
the District in a probationary capacity on August 1, 2007. Redd was hired to render services in
a probationary capacity and the work she performed on August 1, 2007, for which she was
paid, was part of the counseling services she was hired to perform. Redd already held a
credential when she performed the counseling work on August 1. Respondent Redd’s proper
seniority date is therefore August 1, 2007, as set forth in factual finding number 16.

6

6.

The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to Respondents to

perform a service Respondents are competent and certificated to render.

7.

Cause exists to terminate the services provided by Respondents Karla Arriaran-
Rodriguez, Shannon Ford, Araksia Kaladjian, Denise Parsons and Justine Saunders, by reason
of factual finding numbers 1 through 17 and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 6.

8.

Cause does not exist to terminate the services of Respondent Iyashema Redd, as

set forth in factual finding numbers 1 through 17, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 6.

RECOMMENDATION

1.

It is recommended that the Accusation be sustained, and the District may notify
Respondents Karla Arriaran-Rodriguez, Shannon Ford, Araksia Kaladjian, Denise Parsons and
Justine Saunders that their services will not be needed during the 2011-2012 school year due to
the reduction of particular kinds of services.

2.

It is recommended that the layoff notice be rescinded, and the Accusation be

dismissed as to Respondent Iyashema Redd. The seniority list should be changed to reflect that
Respondent Redd’s seniority date is August 1, 2007.

DATED: May ___, 2011

____________________________
Nancy Beezy Micon
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

