BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION
SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH No. 2011020737

Respondents listed in Appendixes A, B, and
C.

PROPOSED DECISION

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State

of California, heard this matter in San Diego, California, on April 18 and 19, 2011.

Mark R. Bresee, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, Attorneys at Law,

represented the San Diego Unified School District.

Fern M. Steiner, Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax, Attorneys at Law, represented all

respondents except those listed below.

Dr. Jeannie Steeg, Director, San Diego City Schools Administrators Association,

represented respondents Patricia MacIntyre, Dr. Patrick Holland, and Laura Alluin.

Respondent Leslie Jimenez represented herself and was present throughout the

hearing.

The matter was submitted on April 29, 2011.1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

William Kowba, Superintendent, San Diego Unified School District, made and

filed the accusation dated March 31, 2011.

1

At the conclusion of the hearing, the parties’ request to submit post-hearing briefs in

lieu of closing argument was granted. Briefs were timely filed by the district, by the
respondents represented by Ms. Steiner, and by the respondents represented by Dr. Steeg.
These briefs were marked for identification and received for non-evidentiary purposes as
Exhibits 16, H, and I, respectively.

1

2.

Respondents2 are certificated district employees.

3.

On March 10, 2011, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and
44955, Sandra Huezo, Chief Human Resources Officer, San Diego Unified School District,
notified the Board of Education of the San Diego Unified School District in writing of her
recommendation to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services for the upcoming
school year. Huezo stated the reasons for the recommendation.

4.

On March 10, 2011, the board adopted a resolution determining that it would

be necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of the current
school year. The board determined that the particular kinds of services that must be reduced
for the 2011-2012 school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE) positions:

Particular Kind of Service

Full-Time Equivalent

Administrators
Central Office Managers
Principals
Vice-principals

Career and Technical Education
Computer Concepts and Applications

12
8
15.5
35.5

3

2

All respondents are permanent employees, since the district and the San Diego
Education Association have a collectively bargained, separate process for the layoff of
probationary employees that supersedes the process set forth in the Education Code.
Accordingly, the term “certificated employees” in this proposed decision refers to
certificated permanent employees, unless otherwise indicated.

The district initially identified 719 certificated employees for layoff. By the time the

hearing began, the district had dismissed about half of the accusations, so that the number
designated for layoff had been reduced to 352. During the course of the hearing, the
accusations were dismissed as to 25 additional respondents. Finally, in the district’s post-
hearing brief, the district identified 20 additional respondents whose accusations it proposed
to dismiss, at least in the event the district’s final proposed layoff list was upheld by the
administrative law judge. Ultimately, as discussed below, it is recommended that the
accusations against these 20 respondents be dismissed, leaving 307 respondents whose
layoffs are upheld. These 307 respondents are listed in Appendix A. The 20 respondents
whose accusations will be dismissed as a result of this proposed decision are listed in
Appendix B. The 25 respondents whose accusations were dismissed by the district at the
hearing are listed in Appendix C.

2

Support Services
Library Media
School Counseling
School Nurse
School Psychology

Elementary Education
Child Development Center
Children Center Resource Teachers
State- Pre-School Teachers
Elementary (K-6)

Middle/High/Alternative Education
Art
Business
English
Foreign Language: French
Foreign Language: German
Foreign Language: Mandarin
Foreign Language: Spanish
Home Economics
Industrial Technology
Mathematics
Music
Physical Education
Science: Biology
Science: General Science
Social Science

Special Education
Mild/Moderate

13
59
42
5
119

8
4
22
461
495

10
2
83

2.5
0.2
0.4

14

2.5
1
15
45
20
11
3
20
229.6

38

The proposed reductions totaled 920.1 FTE positions.3

3

After March 10, 2011, the district continued to evaluate its personnel needs. After

taking into account positively-assured attrition and other matters, the district has determined
it can meet its fiscal needs for the 2011-2012 academic year by reducing services by a total
of 801.1 FTE positions. The specific changes in FTE positions to be reduced are as follows:
(i) counseling (54 FTE, instead of 59); (ii) nursing (21 FTE, instead of 42); (iii) elementary
classroom teachers (383 FTE, instead of 461); and (iv) music teachers (30 FTE, instead of
45).

3

The proposed reductions were a response to a projected $120,000,000 budget shortfall

the district expects to experience at the close of the present academic year, and thus at the
beginning of the 2011-2012 academic year.

5.

The board further determined in the resolution that competency, as described

in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for the purposes of bumping, “must
include status of ‘highly qualified’ for the subject or field within the meaning of the No Child
Left Behind Act, and appropriate certification qualifications (including appropriate English
Language authorizations).”

6.

The board directed the superintendent or his designee to determine which

employees’ services would not be required for the 2011-2012 school year as a result of the
reduction of the foregoing particular kinds of services. The board further directed the
superintendent or his designee to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the
district who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services.

7.

On or before March 15, 2011, the district timely served on respondents a
written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services would not be
required for the upcoming school year. The notice set forth the reasons for the
recommendation. The notice advised respondents of their right to a hearing, that each
respondent had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person sending the notice
by the date specified in the notice, a date which in each case was more than seven days after
the notice was served, and that the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of
the right to a hearing. The district subsequently timely served respondents with the
accusation.

Respondents timely filed written requests for hearing and notices of defense.

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

Respondents are permanent certificated employees of the district.

10.

The services the board addressed in the resolution were “particular kinds of

services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code
section 44955. The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of
services was not arbitrary or capricious and constituted a proper exercise of discretion. No
particular kinds of services were lowered to levels less than those levels mandated by state or
federal law.

11.

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the
welfare of the district and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as
determined by the board.

Respondents contended that the district acted arbitrarily with regard to the number of

certificated employees designated for layoff, in light of a projected $9,000,000 budget
surplus expected at the end of the 2011-2012 fiscal year. Ron Little, the district’s chief

8.

9.

4

financial officer, testified that the board wishes to use the surplus to address certain financial
risks, rather than to decrease the number of certificated staff to be laid off pursuant to the
present proceeding. Out of a total annual district budget of over $1.1 billion, it cannot be
concluded that an anticipated reserve of $9,000,000 constitutes an abuse of the board’s
discretion. In addition, it must be emphasized that the $9,000,000 constitutes a projected
surplus that is a year away. More significant is the $120,000,000 projected shortfall for the
end of the present school year, and thus the beginning of the upcoming school year. The
evidence as a whole established that the board’s decision was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, but instead constituted a reasonable exercise of its discretion.

12.

Respondent Patricia MacIntyre is currently the principal at iHigh Virtual

Academy. She was hired by the district in July 2009, and is thus completing her second year
as Academy principal. The Academy is an independent study high school. The curriculum
is offered primarily online, though some courses (e.g., science labs) are offered in a
traditional school setting. The Academy serves about 70 full-time and 500 part-time
students, the latter coming from the several comprehensive programs in the district.

MacIntyre testified as to her specialized training that led to her being recruited for her
position as Academy principal. MacIntyre has a Master’s degree in computer education, and
20 years experience in math and computers. She served as a site tech coordinator for ten
years. She was then employed at the San Diego County Office of Education as program
manager for the California Technical Assistance Project. Thereafter, she served as director
of Techsets, one of four statewide education technology services, which is housed at the
County Office of Education. As a result of this experience, the district actively recruited
MacIntyre to launch the iHigh Virtual Academy as a pilot program.

MacIntyre has a preliminary administrative services credential, a certificate of

completion of staff development, a clear multiple subject credential, a life single subject
credential in math, and a supplementary authorization in computer concepts and applications.
She is NCLB certified in many fields.

MacIntyre testified that it takes specialized knowledge to serve as principal in a
program such as iHigh. It is a new program and there are no models to which one may refer
for guidance; instead, she must rely on her specialized training and skills. The program she
oversees is not an “IT” program, but instead is one that integrates educational technology
into the classroom. MacIntyre has found her position to be challenging.

MacIntyre testified that the only credential required for her position is an

administrative services credential.

MacIntyre in essence asserted that she should have been protected from layoff (i.e.,
skipped) because of her specialized training and skills. Without question, MacIntyre has a
great deal of experience, training, and skill, and the service she performs for the district is
important. However, a decision not to skip a particular employee or group of employees is
within the district’s discretion. Stated differently, a district “may” (but is not required to)
deviate from terminating employees in order of seniority. (Educ. Code, § 44955, subd.

5

(d)(1).) Here, the district decided not to seek authorization to skip any employees or groups
of employees. The district’s decision in this regard was permissible and constituted a proper
exercise of its discretion.

13.

Respondent Dr. Patrick Holland, a district administrator, was hired by the

district based on his prior experience as an administrator and superintendent. He testified he
believes that if he is laid off, he could be at a competitive disadvantage with regard to rehire,
as compared to a younger teacher who has many years of service ahead of him or her.
However, these matters do not provide a legal basis for the district to skip him or otherwise
not to lay him off.

14.

The board considered all positively assured attrition that existed as of the date
the preliminary layoff notices were served on respondents, in determining the actual number
of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.

15.

No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any

services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3.

Pursuant to section 44995, a senior teacher whose position is discontinued has
the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to
fill. In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is
filling that position. (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.) In
fact, the district has an obligation under section 44955 to determine whether any permanent
employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic layoff possesses the
seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned to another position.
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra. at 136-137.)

4.

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in

with any statistical computation. It is within the governing authority’s discretion to
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law. (San Jose
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) A school district has wide
discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or

6

so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of
law. (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d
318, 322.)

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district and
establishing requirements for employment. This discretion encompasses determining the
training and experience necessary for particular positions. Similarly, school districts have
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343 Districts
also retain discretion to determine standards of competency for purposes of teacher layoffs,
and those standards will be upheld as long as they are reasonable. (Duax v. Kern Community
College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.)4

5.

Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the

junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts
lack. (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of Santa Clara
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843; Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified
School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.)

6.

The district has terminated certain administrative positions, and proposes to

reassign certain of its administrators to classroom teaching positions or to other positions that
do not require an administrative credential. The parties disagree as to how the seniority of
these administrators is to be determined. More specifically, the parties differ as to the proper
interpretation of Education Code section 44956.5. That section provides:

For a certificated employee initially employed in an administrative position on
or after July 1, 1983, who transfers to a teaching position, the period of
employment in the administrative position shall not be included in determining
seniority for purposes of Sections 44955 and 44956, except for school site
administrators who shall earn up to a maximum of three years seniority while
serving as site administrators.

The district proposes to apply this provision so that: (i) individuals who were

hired by the district after July 1, 1983, in site administrative positions earn a
maximum of three years seniority while serving in that capacity; but (ii) individuals
hired by the district after July 1, 1983, in teaching positions, but who later were
promoted to administrative positions, retain their original seniority date, i.e., the
three-year limit on accruing seniority in administrative positions does not apply.

4

Duax involved the layoff of community college teachers pursuant to Education Code

section 97743, but is applicable here by analogy.

7

Respondents contend to the contrary that section 44956.5 is best interpreted as
providing that individuals hired by the district after July 1, 1983, in teaching (or other
non-administrative) positions, and who later are promoted to administrative positions,
are limited to accruing three years of seniority for the period they served in the latter
capacity.

Section 44956.5 is ambiguous. The ambiguity arises from the word

“employed,” the past participle of the verb “to employ.” That verb, in the job context,
means “to use or engage the services of” or “to provide with a job that pays wages or
a salary.”5 When used in the sense of “engage the services of,” or “to provide with a
job,” the term implies the act of hiring someone, i.e., it denotes a specific point in
time. If that is the correct meaning of “employed” in section 44956.5, then the
district’s position is correct. When used in the sense of “use the services of,” the term
implies not the specific moment in time when the employee is hired, but instead the
individual’s continuous, on-going employment status. If that is the correct meaning
of “employed” in section 44956.5, then respondents’ position is correct.

No published judicial decisions have interpreted section 44956.5. No
legislative history has been cited by the parties. And a precise purpose of the
provision (i.e., sufficiently precise to address the issue presented here) cannot be
discerned from the statutory language. One can reasonably infer from the fact that the
section was enacted effective July 28, 1983, that the July 1, 1983, date was intended
as some sort of grandfather clause meant to protect employees who met the required
condition before that date. That observation does not, however, seem sufficient to
permit with confidence an inference as to the meaning of the term “employed” in the
present context.

An attempt to discern which interpretation of section 44956.5 better accords

with public policy is likewise of no avail. On the one hand, it may be argued that the
district’s interpretation avoids discouraging teachers from accepting administrative
positions that could jeopardize years of seniority accrued while serving in that
capacity. On the other hand, it may be argued that individuals with the most recent
classroom experience (i.e., current teachers) are better equipped to teach students than
those individuals who lack such recent classroom experience (i.e., current
administrators), and that therefore respondents’ interpretation of section 44956.5,
which favors the retention of teachers, is best calculated to meet the needs of students.

It is concluded that the term “employed” in section 44956.5 means to “engage

the services of.” This conclusion is reached based on two considerations. First,
though the provision is ambiguous, the interpretation accepted here seems a
somewhat more natural and thus the more likely interpretation, in part because of the

5

These particular definitions are found at Merriam-Webster.com.

8

sense created by the use of the adverb “initially” to modify “employed.”6 Second, the
interpretation accepted here seems more in accord with the fundamental grounding of
the layoff statute in employee seniority. Stated otherwise, provisions of the statute
that deviate from seniority are the exception, and ambiguities should thus not be
construed so as to further such deviation. The district’s interpretation preserves the
seniority of certificated staff; respondents’ interpretation partially eliminates it.

7.

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the
accusation, except as to the 20 respondents listed in Appendix B. Cause exists under
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the district to reduce or discontinue particular
kinds of services. The cause for the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of
services related solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. Cause exists to
reduce the number of certificated employees of the district due to the reduction and
discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The district identified the certificated
employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board be directed be reduced or
discontinued. It is recommended that the board give the respondents listed in Appendix A
notice before May 15, 2011, that their services are no longer required by the district.7

ADVISORY DETERMINATION

The following advisory determination is made:

1.

The accusations served on the respondents listed in Appendix A are sustained.
Notice may be given to such respondents before May 15, 2011, that their services will not be
required because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated.

2.

The accusations served on the respondents listed in Appendix B are dismissed.
Notice may not be given to such respondents that their services will not be required because
of the reduction or discontinuation of particular services.

DATED: May 4, 2011

_____________________________
DONALD P. COLE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

7

By way of contrast, when one asks the question, “How long have you been

employed?” the sense is clearly the on-going employment relationship, not the moment when
that relationship was created. Lexical context helps to determine the meaning of words.

Since the accusations served on the respondents listed in Appendix C were dismissed
at the hearing, no further finding, conclusion, or order is necessary in this proposed decision
as to those respondents.

9

Abbott, Marcia
Aguirre, Olga
Allen, Alexandra
Allen, Sheryl Christina
Alluin, Laura M
Almader, Graciela
Ancora, Carmencita Maria
Anderson, Mark William
Archuleta, Erika A
Ashlock, Emily Marcella
Ashworth, Rodger N
Aviles, Shannon
Baca, Felicia W
Bader, Jennifer L
Bain, Joy Alicia
Baker, Anna K
Banuelos, Jessica Elizabeth
Barnard, Paula Marie
Barnett, Megan A
Barney, Kristin Jewell
Barragan, Frances R.
Bearden, Andrew Robert
Behr, Dana Elizabeth
Bella, Rosemarie Arguilla
Bennett, Jessica Lynn
Bermudez-Iglesias, Karina L
Bethany, Ebony Zakiyah
Bierkan, Janet Maureen
Block, Janell Sohmer
Boelzle, Amy Vince
Bolanos, Audrey Ang
Bondoc, Cherrylyn P
Borja, Akira R
Boughner, Robert G
Bowen, Ann E
Brauch, Cynthia Marie
Brodzki, Jessica Kay
Brown, Cameron Thomas
Buell, Allison Claire Vinci
Burks, Tony
Burningham, Lindsay S
Caducio, Monica
Carian, Melissa L
Carrasco, Griselda
Carrillo, Jesse
Carroll, Carinne C
Carter, William T
Catolico, Monalisa L
Chavira, Sylvia
Childress, Keva
Churchwell, Marissa Jarzyna
Coady, Natasha Margaret
Colby, Jonathan D
Coleman, Jennifer M
Concannon, Alycia

APPENDIX A

Cooke, Candice A.
Cordero, Tania
Cox, Allison
Cox, Patricia Joette
Curtis, Margaret Anne
Dale, Arlet S
Dancy, Winnona D
Davenport, Jamie N
Davies, Heather L
Delatorre, Nada
Demara, Liliana O
Diaz, Jessica Esmeralda
Diaz, Veronica
Dominguez, Griselda H
Donahue, Stacie S
Doolittle, Holly P.
Dove, Kristin Ann
Eden, Laura J.
Eide, Lisa Renee
Elliott, Cheree Danielle
Ely, Cora Liane
English, Kristenza Alaska
Feldman, Shoshana Ann
Fernandez, Carolina
Ferrante, Mackenzie L
Flinn, Nancy
Flores, Lidia
Flores, Marina Avelar
Fogleman, Amy Suzanne
Fox, Amanda Christine
Francke, Colleen
Garcia, Kathleen Loretta
Garcia, Maria Angela
Gavigan, Angela
Gaze, Ashley Abercrombie
Gergurich, Brooke Leilani
Givens, Theresa Marie
Goldberg, Marcos
Gomez, Elda
Gonzalez Castaneda, Linnette D
Gonzalez, Mary-Ann Caswell
Gonzalez, Veronica P
Granada-Mendez, Lorena
Granfield, Kelly R
Gray, Ana L
Greenhalgh, Patricia Kendel
Guerin, Erica Healy
Haling, Breanna Marie
Hammond, Susan
Hancock, Robyn S
Hansen, Marjorie
Harriman-Gomez, Audra Nicole
Harris, Michelle C
Hernandez, Jose A
Hernandez, Michael

10

Herrera, Erica
Herrera, Michelle Arlene
Herrmann, Alicia Catherine
Hess, Lisa Nguyen
Hoff, Cathleen Gallagher
Holland, Patrick
Howerton, Tiffany A
Icenhower, Amanda M
Icenhower, Michelle Elizabeth
Izzard, Amber Rhiannon
Jenkins, Tara
Jiampa, Carrie Maureen
Jimenez, Leslie Diana
Jimenez, Norma A
Jimenez, Rebecca A
Johnson, Jeralyn D
Johnson, Leedward
Jones, Brittany D
Kaase, Nancy A
Kagen, Catherine Ann
Kammerzell, Maria C
Keefe, Colleen E
Khiev, Sarin
Kidder, Anne Marie
Kilian, Kristen L
King, Jacqueline Marie
Klages, Stacie Lynette
Klinger, Lindsay A
Knox, Ashley Marie
Kratt, Christine Marie
Krylow Jr, John Paul
La Salle, Analicia
Lach, Robert
Laidlow, Sandra
Landsberg, Angela Noel
Lenham, Jami M
Leonard, Timothy P
Lerma, Santiago Ocampo
Lewis, Erin
Lewis, Gwenn
Lewis, Kenneth Michael
Liss, John W
Llamas, Richard
Lopez-Hudson, Laura
Lorden, Kathy
Luchans, Samantha L
Luxon, James L
Lynn, Erica Y
MacIntyre, Patricia Colombo
MacKnight, Charliza Javier
Maher, Dora
Mandock, Sheila Marie
Mann, Judy
Marticorena, Wendy Jee
Martinez, Mariana

Mathy, Sarah C
McKee, Natalie
McRae, Rebecca L
Meier, Jessica A
Mejorado, Patricia Hurtado
Mellos, Leslie
Mendoza, Laura Alvarez
Merchant, Emily N
Miller, Kelly Elizabeth
Mochkatel, Lindsay A
Moeller, Amy D
Molinaro, Anthony P
Montano, Norma A
Moore, Melissa R
Moravec, Jason C
Mulvaney, Matthew Stephen
Munoz, Yvonne
Munro, Stanley Jeffery
Munson, Kelly Mary
Murad, Abigail D
Murray, Laurisa Karleen
Nava, Betty Joann
Navarro, Gabriela R
Negrete, Isabel Rosario
Neil, Willie Lateef
Nelson, Matthew A
Nguyen, Minh Tam Thi
Nielsen, Kelly Marie
Norausky, Ashley Paiko
Nordlow, Erin Quinn
Nouvong, Trina Oribelle
O'Brien, Tracy Miriam
O'Donovan, Jacqueline Marie
Oestreich, Jennifer M
O'Hara, Jodi J
Okin, Jacqueline J
Olegario, Vang Xoua
Olson, Anne M
Oluwa, Skye C
Orman, Tarynn
Ortega, Ruben
Pampo, Michelle Francisco
Panerio, Camille Montalbano
Parkinson, Dione L
Pascoe, Susan G
Patolai, Hagit
Perkins, Amy Marie
Petrov, Leticia

Stoever, Matthew
Strahan, Danielle E
Sullivan, Sarah O
Summers, Teresa E
Thomas, Colette M
Thomas, Jessica A
Tidwell, Alma Rosa
Tiong, Imelda
Topliff, Kelli
Torres, Esperanza
Torres, Maria
Tran, Quynh Mai
Treamer, Celia Marie
Trench, Kimberly Anne
Trettevik, Kristen L
Trocha, Shannon Korby
Umada, Barbara
Usborne, Scott D
Valdos, Erika
Valenzuela, Bertha C
Valot, Brooke Ashley
Van Beck, Debra Ann
Vattuone, Vita Maria
Veysey, Cherilyn Avedian
Virtue, Francisca M
Voet, Allison Elizabeth
Wagner, Doreen Lascola
Wagner, Katherine Lynn
Welborn, Nicole E
Welch, Jessica Anne
Wiesner, Andrea M
Williams, Laura J
Wingler, Laura Rachel
Wolfe, Penelope
Wright, Erika Michelle
Wright, Fiona A
Wright, Marie N
Yepiz, Michelle L
Yin, Nina
Young, Jaime H.
Young, Lisa
Zaragoza, Cynthia E
Zdunich, Danielle L
Zeichner, Lori
Zizzo, Josephine G
Zuill, Paula R

Pettinelli, Gina A
Polen, Heather Joanne
Pulverenti, Brad M
Quartuccio, Kristina Elaine
Quezada, German
Randall, Lauren A
Reichel, Carla Elizabeth
Reilly, Alita
Renner, Michael E
Richardson-Davidson, Mary
Rick, Nicole Marie
Roashan, Mariam
Robinson, Alys Jasmine
Robinson, Amanda Keate
Rodriguez, Zuleika
Romero, Brianna M
Romero, Neysa Y
Rose, Erica L
Rosinski, Teri Lynn
Ross, John Mark
Rotkosky, Nicole
Roy, Melissa D
Russell, Jeffrey Lee
Ryan, Jillian Whitney Bosman
Rye, Amie E
Saatkamp, Jessica Lenee
Sanchez, Angelica
Sanchez, Claudia E
Schamp, Dennis W
Shay, Karen D
Shear, Laura Lynn
Shepard, Deborah Elaine
Shire, Shannon Grable
Shoucair, Michelle M
Shults, Kimberlee J
Silva, Susan
Sinclair, Rebecca Ann
Small, Janell H
Smith, Elizabeth M
Soto, Rosa M
Spiegel, Robyn Starr
Stabile, Michelle L
Stacy, Melanie Kristen
Standley, Mayra Alejandra
Staninger, Kimberly
Steffan, Janna M
Steiner, Stephanie H
Stevens, Yumiko E

11

APPENDIX B

Aguilar, Marisela

Andrews, Sophie

Carrillo, Georgette Cristina

Folkman, Jason A

Gomez, Guillermo Antonio

Gomez, Roberto

Goss, Candice Paulette

Hallaran, Nicole D

Hopkins, Sara Kathleen

Kelly, Shannon M

Lugo, Kymberly

Mead, Kathryn M

Melling, Brooke Ann

Moos, Lynn Anne

Perez, Paula

Romo, Kathia M

Shea, Kerry F

Silva, Shelby

Webb, Ryan S

Wilson, Allison Rachel

12

APPENDIX C

Allen, Janette M

Anstead, Lisa Erin

Baker, Steve S

Best, Julie D

Bradshaw, Kelsey Joan

Dier, Christopher

Dohoney, Jennie Lee Labor

Ericson, Amy Elizabeth

Faddis, Desiree

Ford, Deborah B

Guterman, Sara Beth

Hassan, Joann

Hornbrook, Patrick G

Lawrence, Katee M

Lee, Stacy Hong

Lowe, Sally Mao

Nielsen, Eric B

Nunez, Carmen

Partridge, Tracey J

Profit, Toya Milawnn

Sanchez, Michelle Estella

Schliem, Alison Louise

Sparta, Christopher E

Taguiam, Ann Marie

Zafuto, Andrew C

13

