BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
PATTERSON JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STANISLAUS COUNTY
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation/Non-
Reemployment of Certificated Employees of
the Patterson Joint Unified School District:

OAH No. 2011030267

SHIVAUGN ALVES
MARLENE AVILA
DONNA CLARKE
KIM ERVIN
KAREN FAUSS
MICHELLE HAMILTON
TIFFANY HOOD
JAYNE LOBAO
KELLENE MADRUGA
TARAH McCOMAK
JEREMY ROSS
MARIANNE THOMPSON
APRIL WEAVER,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Catherine B. Frink, Office of Administrative

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter in Patterson, California, on
April 13, 2011.

Chesley D. Quaide, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud &

Romo, represented the Patterson Joint Unified School District (District).

Ernest H. Tuttle IV, Attorney at Law, represented all of the respondents.

Oral and documentary evidence was presented and the parties offered oral

closing arguments. The record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision
on April 13, 2011.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Esther Corral-Carlson, Ed.D., is the District Superintendent. Philip

Alfano is the Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources. Their actions, and those
of the District’s Governing Board (Board), were taken solely in their official
capacities.

2.

Respondents Shivaugn Alves, Marlene Avila, Donna Clarke, Kim

Ervin, Karen Fauss, Michelle Hamilton, Tiffany Hood, Jayne Lobao, Kellene
Madruga, Tarah McComak, Jeremy Ross, Marianne Thompson, and April Weaver are
all certificated employees of the District.

3.

The District serves approximately 5,500 students in kindergarten
through twelfth grade. The District has nine school sites and approximately 267
certificated employees.

4.

5.

The District is facing a budget shortfall for the 2011-2012 school year,

and needs to reduce services to remain solvent.

On March 10, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 030711(a),

entitled “Resolution of the Governing Board of the Patterson Joint Unified School
District Regarding the Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of Services
(Certificated Layoff)” (Layoff Resolution) reducing or eliminating particular kinds of
services (PKS) affecting 21.6 full-time equivalent certificated positions (FTE).

6.

The Layoff Resolution was based on the Superintendent’s
recommendation that it was necessary to reduce or discontinue PKS no later than the
beginning of the 2011-2012 school year. In making her recommendation, the
Superintendent took into account all positively assured attrition (i.e., resignations or
retirements, and additional attrition which may occur before the start of the 2011-
2012 school year) which was known to the District as of the date of adoption of the
Layoff Resolution. According to Mr. Alfano, there were no anticipated resignations
or retirements to be taken into account as of the date of hearing.

7.

The Layoff Resolution states that the Board determined that it was

necessary to reduce the following PKS of the District no later than the close of the
current school year:

Services

Home Economics
English
Science
Art
Social Studies

Number of FTE Positions

.60 FTE
2.00 FTE
2.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
2.00 FTE

2

Counselor
Assistant Principal
Elementary Teachers

TOTAL

1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
12.00 FTE

21.60 FTE

8.

As a result of the above PKS reductions and/or eliminations, the Board

determined that it was necessary to decrease 21.60 FTE positions for certificated
employees in the District no later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year, in
accordance with Education Code section 44955.1

9.

The Layoff Resolution directed the Superintendent or her designee to

send appropriate notices to all employees whose services would be terminated by
virtue of the Board’s action.

10.

Before March 15, 2011, the Superintendent caused a letter entitled
“Notice of Recommendation That Your Services Will Not Be Required For The
Ensuing School Year (2011-2012)” (Preliminary Notice) to be served in person or by
certified mail on each of the employees affected by the PKS reductions and/or
eliminations set forth in the Layoff Resolution. The Preliminary Notice advised that
the Superintendent had recommended to the Board that the recipient be given
preliminary written notice that his/her services would be terminated at the close of the
current school year due to reductions in PKS. The Preliminary Notice set forth the
reasons for the recommendation and attached a copy of the Layoff Resolution.

11.

Respondents timely filed a Request for Hearing to determine whether

there was cause for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

12.

13.

Respondents are all permanent certificated employees of the District.

On March 24, 2011, the Superintendent signed the Accusation, and

caused it to be served on respondents. Respondents timely filed Notices of Defense.

14.

At or before the commencement of the hearing, the District rescinded
the Preliminary Notices of the following respondents, who shall be retained for the
2011-2012 school year: April Weaver, Jeremy Ross, and Jayne Lobao.

Development of the District’s Seniority List

15.

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school

district. Among the teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority
in the district gives a greater legal entitlement to a position. Seniority is defined as

1 All statutory references are to the California Education Code unless

otherwise indicated.

3

the date upon which an employee first rendered paid services in a probationary
position. (§ 44845.)

16.

Barbara McCleskey is a Human Resource Specialist with the District.
One of her job duties is to maintain the District’s seniority list for certificated staff.
Ms. McCleskey reviews employee files and makes corrections and additions to the
District’s database based on information provided by staff. Ms. McCleskey used
information derived from the database and employee files to designate employee
status (substitute, temporary, probationary, or permanent) and to determine seniority
dates. In January or early February 2011, the District emailed a copy of the
certificated seniority list to all certificated employees, so that they could verify the
information on file with the District relating to their seniority date, credentials and
coursework. The District made corrections when employees provided information
about new credentials to be posted. The certificated seniority list was further updated
on April 6, 2011.

Seniority Date Challenges

17.

Respondents Marianne (Zamzow) Thompson (7/6/07), Tiffany Hood

(7/6/07), Kellene Madruga (7/6/07), and Shivaugn Alves (7/31/07), were all
employed by the District as temporary certificated employees for the 2006-2007
school year. Ms. Thompson’s first date of service was July 31, 2006; Ms. Hood’s
first date of service was August 31, 2006; Ms. Madruga’s first date of service was
January 22, 2007; and Ms. Alves’ first date of service was July 31, 2006. All four
respondents were re-employed by the District in temporary positions for the 2007-
2008 and 2008-2009 school years. On October 6, 2008, the Board voted to change
the status of respondents from temporary to second year probationary, and credited
each of the respondents with one year of seniority, back to the dates when they began
service in their temporary contracts for the 2007-2008 school year.

18.

Respondents Thompson and Alves each testified that she met

separately with Ms. McCleskey in the summer of 2006 to sign her contract for
temporary certificated employment. Each respondent testified that Ms. McCleskey
told her that, as new people were hired, her status would be “moved up,” i.e., that she
would be moved into a vacant probationary position, if available, and new hires
would fill temporary positions.

19. Ms. McCleskey testified that she told all temporary employees that, as

new people were hired, there was a possibility that they would moved up to
probationary, but the recommendation for probationary status “was at the discretion
of the principal.” Ms. McCleskey stated that she could not “promise” to change the
status of any certificated employee, as that decision is ultimately determined by Board
vote.

4

20.

Certain certificated employees hired after August 31, 2006, including

Marlene Avila (8/9/07), were employed as probationary employees, rather than as
temporary employees, while the above respondents were re-hired as temporary
employees for the 2007-2008 school year.

21.

Respondents contended that the District’s granting of probationary
status to some employees, and not respondents Thompson, Hood, Madruga, and
Alves, was arbitrary. They further argued that the District reneged on a commitment
made to respondents Thompson and Alves when they were hired. These issues are
beyond the scope of this proceeding. There was no evidence or argument to suggest
that respondents Thompson, Hood, Madruga, and Alves were improperly classified as
temporary employees in the 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 school years under applicable
law. The evidence did not establish cause to change the seniority dates of
respondents Thompson, Hood, Madruga, and Alves.

Skipping and Bumping

22.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides that no senior employee may

be terminated while any less senior employee is retained to render a service which the
more senior permanent employee is “certificated and competent” to render. Section
44955, subdivision (c), provides that the governing board shall make assignments and
reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service
which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. “It [is] the district’s
obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to determine whether any permanent
employee whose employment is to be terminated in an economic layoff possess[es]
the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be assigned to another
position.” (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127,
137.) The process by which the district identifies those employees who are more
senior and who are competent to perform a particular kind of service or teach a
particular subject is known as “bumping.”

23.

The Layoff Resolution stated, in part, that “‘competency’ for the

purpose of Education Code section 44955 shall be determined upon current
possession of a preliminary or clear credential for the subject matter or grade level
and the certificated employee having taught the class to which he/she will be assigned
at the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year at least one (1) semester in the past ten
(10) years.”

24.

Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), states that, “[n]otwithstanding

subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a certificated
employee in order of seniority [if] . . . [t]he district demonstrates a specific need for
personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, . . . and that the certificated
employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course
of study . . . which others with more seniority do not possess.” This deviation from
seniority order is known as “skipping.”

5

25.

In order to deviate from seniority order and skip a junior employee, the

District must do the following:

(A) Demonstrate that it has a specific need for personnel to teach a specific

course or course of study;

(B) Establish that special training and experience are necessary to teach that

course or course of study, and state with specificity what special training and
experience are required;

(C) Show that no senior certificated employee has the necessary special

training and experience; and

(D) Show that a less senior certificated employee does have the necessary

special training and experience.

Implementation of Layoff

26.

District staff used the certificated seniority list in identifying employees
affected by the PKS reductions. District staff identified the individuals serving in the
positions affected by the PKS reductions. District staff then identified the least senior
persons occupying the positions affected by the PKS reductions.

27. When the least senior persons occupying the positions affected by the
PKS reductions were identified, District staff looked at each individual’s credentials
to determine whether he or she could displace any less senior certificated employees.

28.

Before March 15, 2011, District staff served the Preliminary Notice

identified in Finding 10, on the most junior employees affected by the PKS reduction,
as set forth in further detail below.

Reduction of 12.00 FTE Elementary Teachers

29.

The following respondents holding Multiple Subject (MS) credentials
were affected by the reduction of elementary teacher services:2 Michelle Hamilton
(8/1/06); Kim Ervin (8/18/06); Karen Fauss (8/21/06); Marianne Thompson (7/6/07);
Tiffany Hood (7/6/07); Kellene Madruga (7/6/07); Shivaugn Alves (7/31/07); Donna
Clarke (8/2/07); and Marlene Avila (8/9/07).

2 All respondents hold a Cross-cultural Language and Academic Development

(CLAD) certificate or English Learner (EL) authorization. None of the respondents
hold a Bilingual, Cross-cultural, Language and Academic Development (BCLAD)
certificate.

6

Skipping of Junior Bilingual Dual Immersion Language Program

Teachers

30.

The District operates a Bilingual Dual Immersion Language Program

(BDILP) at three schools: Walnut Grove School (grades K-8), Grayson Charter
(grades K-5), and Creekside Middle School (grades 6-8). The goal of the program is
for students to be bilingual and biliterate (speaking, reading, and writing) in both
English and Spanish. Students in a particular grade rotate between two teachers, one
of whom teaches primarily in English, and one primarily in Spanish. The BDILP
teachers are required to hold a BCLAD credential. The teaching assignment
(primarily English or primarily Spanish) may vary from year to year, depending on
the needs of the District.

31.

Respondents contend that they all teach EL students in their classes,
and that they have the special training and experience to teach at least the English
portion of the BDILP. This contention was not persuasive. The purpose of EL
instruction is to use various strategies so that students who do not speak English as
their primary language will achieve English proficiency. The experience and training
to instruct students in both English and Spanish, to achieve proficiency in both
languages, justify the requirement that personnel have a BCLAD certificate to teach
in the BDILP. Furthermore, Mr. Alfano testified that a BCLAD certificate is required
to comply with No Child Left Behind (NCLB).

32.

Applying the skipping analysis in Finding 25, the District demonstrated

the need for personnel to teach in the BDILP; the special training and experience
needed to teach in the BDILP includes possession of a BCLAD certificate; none of
the respondents possess the necessary special training and experience, i.e., the
required BCLAD certificate; and the junior teachers identified by the District do
possess the necessary special training and experience to teach in the BDILP.

Skipping of EL Coach

33.

Certificated employee Toney Henry (7/7/08) holds an MS credential
with CLAD certificate, plus a Level I Education Specialist Instruction Credential.
Ms. Henry occupies the 1.0 FTE position of Teach on Special Assignment: English
Learner Programs (EL Coach). Ms. Henry did not receive a Preliminary Notice, and
she will be retained for the 2011-2012 school year.

34.

The EL Coach is a categorically funded position. The EL Coach is not

a classroom teacher. The duties of the position include data analysis, staff
development, and modeling instruction for teachers. The EL Coach works with EL
students at school sites, and monitors processes for categorical compliance. The EL
Coach job description describes the following “Desirable Qualifications:”

7

Knowledge of:
 English Language Development programs
 SIOP and other EL strategies
 Norm Referenced and California Standards Tests

assessments
Instructional Materials


 Categorical Programs and Projects
 Computer Technology and Programs
 Bilingual/Spanish

Ability to:
 Prepare and organize Title III, EIA and other related

programs;

 Collect student and staff data;
 Organize, compile and distribute pertinent

assessment data, including CELDT testing and
reclassification of students;

 Create and maintain assessment and categorical

 Assist with instructional materials for site principals

 Assist site principals in implementation of categorical

 Provide staff development for teachers of English

program reports;

and staff;

programs’ and

Learners.

Experience:
 Three years of teaching experience. A minimum of

one year experience teaching in categorical programs
such as EL, Title I, Title III

Credential:
 California teaching credential, CLAD (BCLAD

preferred)

35.

The District contended that none of the respondents possessed the skills

and ability to perform the duties of the EL Coach. However, the District failed to
establish what special training and experience were necessary to serve in the EL
Coach position. It conceded that all of the respondents met the minimum
requirements for the position: all hold valid California teaching credentials and
CLAD certificates or equivalent EL certifications, and all have the requisite three
years of teaching experience and at least one year of experience teaching in
categorical programs. The District attempted to argue that Ms. Henry was the best
qualified person for the position. However, that is not the standard articulated by

8

section 44955, subdivision (d). Applying the skipping analysis in Finding 25, the
District failed to demonstrate that it had cause to skip Ms. Henry. Michelle Hamilton
is the most senior respondent identified for layoff. She holds the appropriate
credential and certification, and has the required experience to perform the duties of
the EL Coach. Therefore, the District shall rescind the Preliminary Notice issued to
Ms. Hamilton and dismiss the Accusation as to her. Ms. Hamilton shall be retained
for the 2011-2012 school year.

Reduction of 2.00 FTE Social Studies

36.

Respondent Tarah McComak (9/13/10) holds a single subject social

science credential. She received a Preliminary Notice as a consequence of the
reduction of 2.00 FTE social studies as reflected in the Layoff Resolution. Ms.
McComak is the least senior certificated employee with a credential to teach social
studies. She was properly identified for layoff.

Welfare of the District and Its Students

37.

The Superintendent correctly identified the certificated employees

providing the particular kinds of services that the Board directed be reduced or
discontinued. Except as otherwise noted, no junior certificated employee is scheduled
to be retained to perform services which a more senior employee is certificated and
competent to render. The reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the
welfare of the District’s schools and pupils, within the meaning of Education Code
section 44949.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

As set forth in the Findings, all notice and jurisdictional requirements

set forth in sections 44944 and 44945 were met. The notices sent to respondents
indicated the statutory basis for the reduction of services and, therefore, were
sufficiently detailed to provide them due process. (San Jose Teachers Association v.
Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing
Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The description of services to be reduced, both
in the Layoff Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe particular kinds of
services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838. See, also, Degener v.
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)

2.

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another
manner. (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California
Teachers Association v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132
Cal.App.3d 32.) A school board may reduce services within the meaning of the
statute either by determining that a certain type of service shall not be performed at all

9

or by reducing the number of district employees who perform such services.
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167.)

3.

The services identified in Resolution No. 030711(a) are particular kinds

of services that may be reduced or discontinued under sections 44949 and 44955.
The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither
arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the
reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s
schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

4.

As set forth in Findings 17 through 21, respondents did not establish

cause to change the seniority dates of respondents Marianne Thompson, Tiffany
Hood, Kellene Madruga, and Shivaugn Alves.

As set forth in Findings 30 through 32, the District properly skipped

junior employees serving in the BDILP.

As set forth in Findings 33 through 35, the District did not establish

cause to skip employee Toney Henry. Therefore, the District shall rescind the
Preliminary Notice and dismiss the Accusation as to Michelle Hamilton, the most
senior respondent identified for layoff by the District.

5.

6.

7.

With regard to the remaining respondents, as set forth in the Findings

and Legal Conclusions, the District has established that no employees junior to
respondents are being retained to perform the services which respondents are
certificated and competent to render.

RECOMMENDATION

1.

The Accusation is dismissed as to respondent Michelle Hamilton. The
District shall rescind the Preliminary Notice issued to Ms. Hamilton, and she shall be
retained for the 2011-2012 school year.

2.

The District may give notice to the remaining respondents in inverse

order of seniority that it will not require their services for the 2011-2012 school year.

Dated: April 21, 2011

____________________________
CATHERINE B. FRINK
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

