BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
BELLFLOWER UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTIFICATED TEACHERS OF THE
BELLFLOWER UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT

Respondents.

OAH No. 2011020903

CORRECTED PROPOSED DECISION

Jennifer M. Russell, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Bellflower, California on April 27,
2011.

A correction to Factual Finding 16 alone was required, and no other corrections

Eric Bathen, Attorney at Law, represented Bellflower Unified School District

occurred.

(District).

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Kristy Bailey, Carrie

Binder, Rachelle Carman, Sylvia Chandler, Ryan Cherney, Angelica Contreras, Deborah
Contreras, Keribeth Dethlefsen, Lane Fleshman, John Kevin Gaffnay, Kevin Greiving,
Stacy Johnson, Erin Kelly, Debra King, Monique Kroese, Kiyomi Kwak, Jeremy Lugbill,
Karen Meisner, Amber Musick, Maie Rozales-Breig, and Daniel Shaheen, all of whom
were present at the hearing.

Respondents Kristina Nemec, Michael Magnera, Alice Jones and Tara Hefferly

did not appear.

Evidence was received by stipulation, testimony, and documents. The record was

closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 27, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Rick Kemppainen is the District’s Superintendent. Lisa Azevedo is the

District’s Assistant Superintendent for Instructional Personnel and Programs. Their
actions were taken in their official capacity. Mr. Kemppainen made and filed the
Accusations.

2.

Respondents in this proceeding are certificated employees of the District.

1

3.

Between March 11 and March 29, 2011, the District provided written

notice to respondents pursuant to Education Code1 sections 44949 and 44955 that their
services would not be required for the 2011-2012 school year.

4.

On March 22, 2011, the District filed and thereafter served the

Accusations and related documents on respondents. Each respondent appearing in this
matter filed a timely Notice of Defense requesting a hearing for a determination of
whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year. All
prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

5.

On March 10, 2011, the Board of Education (Board) of the District

adopted Resolution of the Board of Education’s Intention to Reduce and/or Discontinue
Particular Kinds of Service, which provides for the elimination of “eighteen (18) single
subject FTE reduction due to increased class size in grades 9-12, one (1) physical and
health impairment FTE due to a reduction in student enrollment, three (3) mild moderate
FTE due to a reduction in student enrollment, two (2) moderate severe FTE2 due to a
reduction in student enrollment, two (2) multiple subject FTE due to elimination of the
First 5 program, three (3) designated subjects FTE due to the elimination of adult school
programs, for a total of twenty (29) FTE reductions of particular kinds of services in
grades pre-K-Adult School”

6.

On March 10, 2011, the Board of the District adopted Resolution of the
Board of Education to Determine the Order of Termination of Certificated Personnel,
which establishes tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated
employees with the same date of first rendered paid service to the district as follows:

1.

Special Credentials

Special Education (10 points)

A.

B.

School Psychologist, Speech and Language Therapist, School
Counselor, and School Nurse (10 points)

Credentials Authorizing Service for Mathematics (10 points) or Science
(10 points)

Professional Preparation, i.e., advanced degree (Master’s or Doctorate) (4
points for each advanced degree)

All statutory citations are to the Education Code, unless indicated

otherwise.

Ms. Azevedo testified that “mild/moderate” refers to resource specialist

class and “moderate severe” refers to class for students with special needs.

2

2.

3.

1

2

4.

5.

6.

After applying No.1 through No. 3 above, and ties remain the same, the
following tie-breaking criterion shall be used: One (1) point for every
accredited college/university semester unit (recognized by BUSD) earned
after Bachelor’s degree.

If the tie remains the same after applying No. 1 through No. 4 above, the
following tie-breaking criterion shall be used: One (1) point for each
college/university semester unit (recognized by BUSD) earned after
Bachelor’s degree in academic core subject areas.

If the tie continues after applying No. 1 through No. 5 above, the
following tie-breaking criterion shall be used: Total years of teaching
experience K-12.

7.

The services set forth in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.

8.

The Board took action to reduce the services set forth in Factual Finding 5
because of uncertainty surrounding future State funding. The decision to reduce services
was not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals whose services are
proposed to be reduced or eliminated. The decision to eliminate the particular kinds of
services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s
discretion.

9.

Ms. Azevedo was responsible for implementation of the technical aspects
of Board’s Resolutions. She reviewed information in multiple personnel files as well as
data from the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing to compile a tentative
seniority list containing seniority dates, current assignments, and credentials and
certifications. She distributed the list to certificated employees within the District for
them to verify, update or correct pertinent information.

10.

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and

“bumping” list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services
being reduced. The District then determined whether more senior employees affected by
the layoffs held credentials in another area and were entitled to “bump” other less senior
employees. In determining who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the
District counted the number of reductions not covered by the known vacancies, and
determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority. The District then
checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they could “bump” other
employees.

11.

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations,

retirements and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of layoff notices to
be delivered to employees by March 15, 2011.

3

12.

The District rescinded the layoff notices to Betsy Kim, Eon McKinskey,

Daniel Droessler and Toan Vo.

13.

Debra King, whose undisputed seniority date is September 14, 1992, holds

a public affairs credential and children center permit. She previously taught in the
District’s adult program. She currently teaches in the District’s child development center.
She contends that she should be re-assigned to teach in the adult program, or
alternatively, her children center permit should allow her to “bump” into a Head Start
teaching position. It was established at hearing that Ms. King’s children center permit
does not authorize her to teach adult education and that Head Start is a permit position
allowing for no “bumping” rights. Consequently, Ms. King’s contentions are meritless.
The District correctly identified Ms. King as an employee subject to layoff.

14.

Carrie Binder’s undisputed seniority date is August 31, 2007. At hearing,

Ms. Binder challenged Daniel Fong’s relative seniority above her contending that his
August 31, 2001 seniority date was not correct. The District offered credible
documentary evidence rebutting Ms. Binder’s contention. The District correctly
identified Ms. Binder as an employee subject to layoff.

15.

August 28, 2009 is the undisputed seniority date for both Stacy Johnson

and Rachelle Carman. Both Ms. Johnson and Ms. Carmen challenged their relative
seniority on the seniority list contending that unidentified colleagues told them that
Darrel Turner, with a September 2, 2005 seniority date, and Gregory Huysman, with a
September 3, 2006 seniority date, both took leaves of absence and then returned to the
District. Neither Ms. Johnson nor Ms. Carmen offered any credible evidence to
corroborate their hearsay testimony. Their challenge to their relative seniority on the
seniority list is rejected. The District correctly identified Ms. Johnson and Ms. Carman
as employees subject to layoff.

16.

Lane Fleshman’s undisputed seniority date is September 3, 2000. The
position in which Ms. Fleshman currently teaches—physical and health impaired—is
subject to elimination pursuant to the Resolution as set forth in Factual Finding 5. At
hearing, Ms. Fleshman expressed concern about the District’s future ability to meet the
needs of physically impaired students as mandated by law. In determining whether the
decision of a school board is reasonable as distinguished from fraudulent, arbitrary, or
capricious, its action is measured by the standard set by reason and reasonable people,
bearing in mind that such a standard may permit a difference of opinion on the same
subject. (Campbell v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.) Reasonable minds can
differ regarding the rationale to eliminate a particular kind of service and the need for
“flexibility” under uncertain financial circumstances when “determining staffing for the
ensuing school year.” No evidence that the Board acted in an arbitrary and capricious
manner was presented. In the absence of such evidence, the Board’s determination
should not be disturbed. (Ibid.)

4

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Section 44949 provides in pertinent part as follows:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the
governing board that his or her services will not be required for the
ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section 44955, the governing
board and the employee shall be given written notice by the
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the
reasons therefore.

[¶] . . . [¶]

2.

Section 44955 provides in pertinent part as follows:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for
causes other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and
Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, and no probationary employee shall
be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as specified in
Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive.

(b) Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all of the
schools district for the first six months in which school is in session shall
have declined . . . , whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced
or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year, .
. . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall
have become necessary by reason of any of these conditions to decrease
the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board
may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of
the certificated employees of
the district, permanent as well as
the close of the school year. Except as otherwise
probationary, at
provided by statute,
the services of no permanent employee may be
terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render
a service which said permanent employee is certified and competent to
render.

[¶] . . . [¶]

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on
the same date,
the governing board shall determine the order of
termination solely on the basis on needs of the district and the students
thereof. Upon the request of any employee whose order of termination is
so determined, the governing board shall furnish . . . a statement of the
specific criteria used in determining the order of termination and the

5

application of the criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group . . . .

(c) . . . [S]ervices of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of
the order in which they were employed, as determined by the board in
accordance with Sections 44844 and 44845. In the event that a permanent
or probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing
as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed
for the ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a
manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which their
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. . . .

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the
following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrated a specific need for personnel to teach a
specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee
has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or
course of study or to provide those services, which others with more
seniority do not possess.

3.
44955 were met.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and

4.

The services set fort in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955. The
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and
pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

5.

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section

44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students
shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce service’ by
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees
are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

6.

Cause exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44945 to reduce the number

of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or discontinuation of the
particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 5. The District properly identified
the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board
directed be reduced or discontinued.

6

7.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

ORDER

The Bellflower Unified School District may give notice to respondents Kristy

Bailey, Carrie Binder, Rachelle Carman, Sylvia Chandler, Ryan Cherney, Angelica
Contreras, Deborah Contreras, Keribeth Dethlefsen, Lane Fleshman, Tara Hefferly, Alice
Jones, John Kevin Gaffnay, Kevin Greiving, Stacy Johnson, Erin Kelly, Debra King,
Monique Kroese, Kiyomi Kwak, Jeremy Lugbill, Michael Magnera, Karen Meisner,
Amber Musick, Kristina Nemec, Maie Rozales-Breig, and Daniel Shaheen that their
services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year.

Dated (Original): May 4, 2011

Dated (Corrected): May 5, 2011

__________________________
JENNIFER M. RUSSELL
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

