BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION
OF THE
RIM OF THE WORLD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH No. 2011031302

Respondents listed in Appendix A.

PROPOSED DECISION

Donald P. Cole, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State

of California, heard this matter in Blue Jay, California on April 25, 2011.

Todd M. Robbins, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, APLC, Attorneys at

Law, represented the Rim of the World Unified School District.

Michael D. Hersh, Attorney at Law, California Teachers Association, represented the

respondents listed in Appendix A.

The matter was submitted on April 25, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Donna Kellogg, Director, Personnel, Rim of the World Unified School

District, made and filed the accusation dated March 11, 2011, in her official capacity as the
designee of Ronald Peavy, District Superintendent.

2.

Respondents1 are certificated District employees.

1

The District initially identified 14 certificated employees as respondents designated

for lay off, and three other individuals who were designated to receive “precautionary” layoff
notices. Six of the 14 individuals designated for lay off (Kristil Baker, Shawna Gray, Lynn
Klopfer, Cynthia Longworth, Jason Stehmeier, and Steven Wallace) did not request a
hearing, and one other (Alicia Wilson) was dismissed as a respondent during the course of
the hearing. By the end of the hearing the number of respondents designated for lay off had
thus been reduced to the 7 respondents identified in Appendix A. The term “respondents” as
hereafter used in this Proposed Decision refers collectively to these 7 remaining individuals.

3.

On March 3, 2011, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and

44955, the superintendent notified the Board of Education of the Rim of the World Unified
School District in writing of her recommendation to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of
services for the upcoming school year.

4.

On March 3, 2011, the board adopted Resolution No. 10/11-12, determining
that it would be necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of
the current school year. The board determined that the particular kinds of services that must
be reduced for the 2011-2012 school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE)
positions:

Particular Kind of Service

Full-Time Equivalent

Elementary Classroom Teachers
Elementary Inter-Disciplinary Subjects
High School English
High School Fine Arts
High School Math
High School Science
Elementary Administrator

6
1
2
1
1
2
1

The proposed reductions totaled 14 FTE positions.

The district later rescinded by 1.0 FTE the number of elementary classroom teachers
positions (from 6 to 5) it would have to reduce in order to meet its fiscal needs for the 2011-
2012 school year. In addition, the district did not serve a preliminary layoff notice on any
district elementary administrator, effectively rescinding the proposed 1.0 FTE reduction in
that particular kind of service. Accordingly, the revised proposed reductions totaled 12 FTE
positions.

5.

The board directed the superintendent or her designee to determine which

employees’ services would not be required for the 2011-2012 school year as a result of the
reduction of the foregoing particular kinds of services. The board further directed the
superintendent or her designee to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees of the
district who would be laid off as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services.

6.

The board further determined in Resolution No. 10/11-12 that “competency,”
as described in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for the purposes of bumping
and rehire rights, “shall necessarily include possession of a valid preliminary or clear
credential and Highly Qualified status under NCLB in the relevant subject matter area, and
an appropriate El Authorization.”

7.

On or before March 15, 2011, the district timely served on respondents a
written notice that the superintendent had recommended that their services would not be

2

required for the upcoming school year. The notice set forth the reasons for the
recommendation. The notice advised respondents of their right to a hearing, that each
respondent had to deliver a request for a hearing in writing to the person sending the notice
by the date specified in the notice, a date which in each case was more than seven days after
the notice was served, and that the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of
the right to a hearing. Along with the written notice, the district timely served on
respondents the accusation and required accompanying documents.

8.

Respondents timely filed written requests for hearing and notices of defense to

determine if there was cause for not reemploying them for the upcoming school year. All
pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

9.

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of the

district.

10.

The services the board addressed in Amended Resolution No. 10/11-1 were
“particular kinds of services” that could be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of
Education Code section 44955. The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these
particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious and constituted a proper exercise
of discretion.

11.

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the
welfare of the district and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as
determined by the board.

12.

The board considered all positively assured attrition that were known to the

board at the time the accusations were served on respondents, in determining the actual
number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.

13.

No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any

services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3

3.

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in

with any statistical computation. It is within the governing authority’s discretion to
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law. (San Jose
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) A school district has wide
discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or
so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of
law. (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d
318, 322.)

4.

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district

and establishing requirements for employment. This discretion encompasses determining the
training and experience necessary for particular positions. Similarly, school districts have
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)

5.

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the

accusation. Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the district to
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services. The cause for the reduction or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the welfare of the schools and
the pupils thereof. Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the district
due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The district
identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the board
directed be reduced or discontinued. It is recommended that the board give respondents
notice before May 15, 2011, that their services are no longer required by the district.

4

ADVISORY DETERMINATION

The following advisory determination is made:

The accusations served on respondents are sustained.2 Notice shall be given to

respondents before May 15, 2011, that their services will not be required because of the
reduction or discontinuation of particular services as indicated.

DATED: April 26, 2011

_____________________________
DONALD P. COLE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

2

Where the lay off of a respondent is less than a full-time-equivalent position, the

applicable fraction of a full-time equivalent position is indicated in parentheses opposite the
individual’s name.

5

Appendix A

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

Jack Allen

Barbara Berteaux

Tracy Cairns

Shalome Nicholas

Tracy Olsen (0.6)

Carie Renfro

Adrian Williams (0.6)

6

