BEFORE THE
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
COUNTY OF MERCED
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In The Matter of the Reduction In Force of:

OAH No. 2011030795

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL
EMPLOYED BY THE MERCED
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF
SCHOOLS,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Jonathan Lew, State of
California, Office of Administrative Hearings, on April 6, 2011, in Merced, California.

Todd A. Goluba, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of Merced County Office of

Education (MCOE).

Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of respondents Catrina Yost

and Leslie Morris. Ms. Morris also appeared personally.

Evidence and testimony were received. Submission of the matter was deferred

pending receipt of written argument. Respondents’ brief was filed on April 7, 2011, and
marked as Exhibit B for identification. MCOE’s brief was filed on April 8, 2011, and
marked as Exhibit 13 for identification. The case was submitted for decision on April 8,
2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Eva L. Chavez is the Assistant Superintendent of MCOE. She is the designee
of Merced County Superintendent of Schools, Steven E. Gomes. The actions of Ms. Chavez
in making and filing the Accusation were taken in her official capacity.

1

2.

Respondents Leslie Morris and Catrina Yost are permanent or probationary

certificated employees of MCOE. On March 14, 2011, MCOE served on each respondent a
written notice that it had been recommended that notice be given to respondents pursuant to
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would be reduced or would not
be required for the 2011-2012 school year. Each written notice set forth the reasons for the
recommendation and noted that the County Superintendent had adopted a Resolution
reducing the certificated staff by 9.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. Respondents
timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them
for the ensuing school year.

3.

On March 25, 2011, MCOE timely served Accusations with required

accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense on respondents. Respondent timely
filed Notices of Defense to the Accusation.

4.

By letter dated March 14, 2011, MCOE Assistant Superintendent Eva L.

Chavez gave the County Superintendent notice of her recommendations that ten certificated
employees be given notice that their services would be reduced or not required for the next
school year and stating the reasons for that recommendation.

5.

On March 11, 2011, the County Superintendent determined that it was

necessary to decrease programs and services and thus it was necessary to reduce teaching and
other certificated services affecting employment of 9.0 FTE positions. The County
Superintendent adopted Resolution No. 2011-04 providing for the reduction or elimination of
the following particular kinds of services (PKS):

Services

Equivalent Positions

Independent Study Teacher
Deaf and Hard of Hearing Teacher
CTE Office Tech in Med. Environ./

Marketing Instructor

CTE Office Tech/Marketing/
Customer Service Instructor

2.0 (184 days)
1.0 (184 days)

1.0 (220 days)

1.0 (220 days)

CTE Warehousing/Logistics Instructor
CTE Accounting/Comp. Office Tech Instructor
CTE Auto Mechanics Instructor
CTE Construction Trade Instructor

1.0 (220 days)
1.0 (220 days)
1.0 (184 days)
1.0 (184 days)

TOTAL

9.0 FTE

6.

MCOE provides support to Merced County’s 20 school districts, serving more
than 55,000 K-12 students of all abilities through assistance with curriculum and instruction,
career and alternative education, business services, technology, special education, and
teacher credentialing. Assistant Superintendent Eva Chavez noted that MCOE reviewed its

2

financial situation, uncertainties around the State budget and declining enrollment in
determining that it was necessary to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services.

The County Superintendent’s resolution to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of

services was made in anticipation of decreased revenues. The proposed reductions are
necessary for MCOE to remain solvent.

Competency Criteria

7.

Paragraph two of Resolution No. 2011-04 provides that for the purpose of

implementing the Resolution, a more senior employee would be “competent” for
reassignment into a position held by a more junior employee pursuant to Education Code
section 44955, subdivision (b), if the employee:

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

currently possesses clear or preliminary credential(s)
authorizing the subject(s) to be taught in an alternative
education classroom setting to which the employee will
be assigned at the beginning of the 2011-2012 school
year, and
has taught the subject area or served in a classroom
teaching position and in the alternative education
classroom setting to which he/she will be assigned at the
beginning of the 2011-2012 school year for at least one
school year in the past three school years, and
has “highly qualified” status under the No Child Left
Behind Act (NCLB) and has a single subject or
supplemental credential in the subject matter to which
he/she will be assigned in an alternative education
classroom setting at the beginning of the 2011-2012
school year, and
possesses a currently valid and properly filed CLAD,
BCLAD, SDAIE or other regular (non-emergency) EL
certificate valid for the 2011-2012 school year which
will permit the employee to provide instruction to
English Language Learners in his/her assignment for the
2011-2012 school year

Leslie Morris

8.

Respondent Leslie Morris is one of 13 independent study teachers. Her

MCOE seniority date is November 26, 2007. She and respondent Catrina Yost are the two
most junior independent study teachers. Ms. Morris holds a preliminary single subject
teaching credential in English. She completed the Verification Process Specific Setting
(VPSS), making her “highly qualified” to provide instruction in English and Social Science.
She is enrolled in a program to become VPSS certified for science as well. As an

3

independent study teacher for grades 9 – 12, Ms. Morris teaches all core subjects including
social sciences, sciences (earth, life and physical), English, mathematics and art. She is
assigned 24 students. She is also assigned to the “Success Lab,” a program where all
independent study students go to receive additional instruction in all subjects. Ms. Morris
provides daily instruction at the Success Lab, from 9:00 a.m. to noon. In providing Success
Lab assistance to students assigned to other independent study teachers, Ms. Morris and the
students’ teachers collaborate in their instruction. On average, six to eight students attend
Success Lab each day. As few as three, and as many as 15 students may appear for Success
Lab on a given day. The great majority of time spent instructing students in the independent
study program is done one on one. Occasionally, Ms. Morris will provide small group
instruction to students in Success Lab.

Students enrolled in independent study require remedial as well as grade level

instruction. Independent study teachers meet at least weekly with students. Instruction is
individualized and largely provided one on one. Instruction is not provided in a classroom
setting. Classroom lectures/presentations are rarely, if ever, offered. Students typically bring
their assignments to the independent study teacher for review during a weekly meeting.

Ms. Morris would like to bump into the Charter Home School teacher position
currently assigned to a junior teacher, Crystal Sousa. Ms. Sousa’s seniority date is August
24, 2009. Ms. Sousa holds a clear single subject teaching credential with single subject
authorizations for both social science and English. MCOE contends that Ms. Morris is
neither certificated nor competent under paragraph 2 of Resolution 2011-04 to bump into Ms.
Sousa’s Charter Home School teaching position. MCOE believes that Ms. Morris needs a
single subject authorization for social sciences to bump into Ms. Sousa’s teaching position.
It also believes that Ms. Morris failed to meet the competency (recency) requirement of
providing instruction in an alternative education classroom setting for “at least one school
year in the past three school years.” The credentialing and competency matters are
separately discussed below.

Catrina Yost

9.

Respondent Catrina Yost is also an independent study teacher. Her MCOE

seniority date is June 25, 2007. She holds a multiple subject credential. She and Ms. Morris
are the two most junior independent study teachers. Ms. Yost did not appear in these
proceedings.

MCOE’s Reason for Disallowing Reassignment

10. Ms. Chavez explained MCOE’s rationale for disallowing the bump. MCOE

started the charter school five or six years ago. It has evolved into a program that now prides
itself in offering and satisfying course requirements for admission into the University of
California (UC). Reference at hearing was made to the charter school being accredited by
UC as offering “A – G Equivalent” instruction. This is not true of MCOE’s independent
study program. There are similarities and differences in the two programs. Both programs

4

are home-based, provide education in grades 9 – 12 core subjects, and offer highly
individualized instruction. However, students enroll in the charter school program with the
expectation of receiving a college preparatory education necessary to gain admission into the
UC system. In contrast, independent study students are offered grade level instruction, but
receive largely remedial instruction. Ms. Chavez noted that there is also more group
instruction in the Charter Home School program, and more collaboration among Charter
Home School teachers than in the independent study program.

Importantly, to receive and retain A – G Equivalent accreditation, MCOE contends

that its Charter Home School teachers, considered as a whole, must hold certain credentials,
including the single subject teaching credential in social science held by Ms. Sousa. The
holder of the single subject credential in a given area becomes the program’s subject matter
expert. They are responsible for developing benchmark assessments for measuring student
progress in each particular subject. These assessments or tests must be given by MCOE to
retain accreditation by the University of California. Charter Home School teachers do teach
most, if not all subjects to their students. This is not unlike independent study teachers.
However, the Charter Home School teacher holding a particular single subject credential is
also responsible for overseeing the development of benchmark assessments, maintaining A –
G Equivalent accreditation and being available to students requiring instruction/access to
their “expertise” in that subject. In the case of Ms. Sousa, the subject is social science.

Ms. Chavez noted that as positions are filled by MCOE in the Charter Home School

program, consideration is given to the specific credentials needed to maintain A – G
Equivalent accreditation. MCOE’s intent in establishing its Charter Home School program is
to offer an alternative pathway for students to satisfy requirements for admission into the
University of California. Ms. Chavez is concerned that allowing the bump into Ms. Sousa’s
position would compromise the ability of MCOE to meet University of California
certification requirements.

Discussion

11.

Credentialing. Preliminarily, school districts have broad discretion to establish
competency standards for purposes of exercising bumping rights. (Duax v. Kern Community
College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 564.) This broad discretion is limited only by a
reasonableness standard, and so the district’s decisions must not be fraudulent, arbitrary or
capricious. Such standard permits “a difference of opinion on the same subject.” (Campbell
Elementary Teachers Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.) Competence is
therefore the threshold inquiry prior to exercising bumping rights. If a permanent certificated
teacher is certificated and competent to render a service provided by a more junior teacher,
the senior teacher is entitled to bump into the junior position. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)

12.

Paragraph two of Resolution No. 2011-04 provides that for the purpose of

implementing the Resolution, a more senior employee would be “competent” for
reassignment into a position held by a more junior employee pursuant to Education Code
section 44955, subdivision (b), if the employee “currently possesses clear or preliminary

5

credential(s) authorizing the subject(s) to be taught in an alternative education classroom
setting to which the employee will be assigned at the beginning of the 2011-2012 school
year, …”

MCOE first contends that in order for Ms. Morris to bump into Ms. Sousa’s position,

she must demonstrate that she is “certificated and competent” to perform Ms. Sousa’s full
particular assignment, and not “certificated and competent” to serve in the Home School
Charter School in general. MCOE urges consideration of how the Charter Home School
program has evolved. At one time, MCOE hired individuals with Multiple Subject
credentials to teach at the Charter Home School. It no longer does so. In recent years
MCOE received accreditation to allow students who attend that program to receive credit for
the A – G requirements necessary to gain admittance to the UC system. MCOE now
advertises this benefit and attracts students based upon this representation. MCOE fears that
by replacing Ms. Sousa, it would lose its Social Science subject matter expert and
compromise its UC accreditation. MCOE established that it now considers the credentials
held by Charter Home School program teachers as a whole, in maintaining a viable UC
accredited program.

13.

Respondents, understandably, urge only general consideration of baseline
credentials needed to teach in the Charter Home School program. Two current Charter
Home School teachers hold only multiple subject credentials. A third holds a single subject
credential in life science. A fourth holds a single subject credential in home economics.
Respondents note that if it were true that MCOE had to assign only single subject teachers
for UC accredited classes or face losing accreditation, then MCOE arguably should not be
able to offer courses outside of English, Social Studies, Science and Spanish, as there are no
employees with a single subject outside of these areas.1

14.

Respondents also believe that the holding of a single subject credential in

social science is only one of three avenues for establishing subject matter expertise for
purposes of UC accreditation. Official notice under Government Code section 11515 is
taken of UC’s “Policy on Non-Site Based Independent Study Schools” and in particular its
definition of a subject expert teacher: “A subject expert teacher is defined as an instructor
who has taught in a particular subject area for at least three years at the high school or
postsecondary level OR has a teaching credential and a bachelor’s or advanced degree in the
subject area OR has been certified as a Highly Qualified Teacher under the federal No Child
Left Behind Act.”

1 MCOE’s Charter Home School program offers the following accredited classes
outside of these single subjects: Algebra 1, Algebra 2, Geometry, Fine Art, Graphic Art, The
Art and History of Floral Design, The Art of Animation, Economics and Food Science.

6

Ms. Morris believes that she meets the first and third test because she has taught at

MCOE since the 2007-2008 school year, and has instructed high school students in
Independent Studies in Social Studies over these three years. She also contends that she is
highly qualified for purposes of No Child Left Behind (NCLB) because she was certified
through the VPSS process and should now be considered an expert in social science.

15. MCOE disputes the above, noting that Ms. Morris has taught only in an

independent study setting and has not taught for at least three years at the high school or
postsecondary level. Further, MCOE contends that the VPSS process relied upon by Ms.
Morris makes her “highly qualified” under NCLB only in the setting in which she is teaching
– Valley School Independent Study Program, and that this authorization is not transferable to
another setting such as the Charter Home School program. MCOE believes there is no
evidence that VPSS in Social Science obtained for an independent study program serving
remedial students would qualify Ms. Morris to serve as a subject matter expert in Social
Science in a Charter Home School program designed to serve four-year UC-bound students.

16. MCOE’s position regarding credentialing is both reasonable and persuasive.

Ms. Morris did not establish that she qualifies as a subject expert teacher even under the
alternative UC criteria. In this regard, she did not establish that she has “taught in a
particular subject area for at least three years at the high school or post secondary level ....”
Teaching in a “particular subject area” suggests more focused instruction in a particular
subject such as Social Sciences, and not the more general and/or remedial instruction
typically provided to independent study students. It also appears that the NCLB “highly
qualified” status contemplated by UC for a subject expert teacher may be different than the
VPSS certification received by teachers in independent study programs.

17.

Importantly, it was not unreasonable for MCOE to view the potential bump as
one embracing Ms. Sousa’s full particular teaching assignment, and not merely a bump into
the Charter Home School program. As noted in Finding 10, the single subject credential
holder becomes the Charter Home School program’s subject matter expert. They are
responsible for developing benchmark assessments for measuring student progress in each
particular subject, in this case social sciences. These assessments or tests must be given by
MCOE to retain accreditation by the University of California. The Charter Home School
teacher holding a particular single subject credential is responsible for overseeing the
development of benchmark assessments, maintaining A – G Equivalent accreditation and
being available to students requiring instruction/access to their “expertise” in that subject.
Ms. Morris does not appear to qualify under alternative UC criteria to be a subject expert
teacher in social science. She does not hold a single subject credential in social science. She
has not demonstrated that she is certificated to render the services currently assigned to, and
provided by Ms. Sousa. She cannot perform the full particular teaching assignment for
which Ms. Sousa is responsible.

7

18.

Competency. Respondent’s also challenge the competency standard under
Resolution No. 2011-04 that a teacher have taught in the alternative education classroom
setting to which she will be assigned “for at least one school year in the past three school
years.”2 It is not necessary to consider respondents’ challenge to the one year of teaching in
the last three since respondents failed to demonstrate that they met threshold
certification/credential requirements for the position.

19.

Skipping Contentions. At hearing, the parties addressed the issue as one

involving bumping under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b). MCOE has argued
in the alternative that it was entitled to skip Ms. Sousa under Education Code section 44955,
subdivision (d). (See also Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th
127.) MCOE contends that Ms. Sousa should be retained because it has demonstrated a
“need for her to teach a specific course of study” and her possession of “special training and
experience” necessary to teach the course. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d).) Given the earlier
findings relating to respondents’ certifications/credentials, it is unnecessary to address
skipping here.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

This is a single issue case – whether respondents may, pursuant to Education
Code section 44955, subdivision (b), bump into the Charter Home School position currently
assigned to Ms. Sousa. Subdivision (b) provides: “Except as otherwise provided by statute,
the services of no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this
section while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.”

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides that when certificated employees face
layoffs due to economic exigency, the school district has an affirmative obligation to reassign
senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions held by junior teachers, if the
senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to occupy such positions. The intent
of the Legislation is clearly to prevent Districts from laying off senior teachers while
retaining junior teachers. If respondents are deemed certificated and competent to serve in
that assignment, Education Code section 44955 affords them rights for consideration for
assignment as a senior employee into positions held by junior employees.

2 A definition of competency as being one year experience teaching the subject in
question within the last ten years was approved by the court in Duax v. Kern Community
College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 55, 565. In Duax, the court noted on page 567 that
since the community college district criteria “require only one year of teaching in the last ten,
not one in the last two or three, we are not persuaded that it too narrowly defines
competency.”

8

3.

The matters set forth in Findings 11 through 17 have been considered.

Respondents have not demonstrated that they meet certification requirements to bump into
the Charter Home School position currently assigned to Crystal Sousa. Given this
determination, it is unnecessary to consider respondents’ other contentions relating to the
competency standard (one year teaching experience in the past three school years), or
MCOE’s alternative contention regarding skipping.

4.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in California Education

Code sections 44949 and 44955 were met. The notices sent to respondents indicated the
statutory basis for the reduction of services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide
them due process. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa
Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The
description of services to be reduced, both in the Resolution and in the notices, adequately
describe particular kinds of services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.
See, also, Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)

5.

The services identified in Resolution No. 2011-04 are particular kinds of

services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The
Merced County Superintendent’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services
was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of his discretion.

6.

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of MCOE due to
the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. Cause for the reduction or
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of MCOE’s schools and pupils within
the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

RECOMMENDATION

1.

Notice shall be given to respondents Leslie Morris and Catrina Yost that their

services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year because of the reduction or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services.

DATED: April 12, 2011

___________________________
JONATHAN LEW
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

9

