BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
SOUTHERN KERN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF KERN

In the Matter of the Accusations Against:

OAH NO. 2011040162

Pamella Anderson, Maryanna Baldridge,
Dorothy Bones, Rebecca Chitwood, Christine
Dorman, Denise Dudley, Carol Edgeworth,
Theresa Gutierrez, Susan Hemmis, Kristina
Hillman, Michelle Hubkey, Terry Johnson,
Catherine Jones, Wayne Karr, George Kelly,
Debroah Keys, Tracy Lethgo, Stanley Lyons,
Julie Mozee, Mishell Prothro, Tara Schank,
Kimberly Schmidt, Deanna Swetland, Valerie
Truehill, Geoffrey Webberly, and Michael
Williams,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Humberto Flores, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings,

State of California, heard this matter on May 20, 2011, in Rosamond, California.

Peter Carton, Attorney at Law, represented the Southern Kern Unified School

District. Lucas Oppenheim, Attorney at Law, represented Respondents.

The hearing in this matter was initially scheduled for April 25, 2011. On April 11,

2011, Presiding Administrative law Judge Michael Scarlett granted a continuance to May 5,
2011. The matter was subsequently continued a second time to May 20, 2011. Evidence
was received and testimony was given at the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
parties agreed to extend submission of this matter to May 31, 2011, to give the parties an
opportunity to submit post hearing briefs and argument. The parties submitted their written
briefs and arguments on May 31, 2011. Respondents’ post hearing brief was marked as
exhibit S. The District’s post hearing brief was marked exhibit 14.

During a telephone conference call on June 6, 2011, Mr. Carton and Mr. Oppenheim

agreed to extend the due date of the proposed decision to June 13, 2011, and to extend the
due date for final decision by the governing board to June 21, 2011.

SUMMARY

The Governing Board (Board) of the Southern Kern Unified School District (District)

decided to reduce particular kinds of services provided by certificated personnel for the
2011-2012 school year for budgetary reasons. District staff carried out the Board’s decision
by using a selection process involving review of credentials, seniority, and bumping rights.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. Rodney J. Van Norman, Superintendent of the District, filed the Accusation in his

official capacity.

2. Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

3. On February 24, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 10-11-14, to discontinue

or reduce particular kinds of services for the 2011/2012 school-year as follows:

Administration
Counselor
Speech Pathologist
Special Education, SDC
Self-contained Classroom Instruction Grades K-6
Departmentalized Instruction, Grades 6-12:
Art
Band
Health
Industrial Arts
Mathematics
Physical Education
ROTC
Science
Social Science
Total

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
2.0 FTE
15.0 FTE

2.0 FTE
.5 FTE
.5 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
3.0 FTE
2.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0FTE
32.0 FTE

4. The Board passed Resolution 10-11-14 pursuant to Education Code section 44955

and made a determination to decrease the number of certificated employees for the ensuing
school year by a corresponding number of full-time equivalent (FTE) positions as set forth in
Factual Finding 3.

5. The Board also passed Resolution 10-11-13, which established tie-breaking

criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered
paid service on the same date. It provided that the order of termination would be based on
the needs of the District and its students in accordance with the specific criteria set forth in
the resolution.

2

6. The Board directed the Superintendent to notify the employees affected by the

Board’s resolution. On or before March 15, 2011, the Superintendent notified certificated
employees, including Respondents, in writing that it had been recommended their services
would not be required for the next school year. The mailing included the reasons for the
notification. Respondents made timely requests for hearing.

7. On April 1, 2011, Superintendent Van Norman made and filed Accusations against

each Respondent. Each Respondent filed a Notice of Defense.

8. The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority dates
(the first date of paid service in a probationary position), current assignments and locations,
advanced degrees, credentials, and authorizations. The District used the Seniority List to
develop a layoff list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services
being reduced. The seniority list (exhibit 7) specifies certain seniority dates for the
certificated employees of the District. Although the Assistant Superintendent of the District
referred to this exhibit as the seniority list during his testimony, it was clear from his
testimony that he did not prepare the document or research the underlying employee records
used to determine the seniority dates contained in this document.1 This affects the weight
given to the document.

9. The District considered positively assured attrition, including resignations and

retirements, occurring prior to sending notices of non-reemployment to the certificated
employees affected by the decision to reduce particular kinds of services. At the hearing, the
District’s counsel stated that there were six retirements or resignations effective at the end of
the current school year. As a result, the District notified Respondents Pamella Anderson
Rebecca Chitwood, Wayne Karr, Tracy Lethgo, Tara Schank, and Kimberly Schmidt that
their layoff notices had been rescinded.

10. Ms. Chitwood, whose layoff notice was rescinded, teaches in a categorically
funded program. Mr. Oppenheim argues that Ms. Chitwood should not have received a
layoff notice as part of the reduction of self-contained classroom instruction because she
doesn’t teach in a self-contained classroom. Therefore, Mr. Oppenheim argues that the
rescission of her layoff notice should not be based on a retirement or resignation and that the
District should rescind the layoff notice of another teacher. Mr. Oppenheim did not provide
statutory or case authority for his contention. The Assistant Superintendent testified that any
teacher with a multiple subject credential would be authorized to teach Ms. Chitwood’s class.
Finally, the question is moot since Ms. Chitwood’s layoff notice was rescinded. Therefore,
Mr. Oppenheim’s contention is rejected.

1 In their closing argument, Respondents objected to exhibit 7. During the hearing,
Mr. Carton moved for the admission of the “seniority list” but mistakenly referred to it as
exhibit 13. The Administrative Law Judge admitted the document. To avoid further
confusion, the undersigned hereby admits both exhibits 7 and 13.

3

11. The District did not issue a layoff notice to Ann Buxton, who has a multiple

subject credential. Ms. Buxton has less seniority than the Respondents who hold the same
credentials and there was not justification to skip her. Therefore, the layoff notice issued to
the most senior Respondent with the same credential should be rescinded. Based on the
application of the tie-break criteria, the most senior Respondent holding a multiple subject
credential is Kristina Hillman.

12. In its resolution, the Governing Board of the District reduced PE from five to two

FTEs. Respondents contend that the District does not actually intend to reduce PE.
Respondents’ contention is persuasive. The Assistant Superintendent testified that Rodney
Van Norman, the former Superintendent of the District, has a PE credential and will fill one
of the remaining PE positions. The District contends that Mr. Van Norman’s seniority date
should be September 18, 2005, based on the application of Education Code section 44956.5.
Mr. Van Norman did not testify at the hearing and there was no documentary evidence to
establish his specific employment history with the District. Therefore, the record is
insufficient to establish an exact seniority date for Mr. Van Norman. The Assistant
Superintendent also testified that the District needs at least four PE teachers in grades 7-12
and did not know why the District had not rescinded any layoff notices to insure the District
would have enough PE teachers for the 2011/2012 school year. Finally, in his closing
argument, Mr. Carton admitted that “[W]hen the dust settles at the end of the school year, the
board and the new superintendent may well have to revisit the possibility of further
restructuring PE services for the fall.”

13. The District contends through exhibit 7 that the seniority date for Respondent

Deborah Keys is August 7, 2008. However, Ms. Keys testified that she began teaching in a
probationary position on December 14, 2006, and that she was immediately reemployed and
has had no break in service since that date. Her testimony was corroborated by exhibits J and
K. However, even if Ms. Keys’ assertion regarding her seniority date is correct, the evidence
does not support a finding that her layoff notice should be rescinded because there are other
more senior teachers with the same credential who have received layoff notices.

14. With the exception of the proposed reduction in PE services, the reduction or
discontinuation of the particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 3, related to the
welfare of the District and its pupils.

15. The remaining Respondents, whose layoff notices have not been rescinded and

whose Accusations will not be dismissed, are not certificated and competent to render a
service being performed by any employee with less seniority who is being retained.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955
were met. Therefore, jurisdiction was established for this proceeding as to all Respondents.

4

2. Except as set forth in Factual Finding 12 and Legal Conclusion 5, cause was

established as required by Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to reduce the number
of certificated employees due to the reduction of particular kinds of services. The Board’s
decision to reduce the identified services of respondents was neither arbitrary nor capricious.
The decision relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and the pupils within the
meaning of Education Code section 44949.

3. Cause exists to dismiss the Accusation against Respondent Kristina Hillman based

on Factual Finding 11.

4. Cause exists to dismiss the Accusations against Respondents Pamella Anderson

Rebecca Chitwood, Wayne Karr, Tracy Lethgo, Tara Schank, and Kimberly Schmidt based
on Factual Finding 9.

5. A district may not dismiss an employee pursuant to Education Code section 44955
and yet continue the identical kind of service and position held by the terminated employee.
(Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 812.)
there is no difference in the method or manner of providing a particular service, a school
district may not justify the substitution of personnel by claiming a reduction in services.
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 843-
844.) In PKS cases, the determination of the amount by which a service is to be reduced is
ordinarily the determination of the number of positions to be eliminated. (San Jose Teachers
Assn. V. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 637.) In this case, the evidence established that
the District needs at least four PE teachers in grades 7-12 for the 2011/2012 school year. The
District’s contention that Mr. Van Norman should fill one of the PE positions is rejected
because the evidence was insufficient to establish a specific seniority date for Mr. Van
Norman. Therefore, the Accusations against Stanley Lyons and Mishell Prothro (the two PE
teachers who received layoff notices) should be dismissed.

If

6. The Administrative Law Judge has considered and rejected all other contentions

asserted by Respondents.

7. Cause exists to give notice to Respondents Maryanna Baldridge, Dorothy Bones,

Christine Dorman, Denise Dudley, Carol Edgeworth, Theresa Gutierrez, Susan Hemmis,
Michelle Hubkey, Terry Johnson, Catherine Jones, George Kelly, Debroah Keys, Julie
Mozee, Deanna Swetland, Valerie Truehill, Geoffrey Webberly, and Michael Williams, that
their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year.

1. Notice may be given to Respondents Maryanna Baldridge, Dorothy Bones,

Christine Dorman, Denise Dudley, Carol Edgeworth, Theresa Gutierrez, Susan Hemmis,
Michelle Hubkey, Terry Johnson, Catherine Jones, George Kelly, Debroah Keys, Julie
Mozee, Deanna Swetland, Valerie Truehill, Geoffrey Webberly, and Michael Williams, that
their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year.

ORDER

5

2. The Accusations against Respondents Pamella Anderson, Rebecca Chitwood,
Wayne Karr, Tracy Lethgo, Tara Schank, Kimberly Schmidt, Kristina Hillman, Stanley
Lyons, and Mishell Prothro are dismissed.

Dated: June 9, 2011

_________________________________
HUMBERTO FLORES
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

