BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION
FARMERSVILLE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of
Certificated Staff of the:

FARMERSVILLE UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT,

OAH No. 2011030466

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Jonathan Lew, State of
California, Office of Administrative Hearings, on April 7, 2011, in Farmersville, California.

Salvador O. Holguin, Jr., Attorney at Law, represented the Farmersville Unified

School District (District).

Ernest Tuttle, III, Attorney at Law, represented respondents identified in Attachment

A attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.

Evidence was received, and the record remained open for submission of written

closing argument. District’s and respondents’ opening briefs were received on April 11,
2011, and marked respectively as Exhibits 15 and H for identification. District’s reply brief
were received on April 12, 2011, and marked as Exhibits 16 for identification. Respondents
did not file a reply brief. The case was submitted for decision on April 13, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Janet Jones is the Superintendent of the District. The actions of Ms. Jones in

making and filing the Accusation were taken in her official capacity.

Ms. Jones noted that there is uncertainty over District funding for the 2011 –

2012 school year, especially if current sales tax rates are not extended. The District has
projected funding cuts from the State, leading to declines in the amount the District is
reimbursed for average daily attendance. The Superintendent has recommended that certain

1

District programs and services be reduced and/or eliminated to address the anticipated
budget deficit.

3.

The Superintendent recommended to the Board that particular kinds of

services being offered by the District be discontinued or reduced. The Superintendent stated
the reasons for the recommendation. The Board approved the recommendations and,
following the adoption of the Resolution set forth below, directed the Superintendent or
designee to implement the recommendations. The Board also charged the Superintendent
and her staff to identify an equivalent number of certificated personnel and give those
certificated employees notice in writing of the Superintendent’s recommendation that their
services would not be required for the ensuing school year. The recommendation of
certificated personnel to be identified for layoff from employment with the District was not
related to their skills or performance as teachers.

4.

In response to the Superintendent’s recommendation above, the Board
adopted Resolution No. 18-03-08-11 on March 8, 2011. The Board resolved that the
District needs to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services as recommended by the
Superintendent and, accordingly, it was resolved that it is necessary to terminate the
employment of an equivalent number of certificated employees of the District due to the
reductions. Resolution No. 18-03-08-11 authorized the Superintendent, or designee, to take
action to reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2011-12
school year:

Particular Kind of Service (PKS)

Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)

Grade K-6 Classroom Instructional Services
Elementary P.E. Instructional Services
Junior High Opportunity Room Services
Junior High Science Services
Junior High Social Studies Services
Junior High English/Language Arts Services
Vocational Education Video/Graphic Design
High School Art Services
High School English Services
High School Investigative/Evaluative Science
High School Earth Science Services
District Psychologist/Intern

TOTAL

11.0
1.0
0.4285
1.1428
0.7143
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.2857
1.0
20.5713 FTE

The proposed reductions total 20.5713 FTE, with an equivalent number of

certificated positions.

2

5.

The services set forth in Resolution No. 18-03-08-11 are “particular kinds of

services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code
section 44955. There was no evidence that the Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue
these particular kinds of services was arbitrary or capricious. The reduction or elimination
of the particular kinds of services set forth in Resolution No. 18-03-08-11 constituted a
proper exercise of the Board’s discretion, within the meaning of Education Code section
44955.

6.

On March 10, 2011, the District personally served written preliminary notice

that advised permanent and probationary certificated employees, pursuant to Education
Code sections 44949 and 44955, that their services would not be required for the next
school year. The preliminary notices were served on 17 certificated permanent and/or
probationary employees of the District. Each written notice set forth the reasons for the
recommendation and noted that the Board had adopted Resolution No. 18-03-08-11, which
was attached to the preliminary notice. Of the 17 employees served a preliminary notice, 15
certificated employees timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is cause
for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.

7.

The Superintendent made and filed Accusations against each of the

certificated employees of the District who timely requested a hearing after receipt of the
preliminary notice or double notice. It was not disputed that the Accusations, with required
accompanying documents and blank Notices of Defense, as well as Notices of Hearing,
were timely served on the responding employees.

8.

Notices of defense were filed by, or on behalf of, 15 District employees. The

District rescinded the preliminary notice to one employee, leaving 14 respondents.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections

44949 and 44955.

District Seniority Dates and Employment Status

9.

Tenure is the relationship between a teacher and the District which gives the

teacher greater job security.

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school district. Among

the teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority in the District gives a
greater legal entitlement to a position. (See Ferner v. Harris (1975) 45 Cal.App.3d 363.)

Seniority date is defined as the date upon which and employee first rendered paid

service in a probationary position. (Ed. Code, § 44845.)

3

10.

At the time of hearing, the parties stipulated to the following regarding dates

of first paid service, in any capacity, by respondents with the District:

Respondents Mandy Ewing, Maria Gonzalez

a.
Amezcua, Jillian Hanson, Heidi Jaramillo, Katie Kirby,
Anthony Lopez, Sara Pendola, Ernesto Perez, Michelle
Plantenberg, Laurie Thomas, Denise Vasquez, and
Gerardo Vazquez were all employed or eventually
recognized as probationary teachers in the 2009 – 2010
school year. As such, they were considered
probationary employees, but because of prior
employment as temporary employees for more than 75
percent of the 2008 – 2009 school year they were
credited with one additional year of service in
accordance with Education Code section 44918.

However, respondents Heidi Jaramillo, Katie

b.
Kirby, Anthony Lopez, Michelle Plantenberg and
Denise Vasquez each first served in categorically
funded positions on August 9, 2007.

Respondents Sara Pendola and Ernesto Perez

c.
first served in categorically funded positions on August
11, 2008.

d.
Respondents Laurie Thomas and Gerardo
Vazquez first served in categorically funded positions
on August 17, 2009.

Respondents each contend that due to the categorical
funding of their positions, they should have received
probationary employment rather than temporary
employment with the dates they first served in a
categorically funded position.

The District’s records show that respondents Mandy
Ewing, Maria Gonzalez Amezcua and Jillian Hanson
only served as backfill temps prior to being employed as
probationary employees. Respondent Jillian Hanson
disputes this and contends that she should be a
categorically funded temporary employee for school
year 2008 – 2009 and testified accordingly.

4

Seniority Date Determinations

11.

The stipulation (Finding 10) was based upon a review of each respondent’s

prior employment history, determining that prior to the 2009 – 2010 school year, all
respondents had been employed by way of temporary contracts. The District reviewed each
contract to determine when each had first worked in a categorically funded position, if ever.

12.

Education Code section 44845 provides: “Every probationary or permanent

employee employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on the date
upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.” Thus, temporary
service is not generally included for purposes of computing eligibility for classification as a
permanent employee.

Education Code sections 44909 and 44918 further define circumstances of
employment under which service as a categorically funded employee or temporary
employee, for at least 75 percent of the number of days the regular schools of the district
were maintained, will be deemed service for a complete school year as a “probationary”
employee. The District applied these sections here. Since respondents were all employed
as probationary employees for the 2009 – 2010 school year, and had worked at least 75
percent of the days in the 2008 – 2009 school year as temporary employees, they were all
given one year credit back to August 11, 2008, as their District seniority date.

13.

Respondents believe that their District seniority dates must be adjusted even

further to account for earlier service in categorically funded positions. Specifically,
respondents Jaramillo, Kirby, Lopez, Plantenberg and Vasquez (Denise) each first served in
categorically funded positions on August 9, 2007.

The California Court of Appeal held that under certain circumstances, temporary

employees serving in categorically funded positions may be entitled to layoff notice if there
is a reduction of service, but the funding source or program pursuant to which they are
employed is continuing. (Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City
School District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260.) Bakersfield extended to categorical
employees the procedural formalities due permanent and probationary employees where
there was no indication that the categorical program had expired. It characterized
categorical employees in this position as “probationary” for this purpose. (Id. at p. 1287.)
Respondents also believe Bakersfield extends and allows for the counting of time spent in
categorical temporary service towards their seniority.

14.

The District believes respondents’ interpretation fails because categorical
employees in programs that expire would receive no procedural layoff rights if they can
simply be released when all categorical funds for a program are exhausted. They would
have no right to retention. Thus, the District argues that it would not make sense to count
seniority for an employee who worked five years in a categorical temporary assignment, if
that same employee could be released when all categorical funds expired. The Bakersfield

5

court expressly recognized that categorically funded employees are treated like temporary
employees in certain respects:

[T]hey may be dismissed without the formalities
required for probationary and permanent employees in
the event the program expires or is terminated, and their
service does not count toward acquiring permanent
status (unless they are reemployed the following year in
a probationary position).

(Id. at p. 1286. See also Zalac v. Governing Board (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 842-846.)

Moreover, the District noted that Bakersfield applies only to employees actually

serving in categorically funded positions. It did not hold that “backfill” temporary
employees replacing regular employees serving in categorical programs have any
procedural rights in connection with a certificated layoff. Such employees are replacing
other employees on a leave of absence and may be released at the pleasure of the governing
board as other temporary employees.

15.

Respondents rely upon a 1972 Attorney General opinion. (55 Ops.Atty.Gen.

428 (1972).) In Haase v. San Diego Community College District (1980) 113 Cal.App.3d
913, the Court of Appeal rendered its interpretation of Education Code section 13329,
predecessor to current section 44909, and the same section analyzed in the Attorney General
opinion. In Haase, the employee worked for three consecutive years as a part-time
temporary instructor at a community college, pursuant to the predecessor to section 44909.
The appellate court found that Haase was not a probationary employee. In doing so the
court explained:

This conclusion is further strengthened by the language
of the enactment giving credit toward tenure for service
under the section for “at least 75% of the number of
days in regular schools of the district by which he is
employed are maintained” where such person is later
employed as a contract employee. Language relating to
credit if one eventually becomes a contract employee is
superfluous if one has already reached that status.

16.

The District’s expressed concerns in this case were indirectly considered by

the Fifth District Court of Appeal in its Bakersfield decision. In Bakersfield, laid off
teachers who had been classified as temporary employees in their employment contracts
claimed that they were entitled to be classified as probationary employees. The district
classified one group of teachers in that case as temporary based upon the status of their
certification to teach – working under emergency teaching permits. The appellate court
determined that the district’s policy for classifying teachers as temporary employees, insofar
as it was based on the fact they held something less than a preliminary or professional

6

(clear) credential, was invalid. (Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. Bakersfield
City School District, supra, (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th at p. 1301.) Districts could classify
teachers as temporary only if, by virtue of the positions they occupied or the manner of
services performed, they fell within specific Education Code provisions that defined
temporary employees. All certificated teachers who are not so classified as temporary
employees, and who are not properly classified under the Education Code as permanent or
substitute employees, must be classified as probationary employees. (Ed. Code, § 44915.)

Thus, the Bakersfield court determined that such improperly classified certificated
teachers, and also those teachers assigned to categorically funded positions where funding
had not expired, may not be laid off without the procedural formalities due a permanent and
probationary employee. These certificated teachers must be considered as probationary
employees and accorded the rights of probationary employees as provided in the Education
Code, “including the right to accrue seniority (§ 44845) and the rights to notice and a
hearing in the event of a workforce reduction (§§ 44949, 44955).” (Bakersfield Elementary
Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City School District, supra, (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th at
p. 1301.)

17.

The Bakersfield City School District in Bakersfield was troubled that such
interpretation of the Education Code permitted certificated employees having less than a
regular credential to be classified as probationary employees, “and so to acquire seniority.”
It contended that this would defeat the Education Code’s preference for fully credentialed
teachers and “envision the possibility an emergency-permitted teacher may have more
seniority than one with a regular credential.” (Id. at p. 1300.) The appellate court addressed
this argument as follows:

Section 44845 states: “Every probationary or
permanent employee … shall be deemed to have been
employed on the date upon which he [or she] first
rendered paid service in a probationary position.” (See
San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen, supra, 144
Cal.App.3d at pp. 640-641, 192 Cal.Rptr. 710 [statute
applies to probationary service in children’s center, i.e.,
in any position requiring certification qualifications, as
well as to service in regular program.].) If the
Legislature had intended that only probationary and
permanent employees with a preliminary or clear
credential shall acquire seniority, it would not have
been difficult to say so. … But once having determined
that certificated employees with less than a regular
credential must in certain circumstances be classified a
probationary, we cannot then overlook the clear
directive in section 44845 that, as probationary
employees, they are entitled to accrue seniority.

7

[Emphasis in original.]

18.

This approach was also followed by the First District Court of Appeal when

considering similar arguments and concerns raised by the Vallejo City Unified School
District that it would be required to retain or reappoint provisionally credentialed teachers
ahead of fully credentialed teachers who have less seniority if the district were required to
base seniority solely on “the date upon which [a probationary or permanent employee] first
rendered paid service in a probationary position.” (California Teachers Association v.
Vallejo City Unified School District (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135, 156.)

The Vallejo court relied upon the reasoning set forth in Bakersfield. But it then
further explained that districts enjoyed discretion in determining which teachers are released
or rehired. For example, it noted that when multiple employees enjoy the same start date,
the district was to determine the order of termination “solely on the basis of the needs of the
district and the students thereof.” (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) When making
assignments and reassignments, the governing board was to consider teacher “seniority and
qualifications.” (Emphasis in original. California Teachers Association v. Vallejo City
Unified School District, supra, 149 Cal.App.4th at p. 156.) Importantly, the Vallejo court
noted: “Another option to avoid the problem of rehiring less qualified teachers would be for
a school district to exercise its discretion to nonreelect probationary employees who lack a
full credential.” (Ibid.)1

In declining to carve out an exclusion to address seniority concerns, the Vallejo court

concluded:

Thus, school districts have tools at their disposal
enabling them to retain and rehire the most qualified
teachers, and no pressing policy reason requires us to
read an exclusion into the layoff provisions that is not
supported by statutory language.

19.

Although the District credited respondents, as former temporary employees,

with one year’s credit toward seniority after they were hired or classified as probationary
employees under Education Code sections 44909 and 44918, they were required to do more.
Bakersfield extends and allows for the counting of time spent by certain respondents in
categorical temporary service towards their district seniority.

1 The Vallejo court reasoned: “In Mendocino, supra, 92 Cal.App.4th 522, 111

Cal.Rptr2d 879, Division Five of this court considered whether a school district had
authority to nonreelect a probationary teacher who had been laid off for economic
reasons but was eligible for preferred reappointment. The court considered the
policies served by the nonreelection statute (§ 44929.21, subd. (b)) and the layoff
statutes (§§ 44949, 44955, 44957) and concluded a district’s absolute right of
nonreelection, and its purpose of ensuring children are taught by qualified educators,
prevails.” (Id. at p. 157.)

8

20.

For the above reasons, for purposes of establishing District seniority, the

following findings are made:

a.

Respondents Heidi Jaramillo, Katie Kirby, Anthony Lopez, Michelle

Plantenberg and Denise Vasquez each first served in categorically funded positions on
August 9, 2007. They are to be credited with an additional year of seniority by virtue of this
status. At hearing, the parties represented that this change will have no impact on proposed
layoffs as no less senior teachers are being retained to perform services that these
respondents are certificated and competent to perform.

b.

Respondents Sara Pendola and Ernesto Perez first served in categorical

positions on August 11, 2008. They were already credited with an additional year of service
because of prior employment as temporary employees for more than 75 percent of the 2008
– 2009 school year. The fact that their service was in a categorical position, and not
temporary, does not affect the calculation of their district seniority. Their seniority dates
should not be adjusted.

c.

Gerardo Vasquez and Laurie Thomas first served in a categorically funded

position on August 17, 2009. The district tacked on an additional year of service under
Education Code section 44918. The additional year is deemed to be probationary service
under section 44918. Their seniority dates should not be adjusted.

d.

Respondents Mandy Ewing, Maria Gonzalez Amezcua served as backfill

temps prior to being employed as probationary employees. As noted in Finding 14,
Bakersfield applies only to employees actually serving in categorically funded positions. It
did not hold that “backfill” temporary employees replacing regular employees serving in
categorical programs have any procedural rights in connection with a certificated layoff.
Such employees are replacing other employees on a leave of absence and may be released at
the pleasure of the governing board as other temporary employees.

Even if respondent Jillian Hanson was a categorically funded temporary employee

for school year 2008 – 2009, she did not hold probationary employment until the following
year. She was properly credited by the District for the one year’s service in 2008 – 2009.
Her District seniority date reflects this.

Competency Issues

21.

Respondent Bret Leal. Respondent Leal possesses a Professional Clear
Single Subject credential in Art. His District seniority date is August 11, 2000. He is
assigned to teach Art at Farmersville High School, one of the programs that is being
reduced. Mr. Leal would consent to being assigned to work in continuation or opportunity
school assignments held by junior teachers next school year. The District has determined
that he is not competent to do so.

9

As a Title 1 recipient, the District receives federal funds for all schools and must

maintain and assign highly qualified teachers into teaching assignments as defined by
federal No Child Left Behind (NCLB) requirements, particularly in core subjects. Over
time the District has required teaching staff at its continuation school to possess a credential
specific to the core assignment or to obtain state approved verification (VPSS) to meet
NCLB highly qualified requirements. Mr. Leal does not possess VPSS certification in
English, Math or Science. These are the core subjects taught by employees more junior to
Mr. Leal at the continuation school.

Mr. Leal has not demonstrated that he is competent to bump into the continuation or

opportunity school assignments held by junior teachers.

22.

Respondent Laurie Thomas. Ms. Thomas has concerns about how the

physical education services to District students will be provided next year. She is the only
female junior high school physical education teacher and contends that it would not be
appropriate for a male teacher to supervise the girls’ locker room.

The District is aware and prepared to provide student locker room supervision by

other means. Classified employees will provide supervision, and students shall receive
instruction through other credentialed and competent teachers.

Welfare of the District and Its Students

23.

The Superintendent correctly identified the certificated employees providing

the particular kinds of services that the Board directed be reduced or discontinued. No
junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services which a more
senior employee is certificated and competent to render. The reduction or discontinuation of
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils, within the meaning of
Education Code section 44949.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections
44949 and 44955. All notices and other jurisdictional requirements of sections 44949 and
44955 were met. The notices sent to respondents indicated the statutory basis for the
reduction of services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due process.
(San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara
Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The description
of services to be reduced, both in the Board Resolution and in the notices, adequately
describe particular kinds of services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.
See, also, Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)

10

2.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.) The burden is on the District to demonstrate that the reduction or elimination of
the particular kinds of services is reasonable and that the District carefully considered its
needs before laying off any certificated employee. (Campbell Elementary Teachers
Association v. Abbott, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at pp. 807-808.)

3.

The services identified in Resolution No. 18-03-08-11 are particular kinds of
services that may be reduced or discontinued under sections 44949 and 44955. Legal cause
exists to reduce or eliminate 20.5713 FTE of particular kinds of services offered by the
District as set forth in detail in the Factual Findings. The Board’s decision to reduce or
discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper
exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of services relates
solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section
44949.

4.

As set forth in Finding 20a, the seniority dates for respondents Heidi

Jaramillo, Katie Kirby, Anthony Lopez, Michelle Plantenberg and Denise Vasquez should
be adjusted. They each first served in categorically funded positions on August 9, 2007.
They are now credited with an additional year of seniority by virtue of this. (See Findings 9
through 19.) Their seniority dates must be adjusted to account for the additional year of
service deemed probationary.

The seniority dates for remaining respondents should not be adjusted. (See Finding

20b through 20d.)

5.

The District was required to exercise tie-break criteria with respect to teachers

with a District seniority date of August 11, 2008. Except for the corrections to seniority
dates per Finding 20a, application of tiebreak criteria was appropriate.

6.

Cause exists for the reduction of the particular kinds of services and for the

reduction of full-time equivalent certificated positions at the end of the 2010 – 2011 school
year pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. No employee with less
seniority than any respondent is being retained to render a service which any respondent is
certificated and competent to render.

7.

The District’s Governing Board may give remaining respondents whose

preliminary notices have not been rescinded final notice before May 15, 2011, that their
services will not be required for the ensuing school year, 2011-2012.

11

RECOMMENDATION

Cause exists for the reduction of 20.5713 full-time equivalent certificated positions

at the end of the 2010-2011 school year. After making the adjustments to seniority dates set
forth in the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions, notice shall be given to respondents
that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the ensuing school year, 2011-
2012, because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services. Notice
shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: April 19, 2011

___________________________
JONATHAN LEW
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

12

ATTACHMENT A

Final List of Respondents Following Rescission of One Notice

Daniel Benitez
1.
Mandy Ewing
2.
Maria Gonzalez Amezcua
3.
Jillian Hanson
4.
Heidi Jaramillo
5.
Katie Krby
6.
Bret Leal
7.
Anthony Lopez
8.
Sara Pendola
9.
10.
Ernesto Perez
11. Michele Plantenberg
Laurie Thomas
12.
Denise Vasquez
13.
Gerardo Vazquez
14.

13

