 
BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
HESPERIA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

OAH No. 2011031299 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Proceeding Involving: 
 
 Ryan Antle, Denise Avila, Aaron Blaker, 
Willis Booth II, Melanie Butts, Lisa Chavez, 
Lauren Cisneros, Amber Derrick, Thomas 
Dingeldein, Lori Esparza, Allison Griffin, 
Andrew Hammons, Holly Hammons, Camie 
Lindley, Christina Maples, Nina McVay, 
Stephanie Merenda, Jennifer Mestas, Marisa 
Monroe, Yadira Moreno, Sarah Murray, 
Tammy Scott, Lauren Torrez, and Jeanne 
Wells,  
 
 
 
 
 

          Respondents. 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Carlos Perez, Attorney at Law, represented all respondents appearing at the reduction 

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 

Mark W. Thompson, Attorney at Law, represented the Hesperia Unified School 

 
 
California, heard this matter in Hesperia, California, on April 13, 2011. 
 
 
District.  He was assisted by Matt Spencer, HUSD‟s Assistant Superintendent of Personnel 
Services, and Cindy Fortin, Assistant Director of Personnel Services.  
 
 
in force hearing other than Lauren Cisneros.  He was assisted by Conrad Ohlson, CTA 
Professional, and Tom Kirman, President of the Hesperia Teachers Association. 
 
 
administrative proceeding. 
 
 
 
 

Respondent Lauren Cisneros represented herself and was present throughout the 

The matter was submitted on April 13, 2011. 

 

 
 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

3. 

1. 

2. 

The Hesperia Unified School District is located in San Bernardino County‟s 

The District is governed by an elected five member Board of Education (the 

Since Proposition 13 was implemented in 1978, public schools have obtained 

 
The Hesperia Unified School District 
 
 
High Desert.  It encompasses about 240 square miles and serves approximately 21,000 
Kindergarten through 12th grade students residing within the City of Hesperia, portions of the 
City of Victorville, and unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County.  The District 
maintains 15 elementary schools, three middle schools, three comprehensive high schools, 
two alternative high schools, and an adult education program.  HUSD employs about 2,000 
persons, approximately 850 of whom provide certificated services.  About 90 percent of the 
District‟s annual budget pays the salaries and benefits of HUSD employees. 
 
 
Governing Board).  Mark A. McKinney is HUSD‟s Superintendent of Schools and Chief 
Executive Officer. 
 
The Fiscal Crisis – Economic Layoffs 
 
 
financing primarily from the State of California.  A school district cannot determine the level 
of state funding it will receive until the state budget is chaptered, an event that is supposed to 
occur each year in late June.  Before then, a school district‟s governing board must take steps 
to make certain that ends meet if the worst-case financial scenario develops.  
 
 
California‟s continuing budget problems have had a crippling impact on HUSD and 
other public school districts.  With regard to its budget for the 2011-12 school year, HUSD 
has projected a shortfall of approximately $7 million.  Declining student enrollment was not 
a factor in HUSD reaching the very difficult decision that it was necessary to reduce staffing 
to balance its budget.    
 
The District’s Response 
 
 
Superintendent McKinney recommended that HUSD‟s Governing Board approve a 
resolution reducing or eliminating 42 full time equivalent (FTE) positions, including 27 
elementary FTEs, 20 secondary FTEs, and five pupil personnel services FTEs.   
 
On March 7, 2011, the Governing Board adopted Amended Resolution No. 
 
2010/11-30, set forth hereafter as Appendix A.  The amended resolution: (1) eliminated 42 
full time equivalent (FTE) positions; (2) defined “competency” as described in Education  
 
 

In response to the anticipated budgetary shortfall and after careful study, 

 
5. 

4. 

 

 

2 
 

 

6. 

The services identified in Amended Resolution No. 2010/11-30, including 

Code section 44955(b), 44956 and 44957 for the purposes of bumping and reemployment1; 
(3) provided that the order of termination for certificated employees with the same seniority 
date would be determined “solely by the criteria set forth in the Tentative Agreement 
between the District and the Hesperia Teachers Association dated February 22, 2011 . . .”; 
and (4) authorized the District Superintendent or designee to initiate layoff procedures and to 
give notices required by the Education Code before March 15, 2011. 
 
The Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
counseling services, were particular kinds of services that could be reduced or discontinued 
under the Education Code.  The decision to reduce or discontinue those services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious, and it was a matter well within the Governing Board‟s discretion.  
No particular kinds of services were lowered to levels below levels required by state or 
federal law.  The recommendation that certain particular kinds of services be reduced or 
discontinued, and the resolution based upon that recommendation, was related solely to the 
economic crisis and HUSD‟s need to balance its budget.  
 
The Seniority List 
  
 
updated as new certificated employees are hired and as other employees resign or retire.  The 
seniority list is a spreadsheet organized from the most senior employee to the most recently 
hired employee.  The spreadsheet contains a seniority number, each employee‟s name, the 
school site where the employee provides services, the employee‟s status (permanent or 
probationary), the employee‟ seniority date (the first date of paid service in a probationary 
capacity),the employee‟s assignment, the employee‟s credentials, the employee‟s English 
Language authorization (e.g., BCLAD, CLAD, AB 2913, etc.), and bumping notes. 
  

HUSD maintains a seniority list, a constantly evolving document that is 

7. 

The resolution stated that “„competency‟ . . . shall necessarily include: (1) possession 

                                                
1  
of a valid credential and No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Highly Qualified status in the 
relevant subject matter area; (2) an appropriate English Learner (EL) authorization if 
required by the position; (3) for bumping a holder of a Single Subject credential in grades 9-
12, an equivalent Single Subject credential authorizing service in all grades 9-12; (4) for 
specialty positions requiring specific training and/or experience including but not limited to 
High School Music, AVID, and ASB, the specific training and experience necessary to fulfill 
all of the duties of the position which shall include at least one (1) year of experience in the 
position within the last five (5) years.” 
 

Prior teaching experience was not required for competency purposes in areas outside 

the specialty areas of High School Music, AVID, and ASB. 

3 
 

 

8. 

In December 2010, when it became apparent that a reduction in force might be 
 
required, HUSD circulated a preliminary seniority list to all employees with the request that 
each employee review the list and verify or update his or her seniority information; if an 
employee did not return the list with corrections, the administrative staff concluded that the 
information set forth in the seniority list was correct.  HUSD administrative staff accepted 
new credentials and updated information before the layoff notices were issued, and staff 
continues to do so.   
 
The Issuance of Layoff Notices 
 
 
began the process of identifying those certificated employees who should receive preliminary 
layoff notices as a result of the Governing Board‟s amended resolution.  Whenever an 
employee was tentatively identified to receive a preliminary layoff notice, that employee‟s 
seniority date and credentials were carefully examined to determine if that employee held the 
credentials and competency to “bump” into a position held by a more junior employee.   

Using the updated seniority list, Assistant Director Cindy Fortin and her staff 

9. 

10. 

 
For employees who first provided service on the same day, Assistant Director Fortin 

 
applied the Governing Board‟s tie-breaking resolution.  The tie-breaking criteria were 
reasonable, and their application was in the best interest of the District and the students.  
 
Before issuing preliminary layoff notices, the District considered all known positively 
 
assured attrition to determine the number of layoff notices that actually needed be served.  As 
a result of attrition occurring after the preliminary layoff notices were sent, a few more layoff 
notices were served than ultimately were necessary.  
 
 
Taking into account all known positive attrition, the District identified those 
employees who were impacted by the Governing Board‟s amended resolution.  The District 
timely served upon each of those employees a written notice advising that the Superintendent 
had recommended that the employee‟s services would not be required for the 2011-12 school 
year.  The notice and accompanying documents set forth the reason for the recommendation.  
The employees served with the preliminary notice were advised of their right to a hearing; 
the employees were warned that the failure to submit a written request for a hearing by 
March 28, 2011, would constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing.   
 
 
seventeen of these employees requested a hearing.   
 
The Administrative Hearing 
 
 
11.  On April 13, 2011, the record in the layoff proceeding was opened.  
Jurisdictional documents were introduced.  An opening statement was presented on the 
District‟s behalf.  Opening statements were not provided on behalf of any certificated 

Twenty-four certificated employees were served with the preliminary layoff notices; 

4 
 

 

employee and were waived.  Sworn testimony was taken; documentary evidence was 
received; a written stipulation was received; closing argument was given; the record was 
closed; and the matter was submitted.   
 

Amended Resolution No. 2010/11-30 directed that four full time equivalent 
counseling positions be reduced.  In determining who was the most junior employee, HUSD 
staff looked to the employees first paid date of probationary service as an HUSD employee, 
and not to the employee‟s first paid date of service in the capacity of a school counselor.   
The written stipulation provided that all jurisdictional requirements were met and contained 
agreement on many evidentiary matters.  
 
The Reduction in Force Proceeding 
 
 
in force was the result of a budgetary crisis and was initiated in good faith.  This layoff 
proceeding is unrelated to the professional fitness of any individual who was served with a 
preliminary layoff notice.  HUSD complied with all jurisdictional requirements in bringing 
this reduction in force proceeding, and the reduction in force proceeding was in the best 
interest of the District and the students thereof.   
 

12.  Assistant Superintendent Spencer established that HUSD‟s proposed reduction 

13. 

In preparing for the reduction in force hearing, the District withdrew the 

Assistant Director Fortin established that whenever a certificated employee was 
identified to receive a preliminary layoff notice as a result of the reduction or elimination of 
the particular kind of service, the seniority list was carefully reviewed to determine if that 
employee was competent to hold a position being held by a more junior employee.  HUSD 
used the seniority list and the Governing Board‟s amended resolution defining “competency” 
for “bumping” purposes.  Bumping was appropriate in all instances with the exception of 
Peter Delagardelle, who should not have displaced Ryan Antle.2 
 
 
preliminary layoff notices served upon Lisa Chavez, Aaron Blaker, Nina McVay, and Marisa 
Monroe.   The withdrawals were based upon the retirement of more senior employees whose 
positions were filled by these employees by reason of their seniority and credentials. There 
was no objection to the withdrawal of these preliminary layoff notices served upon these 
employees. 
  
The Bumping of Peter Delagardelle 
 
 
amended resolution.  Administrative staff determined that Mr. Delagardelle (seniority 
number 30) was senior to Ryan Antle (seniority number 887) and that he was competent to 
assume the physical education instructor position that Mr. Antle held.   

14.  Mr. Delagardelle‟s position as Director of Athletics was eliminated under the 

                                                
2  

This matter is discussed in Factual Finding 14. 

5 
 

 

 

Under the Governing Board‟s amended resolution, “competency” for bumping 

purposes required that Mr. Delagardelle hold “an appropriate English Learner (EL) 
authorization if required by the position.”  Mr. Delagardelle did not hold any kind of EL 
authorization.  It is likely that Mr. Delagardelle was not required to have any kind of EL 
authorization to serve as Athletic Director since he was not engaged in the delivery of 
instruction to students.  That is not the case if he delivers instructional services to just one EL 
student, however.   

 
Notice is taken that all Kindergarten through 12th grade teachers who have one or 

more EL students in one of their classes must hold EL certification, including PE teachers.   

 
In reviewing the seniority list, it is evident that every other HUSD PE teacher holds 

an EL authorization.  There is a reason for this – they deliver instruction to some EL 
students.  It is highly unlikely that if he were assigned to serve as a PE teacher, Mr. 
Delagardelle would not have to instruct at least one EL student.  Mr. Delagardelle was 
required to hold an EL authorization to be deemed “competent” for bumping purposes.   

 
The decision to bump Mr. Delagardelle into Mr. Antle‟s position was mistaken and 

likely the result of an oversight.  As a consequence of this erroneous determination, Mr. 
Delagardelle was not served with a preliminary layoff notice and, thus, he is not subject to 
this layoff proceeding.  The remedy for the erroneous determination is to rescind the 
improper bump and to rescind the preliminary layoff notice that was served on the most 
junior employee who suffered prejudice as the result of the improper bumping decision, in 
this case Ryan Antle.3   
 
Treatment of Counselors 
 
 
personnel services (PPS) credential.  Some school counselors were employed by HUSD as 
classroom teachers before they became school counselors.  The seniority date for school 
counselors is calculated from the counselor‟s first paid date of probationary service, whether 
that employment was in the capacity of a classroom teacher or as a school counselor.  Some 
counselors hold a teaching credential in addition to holding a PPS credential. 
 

15.  HUSD employs many school counselors, each of whom must hold a pupil 

Mr. Antle did not file a request for a hearing and there is no jurisdiction over him in 

                                                
3  
this proceeding; however, that has nothing to do with the administrative law judge‟s legal 
obligation to prepare a proposed decision, containing findings of fact and a determination as 
to whether the charges were sustained by the evidence.  The evidence did not support Mr. 
Antle being served with a preliminary layoff notice because no certificated employee was 
senior and competent to replace him under the statutes and the amended resolution. 

6 
 

 

Amended Resolution No. 2010/11-30 required that four FTE counseling positions be 

 
discontinued.  It is well settled that “counseling” is a particular kind of service that the 
governing board of a school district may reduce or discontinue.  District staff identified 
Patricia Chandler (seniority number 737), Lauren Cisneros (seniority number 738), Lori 
Esparza (seniority number 742), and Yadira Moreno (seniority number 744) as the most 
junior counselors.   
 

Ms. Chandler and Ms. Cisneros held the same seniority date, February 20, 2007.  Ms. 

Chandler held a single subject teaching credential which authorized her to teach physical 
education and adaptive PE.  Ms. Cisneros did not hold any credential besides the PPS 
counseling credential. 

 
By reason of Ms. Chandler‟s seniority and possession of a single subject teaching 
credential in physical education, Ms. Chandler bumped into a physical education teaching 
position that was held by Willis Booth II (seniority number 873), a probationary teacher.   
 
 
16.  Ms. Cisneros expressed concern in this proceeding that HUSD had improperly 
determined the “seniority” of counselors employed by the District.  She observed that school 
counselors are not members of the Hesperia Teachers Association, hold positions with duties 
that are quite different from their teaching counterparts, and have a different pay scale.   
 

Ms. Cisneros observed that the District provides counselors with a seniority date that 
is based on the employee‟s first paid date of probationary service in any capacity, rather than 
providing counselors with seniority date that is based on the employee‟s first paid date of 
service with the District in the capacity of a school counselor.  Under the present system, the 
services of an HUSD school counselor with less counseling service than another school 
counselor, but who has more seniority as a result of teaching experience with the District, 
will be retained over a school counselor with more counseling service.   
 

Ms. Cisneros believed that the District improperly set seniority dates for counselors 

because those seniority dates were based upon a first paid date of service with the District in 
any credentialed capacity, and she suggested that the Governing Board could remedy this 
improper and inequitable situation by using Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
(d)(1) to skip counselors with more seniority as counselors over counselors who had more 
seniority by reason of teaching experience.   

 
Ms. Cisneros offered a letter from Kim Falahee, a counselor, and a 2003 memo from 

(then) Deputy Superintendent Bill Freeman to support the merits of her position and to 
establish how counselors were previously treated.  She implied that the District changed its 
policy in determining the seniority date of counselors and in the treatment and retention of 
counselors.  Ms. Cisneros did not establish that any specific promises were made to her 
concerning her seniority date or her retention as a counselor.  No evidence supported the 
application of an estoppel doctrine. 

7 
 

 

 

17. 

Counseling is a particular kind of service under the Education Code.  The 

The term “skipping” involves a school district‟s decision to retain the services of a 

District established the seniority of HUSD certificated employees – teachers and counselors 
alike – in accordance with the provisions of Education Code section 448454, as was required.   
 
 
junior employee to provide specific services when that a junior employee has special 
qualifications, training and/or experience that is required that more a senior employee does 
not possess.  An employee has no right to skip; only a school district has the authority to skip 
a junior employee over a senior employee, and only then upon a showing of good cause. 
 
 
accordance with the Education Code.  HUSD was under no duty to skip school counselors 
with more counseling experience over counselors with less counseling experience but more 
seniority with the District.  School counselors with appropriate teaching credentials and more 
seniority with the District were properly bumped into positions that were being held by more 
junior teachers.  
 
 

18.  HUSD‟s determination of the seniority dates of school counselors was in 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Statutory Authority for Reduction in Force Proceedings  
 
 
 

Education Code section 44949 provides in part: 

1. 

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is 
given notice by the governing board that his or her 
services will not be required for the ensuing year for the 
reasons specified in Section 44955, the governing board 
and the employee shall be given written notice by the 
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . 
that it has been recommended that the notice be given to 
the employee, and stating the reasons therefor. 
 

. . . 

 
(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if 
there is cause for not reemploying him or her for the 

Education Code section 44845 provides: “Every probationary or permanent employee 

                                                
4   
employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on the date upon 
which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.” 
 

8 
 

 

ensuing year. A request for a hearing shall be in writing 
and shall be delivered to the person who sent the notice 
pursuant to subdivision (a), on or before a date specified 
in that subdivision, which shall not be less than seven 
days after the date on which the notice is served upon the 
employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on or 
before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall 
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a 
hearing . . .  
 
(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, 
the proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in 
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 
11500) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the 
Government Code and the governing board shall have all 
the power granted to an agency therein, except that all of 
the following shall apply: 
 

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of 
defense, if any, within five days after service upon him 
or her of the accusation and he or she shall be notified of 
this five-day period for filing in the accusation. 

 
(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 

of the Government Code shall be available only if 
request is made therefor within 15 days after service of 
the accusation, and the notice required by Section 11505 
of the Government Code shall so indicate. 

 
(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an 
administrative law judge who shall prepare a proposed 
decision, containing findings of fact and a determination 
as to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are 
related to the welfare of the schools and the pupils 
thereof.  The proposed decision shall be prepared for the 
governing board and shall contain a determination as to 
the sufficiency of the cause and a recommendation as to 
disposition. However, the governing board shall make 
the final determination as to the sufficiency of the cause 
and disposition.  None of the findings, recommendations, 
or determinations contained in the proposed decision 
prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding 
on the governing board.  Nonsubstantive procedural 

9 
 

 

errors committed by the school district or governing 
board of the school district shall not constitute cause for 
dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial 
errors.  Copies of the proposed decision shall be 
submitted to the governing board and to the employee on 
or before May 7 of the year in which the proceeding is 
commenced.  All expenses of the hearing, including the 
cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid by the 
governing board from the district funds . . . 

 

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient 
when it is delivered in person to the employee to whom it 
is directed, or when it is deposited in the United States 
registered mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the last 
known address of the employee. . . . 
 
(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) 
any continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of 
the Government Code, the dates prescribed in 
subdivision (c) which occur on or after the date of 
granting the continuance and the date prescribed in 
subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which occurs after the 
date of granting the continuance shall be extended for a 
period of time equal to the continuance. 

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or 
her position for causes other than those specified . . . and 
no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her 
position for cause other than as specified . . . 
 
(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be 
reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of 
the following school year . . . and when in the opinion of 
the governing board of the district it shall have become 
necessary by reason of any of these conditions to 
decrease the number of permanent employees in the 
district, the governing board may terminate the services 
of not more than a corresponding percentage of the 
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well 
as probationary, at the close of the school year. Except as 
otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 

10 
 

 

 
 
 

2. 

Education Code section 44955 provides in part: 

permanent employee may be terminated under the 
provisions of this section while any probationary 
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is 
retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render . . . 
 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to 
the district on the same date, the governing board shall 
determine the order of termination solely on the basis of 
needs of the district and the students thereof.  Upon the 
request of any employee whose order of termination is so 
determined, the governing board shall furnish in writing 
no later than five days prior to the commencement of the 
hearing held in accordance with Section 44949, a 
statement of the specific criteria used in determining the 
order of termination and the application of the criteria in 
ranking each employee relative to the other employees in 
the group.  This requirement that the governing board 
provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for 
determining the order of termination shall not be 
interpreted to give affected employees any legal right or 
interest that would not exist without such a requirement. 
 
(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given 
before the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in 
Section 44949, and services of such employees shall be 
terminated in the inverse of the order in which they were 
employed, as determined by the board in accordance 
with the provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845.  In the 
event that a permanent or probationary employee is not 
given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for 
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed 
for the ensuing school year. 
 
The governing board shall make assignments and 
reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be 
retained to render any service which their seniority and 
qualifications entitle them to render.  However, prior to 
assigning or reassigning any certificated employee to 
teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught, 
and for which he or she does not have a teaching 
credential or which is not within the employee‟s major 
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the 

11 
 

 

governing board shall require the employee to pass a 
subject matter competency test in the appropriate subject. 
 
(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district 
may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in 
order of seniority for either of the following reasons: 
 

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for 

personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or 
to provide services authorized by a services credential 
with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or 
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated 
employee has special training and experience necessary 
to teach that course or course of study or to provide those 
services, which others with more seniority do not 
possess. 
 
(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving 

compliance with constitutional requirements related to 
equal protection of the laws. 

4. 

3. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service is to be 

 
Jurisdiction 
 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements set forth in those statutes were satisfied as 
to all respondent certificated employees.   
 
The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services 
 
 
reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the board acted unfairly or 
improperly simply because it made a decision that it was empowered to make by statute.  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.)  A school board‟s decision 
to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in with any statistical 
computation.  It is within the discretion of a school board to determine the amount by which 
it will reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service as long as a district does not reduce a 
service below the level required by law.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) 
 
Competence 
 
 
The Education Code leaves to a school board‟s discretion the determination of 
whether in addition to possessing seniority an employee is also “certificated and competent” 

5. 

12 
 

 

to be employed in a vacant position.  The term “competent” relates to an individual‟s specific 
skills or qualifications including academic background, training, credentials, and experience, 
but it does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance.  (Forker v. Board of 
Trustees (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)  In addition to seniority, the only other limitation 
in placing a teacher in a vacant position is that the teacher be “certificated and competent” to 
render the service required by the vacant position.  Among employees who meet this 
threshold limitation, there is no room for comparative evaluation. (Martin v. Kentfield School 
Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299.)  An employee who holds a special credential or needed 
skill, if such credentials or competence are not shared by a more senior employee, may be 
retained even though it results in termination of a senior employee.  (Moreland Teachers 
Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.) 
 
Seniority, Bumping, and Skipping  
 
 
 
 
subdivision (b), in part, as follows:  
 

Education Code section 44955 - the economic layoff statute - provides in 

The Statutory Scheme 

6. 

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of 
no permanent employee may be terminated under the 
provisions of this section while . . . any other employee 
with less seniority, is retained to render a service which 
said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 
render.  

 

Subdivision (b) provides “bumping” rights for senior employees, and “skipping” 

authority that enables a school district to retain junior employees who are certificated and 
competent to render services which more senior employees are not.  Subdivision (d)(1) of 
section 44955 provides an exception to subdivision (b) where a district demonstrates specific 
need for personnel to teach a specific course of study and that a junior certificated employee 
has special training and experience necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated 
employee does not possess.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 
127, 134-135.)   
 
 
 
 
determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an 
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be 
assigned to another position.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra. at pp.136-137.) 
 

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to 

Bumping 

7. 

 

 

13 
 

 

Skipping 

9. 

8. 

As a result of the Governing Board‟s lawful reduction of particular kinds of 

Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 expressly allows a district to demonstrate 

 
 
its specific “needs” and there is nothing in the statute that requires that such needs be 
evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job descriptions, or program requirements. 
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra., at p. 138.) 
 
Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees 
 
 
service, cause exists under the Education Code for the District to give final notice to the 
respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment will be terminated at the 
close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed by the District for 
the 2011-2012 school year. 
 
Determination 
 
 
the evidence and were related to the welfare of the Hesperia Unified School District and its 
pupils.  Other than the issuance of the preliminary layoff notice to Ryan Antle, the District‟s 
administrative staff made necessary assignments and reassignments in such a manner that the 
most senior employees were retained to render services which their seniority and competency 
entitled them to render.  No employee with less seniority than any respondent identified 
hereafter will be retained to render a service which any respondent is certificated, competent 
and qualified to render. 

10.  All charges set forth in the Accusation were sustained by the preponderance of 

14 
 

 

RECOMMENDATION 

 

 
 
It is recommended that the Governing Board withdraw the layoff notices served upon 
respondents Lisa Chavez, Aaron Blaker, Nina McVay, Marisa Monroe, and Ryan Antle and 
that it dismiss the accusations filed against these respondents. 
     
 
It is recommended that the Governing Board issue final notices to the following 
certificated employees: Denise Avila, Willis Booth II, Melanie Butts, Lauren Cisneros, 
Amber Derrick, Thomas Dingeldein, Lori Esparza, Allison Griffin, Andrew Hammons, 
Holly Hammons, Camie Lindley, Christina Maples, Nina McVay, Stephanie Merenda, 
Jennifer Mestas, Yadira Moreno, Sarah Murray, Tammy Scott, Lauren Torrez, and  
Jeanne Wells. 
 
 
 
Dated: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

________________________________ 
JAMES AHLER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

15 
 

 

 
 
Appendix A 
 
HESPERIA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
AMENDED RESOLUTION No. 2010/11-30 
REDUCTION OR DISCONTINUANCE OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES 

WHEREAS. the State budget crisis has forced the Board of Education of the Hesperia 

Unified School District to implement cost saving measures; and 

WHEREAS, the Board has determined that it is in the best interests of the District and the welfare 
of the schools and the pupils thereof that the particular kinds of services set forth herein must be reduced 
or discontinued due to financial conditions; and 

WHEREAS, it is the opinion of the Board that because of the aforementioned reason, the 

number of certificated employees of the District must be reduced; and 

WHEREAS, this Board does not desire to reduce the services of regular certificated 

employees based upon reduction of average daily attendance during the past two years. 

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of Education of the Hesperia 

Unified School District as follows: 

A. 

That the particular kinds of services set forth below be reduced or 
discontinued commencing in the 2011-2012 school year. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Elementary Classroom Teachers 

Elementary Intervention Teachers ('ride t Funded) 
Data Analysis Teacher on Assignment (Title I 

Funded) 
Middle School Math/Science Core Teacher 

Middle School English Teacher (includes 

Language Arts/Reading Core) 
Middle School Math Teacher 

Middle School Social Science Teacher 

Middle School Choir/Music Appreciation Teacher 

Middle School P.E. Teacher 

17 
9 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

16 
 

 

Middle School Home Economics Teacher 

High School Work Experience Teacher 

High School Night Program Teachers 

High School Athletic Director 

Counselors 

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

 

SUB-TOTALS:  Elementary 

 

Secondary 

Pupil Personnel Services 

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

1 

1 

2 

1 

4 

 

42 

27 

10 

5 
42 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

That due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services, the 
corresponding number of certificated employees of the District shall be terminated, 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 

That the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services must be achieved by 
the reduction or discontinuance of regular certificated positions and not by the 
termination of temporary and substitute employees. 

That "competency" as described in Education Code section 44955(b), 44956 and 44957 
for the purposes of bumping and reemployment shall necessarily include: (I) possession 
of a valid credential and No Child Left Beyond (NCLB) Highly Qualified status in the 
relevant subject matter area; (2) an appropriate English Learner (EL) authorization if 
required by the position; (3) for bumping a holder of a Single Subject credential in grades 
9-12, an equivalent Single Subject credential authorizing service in all grades 9-12; (4) 
for specialty positions requiring specific training and/or experience including but not 
limited to High School Music, AVID, and ASB, the specific training and experience 
necessary to fulfill all of the duties of the position which shall include at least one (1) 
year of experience in the position within the last five (5) years. 

That, as between certificated employees with the same seniority date, the order of 
termination shall be determined solely by the criteria set forth in the Tentative Agreement 
between the District and the Hesperia Teachers Association dated February 22, 2011, 
which is hereby adopted by the Board. 

 

 

 

 

 

B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

F. 

That  the  District  Superintendent  or  designee  is  directed  to  initiate  layoff  procedures 
and give appropriate notice, pursuant to Education Code sections 44955 and 44949, prior 
to March 15, 2011. 

 
PASSED AND ADOPTED at the regular meeting of the Board of Education held on March 7, 2011, in 
the County of San Bernardino, California. 

 
17 
 

 

