BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD  
LONG BEACH UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
 
OAH Case No. 2011020278 
 
 

 

 
In the Matter of  the Accusation 
Against:   
 
 
Certain Probationary and Permanent 
Certificated Employees and Temporary and 
Categorical Certificated Employees of the 
Long Beach Unified School District,  
 
 
                                    Respondents. 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard by Vincent Nafarrete, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 

 
 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 4 – 7 and 11, 2011, at Long Beach.   
 
 
Attorney at Law, Jabari A. Willis, Attorney at Law, and Cathie L. Fields, Attorney at Law, of 
the law firm Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Rudd & Romo.      
 

The Long Beach Unified School District was represented by Anthony P. De Marco, 

Except for those 16 respondents who represented themselves, the remaining 545 

respondents were represented by Marianne Reinhold, Attorney at Law, and Kent Morizawa, 
Attorney at Law, of the law firm Reich, Adell & Cvitan.  The complete list of the 545 
probationary and permanent certificated employees and temporary and categorical 
certificated employees represented by Reich, Adell & Cvitan is set forth in Exhibit FF and is 
hereby incorporated into this Proposed Decision by this reference.  
 

The following 16 respondents represented themselves:  Gabriela Arredondo, Spencer 

Barber, Rosalin Bender, Loshonda Bogin, Mikel Edillon, Ariel Gonzales, Meylin Johns, 
Derek Johnson, Catherine Jones, Janet Jones, Michell Koga, Erika Medina, Kathleen Nugal-
Yayoshi, Carlin Stein, Carol Takagi, and Nora Valdez.   The List of Self-Represented 
Respondents is set forth in Exhibit 24 and is hereby incorporated into this Proposed Decision 
by this reference. 
 
 
At the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing, the parties’ request to file written 
argument was granted.  On April 20, 2011, the school district’s counsel filed a Closing Brief, 
which was marked as Exhibit 25.  On April 27, 2011, counsel for the majority of respondents 
filed a Closing Brief, which was marked as Exhibit GG.  On April 27, 2011, the only self-

represented respondent to have filed a written argument was respondent Carlin Stein, whose 
Response was marked as Exhibit HH.1 
   

Oral, documentary, and stipulated evidence having been received and written 

arguments reviewed, the Administrative Law Judge submitted this matter for decision on 
April 27, 2011, and finds as follows: 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1.   

 
The Administrative Law Judge takes official notice that, on March 18, 2011, 
 
the Accusation was made and filed by Christopher J. Steinhauser in his official capacity as 
Superintendent of the Long Beach Unified School District, State of California (District).   
 

2.   

Respondents, and each of them, are employed by the District as probationary 

3. 

4. 

The District is a large unified school district comprised of several high 

Due to the ongoing economic downturn, the State budget deficit, and the 

and permanent certificated employees or as temporary and categorical certificated 
employees.   
 
 
schools, numerous middle and elementary schools, adult and continuation schools, and other 
schools and programs.  The District also operates child development centers and a Head Start 
program.  The District serves and educates pupils in kindergarten through twelfth grade who 
reside in the Long Beach area of Los Angeles County.   
 
 
anticipated reduction in State funding, the District has determined that it must reduce 
expenditures to maintain a balanced budget and its reserve.  The Superintendent determined 
that the District’s budget must be curtailed by $56 million for the 2011-2012 school year and 
by $85 million for the next two school years from 2011 through 2013.  On February 15, 
2011, the Superintendent recommended to the Governing Board that particular kinds of 
services be reduced or discontinued no later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school 
year.   
 
 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 and upon the recommendation of the 
Superintendent, the Governing Board determined that the District faced financial constraints 
resulting from revenue being insufficient to maintain the current levels of programs and 
program changes were necessary.  The Governing Board resolved that it was in the best 
interests of the District and its students to reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds of 
services no later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year and to terminate or layoff 
                                                 

(A) On February 15, 2011, in Resolution No. 020111-B, and pursuant to 

5. 

1 The Administrative Law Judge on his own motion admitted the Declaration of 
Carlin Stein, which was attached to respondent Stein’s Response, into evidence.  In addition, 
a Section List by Teacher for 2009-2010 for respondent Stein was separately marked as 
Exhibit II and likewise admitted into evidence.   

 

2 

 

 

(B) On February 15, 2011, in adopting Resolution No. 020111-B, the 

(C) On February 15, 2011, the Governing Board directed the Superintendent 

certificated employees equal in number to the positions affected in the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  The Governing Board further determined that 
it was necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services even after having 
considered all positively assured attrition due to resignations, retirements, and other 
permanent vacancies in reducing services.  The Governing Board resolved that the layoff of 
probationary and permanent certificated employees shall be in addition to the release of all 
temporary and categorical certificated employees of the District.      
 
 
Governing Board also adopted Exhibit A to the resolution, which is the list of particular 
kinds of services recommended for reduction or discontinuance.  Under Exhibit A, the 
Governing Board resolved to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services totaling 
777.50 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.  On March 1, 2011, the Governing Board 
amended Exhibit A, decreasing the reduction or discontinuance of district-wide programs by 
9.00 FTE and increasing the reduction or discontinuance of Head Start school readiness 
teachers by 4.00 FTE and school readiness education specialist by 1.00 FTE.   As a result of 
the March 1, 2011 amendment to Exhibit A, the Governing Board has resolved to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services by 773.50 FTE.   
 
 
or his designee to send notices to all probationary or permanent certificated employees, 
possibly affected by the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services, and in 
accordance with Education Code sections 44955 and 44949, that their services will not be 
required for the next school year.  The Governing Board also directed the Superintendent or 
his designee to notify all temporary and categorical certificated employees pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44954, 44949, and 44955, that their services will not be required for 
the 2011-2012 school year and they will be released, and that, if they claim that they cannot 
be released and believe they are entitled to a hearing, then those temporary and categorical 
certificated employees should be told that they can request a hearing.     
 
 
pursuant to Resolution No. 020111-B and the provisions of Education Code sections 44949 
and 44955, Ruth Perez Ashley, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resource Services, as the 
designee of the Superintendent, gave written notices by personal service and certified mail to 
probationary and permanent certificated employees that their services will not be required for 
the ensuing 2011-2012 school year because the Governing Board had determined to reduce 
or discontinue certain particular kinds of services at the end of the current school year due to 
financial constraints and had resolved that it was necessary to layoff  certificated employees 
under Education Code section 44955.  The written notices informed probationary and 
permanent certificated employees of the reasons for this ―Notice of Recommendation Not to 
Reemploy Certificated Employees‖ and their right to request a hearing to determine whether 
there was cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year.  The written notices 
included a copy of Resolution No. 020111-B with the list of particular kinds of services and 
the tie-breaking criteria, copies of Education Code sections 44955 and 44949, and a Request 
for Hearing Form.   

Beginning on February 28, 2011, and continuing until March 15, 2011, and 

6. 

 

3 

8. 

7. 

Beginning on March 1, 2011, and continuing until March 15, 2011, and 

(A) The District had principals and site and program administrators obtain 

 
pursuant to Resolution No. 020111-B and the provisions of Education Code sections 44949, 
44955, and 44954, the Assistant Superintendent, as the designee of the Superintendent, also 
gave written notices by personal service and certified mail to temporary and categorical 
certificated employees that the Governing Board had determined that their services will not 
be required for the ensuing 2011-2012 school year and to release them from their temporary 
employment.  The written notices informed the temporary and categorical employees that the 
reasons for their release were that the Governing Board had determined to reduce or 
discontinue certain particular kinds of services at the end of the current school year due to 
financial constraints and had resolved that it was necessary to layoff certificated employees.  
The written notices also informed temporary and categorical certificated employees of their 
limited right to participate in the layoff proceeding applicable to probationary and permanent 
certificated employees and their right to request a hearing under Education Code section 
44955.   The written notices included a copy of Resolution No. 020111-B with the list of 
particular kinds of services and the tie-breaking criteria, copies of Education Code sections 
8366, 44954, 44955, and 44949, and the Request for Hearing Form.   
 
 
signatures of probationary and permanent certificated employees and temporary and 
categorical certificated employees on Proofs of Service to demonstrate that service of the 
preliminary notices and release notices was made by personal delivery or mail.   Principals 
and site and program administrators then signed the Proofs of Service under penalty of 
perjury. 
 
(B) Respondents are those probationary and permanent certificated employees 
 
and temporary and categorical certificated employees of the District who requested a hearing 
to determine if there is cause for not re-employing or releasing them for the ensuing school 
year.   There were approximately 674 certificated employees who had been served with 
preliminary notices and notices of release and then filed requests for hearing.   
 
 
sufficient under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 in providing written notice to 
respondents who are probationary and permanent certificated employees that their services 
will not be required for the ensuing school year.   Likewise, the District’s notice of release 
dated March 1, 2011, was sufficient under Education Code sections 44949, 44955, and 
44954 in providing written notice to respondents who are temporary or categorical 
employees that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year.   Respondents 
were not prejudiced by errors in the notices, if any, with respect to the attachments, spellings 
of their names, addresses, site or school locations, employee numbers, or any other matters.   
No claims or complaints were raised in the hearing that the preliminary notices, or notices of 
release, or contents thereof, were deficient in any respect. 
 
 
personal delivery or certified mail with an Accusation, Notice of Accusation and 
Acknowledgement of Request for Hearing, copies of pertinent sections of the Government 

10.  On or about March 15, 2011, the District properly served respondents by 

The District’s preliminary notice of layoff dated February 28, 2011, was 

9.  

 

 

4 

11.  On February 15, 2011, in Resolution No. 020111-B and Exhibit B thereto, and 

Code and Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, a blank Notice of Defense form, and 
Notice of Hearing.  Subsequently, 550 respondents filed notices of defenses, requesting a 
hearing to determine if there is cause not to employ or to release them for the ensuing school 
year and objecting to the Accusation.  Approximately eight respondents filed notices of 
defense that were late or untimely but the District nevertheless allowed them to participate in 
the layoff hearing.  When the location of the hearing was changed, the District served all 
respondents with an Amended Notice of Hearing, setting forth the new hearing location.  All 
prehearing and jurisdictional requirements have been met by the parties.    
 
 
pursuant to Education Code section 44955, the Governing Board adopted a tie-breaking 
resolution, which was entitled, ―Criteria to be Applied to Determine Order of Layoff for 
those Certificated Employees with the Same Date of First Paid Probationary Service.‖   This 
tie-breaking resolution set forth criteria to be used in determining the order of termination or 
layoff of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the same 
date or have the same first date of paid service.  Under the tie-breaking criteria, the 
Governing Board gave the three highest tie-breaking priorities to the possession of 
credentials authorizing service as a speech therapist, possession of preliminary or clear 
English Learner (EL) Certificate with an included bilingual component (BCLAD or 
Bilingual Cross-cultural Language and Academic Development or equivalent) and 
preliminary or clear credentials authorizing service in special education, and possession of a 
non-bilingual preliminary or clear EL certification (CLAD or Cross-cultural Language and 
Academic Development/SB395 or equivalent) and a preliminary or clear credentials 
authorizing service in special education.   The Governing Board gave the 17th tie-breaking 
priority to the possession of specialized training in Advanced Placement (TB17-A), National 
Board Certification (TB17-B), GATE Certification (TB17-C), AVID (Advancement Via 
Individual Determination) (TB17-D), International Baccalaureate Certificate (TB17-E), and 
Non-Violent Crisis Intervention Certificate (TB17-F) and the 18th tie-breaking priority to 
total years of service in the District.  The Governing Board found that the tie-breaking 
criteria were based solely on the needs of the District and its students at the present time.  
 
 
its findings, the Governing Board resolved and took action to reduce or discontinue certain 
particular kinds of services or programs offered by the District for the 2011-2012 school 
years in the following FTE positions:   
 

12.  On February 15 and March 1, 2011, pursuant to Resolution No. 020111-B and 

Elementary School Services  
 
Elementary Classroom Instruction (K-3)  
Elementary Classroom Instruction (4-5) 

 

          Elementary Computer Instruction 
          Elementary Guidance 
          Elementary Itinerant Music—Vocal/Instrumental 
          Elementary Reading 
          Elementary Special Ed—Mild Moderate 

   
   

Intervention Specialist 

 

 

 

 
 

   
   
 

 
  FTE 
         319.00 

  1.00 
     
     
  1.00 
             5.00 
  1.00 
     
  1.00 
      
 10.00 
 

 

5 

ELL Specialist 
Subtotal--Elementary School Services 

 

 

 

 
 

   7.00 
 
           345.00 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Middle School Services 
 
 
Middle School Art Instruction 
 
Middle School Dance Instruction 
 
   
 
Middle School English Instruction 
Middle School Language Arts Instruction 
 
Middle School Language Arts/Spanish 
 
Middle School Computer Instruction 
 
Middle School Guidance Instruction 
Middle School Health Instruction 
 
Middle School Humanities Core Instruction 
 
Middle School Humanities Core/Spanish 
Middle School Math Instruction 
 
Middle School Social Science Instruction   
 
Middle School Math/Science Instruction 
Middle School Special Ed—Mild Moderate 
Middle School 6th Grade Self-Contained 
 
Middle School Technology Core/Spanish   
 
Middle School Technology Core 
 
Subtotal--Middle School Services 

 
 

 

 

 
High School Services 
 
 
 
High School Art Instruction 
 
High School Auto Shop 
 
 
 
  
High School Business Education   
High School Computer Applications Instruction 
High School English Instruction   
 
High School Foreign Language Instruction 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

-French 
-Italian  
-Spanish  
-J ap an e se  
-Khmer 

   
   
 
 
   
High School Graphic Arts Instruction 
 
High School Health/Health Science Instruction  
 
High School Home Economics Instruction 
High School Junior ROTC  
 
High School Math Instruction 
-Algebra 
-Integrated (CAMS) 
-Geometry 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

  FTE 
  1.00 
  1.00 
11.00 
  1.00 
  1.00 
  1.00 
  1.00 
   4.00 
   1.00 
   1.00 
   7.00 
   1.00 
   1.00 
   8.00 
 21.00 
   1.00 
   2.00 
 64.00 

  FTE 
  5.00 
  1.00 
  2.00 
22.00 
12.00 

  1.00 
    
  1.00 
    
  3.00 
    
  2.00 
    
  1.00 
    
 
  1.00 
           18.00 
  4.00 
 
  2.00 
 

            
 
 
              
                        

 15.00 
   2.00 
   6.00 

6 

 
 

 
 

 

 

High School Music Instruction 
High School Physical Education Instruction 
High School Special Ed—Mild Moderate 
High School Social Science Instruction   
Millikan High School Opportunity Program 
Subtotal--High School Services 

 

 

 

 
District-Wide Programs 
 
Counseling Services 
 
Assistant/Vice-Principals 
 
Teacher Librarians   
 
 
Nurses 
 
Psychologists 
 
 
6th Grade AVID—Full-Time Instruction  
 
Subtotal--District-Wide Programs  

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

             2.00 
             9.00 
             3.00 
             5.00 
             1.00 
           118.00 

 
  FTE 
 
 35.00 
 
 10.00 
 
   7.00 
 
 11.00 
 
   9.00 
   2.00 
 
            74.00 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

    
  
 
 
 
 

 
-Intensive Learning Program 
-Intervention & Progress Specialist  
 
 
 
 

TOSA/Program Facilitators/Coordinators    
AVID/AP Coordinator 
 
Coordinated Student Services/Special Education 
 
 
EL Coordinator/Program Facilitator (Cabrillo) 
Elementary Physical Education Coach 
Elementary Specialist (ARRA) 
Learning Directors 
 
Middle School—Professional Learning Community Coach 
Office of Curriculum, Instruction & Professional Development  
     
-Peer Assistance& Review Coach 
 
     
-ELD Specialist 
 
 
     
-Home Schooling K-8/PMIS  
 
     
-Program Facilitator   
 
 
    
-TOSA (ELL Teacher Coaches) 
 
      
 
-Parent Center Instruction 
 
Program Facilitator—ACE Academy 
Program Facilitator—IB-MSAP (Hudson K-8 School) 
 
Program Facilitator—IB-MSAP (Lindsey Middle School) 
 
Program Specialist—IB-MSAP (Dooley Elementary) 
Subtotal--TOSA/Program Facilitators/Coordinators 
 
 
Child Development Center   
 
 
School Aged Care—Teachers 
School Aged Care—Coordinating Teachers 
 
Full Day Preschool—Teachers 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

   FTE 
   1.00 

   3.00 
 43.00 
   0.50 
   1.00 
 12.00 
 10.00 
   1.00 

   1.00 
   1.00 
   1.00 
   1.00 
 11.00 
   1.00 
   0.50 
   0.50 
   0.50 
   0.50 
 89.50 

    FTE 
   35.50 

   26.50 

7 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Full Day Preschool—Coordinating Teachers 
Subtotal--Child Development Center 

 

 

 

 
Head Start 
First Five—School Readiness Teachers 
 
First Five—School Readiness Education Specialist 
 
Subtotal--Head Start   

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Adult Education 
Adult Education - Long Beach School for Adults 
Subtotal--Adult Education  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     FTE 
 
 
    6.00 
              6.00 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
   62.00 

     FTE 
     4.00 
     1.00 
     5.00 

     FTE 
     2.00 
     1.00 
     1.00 
     1.00 
     1.00 
     1.00 
     1.00 
     1.00 
     1.00 
   10.00 

 

Career Technical Education   
Career Technical Education Instruction 
 
Law Enforcement 
Co-Op Foods/Retail   
Careers with Children 
Retail Merchandising 
 
Media Occupations 
 
Medical Assistant 
Animal Care   
 
Occupational Health   
Subtotal--Career Technical Education 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 

The services set forth in Finding 12 above are particular kinds of services 

The reduction or discontinuance of the particular kinds of services set forth hereinabove 
constitute a total of 773.50 FTE.   
 
 
performed by certificated employees of the District which may be reduced or discontinued 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  The determination of the Governing 
Board to reduce or discontinue these services is within its sound discretion and not arbitrary 
or capricious.   The reduction or discontinuance of these particular kinds of services is related 
to the welfare of the District and its pupils and is necessary in order for the District to 
maintain a balanced budget.  Following the reduction or discontinuance of these particular 
kinds of services, the District will still be able to provide mandated and essential services.   
 
 
list, which contains the names of certificated employees, their seniority rankings, job 
information (status, FTE, and titles), seniority dates or first dates of paid service, whether 
they were served with a preliminary layoff notice, whether they possess an EL authorization, 
their current work sites, basic subject area, credentials and authorizations, and tie-breaker 

(A) The District prepared a Certificated Seniority List (Exh. 8), or seniority 

14. 

8 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

(B) For respondents and certificated employees who first rendered paid service 

rankings and credits.   In addition, the Certificated Seniority List includes special contract or 
temporary employees who work at the District’s child development centers under child 
development permits and children’s center instructional permits, Head Start teachers and 
education specialists, and certificated employees who were laid off last year, placed on re-
employment lists, and then hired as temporary or special contracts teachers.  While named on 
the seniority list, the temporary teachers were not given or listed with any seniority dates.  
The District has operated an on-line system whereby certificated employees are able to check 
their job status, credentials and authorizations, special training and skills, and to respond, 
question, or submit information on the on-line system to confirm, correct, or change 
information maintained by the District for purposes of its Certificated Seniority List.   
 
 
in a probationary position on the same date, the District applied the tiebreaking criteria and 
ranked them in order of termination on the Certificated Seniority List.  The District also 
developed a seniority list of employees who are assigned and work at child development 
centers (Exh. 9), a Bumping Chart (Exh. 10), a Lay-off Analysis sorted by particular kinds of 
services (Exh. 11), a List of Employees on Leaves of Absence (Exh. 12), a List of Teachers 
on Special Assignments (TOSA) (Exh. 13), a List of Certificated Administrators (Exh. 14), a 
List of Job Shares (Exh. 15), a list of temporary certificated employees in leave replacement 
positions (Exh. 16), and a list of certificated employees in categorically-funded positions 
(Exh. 17).    
 
 
reduction or discontinuance and determined how many temporary and categorically 
certificated employees were working in those services under special contracts.  After taking 
into account the release of temporary and categorically certificated employees under special 
contracts, the District identified the least senior probationary or permanent certificated 
employees assigned to the particular kinds of services subject to being reduced or 
discontinued.  The District reviewed the seniority and credentials of the probationary and 
certificated employees and the particular kinds of service to which they are currently 
assigned.  The District then determined whether they held credentials and authorizations in 
other areas of service or teaching and were entitled to bump other less senior probationary 
and permanent certificated employees and whether certain certificated employees should be 
skipped and retained.  The District continued to conduct its seniority and bumping analysis 
during and until the conclusion of the hearing.  
 
 
Further, the District has obviated the need to reduce or discontinue all of the 
particular kinds of services described in Finding 12 above and to terminate the employment 
of all respondents given preliminary notice and the Accusation by giving notices of release to 
temporary and categorical certificated employees under special contracts and by taking into 
account the personnel changes and attrition due to retirements and resignations of individual 
certificated employees within the District.  The District has reasonably determined and 
accounted for what will be positively assured attrition among its certificated staff for the 
ensuing 2011-2012 school year and reduced by corresponding number the number of 

(C) The District reviewed the particular kinds of services which are subject to 

15. 

 

 

9 

 

16. 

(B) The District determined that certificated employee Leigh Alexander (86), 

certificated employees whose employment must be terminated due to the present reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.    
 
(A) In testifying during the hearing, the Assistant Superintendent reviewed the 
 
Certificated Seniority List and delineated which respondents and certificated employees who 
were served with preliminary notices, were still subject to layoff in this proceeding.   At the 
outset, the Assistant Superintendent announced that certificated employee Kelley V. Meade 
(1), who is first on the seniority list, was served with a preliminary notice but that she was no 
longer subject to layoff because she teaches earth science and chemistry based on her 
credential and board authorization and there is no more senior certificated employee who is 
qualified and competent to bump or displace her.2   Likewise, certificated employees Laura 
Bridwell (2) and Ann Mantel (4) were not given preliminary notices because they serve in 
the areas of speech and language and special education-mild and moderate, respectively, 
which are not subject to the current reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of 
services.   The first respondent or certificated employee on the Certificated Seniority List 
subject to layoff is respondent Dirk Davis (25), a 0.5 FTE high school physical education 
teacher, who lacks the qualifications or competency to bump or displace another certificated 
employee.    
 
 
who is on special assignment in speech and language, possesses the qualifications and 
competency to bump into another position.  Alexander was not served with a preliminary 
notice and is not subject to layoff.  The District further determined that respondent Ryan 
Burns (122), an administrator and psychologist at Lakewood High School, has a special skill 
of interpreting for the deaf and will not be subject to layoff in this proceeding.   
 
 
education credential, respondent Debra Davis-Garriott (1259) is able to bump a less senior 
certificated employee or respondent or a vacant position.  The District also determined that 
respondent Barbara Gilmore (2810) is able to bump into the position of a less senior 
certificated employee or respondent or a vacant position.  The District determined to 
withdraw the preliminary notice and Accusation issued to respondents Davis-Garriott and 
Gilmore.    
 
 
examination of the Assistant Superintendent Perez Ashley and testimony by individual 
respondents, the District re-checked its information and data on respondents’ credentials, 
authorizations, and assignments, and continued to determine whether respondents were 
entitled to bump less senior respondents or certificated employees.  As such, the District 
modified or amended the Bumping Chart, the most current version of which was marked as 
Exhibit 22.   
                                                 

17.  During the hearing and based upon information elicited on the cross-

(C) Further, the District announced that, because she possesses a special 

 

2 The number in parentheses following the name of each respondent or certificated 

employee corresponds to his or her rank or place on the Certificated Seniority List relative to 
other certificated employees.     

 

10 

18. 

(A) As set forth in the Amended Bumping Chart (Exh. 22), the District 

 
rescinded the preliminary notice and/or dismissed the Accusation issued against respondents 
Ryan Burns (122), Lidia Santana (147), Mikel Edillon (1175), Dalis La (1438), and Helen 
Magana (1444).  The names of these respondents were lined out or stricken in the Amended 
Bumping Chart.  In addition, the District requested that respondent Michael Humphries (285) 
be stricken from the bumping chart.  These respondents will not receive final layoff notices 
and will be re-employed for the next school year.     
 
 
dismissed the Accusation issued to all of the respondents named in the two-page exhibit 
entitled, ―Release from Hearings 4/6/2011‖ on page 1 and ―Release From Hearing—Not on 
Bumping Chart‖ on page 2.  Moreover, the District added respondent Justin Gaschen (1087) 
to this list of respondents, each of whom will not receive a final notice and will be retained 
for employment for the next school year.    
 
 

(B) During the hearing, the District rescinded the preliminary notice and/or 

 

Changes in Seniority Dates and Application of Tie-Breaking Criteria 

 

 

19. 

(C) The District also changed the seniority dates for respondents Alicia 

(A) During the hearing, the District changed the seniority dates and rankings 

(B) The District changed the seniority date for respondent Marnelle Leonard to 

 
 
on the seniority list for the following respondents:   Meghan Carungcong to August 20, 2007, 
and ranking 179A; Blanca Pacheco-Jones to September 2, 2003, and ranking 263A; for 
Griselda Rodriguez to August 20, 2001, and ranking 1323A; Arcelia Salazar to August 20, 
2001, and ranking 1338A; and Jennifer Ito to January 16, 2001, and ranking 1445A;  
 
 
August 20, 2001, and her ranking to 1300A.   She attended training at the New Teacher 
Institute in 2001.   
 
 
Huizar, Michelle Twogood, Holly Camarillo, and Karen Hardy to August 18, 2003, and their 
respective rankings to 796A, 801A, 809A, and 838A for having attended training at the New 
Teacher Institute that year.   
 
 
from 927 to 928A after giving her tiebreaker credit under TB14 for possessing a multiple 
subject credential and supplemental credential.    
 
 
June 27, 2002, and her ranking to 1145A; the seniority list ranking for respondent Elida 
Rangel to 1277A; and the seniority list ranking for respondent Daniel Yaeger to 1301A; .   
 
 
tiebreaker credit for having completed the Non-Violent Crisis Intervention training (TB 17-
F). 
 

(E) The District changed the seniority date for respondent Beverly Wiegand to 

(F) The District also credited respondent Erika Medina (216A) with additional 

(D) The District changed the seniority list ranking for respondent Anna Lim 

 

 

 

 

11 

22. 

21. 

The District and respondents further stipulated that all respondents who 

20.  As set forth in the written Stipulations (Exh. 20), the District and respondents 

 
stipulated that certain respondents will have their seniority dates modified to the following 
dates:  Dustin Shade (32), September 2, 2008; Obiorah Ebo (81), August 18, 2008; Stacy 
Burcham (143), August 13, 2007; Geoffrey Barbe (275), August 21, 2006; Toiya Smith 
(757), August 18, 2003; Melinda Clare (968), August 19, 2002; David Noyes (1145), July 1, 
1993; Heidi–Lynn Doon-Samaniego (1501), August 21, 2000; Rosio Dominguez (891), 
August 4, 2003; and Anselm Feliciano (1392A), July 9,  2001.  These changes in seniority 
dates have had or will have the concomitant effect of changing these respondents’ rankings 
on the District’s seniority list. 
 
The District and respondents further stipulated that certain respondents will 
 
receive additional tiebreaker (TB) credits for the following criteria set forth in Exhibit B to 
Resolution No. 020111-B as follows:  Valdez (257), TB 18-H; Goldman (312), TB 6; Alicia 
Huizar (894), TB 8; Ward (1449), TB 18-I; Christina Cancino (1413), TB 17-F and 18-I; 
Ornelas (629), TB 18-F; Valenzuela (446), TB 18-E; and Jackson (2347), TB 18-M.   These 
additional tiebreaker credits will modify the rankings of these respondents among other 
certificated employees having the same first date of paid service with the District. 
 
 
participated in training or sessions of Open Court/Reading First, New Teacher Institute, 
Language!, High Point, PEACE Academy, and Linda Mood Bell programs will receive 
credit towards their seniority dates in a manner consistent with the Decision in Case No. 
2010020244 in last year’s layoff proceeding.  The District will recognize the attendance of 
respondents at these mandatory training programs as their first dates of paid service in a 
probationary position for the purposes of delineating seniority.   
 
 
The District and respondents further stipulated that all respondents who are 
teachers at Addams Elementary School, and who were first hired for the 2001-2002 school 
year and then worked on the first school day for that school year, will have a seniority date of 
July 23, 2001.   
 
The parties further stipulated that the date of July 1, 2001, was a Sunday and 
 
therefore a non-working and non-school day.  The District will designate a correct seniority 
date for those certificated employees who were assigned a seniority date of July 1, 2001.    
 
(A) The seniority date of respondent Diane Gagnon (1040) shall be August 15, 
 
2002, because she attended the phonics training at the Open Court/Reading First! program on 
direction of her principal and was paid for that first date of service.   Gagnon’s seniority date 
shall be changed pursuant to the stipulation of the parties regarding this training.   
 
 
and Jacqueline Hernandez (1224) all attended the training in Las Vegas that was required and 
mandatory of new certificated employees at Edison Charter School that school year.  These 
respondents shall have their seniority dates changed to August 16, 2001, pursuant to the 
parties’ Stipulation.  

(B) Respondents Patricia De Koekkoek (1215), Bernadette Wheeler (1217), 

25. 

24. 

23. 

 

 

12 

Seniority Claims of Individual Respondents 

 

 

 

26. 

(A) Respondent Kem Sokvylay (1124) contended that her seniority date 

(B) Respondent Stacy Wills (827) is a second grade teacher and has been 

(C) Respondent Kathleen Daley (1045) has been assigned a seniority date of 

(D) Respondent Iyaunna Towery (1058) has been assigned a seniority date of 

 
 
should be backdated by approximately two weeks to July 29, 2002, because she attended 
SDAIE (Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English) training at her school site.   
Sokvylay began teaching on August 13, 2002, at a year-round school and began receiving her 
12-month salary in July 2002.  She was told by the principal that she had to ―make-up‖ 31 
work days during the school year if she wanted to receive her full salary for the school year.  
Sokyvlay choose to attend the SDAIE training as one of her make-up dates.   
 
 
assigned a seniority date of August 18, 2003.   Wills likewise contends that her first date of 
paid service was July 21, 2003, because she was hired to teach at a year-round school and 
told that she had to work make-up days to earn her full year’s salary.   She elected to work as 
a substitute teacher on July 21, 2003, and was paid for her service.   
 
 
August 19, 2002.  She contends that her first date of paid service as a probationary employee 
was July 31, 2002, because she reported to work and taught in the classroom in order to 
make-up days to earn a full salary for her first year.    
 
 
August 19, 2002, but claims that her first date of paid service was July 3, 2002, when she 
participated in training to ―learn the ropes‖ as suggested by her new principal.  Towery 
admitted that she had to work 20 make-up dates in her initial year of employment to earn her 
full year’s salary.   
 
 
(E)  Because the evidence did not show that respondents Sokyvlay, Wills, 
Daley, and Towery were required or directed by their principals to attend their respective 
trainings or activities and did not show they began providing paid service to the District in a 
probationary position on those earlier claimed dates, these respondents’ make-up dates, much 
like summer school teaching or substitute teaching stints, did not begin to accrue service or 
seniority credit for them.  As such, these respondents’ claims for changes in their seniority 
dates must be rejected.  (See Ed. Code, §§ 44913 and 44918.)      
 
 
both assigned new seniority dates of August 20, 2001, and September 4, 2001, respectively, 
after the District determined that their prior seniority dates of July 1, 2001, was a Sunday, as 
set forth in Finding 24 above.  Leonard was credited for having attended training at the New 
Teacher Institute.  During the hearing, both Leonard and Burg ostensibly contended that the 
District should be collaterally estopped from changing their seniority dates because July 1, 
2001, was the date that they were assigned for last year’s layoff proceeding.  Their claim was 
not persuasive, for it was not established that their seniority dates were actually litigated last 
year.  As such, it was not established the doctrine of collateral estoppel should apply.  (See 
City of Long Beach v. Mansell (1970) 76 Cal. App. 3d 796, 814-815.)  Moreover, the District 

(A) Respondents Marnelle Leonard (1300A) and Gary Burg (1221A) were 

27. 

 

 

13 

 

 

28. 

Respondent Georgia Gegenworth (1281) is another certificated employee 

(C) Respondent Burg is a fifth grade GATE (Gifted and Talented Education) 

(B) Respondent Leonard also argued that her seniority date should be earlier in 

has determined that their prior date of July 1, 2001, was a mistake and changed it to correct 
the mistake.   
 
 
August 2001 because she taught pupils for three weeks that month after being contracted to 
complete the assignment of a teacher who moved out-of-state.  Her alternative argument was 
likewise unpersuasive.  Leonard’s contract service beginning in early August 2001 was 
comparable to a substitute teaching assignment which cannot be included in the calculation 
of her service or seniority under Education Code section 44918.   
 
 
teacher.  He further contended that his seniority date should be June 19, 2001, because he 
attended a GATE training session during the summer on the ―request‖ of his new principal.  
Burg admitted, however, that he was not paid by the District to attend this training.  At the 
time, he was working for another school district and took a leave from that job to attend the 
GATE training.  Burg’s first date of paid service as a probationary employee with the District 
was September 4, 2001.   However, if the District corroborates that Burg attended the New 
Teacher Institute in August 2001, his participation was mandatory, and he was paid for his 
participation in this training, then the District shall adjust Burg’s seniority date in accordance 
with the Stipulation set forth in Exhibit 20.    
 
 
whose seniority date was changed from July 1, 2001.  The District determined that her 
seniority date is August 20, 2001.  Gegenworth asserted that her seniority should be changed 
back to July 1, 2001, because she was hired at a year-round elementary school on or about 
that date and then taught pupils during an intersession that month.  Her principal advised her 
that teachers were needed for the intersession and Gegenworth volunteered to teach 
intersession and was paid for her work.   However, Gegenworth’s argument must fail, for 
teaching during an intersession, like during a summer session, does not operate to accrue 
service or seniority credit for a certificated employee under Education Code section 44913.   
 
 
contended that their seniority dates should be changed by one month to on or about July 8, 
2002, because that was when they both started a three-week curriculum and classroom 
training program under the Bilingual Intern/District Intern Program for completion of their 
student teaching.  Respondents’ seniority dates will not be changed inasmuch as they were 
not paid during their training stints as student interns that month of July 2002.   Baker’s date 
of first paid service as a probationary employee with the District was August 19, 2002, and 
Herrera-Gonzales’ date was, in fact, August 2, 2002.     
 
 
(B) Respondent Erin Boeglin (1071) asserts that her seniority date should be 
updated by three months to June 24, 2002, since she worked as an intern during a summer 
session before being hired as a full-time teacher.  Boeglin was paid for her service as a 
summer intern.  Her argument was not persuasive inasmuch as Education Code section 
44913 provides that service in a summer session cannot be included in the acquisition of 

(A) Respondents Torrie Baker (1057) and Alina Herrera-Gonzales (1129) 

29. 

 

 

14 

31. 

30. 

Respondent Pamela Crissman (1200) is a school nurse and has a seniority date 

permanent status or in the computation of service required for permanent status.  In addition, 
it was not established that Boeglin served in a probationary position during that summer 
session.  Boeglin’s first date of paid service as a probationary employee with the District 
shall remain August 19, 2002.    
 
 
of September 4, 2001.  She contends that her seniority date should be backdated one year 
because she worked as a substitute school nurse for the prior school year.  Even if she was 
hired as a probationary certificated employee for the 2001-2002 school year, Crissman’s 
service as a substitute school nurse in the prior school year did not constitute service as a 
probationary employee under Education Code section 44918 because she did not work for at 
least 75 percent of the school days.  She worked for the District for approximately 94 school 
days, which was not 75 percent of the District’s school days for 2000-2001.  Crissman’s 
seniority date shall remain as September 4, 2001.   
 
 
Respondent Griselda Rodriguez (1422) has been assigned a new seniority date 
of August 20, 2001, and a new seniority ranking of 1323A.  She contended that her seniority 
date should be changed to July 9, 2001, for having attended the Module A session of the 
Essential Elements of Effective Instruction (EEEI) training provided by the District’s 
Professional Development Program.  Rodriguez’s principal advised her to attend the training 
and she was paid an hourly wage for her attendance.   Rodriguez’s argument is well taken, 
for, as was established by the redirect or rebuttal testimony of the Assistant Superintendent, 
the District has determined that the EEEI training was mandatory and will adjust the 
seniority dates of respondents and certificated employees who attended this training.  
Accordingly, Rodriguez’s seniority date shall be July 9, 2001.     
 
 
contract. As a temporary certificated employee, she does not have a seniority list ranking.  
Last year, her employment was terminated following that year’s layoff proceeding and she 
then was hired to work this school year under a special contract.  Gant contended that her 
seniority date should be revised but, as a temporary employee, she is subject to release under 
Education Code section 44954.  As such, jurisdiction does not exist to review her challenge 
of any purported seniority date.   
 
 
Respondent Angela Boone (1310), a kindergarten teacher, has a seniority date 
of August 20, 2001.  She claimed that her seniority date should be August 14, 2001, because 
she attended a three-day orientation at her new school site on direction of her principal.  
During the orientation, Boon participated in the assessments of pre-kindergarten pupils and 
was introduced to other staff.  She was paid for her attendance at the orientation.   Inasmuch 
as the orientation was mandatory and she was paid for her attendance, Boone demonstrated 
that her first date of paid service with the District must be advanced by six days to August 
14, 2001.   
 
 
 

Respondent Linda Gant is a temporary employee working under a special 

33. 

32. 

 

15 

Individual Respondents’ Tie-Breaking Arguments 

35. 

34. 

Respondent Christina Cancino (1413) is a first grade teacher whom the 

 
 
District proposes to be bumped by another certificated employee.  Currently, she has been 
assigned a seniority date of July 1, 2001.  Cancino asserted that she should receive additional 
tie-breaker credit under criteria TB-8 for possessing an English Learner Certification with a 
BCLAD component.  She claimed that she applied for a BCLAD in 2001 after completing 
her university studies and passing a national CLAD/BCLAD examination.  While she has 
been given tie-breaking credit for having a CLAD, the District’s records do not show that she 
had a BCLAD by March 15, 2011.   In the absence of any evidence that she has been granted 
the bilingual certificate, Cancino cannot be awarded additional tie-breaking credit for 
possessing a BCLAD.   
 
 
Several respondents, including Geoffrey Barbe (275), Bernadette Wheeler 
(1217), and Jose Ramirez (1286), have claimed that they deserve tie-breaking credit for 
having specialized training in AVID (TB-17D).   As established by the testimony of the 
Assistant Superintendent, the District has determined that certificated employees will receive  
tie-breaking credit under 17D as long as they have completed some or a portion of the three-
level training to teach the AVID curriculum.   On August 16, 2007, Ramirez attended a six-
hour or ―Day 2‖ AVID training session for which he received recognition at his school.   
From July 28 through August 1, 2008, Barbe attended the AVID Summer Institute in San 
Diego where he received training in the Implementation portion of the AVID program.  On 
August 3 – 7, 2009, Wheeler attended the AVID Summer Institute in San Diego where she 
received training in the Implementation portion of the AVID program.  Respondents Barbe, 
Wheeler, and Ramirez will each receive tie-breaking credit for completing some or a portion 
of the AVID training.   
 
 
tie-breaking credit for possessing a Master’s degree (TB-11).  However, Ornelas completed 
the last required class for her Master’s degree on March 4, 2011, and thereafter provided the 
District with the transcript of her coursework.  Because it was not established that Ornelas 
filed the coursework transcript for her Master’s degree with the District or the county office 
of education by March 15, 2011, Ornelas is not entitled to receive tie-breaking credit for 
having attained a Master’s degree.  (See Ed. Code § 44949; Campbell v. Abbott (1978) 76 
Cal. App. 3d 796, 814-815.)  
 
 
Respondent Megan Shihady (753) asserted that she should receive tie-breaking 
credit (TB-17D) for attending the 2009 AVID Summer Institute where, she testified, that she 
received training in Implementation.  In the absence of any documentary evidence 
corroborating her claim, Shihady’s request for tie-breaking credit under criteria 17-D must be 
denied at this time.  The District may award the tie-breaking credit on its own motion it 
determines that Shihady’s claim is substantiated and awarding the credit is appropriate.    
 
 
English.  Stein is an English teacher at Wilson High School who is on maternity leave.  In the 

Respondent Brenda Ornelas (629) contended that she should receive additional 

(A) Respondent Carlin Stein (462) holds a clear single subject credential in 

37. 

38. 

36. 

 

16 

 

2009-2010 school year, she taught English 1-2 and accelerated English 1-2.  Stein was served 
with a preliminary layoff notice but was not identified for layoff until the end of the hearing 
when the District presented its latest Bumping Chart.  Stein is now subject to being bumped 
by a more senior middle school teacher Melissa Mann (665), who possesses a clear single 
subject credential in Spanish and English.  Mann, in turn, is subject to being bumped by 
another more senior certificated employee.   
 
(B) In her written Response, Stein ostensibly argued that her seniority ranking 
 
should be higher because the District failed to give her tie-breaking credit for having attained 
a Master’s degree (TB-11).  For the last two years, Stein attended classes through Concordia 
University for a Master’s degree in education and successfully completed the coursework in 
March 2011.  The degree did not post to the Website of Concordia University until April 1, 
2011.   Because it was not established that she filed her Master’s coursework transcript with 
the District and/or county office of education by March 15, 2011, however, Stein is not 
entitled to receive tie-breaking credit for having obtained a Master’s degree.  (See Ed. Code, 
§ 44949; Campbell v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 814-815.)  As such, Stein’s 
seniority ranking will remain the same and she may be laid off pursuant to the present 
reduction of particular kinds of services.   
 
 

International Baccalaureate Program 

39. 

 
 
Exercising its discretion under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), 
the District has determined to deviate from the order of seniority in this layoff proceeding by 
skipping one teacher, Tiffaney Mocsary (542), in the International Baccalaureate (IB) 
program at Jordan High School.  The District also has IB programs at one elementary school 
and two middle schools but has determined to skip only the one certificated employee at the 
high school program because the high school IB program is a diploma program that 
implements a global curriculum and supports the District’s mission to prepare its pupils for 
college and successful careers.  Specifically, the District has determined to skip Mochsary, a 
high school art teacher with IB training and certification, because she has the special training 
and experience to teach in the high school IB program.  As such, the District has properly 
demonstrated that it has a specific need for personnel to teach in the specific course of study 
of IB and that Mocsary has the special training and experience necessary to teach that course 
of study.  Mocsary may be skipped pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
(d).    
 
 
contended that they should be skipped as an IB teacher because each has completed IB 
training.  Kittleson has also attended training in elementary writing and ELL facilitation.  
Hardy and Kittleson teach fifth and first grade, respectively, at Dooley Elementary School, 
which has an elementary-level IB program.  Hardy has introduced IB concepts to her 
students in her fifth grade curriculum.  Both teachers hold multiple subject credentials.  
Kittleson also has a clear special instruction credential in reading.  It was not established, 
however, that either Hardy or Kittleson has any experience in teaching in a high school IB 

Respondents Carol Hardy (888) and Kimberly Kittleson (1150) each 

40. 

 

17 

program.  As such, Hardy and Kittleson are not certificated and competent to teach in the 
high school IB program.  The District’s decision not to select them to be skipped for the high 
school IB program was reasonable and not arbitrary or capricious.  Nor was it established 
that Hardy or Kittleson is certificated and competent to bump into Mochsary’s art and IB 
position at the high school.     
 
 

Advanced Placement 

42. 

41. 

 
 
For this year’s reduction in particular kinds of services, the District has also 
determined to deviate from the order of seniority of certificated employees and to skip, and 
exempt from layoff, those certificated employees who are currently teaching an Advanced 
Placement (AP) course at the high school level.  The District’s AP program is comprised of 
academically rigorous courses in specific content areas for which its pupils can earn college 
credits.  To be able to teach an AP course, a teacher is required to undergo intensive training 
and to prepare and submit a course syllabus to the College Board for its approval.  As such, a 
certificated employee currently teaching an AP course would necessarily have the required 
AP training and course syllabus approved by the College Board.  The District has shown a 
need for certificated employees to teach in its AP program and reasonably determined what 
special training and experience is necessary for certificated employees to teach the AP 
program and to be skipped from the layoff process.   Further, the District determined that a 
certificated employee must have the same qualifications to be able to bump into an AP 
teaching position.   The District’s criteria for skipping and bumping teachers in the AP area 
were reasonable and based solely on the needs of the District and its pupils.   
 
 
School and teaches Rhetoric and Composition and English 5-6.  She holds a single subject 
credential in English.  She was served with a preliminary layoff notice.  In the its latest 
Bumping Chart, the District initially determined that Ortiz could bump Michael Humphries 
(285) but that she, in turn, would be bumped by Leslie Theobald (619).  Near the conclusion 
of the hearing, the District announced that it was withdrawing the preliminary notice issued 
to Humphries and he would be retained.  Humphries is a high school English teacher who 
teaches AP English Language and Composition.   Theobald is a middle school English 
teacher who likewise holds a single subject credential in English.  The District reasonably 
determined, and did not abuse its discretion, to skip Humphries and to have Ortiz bumped by 
Theobald.   
 
 
senior high school English teachers, Diana Carbonara (336) and Macy Jelinowicz (374).  
However, both of these teachers are being skipped.  Carbonara teaches an AP course and 
Ortiz may not bump into an AP position because she is not currently teaching an AP course.  
She has completed AP training but has not been assigned to teach an AP course yet.  The 
other teacher, Jelinowicz, is apparently being skipped because she teaches three periods of 
Reading Intervention Literacy Workshops.  It was not established that the District’s decision 

(B) During the hearing, Ortiz argued that she should be able to bump two less 

(A) Respondent Krystal Ortiz (425) is an English teacher at Wilson High 

 

 

18 

43. 

Respondent Ann Sourn (655) teaches history at the middle school level under 

to layoff Ortiz from her employment was arbitrary or an abuse of its discretion.  Ortiz may 
receive a final layoff notice.  
 
 
her clear single subject credential in social science.  She is subject to being bumped and 
argued that she should be able to bump several less senior certificated employees who teach 
high school history and hold single subject social science credentials.  Her arguments were 
not persuasive.  Each of these certificated employees, however, teaches at least one AP 
history class and are eligible to be skipped under the District’s AP skipping criteria.  Sourn 
does not teach an AP class and may not bump into their positions.   On the other hand, the 
District is proposing to have Sourn bumped by the more senior certificated employee 
Gabriella Belayachi (1097).  Belayachi is subject to layoff based on her position as a fourth 
grade intensive structured English teacher.  She can bump into Sourn’s middle school 
position by virtue of having a supplemental authorization in social science along with her 
multiple subject credential.  Sourn may receive a final layoff notice. 
 
 

AVID 

44. 

The District has determined to skip, and exempt from layoff, those certificated 

 
 
employees who are currently teaching one or more AVID classes at the middle school and 
high school levels.  AVID is a college-readiness program designed to increase the number of 
mid-academic pupils who enter college and have careers.  The District considers the AVID 
program to be an important component of its educational mission to help pupils who are less 
prepared or have received lesser amounts of services.  In general, in order to be certified or 
qualified to teach an AVID course, a teacher is required to complete three levels of 
specialized training.  However, the District plans to skip certificated employees currently 
teaching at least one AVID course even though they have not completed the three levels of 
specialized training.  On the other hand, to be eligible to bump a junior certificated employee 
who is currently assigned to teach in the AVID program, the District has determined that the 
more senior certificated employee must have completed the three levels of AVID training in 
Implementation, Tutorology, and Refining.   The District has shown a need for certificated 
employees to teach in its AVID programs and reasonably determined what special training 
and experience is required for skipping and bumping those certificated employees in the 
AVID programs.   The District’s determination was based solely on the needs of the District 
and its pupils. 
 
 
Respondent Julie Sparks (829) teaches accelerated Humanities core classes at 
a middle school and holds a multiple subject credential.  She is not teaching an AVID class 
this year but has completed the three levels of AVID training and introduces AVID skills to 
sixth grade pupils by rotating into two periods of self-contained sixth grade classes three to 
four times per week.  In doing so, Sparks teaches and supports goal-setting skills, note-
taking, reading, and organizational skills.  While she was not skipped for AVID because she 
is not teaching an AVID class, Sparks insists she can bump Cindy Pitts (719), a middle 
school language arts teacher, and Lori Primrose (698), a seventh grade language arts and 

45. 

 

19 

47. 

46. 

Respondent Anna Weber (136) is an eighth grade science teacher with a 

Respondent Brenda Ornelas (629) is an eighth grade history teacher who 

academic success teacher, but neither Pitts nor Primrose teach an AVID course or received a 
preliminary layoff notice.  Sparks also argued that she can bump Stacey Collins (447), an 
eighth grade English teacher, who has one AVID course in her course load, but Collins did 
not receive a preliminary notice and is not subject to layoff, and Sparks did not show that she 
has certification or competency to teach English.  As such, Sparks may not bump into these 
teachers’ positions.   
 
 
received tie-breaking credit for having completed two levels of AVID training.  Ornelas was 
not skipped as an AVID teacher because she is not teaching an AVID class this school year.  
She did coordinate an AVID program two years ago.  However, Ornelas may not bump a less 
senior certificated employee who has an AVID course load because it was not established 
that she has completed the three levels of training necessary to receive AVID certification.   
 
 
multiple subject credential in general subjects and introductory science.  Weber argued that 
she should be able to bump Dustin Shade (32) or Jagesh Patel (39).  Patel is a middle school 
science teacher who teaches math, engineering, and science achievement (MESA), which 
Weber has previously taught, but Patel is already subject to being bumped by another 
certificated employee more senior than Weber.  The District does not plan to layoff Shade, 
an intermediate science and GATE teacher, because he teaches an eighth grade AVID class.  
While Weber completed a two-day AVID science training program in 2009, it was not 
established that she has completed the required three levels of AVID training to bump into an 
AVID position.  Weber does not have tie-breaking credit for AVID training and does not 
teach an AVID class.  According to the latest Bumping Chart, the District has determined to 
have Billy Hong (1322) bump into Weber’s position.  Hong is more senior and is certificated 
to teach middle school science based on his supplemental authorization in science.  Weber 
may receive a final layoff notice.   
 
 
School whom the District has proposed to be bumped by the more senior certificated 
employee Thyjuan Harris (2679).    Beisel holds a clear single subject credential in social 
science and a clear multiple subject credential.   She has argued that she should be able to 
bump respondents Elizabeth Duty (272) and Santiago Camarena (318), who are also middle 
school teachers.  However, Duty and Camarena each teach an AVID course and it was not 
established that Beisel has ever taught AVID or undergone the requisite three-levels of 
AVID training to be eligible to bump them.  In any case, the District plans to have Duty 
bumped by respondent Tracie Gallagher (400), a middle school Humanities core and current 
AVID teacher, and does not plan to issue a final layoff notice to Camarena.  Beisel’s 
argument was not persuasive and she may receive a final layoff notice.   
 
 
Respondent Alexandria Moreland (156) is a middle school science and GATE 
teacher with clear credentials in biological science and general subjects.  Initially, the District 
planned to have Moreland bumped by the more senior Carol Clanton (1208).  Moreland then 
argued that, with her single science biology credential, she should be able to bump the 

Respondent Grace Beisel (539) is a sixth grade teacher at Stephens Middle 

49. 

48. 

 

20 

following less senior high school science teachers:  Dustin Shade (32), Jagesh Patel (39), 
Anne Maben (83), and Matthew Michelin (94).  The District re-examined Moreland’s 
credentials and assignment and determined that she should bump Patel but that she, in turn, 
should still be bumped by Clanton.  Shade teaches an AVID course and is being skipped.  It 
was not shown that the District’s redetermination was incorrect or unreasonable.  Moreland 
may receive a final layoff notice. 
 
 

AVID and Social Science 

51. 

50. 

Respondent Michael Carroll (316) holds a clear single subject credential in 

Respondent Megan Shihady (753) is a middle school history teacher with a 

 
 
social studies and teaches United States history at Poly Academy of Achievers and Leaders 
(PAAL).  The District has determined that he should be laid off pursuant to the reduction of 
high school social science instruction and that he is not eligible to bump any certificated 
employee.  Carroll argued that he should be able to bump several certificated employees who 
have less seniority but these other certificated employees all teach AP or AVID courses.  
Because it was not established that he teaches an AP course or has completed any AVID 
training, Carroll may not bump into these positions.  Carroll may receive a final layoff 
notice.      
 
 
clear multiple subject credential, a supplemental authorization in social science, and current 
board authorization for teaching social science from kindergarten through twelfth grade. 
The District proposes to have her bumped by Kelley Hoisington (1051), a second grade 
teacher with more seniority who can assume Shihady’s position by virtue of having a 
supplemental authorization in social science.  Because she is subject to being bumped, 
Shihady argued that she should be able to bump one high school and three middle school 
social science teachers, all of whom teach an AVID course.  Shihady argued that she can 
teach AVID because she received AVID training in history and social science in 2009, 
provides support for AVID teachers and participates in AVID activities at her school, and 
implements AVID strategies in her classes.  However, because it was not established that she 
has completed the three levels of AVID training, Shihady may not bump into a position that 
includes teaching an AVID course.  Shihady may be given a final layoff notice.   
 
 
in social science and teaches history, including accelerated medieval world history, and 
GATE at a middle school.   She received a preliminary layoff notice.  Hamilton has 
completed an undetermined number of levels of AVID training for which she received 
tiebreaking credit.  She is not eligible to be skipped as an AVID teacher since she is not 
teaching an AVID course this year but, in prior school years, she did teach AVID elective 
courses and was an AVID elective coordinator at her site.  During the hearing, Hamilton 
argued that she should be able to bump three less senior certificated employees, including 
Stephanie Manion (140).  The District now plans to allow Hamilton to bump Manion but also 
plans to have Hamilton be bumped by the more senior Kathy George (1285).   
 

(A) Respondent Gail Hamilton (580) possesses a clear single subject credential 

52. 

 

21 

 

 

(B) Respondent Stephanie Manion (140) has a clear single subject credential 

(C) Respondent Kathy George (1285) is a kindergarten teacher and has a life 

 
in social science and teaches medieval world history and one or two periods of AVID at a 
middle school.   She did not receive tiebreaking credit for completing AVID training.  
Nevertheless, because she is currently teaching an AVID course, Manion should be eligible 
to be skipped for AVID.   It was not established why the District did not skip Manion for 
AVID.  While Manion is junior to Hamilton, it was not established that Hamilton has 
completed the three levels of AVID training required to bump into the AVID position held 
by Manion.   
 
 
standard elementary credential in sociology.  George is more senior than Hamilton but it was 
not established whether George with her elementary credential is certificated and competent 
to teach Hamilton’s course load of social science, history, and medieval history.   
 
(D) Based on Findings 52(A) – (C) above, respondent Manion should be 
 
skipped pursuant to the District’s criteria for skipping certificated employees currently 
teaching AVID at the middle or high school level.  Moreover, because it was not established 
that George should be able to bump Hamilton, Hamilton should not be served with a final 
layoff notice either. 
 
 

 

Elementary Teaching 

 

53. 

(B) For her part, Gladinus argued that she should be able to bump into 

 
 
(A) Respondent Elizabeth Gladinus (1429) is a kindergarten teacher who holds 
a multiple subject credential.  She is assigned to a 0.50 FTE position because she is sharing a 
job with another certificated employee.  Gladinus is entitled to return to a full-time teaching 
position.  However, the District has proposed to terminate her employment due the reduction 
of particular kinds of services.  The District plans to reassign Terri Mostert (1610) and have 
her bump into Gladinus’ kindergarten position.   Mostert is on special assignment in a special 
education position.  Mostert is certificated to teach kindergarten based on her clear multiple 
subject credential.    
 
 
positions held by Griselda Rodriguez (1323A), Cindy Pitts (719), Annemarie Lander (1223), 
and Grant Robinson (1220).   Rodriguez holds a multiple subject credential and teaches 
second grade Excel but is subject to being bumped by a certificated employee more senior 
than Gladinus.  Pitts is a middle school language arts teacher and Lander teaches eighth 
grade history and seventh grade language arts.  Gladinus argued that she is eligible to receive 
board authorization in language arts and social studies.  However, since she does not 
currently hold a credential or board authorization to teach middle school language arts or 
social studies for the ensuing school year, Gladinus may not bump into the positions held by 
Pitts and Lander.  Pitts and Lander were not served with preliminary layoff notices.  Finally, 
Robinson teaches accelerated science and math in a self-contained sixth grade classroom 
under a multiple subject credential.  He is now subject to being bumped himself by a 
certificated employee more senior than Gladinus.  Accordingly, it was not established that 

 

22 

the District erred or was arbitrary in these bumping determinations.  Gladinus may receive a 
final layoff notice.   
 
 

Math 

55. 

54. 

Respondent Wendy Tunnicliff (184) is a middle school math teacher who 

 
 
possesses a clear multiple subject credential and a clear single subject credential in 
foundational math not including trigonometry or calculus.   At the outset of this proceeding, 
the District planned to have Tunnicliff bumped by the more senior Mary Steward (929), a 
first grade teacher with a clear multiple subject credential and a supplemental authorization 
in math.  Tunnicliff then testified and argued that she should be able to bump several less 
senior high school math teachers, including Rebeka Luu (123).  The District then re-
examined the credentials and assignments of Tunnicliff and other math teachers and 
determined that Tunnicliff should, in fact, bump Luu but that she should still be bumped by 
Stewart.  It was not established that the District’s bumping redetermination was incorrect or 
unreasonable or that Tunnicliff should be able to bump any other less senior certificated 
employee in math.  Tunnicliff may receive a final layoff notice. 
 
 
Respondent Jeffrey Jackson (2347) is a computer teacher at Reid High School 
and holds a single subject credential in industrial and technology education.  Originally, the 
District determined Jackson was subject to layoff due to the reduction of computer 
applications instruction at the high school level.   After Jackson contended that he should 
bump a less senior certificated employee, the District determined that he should bump Gary 
Romanio (177), a teacher who teaches several core subjects at Cabrillo High School with a 
single subject credential in art.  Jackson is not identified as a respondent who will be 
receiving a final layoff notice.   
 
 
and possesses a multiple subject credential.  Under its preliminary layoff or bumping 
analysis, Ward was subject to being bumped by Rosemary Sissons (2415), a teacher on 
special assignment, pursuant to the reduction of learning directors.  During the hearing, Ward 
argued for additional tiebreaker credit and that she was credentialed and competent to bump 
less senior certificated employees.  After the District agreed to grant additional tiebreaker 
credit to her, Ward did not appear on the most recent Bumping Chart (Exh. 22).   
Examination of the Certificated Seniority List also revealed that Sissons was not served with 
a preliminary layoff notice but the District plans to reassign her and noted her to be bumping 
Raina Southwell (913) on the most recent Bumping Chart.   Ward is not identified as a 
respondent who will be receiving a final layoff notice. 
 
 
for the District.  She holds a clear multiple subject credential and a supplemental 
authorization in math.  Martinez received a preliminary layoff notice due to the reduction of 
TOSA ELL teacher coaches by 11.00 FTE.  After she testified in the hearing and upon re-
examination of respondents’ credentials and assignments, the District has now determined 

Respondent Lina Martinez (721) is an English Language Learner (ELL) coach 

Respondent Lea Ward (1449) is a Humanities core teacher at a middle school 

57. 

56. 

 

23 

58. 

Respondent Anna Marie Olvera Estrada (567) possesses a multiple subject 

that Martinez should bump Ling Bensie (309).  Bensie is math teacher and math department 
chair at a school serving pupils from kindergarten through eighth grade.  She possesses a 
multiple subject credential and a supplemental authorization in introductory mathematics.  
She teaches Algebra 1-2, seventh grade math and accelerated math, and seventh grade 
mathematics development.  Bensie received a preliminary layoff notice.  The District’s 
determination that Martinez is certificated and competent to bump Bensie and teach her 
classes was not shown to be erroneous or an abuse of discretion.  Bensie, but not Martinez, 
may receive a final layoff notice.    
 
 
credential in general subjects and supplemental authorizations in history, introductory 
English, and introductory social science.  She teaches English at the middle school level and 
received a preliminary layoff notice due to the reduction in elementary classroom instruction.  
Estrada argued that she should be able to bump less senior teachers in social science or 
history but she has no prior experience teaching history or social science above the 
elementary level.  Her claim that she can bump a less senior math teacher because she is 
eligible to receive board authorization to teach math was not persuasive inasmuch as she 
does not hold any current board authorization to teach math for the next school year.  Since 
the outset of the hearing in this matter, the District determined that Estrada may bump Karla 
Sorensen (398) but, in turn, she will be bumped by Jacqueline Hernandez (1224).  Sorensen 
is a less senior middle school teacher who holds a clear single subject credential in English.  
Hernandez is a more senior elementary school teacher with a multiple subject credential.   It 
was not established that the District’s bumping redetermination was incorrect or an abuse of 
discretion or that Estrada should be able to bump any other less senior certificated employee 
in English or social science.  Estrada may receive a final layoff notice. 
 
 

Spanish 

59.   Respondent Gildenia Carvajal (276) possesses a clear single subject credential 

 
 
in Spanish and is assigned to teach Spanish at the Poly Academy of Achievers and Leaders 
(PAAL).  Carvajal was initially subject to being bumped and argued that she should be able 
to bump the less senior high school Spanish teacher Kristina Kim (130).  The District 
thereupon re-examined the credentials and assignments of Carvajal and Kim and determined 
that Carvajal could, in fact, bump Kim.  However, the District further found that Carvajal 
should still be bumped and laid off.  It was not established that the District’s bumping 
redetermination was incorrect or unreasonable or that Carvajal should be able to bump any 
other less senior certificated employee in Spanish.  Carvajal may receive a final layoff notice. 
 
 
Respondent Janice Johnson-Lichfield (243) is a high school Spanish teacher 
with a clear standard secondary credential in Spanish and a supplemental authorization in 
music.  The District has determined that Johnson-Lichfield should be bumped by Lupe 
Garcia (579) and Garcia, in turn, should be bumped by Dinna Un-Maciel (1088) due to the 
reduction of Spanish instruction.  Respondent Garcia teaches Spanish at a middle school 
while holding a clear single subject credential in Spanish.  As such, Garcia may bump 

60. 

 

24 

Johnson-Lichfield.  However, respondent Un-Maciel, an elementary school teacher with a 
multiple subject credential and a supplemental authorization in Spanish, has been released or 
dismissed from the layoff process, as set forth in Exhibit 21.  Accordingly, Garcia may bump 
into Johnson-Lichfield’s high school position and Johnson-Lichfield may receive a final 
layoff notice.  
 
 

Science 

61. 

 
 
Respondent Christie Endres (263) teaches eighth grade science at Marshall 
Middle School and has a preliminary single subject credential in biological sciences.  The 
District has proposed to have Endres bumped by a more senior certificated employee, 
Jacklyn Schulte (1109), who teaches kindergarten but holds a clear single subject credential 
in life science.   Due to the prospect of being bumped, Endres contended that she should be 
able to bump several certificated employees with less seniority.  However, three of them 
teach either at least one AVID or an AP course and Endres does not teach AVID or AP and 
has not completed the required AVID or AP training to bump into those positions.   She only 
attended a level one AVID training a few summers ago.   It was not established that the 
District’s determination to reassign Schulte and to bump Endres was erroneous or an abuse 
of its discretion.  Endres may be given a final layoff notice.   
 
 

English Learner and English 

62. 

 
Respondent Allison Arzuman (1418) is a second grade, English only, teacher 
 
with a clear multiple subject credential.   She has a non-bilingual EL certificate and a CLAD 
and teaches pupils who are English learners.  The District proposes to have Arzuman 
bumped by the more senior certificated employee, Deborah Avila (2017), who teaches eighth 
grade economics and holds a clear multiple subject credential and a board authorization for 
the current school year to teach social science.  Avila also received tie-breaker credit for 
having a non-bilingual EL certification and a CLAD.  It was established that Avila is 
certificated and competent to be reassigned to Arzuman’s elementary teaching position.   For 
her part, Arzuman contended that she should be able to bump the less senior Osvaldo 
Ocampo (1221), an English Language Learner coach who has a clear multiple subject 
credential and a clear CLAD certificate.  She added that she currently teaches EL pupils and 
has received SDAIE training to teach ELL pupils.  Unfortunately, the District plans to bump 
Ocampo by reassigning Athena Alfaro (2926) to that ELL coach position.  Alfaro has more 
seniority than Arzuman and holds a multiple subject credential with an EL certificate and a 
BCLAD certificate.  The District’s determination to bump Arzuman and to reassign Alfaro to 
Ocampo’s position was not shown to be erroneous or an abuse of discretion.  Arzuman may 
receive a final layoff notice.    
 
 
She possesses a multiple subject credential in general subjects and a supplemental 
authorization in English.  The District served Valenzuela with a preliminary layoff notice and 

(A) Respondent Mireya Valenzuela (446) is a middle school English teacher.  

63. 

 

25 

 

64. 

Respondent Julianne Beebe (335) is a high school English teacher at PAAL 

(B) Respondent Hegamin (1053) is a fifth grade English teacher who holds a 

proposes to have her bumped by the more senior Sheila Lee (1321) due to the reduction of 
special education intervention and progress specialists.  Like Valenzuela, Lee possesses a 
multiple subject credential and a supplemental authorization in English.  Here, Valenzuela 
contended that she should be able to bump the less senior Kimberlie Smith (371), a sixth 
grade English teacher.  Smith also has a multiple subject credential and a supplemental 
authorization in introductory English.  Valenzuela should be able to bump Smith, but, Smith 
is already slated to be bumped by the more senior Terrence Hegamin.    
 
 
clear multiple subject credential in general subjects and special preparation for teaching 
middle-level students as well as a supplemental authorization in English. With his credential 
and supplemental authorization, Hegamin is able to bump Smith and to teach her course load.  
It was not established that the District’s determination to have Hegamin bump Smith and to 
have Lee bump Valenzuela was erroneous or arbitrary and capricious.  Both Valenzuela and 
Smith may receive final layoff notices.   
 
 
and holds a clear single subject credential in English.  The District plans to have Beebe 
bumped by reassigning the more senior Paula Libby (1365) to her position due to the 
reduction of the particular kind of service for AVID and AP coordinator by 1.0 FTE.  Libby 
has four periods of ―AVID Peer Tutor‖ at Cabrillo High School and is noted to be a 
department head.  Although Libby was not served with a preliminary layoff notice to indicate 
that her position is being eliminated in this layoff proceeding, the District may reassign 
Libby and have her bump Beebe due to the reduction of AVID and AP coordinator.   It was 
not established that the District’s determination to reassign Libby and to have her bump 
Beebe was arbitrary or an abuse of its discretion.  Beebe may be given a final layoff notice.    
 
 
possesses a life standard secondary teaching credential in sociology and social science and 
supplemental authorizations in English and physical education.  He teaches five periods of 
English, including one period of accelerated English, and coaches the boys’ tennis teams at 
the high school.  He is subject to being bumped by the more senior certificated employee, 
Alissa Gamboa (1110), a fourth grade teacher who received a preliminary layoff notice 
pursuant to the reduction of the particular kind of service in elementary instruction.  Gamboa 
is more senior than Murry and holds a clear single subject credential in English which 
authorizes her to assume the teaching of Murry’s English classes.    
 
 
because she does not possess a physical education credential and cannot teach his physical 
education class in the fall.  However, the Certificated Seniority List does not show that 
Murry teaches any period of physical education.  In addition, he is not assigned to the 
physical education department.  The evidence demonstrated that he coaches the boys’ tennis 
teams in eighth period which would be considered an after school program.   Second, Murry 
argued that he cannot be laid off because of the protections afforded to him as a U.S. Army 
veteran by the federal Veterans’ Preference Act of 1944 (Act).   However, Murry did not 

(A) Respondent Jack Murry (422) is a high school English teacher who 

(B) First, Murry contended that Gamboa cannot bump into his position 

65. 

 

 

26 

establish by his submittals of the synopsis of the Act and the article by Minnesota law firm 
that the Act bars his layoff from employment in this state under Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955.   Third, Murry’s bumping arguments were not persuasive.  As such, Murry 
may be given a final layoff notice.    
 
 

Health Science and Business Education 

67. 

66. 

Respondent Mark Jonas (450) is a health science teacher and health 

Respondent Shannon Brizendine (576) teaches health education at a middle 

 
 
school pursuant to her clear single subject credential in health sciences.  She also teaches one 
period of seventh grade accelerated science pursuant to a Governing Board authorization for 
biological science for kindergarten through grade 8.   Initially, Brizendine was subject to 
being bumped and then argued that she should be able to bump the less senior middle school 
science teachers, Helen Ahn (570) and Sonia McMichael (537).  However, neither Ahn nor 
McMichael was served with a preliminary notice and are not subject to layoff.  Subsequently, 
the District determined that Brizendine should be bumped by a more senior high school 
health education teacher, Stephen Heavin (323), pursuant to the reduction of high school 
health science services.  It was not established that the District’s bumping redetermination 
was incorrect or unreasonable or that Brizendine should be able to bump any other less 
senior certificated employee in science.  Brizendine may receive a final layoff notice. 
 
 
department head at a school for kindergartners through eighth graders.  He holds a clear 
multiple subject credential and a supplemental authorization in health science.  He received a 
preliminary layoff notice and is subject to being bumped by the more senior Cheryl Deaton 
(3798).   Deaton is a health education and computer teacher at Renaissance High School.  
She holds a clear single subject credential in health science and industrial and technology 
education and a supplemental authorization in biology.  Deaton did not receive a preliminary 
layoff notice but the District has determined to reassign her to Jonas’ position or assignment.  
Jonas has argued that Deaton cannot teach all of his classes.  He teaches health and science to 
seventh graders but also science for eighth graders.  Jonas contended that eighth grade 
science includes chemistry, astronomy, and physical science and Deaton is not competent to 
teach those subjects while holding a supplemental authorization for biology.  Jonas’ 
argument was not persuasive, for if he can teach eighth grade science with his multiple 
subject credential and a supplemental authorization in health science then Deaton should be 
able to do so with her single subject health science credential.   Deaton may bump Jonas and 
Jonas may receive a final layoff notice.   
 
Respondent Michael Carr (1902) holds a clear single subject credential in 
 
business and is a high school business education teacher.  He teaches several periods of 
computer applications and was given a preliminary layoff notice due to the reduction of 
instruction of high school computer applications.  Carr argued that he should be able to bump 
less senior respondents at the high school level since he has a single subject business 
credential and is authorized to teach their business courses.  According to the most recent 
Bumping Chart, the District plans to have Carr bump into a position held by a less senior 

68. 

 

27 

certificated employee after conducting a series of bumps, including Carlin Stein (462).  As 
such, the District does not plan to give a final layoff notice to Carr.  It was not established 
that the District’s bumping redetermination was incorrect or arbitrary and capricious.   
 
 

Music 

70. 

69. 

 
Respondent Grant Robinson (1220) is a sixth grade GATE and self-contained 
 
classroom teacher who teaches accelerated science and math.  He possesses a clear multiple 
subject credential.  He claims to have a supplemental authorization in music.  According to 
the latest Bumping Chart, the District plans to have Robinson bumped by Christine 
Montemer (2996), who is subject to layoff due to the reduction in special education 
intervention and progress specialists by 43.0 FTE.  Montemer has a clear multiple subject 
credential, a supplemental authorization in music, and a certificate of eligibility for an 
administrative services credential; she is on special assignment at an elementary school.  
Montemer was not served with a preliminary layoff notice and the District was not planning 
to terminate her employment. However, the District now seeks to reassign Montemer to 
Robinson’s position.  In any case, Robinson claims that he can assume the assignments of 
any of three less senior middle school music teachers, each of whom possesses a single 
subject credential in music.  Inasmuch as the Certificated Seniority List does not demonstrate 
that he holds any credential or authorization to teach music, Robinson’s bumping claims 
must be rejected at this time.   
 
 
(A) Respondent Drew Holt (151) holds a preliminary single subject credential 
in music and teaches music at Renaissance High School, the District’s performing arts high 
school.  He teaches freshman, intermediate, and advance concert choir and international 
choir.  In connection with his choir duties, Holt prepares students for choir festivals.  He also 
teaches beginning, intermediate, and advance guitar, which involve instruction in note 
reading and classical and jazz performance.  Aside from his credential, Holt has a master’s 
degree in choral conducting, engaged in vocal performances, taught voice, and directed 
musicals.   Holt received a preliminary layoff notice but, initially, was not slated for layoff.  
Upon re-analysis of credentials and assignments, the District has now determined that Holt 
may be bumped by respondent Stacy Burcham and should be laid off.   
 
 
music and is a music teacher at Lakewood High School where she teaches jazz band, 
exploring music, orchestra, drill team, band, symphonic winds, and physical education with a 
marching band emphasis.  She arranges vocal and instrumental music for her high school’s 
shows and helps to produce musical performances each year.  She has previous experience in 
teaching choir and guitar for different school districts and as a student-teacher.  She also 
teaches singing and choir at a summer music camp and has performed vocally and given 
vocal lessons.   Burcham was served with a preliminary layoff notice and initially was not 
slated for layoff.   Upon redetermination of credentials and assignments, the District has 
determined that Burcham is certificated and competent to bump the less senior Holt from his 
high school music position but that she, in turn, is subject to being bumped by respondent 

(B) Respondent Stacy Burcham (224A) has a single subject credential in 

 

 

28 

 

 

(C) Respondent Geoffrey Barbe (275) possesses a single subject credential in 

(D) Respondent Timothy Borgerding (1052) is a fifth grade teacher who holds 

Geoffrey Barbe.   In this proceeding, Burcham argued that Barbe may not bump her because 
she has successfully completed sign language classes and uses sign language to teach deaf 
and hard-of-hearing pupils in band and music classes in the absence of an interpreter and 
Barbe does not possess the ability to use sign language.  It was not established, however, that 
Burcham’s sign language skills are an essential or required component of her teaching duties 
or that she is assigned to teach music to a class comprised solely or largely of deaf and hard-
of-hearing pupils.   Burcham’s argument that Barbe may not bump her was not persuasive.      
 
 
music and teaches beginning and advanced orchestra, steel drum band, and beginning and 
advanced band at Stephens Middle School.   He does not teach an AVID class this year for 
purposes of skipping.  He has not completed the three levels of AVID training to qualify to 
bump into an AVID position.   Upon re-examination of credentials and assignments, the 
District has determined that Barbe may bump Burcham but that he, in turn, is subject to 
being bumped by Timothy Borgerding.   Barbe has experience in supervising school color 
guards, drill teams, and jazz bands while he previously taught at three different high schools 
in other school districts.   
 
 
a multiple subject credential.  He was served with a preliminary layoff notice due to the 
reduction in elementary school services.  However, because he also possesses a supplemental 
authorization in music, Borgerding may bump into a music position.   The District has 
determined that Borgerding may bump Barbe at the middle school level.   
 
 
District’s determinations to bump respondents Holt, Burcham, and Barbe were incorrect or 
arbitrary and capricious.  Nor was it established that Holt, Burcham, and Barbe are able to 
bump any other less senior certificated employee in music.  Respondents Holt, Burcham, and 
Barbe may receive final layoff notices. 
 
 
She possesses a clear single subject credential in music. Yoon was served with a preliminary 
layoff notice but the District has now determined that she should bump Karina Ivey (313).  
Ivey is a music teacher for kindergarten through eighth grade and holds a single subject 
credential in music and art.  It was not established that the District’s determination to have 
Yoon bump Ivey was an incorrect analysis of the certificated employees’ credentials and 
assignments or an abuse of its discretion to reassign certificated employees to facilitate the 
reduction of particular kinds of services.  Yoon was not identified as a respondent who will 
receive a final layoff notice.   
 
 
Respondent Megan Carungcong (179A) is an itinerant music teacher who 
holds a clear single subject credential to teach music.  She received a preliminary layoff 
notice and the District has determined that she is not certificated and competent to bump any 
less senior certificated employee.  Carungcong argued that she should be able to bump either 
respondent Holt or respondent Burcham but the District has determined that Burcham may 

Respondent Anne Yoon (533) is an itinerant music teacher for the District.  

(E) Based on Findings 70(A) – (D) above, it was not established that the 

72. 

71. 

 

 

29 

bump Holt and that Burcham is subject to being bumped herself.  It was not established that 
the District’s bumping redeterminations or that the District’s determination that Carungcong 
cannot bump any other less senior certificated employee in music was incorrect or an abuse 
of its discretion.  Carungcong may receive a final layoff notice. 
 
 

Art 

73. 

Respondent Alison Rockwood (478) is an art teacher at Lakewood High 

 
 
School where she teaches four periods of drawing and painting and one period of ceramics.  
She possesses a clear single subject credential in art, a master’s degree, and AP training.  
Rockwood was served with a preliminary layoff notice and the District proposes to terminate 
her employment pursuant to the reduction of high school art instruction.  In this proceeding, 
while she admits that she has not taught AP art or prepared an AP syllabus for approval by 
the College Board, Rockwood contended that she should be able to bump certificated 
employee Catherine Jones (146), who teaches drawing and painting at another high school.  
Jones, however, is being skipped because she has AP training but, more importantly, 
currently teaches one period of AP art history.  The District’s decision not to allow 
Rockwood to bump Jones was reasonable and not an abuse of discretion inasmuch as 
Rockwood has not taught AP art or prepared an AP syllabus to teach AP art.  Rockwood may 
be given a final notice of layoff.    
 
 

Physical Education and Dance 

74. 

(A) Respondent Warren Smitheran (997) is a high school physical education 

 
 
and computer applications teacher who possesses a clear single subject credential in physical 
education and a supplemental authorization in computer concepts and applications.  He was 
served with a preliminary layoff notice due to the reduction in high school computer 
applications instruction.  At the hearing, Smitheran contended that he can teach the physical 
education classes as well as the dance classes of fellow high school physical education 
teachers who are junior to him in seniority and that he should be able to bump to their 
positions.  Subsequently, the District determined that Smitheran should bump respondent 
Mario Morales (845).   
 
 
Middle School.  He possesses a single subject credential in physical education and teaches 
several periods of physical education to eighth grade pupils.  Ortiz argued that he can bump 
Morales inasmuch as he has the credential and experience in providing instruction in weight 
training and advanced kinesiology to high school pupils.   He previously taught ninth grade 
physical education at Reid High School.  In addition, Ortiz contended that he can bump 
several high school dance teachers.  His physical education credential allows him to teach 
dance and he has experience in teaching dance.  The physical education curriculum for 
eighth grade includes square dancing.  Ortiz also took classes in college in dance and is 
proficient in line dancing, salsa, and cowboy boogie.    

(B) Respondent Tito Ortiz (987) is a physical education teacher at Hughes 

 

 

30 

 

 

75. 

(C) Respondent Mario Morales (845) is a physical education teacher at Wilson 

 
High School.   He holds a clear single subject credential in physical education.  He teaches 
two periods of weight training, two periods of advanced kinesiology, and two periods of 
team football.  Pupils receive physical education credit for taking the team football classes 
where Morales instructs the students on weight training and the fundamentals, techniques, 
and safety requirements to play football.  After school, Morales coaches the high school 
football team during team practices and games.  His position as football coach requires him 
to attend football clinics and to confer with college and professional football coaches.  
Morales has less seniority than Smitheran.   
 
(D) Based on Findings 74 (A) – (C) above, while Smitheran and Ortiz do 
 
possess the same credential as Morales and are therefore certificated to teach Morales’ 
courses in weight training and advanced kinesiology, it was not established that Smitheran or 
Ortiz possesses the competency to teach his courses in team football.  Neither Smitheran nor 
Ortiz demonstrated that he has previously taught team football or has the skills, 
qualifications, or experience to assume the teaching of the two periods of team football.  As 
such, neither Smitheran nor Ortiz is competent to bump into Morales’ position.  Morales may 
not be given a final layoff notice.   
 
 
(A) Respondent Johanna Knox (846) is a high school physical education 
teacher with a single subject credential in physical education.  She teaches tenth grade 
advanced kinesiology as well as two periods of ninth grade physical education with a dance 
emphasis.  The latter course involves the instruction of the art and techniques of dance, 
including timing and choreography.   
 
 
School and holds a single subject credential in English and a supplemental authorization in 
dance.  Her supplemental authorization permits Waters to teach dance in grades 12 and 
below.  She teaches at least four periods of physical education with a dance emphasis and 
two periods of dance.  In her course load, Waters teaches beginning, intermediate, and 
advanced dance for grades nine through 12.   The curriculum that she teaches includes the 
history and art of dance, body awareness, choreography, and various forms of dance, such as 
modern, jazz, Latin, and hip hop.  In addition, Waters produces, manages, and choreographs 
student dance performances and productions.  Pupils can earn both physical education and 
performing arts credits for taking her dance classes.   
 
 
Cabrillo High School and holds a single subject credential in physical education.  She 
teaches physical education with a dance emphasis and dance, including advanced dance.  
While pupils may take her beginning dance class for physical education credit, pupils are 
required to audition for the upper level classes for which they may receive fine art credit. 
After school, Clark-Booth oversees dance team activities.  In her classes, she teaches the art 
of dance and several forms of dance, such as jazz and folk dance.  She has also trained and 
performed with the professional dance company Alvin Ailey and coordinated dance at a 
community college and a high school for performing arts.   

(B) Respondent Jennifer Waters (741) is a dance teacher at Millikan High 

(C) Respondent Keisha Clark-Booth (577) is a dance and cheer teacher at 

 

 

 

31 

 

76. 

(B) Respondents Knox, Waters, and Clark-Booth were served with 

(A) Based on Findings 74(A) – (C) and 75(A) – (C) above, it was not 

 
established that respondents Smitheran, Ortiz, and Morales are competent to teach the dance 
assignments and classes of respondents Knox, Waters, and Clark-Booth.  The latter dance 
instructors have specialized knowledge and experience in various forms of dance, the art of 
dance, choreography, and dance production which Smitheran, Ortiz, and Morales do not 
possess.  While their physical education credentials allow them to teach dance, Smitheran, 
Ortiz, and Morales can only teach social forms of dancing and not the high levels of dance 
and choreography required for dance at the high school level.  Smitheran, Ortiz, and Morales 
may not bump into the dance assignments or teaching positions of Knox, Waters, and Clark-
Booth.   
 
 
preliminary layoff notices, but the District did not indicate having any plans to terminate 
their employment.     
 
 
Smitheran may be laid off pursuant to the reduction of high school computer applications 
instruction.  According to the latest bumping chart, the District plans to reassign the more 
senior certificated employee Samuel Thompson (3346), a high school health education 
teacher with a life single subject credential in physical education and a current board 
authorization for health science, and to have Thompson bump Ortiz.  The District’s 
determinations to terminate Smitheran and to bump Ortiz were not shown to be unreasonable 
or an abuse of discretion.  Smitheran and Ortiz may receive final layoff notices.   
 
 

(C) Based on Findings 74(A) – (D), 75(A) – (C), and 76(A) above, respondent 

 

Counseling 

77. 

78. 

Respondents Spencer Barber (366) and Lashonda Bogin (271) are both 

The Governing Board resolved to reduce or eliminate the particular kind of 

 
 
service of counseling services by 35.0 FTE.   In this District, counselors are considered 
management employees and are not represented by the teachers’ association.  As such, the 
majority of self-represented certificated employees in this proceeding (Exh. 24) were 
counselors.   
 
 
counselors at Cabrillo High School.   Each holds a clear pupil personnel services credential.  
Bogin also has a preliminary multiple subject credential.  Each is subject to layoff due to the 
reduction of counseling services.  During the hearing, respondents separately complained 
about the District’s determination to skip the less senior certificated employee, Lionel 
Gonzalez (250), who is a counselor at Jordan High School and holds a clear pupil personnel 
services credential.  Gonzalez was served with a preliminary notice.  Respondents 
characterized Gonzalez’s position as head counselor of the Male Academy at that high 
school and contend that no special training or experience is needed to fill the position of head 
counselor at the Male Academy.  Respondents asserted that they have the credentials and 
competency to be head counselor of the Male Academy.  Barber has acted as a liaison to the 
Male Academy at his site and Bogin has been the leader of an AVID program and counsels 

 

32 

79. 

Respondent Erika Medina (216A) is a counselor at Lakewood High School 

at-risk pupils.  Here, however, the District determined to skip Gonzalez not as or to be head 
counselor of the Male Academy, but because he has developed programs for at-risk pupils 
and training models for counselors and teachers to work with at-risk pupils.  As such, the 
District demonstrated that it has a special need for personnel to be a counselor for the Male 
Academy at Jordan High School and determined that Gonzalez has special training and 
experience to fill that position, which special training and experience other certificated 
employees and/or respondents with more seniority do not possess.  It was not established that 
the District’s determination was arbitrary and capricious and not based solely on the needs of 
the District and its pupils. As such, Gonzalez may be skipped from the District’s layoff 
process pursuant to Education Code section 44495, subdivision (d), and Barber and Bogin 
may be given final layoff notices that their services will not be needed next year due to the 
reduction of particular kinds of services in counseling.    
 
 
and holds a clear pupil personnel services credential.  Medina contends that her seniority date 
should be updated by four days because she worked as a senior office assistant for the 
District during pre-registration.  Medina was given tie-breaking credit that improved her 
seniority but her four days of work as a classified employee will not count towards her first 
date of paid service as a certificated employee.  Medina also complained that she should be 
retained or skipped because she is fluent in Spanish.  The District’s determination not to 
retain or skip Medina was not shown to be arbitrary or capricious.   Medina may be given a 
final layoff notice.   
 
 
holds a life standard designated subjects credential in public safety education, a clear single 
subject credential in art, a life standard pupil personnel services credential in pupil 
counseling and psychology, and a life standard elementary credential in art and 
anthropology, and a professional administrative services credential.  Takagi contends that she 
should be skipped and retained because she has extensive experience in several areas 
including data analysis, special education, and administration.  She has presented at 
conferences and published articles.  However, the determination of the District not to skip 
Takagi is within its sound discretion and not arbitrary or capricious. Takagi may be given a 
final layoff notice due to the reduction of counseling services.    
 
 
possesses a clear pupil personnel services credential in school counseling.  She is employed 
in a 0.60 FTE position and considered to be a first year probationary employee.  In this 
proceeding, Bender contested her status as a probationary employee, stating that she has 
worked for the District since October 1998 and should be re-classified as a permanent 
employee because she worked for three or more days each week in the past school years.  It 
was not established, however, that Bender served or worked for at least 75 percent of the 
District’s school days in any two complete consecutive school years to qualify for permanent 
status within the meaning of Education Code sections 44908 and 44929.21.  As such, Bender 
may be given a final notice and laid off prior to any permanent counselor.   
 

Respondent Carol Takagi (220) is a counselor at Lakewood High School.  She 

Respondent Rosalin Bender (2089) is an elementary school counselor and 

81. 

80. 

 

33 

Head Start 

82. 

Respondent Natividad Magallon has been a preschool teacher for the District’s 

 
 
Head Start program for 10 years and holds a child development permit and child 
development site supervisor permit.  In this proceeding, Magallon asserted that she cannot be 
laid off from her preschool job because the Head Start program is not part of the District’s 
regular educational program.  Under Education Code section 44909, the District may employ 
persons possessing an appropriate credential as certificated employees in programs and 
projects to perform services conducted under contract with public or private agencies or 
categorically funded projects which are not required by federal or state statutes as long as the 
terms and conditions under which such persons are employed are mutually agreed upon and 
reduced to writing.  Here, Magallon, like other temporary employees and employees in 
categorically funded programs, signed a special contract every year for temporary 
employment in a categorically funded or contract program.  It was not established that 
Magallon at any time was employed as a probationary employee.  As a temporary 
certificated employee in the Head Start or child development program, Magallon was entitled 
to notice under Education Code sections 8366, 44949, and 44954 before she can be 
dismissed from her job.  On March 1, 2011, the District provided notice to Magallon and 
other temporary certificated employees in the Head Start program that their services will not 
be required for the next school year.  As a temporary certificated employee, Magallon may 
be released from her employment.   
 
 
83.  Any claims and contentions made by the parties at the hearing or in written 
argument for which there are no specific findings in this Proposed Decision were deemed 
unproven or were considered irrelevant or surplussage.   
 
 
 
 

*  *  *  *  *  *  * 

Pursuant to the foregoing findings of fact, the Administrative Law Judge makes the 

 
 
 
following determination of issues: 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1.   

Jurisdiction exists for the subject proceedings pursuant to Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955, based on Findings 1 – 25 above.  All notices, the Accusation, and 
other related papers and reports required by these Education Code sections have been 
provided in a timely manner and, as such, the parties have complied with the statutory 
requirements.   
 

 

 

34 

3. 

2.   

Cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to reduce 

 
or discontinue by 773.50 full-time equivalent positions the concomitant number of 
certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular 
kinds of services, based on Findings 1 – 83 above.   With respect to those respondents whose 
employment have been found to be terminable by the District and any other certificated 
employees who received notices but did not request a hearing, if any, the causes set forth in 
the Accusations relate solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils within the 
meaning of Education Code section 44949.   
 
 
Cause does not exist pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to 
terminate the employment of the following respondents and/or certificated employees:  Ryan 
Burns (122), Debra Davis-Garriott (1259), Barbara Gilmore (2810), Lidia Santana (147), 
Mikel Edillon (1175), Dalis La (1438), Helen Magana (1444), Michael Humphries (285), 
Dawn Lucchese (659), Rita Aslan (928), Maria Yepez (2175), Stephen Heavin (3230), 
Sheryl McGushion (2771), Lisa Boese (1705), Rachel Peters (2377), Dinna Un-Maciel 
(1088), Ruby Gaytan (2494), Samuel Thompson (3346), Jessica Parker (3070), Kay 
Whitman (760), Sonja Brown (1089), Sharon Chavez (3026), Kristy Freund-McFeggan 
(808), Stacy Copp (2661), Joan Russell (2350), Heather Mills (1654), Adara Newidouski 
(2178), Paul Lavecchio (3239), Paula Swiercz (1091), Tracy Fideler (1488), Patricia Grote 
(3960), Carla Castro (1397), Martin Axelson (3162), Shannon Mulvaney (2956), Ana Laura 
Frausto (889), Stephanie Bassard-Jones (3021), Wanda Selby (2436), Adriana Wright 
(3179), Victoria Bahr (1495), Julie Bates (1508), Timothy Branda (1492), Willette Clark 
(1586), Margaret Devine (1505), Heidi-Lynn Doon-Samaniego (1501), Michelle Franco 
(1509), Jessica Ghareeb (1489), James Goodrich (1498), Denise Grantham (1499), Leonard 
Hawkins, Jr. (1500), Phillip Higgins (1494), Marvin Holm (2976), Jennifer Kolb (1502), 
Linda Lofstrom (1491), Amy Love (1507), Mary McDonald (1506), Kathryn Meacham-
Shirley (1533), Glenda Mutz (1496), Annette Paluska (1503), Christy Pravednikov (1504), 
Elizabeth Robles (1487), Robb Rugeroni (2980), Terry Spencer (1493), Susan Temple 
(1690), Laura Wilcox (1490), and Justin Gaschen (1087), inasmuch as the District withdrew 
or dismissed the Accusation against these respondents and each of them, as set forth in 
Findings 18(A) and 18(B) above.       
 
 
terminate the employment of the following additional respondents and/or certificated 
employees:  Tiffaney Mocsary (542), Jeffrey Jackson (2347), Lea Ward (1449), Lina 
Martinez (721), Anne Yoon (533), Mario Morales (533), Johanna Knox (846), Jennifer 
Waters (741), Keisha Clark-Booth (577), and Lionel Gonzalez (250), based on Findings 39, 
55, 56, 57, 71, 74(A) – (D), 75, 76,  and 78 above.      
 
 
respondents Meghan Carungcong (179A), Blanca Pacheco-Jones (263A), Griselda Rodriguez 
(1323A), Arcelia Salazar (1338A), Jennifer Ito (1445A), Marnelle Leonard (1300A), Alicia 
Huizar (796A), Michelle Twogood (801A), Holly Camarillo (809A), Karen Hardy (838A), 
Anna Lim (928A), Beverly Wiegand (1145A), Elida Rangel (1277A), Daniel Yaeger 
(1301A), Erika Medina (216A), Dustin Shade (32), Obiorah Ebo (81), Stacy Burcham 

Cause does not exist pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to 

Cause exists to change the seniority dates and/or seniority list rankings of 

5. 

4. 

 

35 

8. 

6. 

7. 

Cause exists to change the application of the tie-breaking criteria for 

Cause exists to change the seniority dates and/or seniority list rankings of 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the District 

(224A), Geoffrey Barbe (275), Toiya Smith (757), Melinda Clare (968), David Noyes 
(1145), Heidi-Lynn Doon-Samaniego (1501), Rosio Dominguez (891), and Anselm Feliciano 
(1392A), based on Findings 19(A) – 19(F), 20, and 25(A) and (B) above.  
 
 
respondents Diane Gagnon (1040), Patricia De Koekkoek (1215), Bernadette Wheeler 
(1217), Jacqueline Hernandez (1224), Griselda Rodriguez (1323A), and Angela Boone 
(1310), based on Findings 25, 31, and 33 above. 
 
 
computing the seniority ranking of respondents Geoffrey Barbe (275), Bernadette Wheeler 
(1217), and Jose Ramirez (1286), based on Findings 11 and 35 above. 
 
 
to serve upon respondents, notices that their services will not be required for the ensuing 
2011-2012 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of 
services, as long as those respondents so served were previously identified in bumping charts 
and during the hearing as being the subjects of a final layoff notice.   During the hearing, the 
District presented an initial Bumping Chart (Exh. 10) and subsequent amended Bumping 
Charts (Exh. 22) that showed whether respondents were subject to a final layoff notice 
because they were to be bumped by another more senior certificated employee and/or unable 
to bump any other less senior certificated employee.  In addition, the Assistant 
Superintendent reviewed respondents individually and rank-by-rank on the Certificated 
Seniority List and identified those respondents who were still subject to receipt of a final 
layoff notice.  As evidence was presented and respondents testified, the District made 
changes and corrections to the bumping chart as well as to individual respondent’s 
credentials, training, and assignments.  By issuance of amended bumping charts and 
testimonial evidence, the District thus represented, directly or indirectly, that those 
respondents who were not so identified for layoff during the hearing would not receive final 
layoff notices.  As such, those respondents may reasonably have relied upon the District’s 
representations and elected not to testify or present evidence during the layoff hearing.3   As 
a matter of due process and fairness then, the District shall serve final layoff notices only 
upon those respondents who were previously identified during the hearing in the bumping 
charts or other documentary or testimonial evidence of the District as being subject to the 
receipt of a final layoff notice.  To serve final layoff notices upon any respondents who were 
not previously identified for layoff during the hearing would, despite service of a preliminary 
notice, mean that such respondents would be denied their due process rights to have a 

                                                 

3 For example, respondent Carlin Stein (462) was not identified in the initial Bumping 

Chart or the testimony of the Assistant Superintendent as a certificated employee who was 
subject to being bumped or laid off.   The District did not identify Stein as a layoff candidate 
until it presented the latest Bumping Chart on the last day of the hearing.  Carlin was not 
present on the last hearing day to present any testimony or evidence.  Accordingly, the 
Administrative Law Judge admitted Stein’s declaration and section list into evidence.    

 

36 

9. 

Based on Findings 1 – 83 above, except as provided in this Proposed Decision 

meaningful and complete hearing and opportunity to be heard under Education Code section 
44949 and 44955 and applicable sections of the Government Code.   
 
 
and/or due to determinations by the District in reasonable exercise of its discretion, there is 
no certificated probationary or permanent employee or temporary or categorical certificated 
employee with less seniority than any one of respondents who is being retained by the 
District for the 2011-2012 school year to render services which any one of respondents is 
certificated and competent to render.  
 
 
 
 

*  *  *  *  *  *  * 

WHEREFORE, the Administrative Law Judge makes the following Order:  

ORDER 

2. 

1. 

The Accusation issued against respondents named or identified in Findings 

 
 
18(A), 18(B), 39, 55, 56, 57, 71, and 74(A) – (D) above, must be dismissed, based on 
Conclusion of Law 3 and 4 above.  These respondents may not be given final layoff notices 
that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year. 
 
 
The Accusation issued against all of the remaining respondents is sustained, 
based on Conclusions of Law 1, 2, 8, and 9 above.   The District may give notice to these 
respondents, and each of them, in inverse order of seniority that their services will not be 
required for the ensuing 2011-2012 school year because of the present reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code section 44955.   
 
 
The District may give notice to any respondents and certificated employees, 
who were served with notices and/or the Accusation that their services will not be needed 
next year but did not file requests for hearing or did not appear at the hearing, that their 
services will not be required for the ensuing 2011-2012 school year because of the reduction 
or discontinuance of particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 
and 44955.   
 
 
take into account any additional positively assured attrition among certificated employees in 
deciding how many and which respondents should be terminated before the ensuing 2011-
2012 school year.   

Before giving notice to respondents, the District shall further determine and 

4. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

37 

5. 

The District may give notice to any respondents that their services will not be 

 
required for the ensuing 2011-2012 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services as long as those respondents were previously identified as being 
subject to receipt of a final layoff notice, based on Conclusions of Law 8 above.    
 
 
 
Dated:   May 6, 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Vincent Nafarrete 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

38 

