BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD
SANTA BARBARA SCHOOL DISTRICTS
COUNTY OF SANTA BARBARA
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Layoffs Of:

Certificated Employees of the Santa Barbara
School Districts,

Respondents.

OAH Case No. L2011040161

PROPOSED DECISION

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard

this matter on May 3, 2011, in Santa Barbara, California.

Mary L. Dowell and Meredith G. Karash, Attorneys at Law, represented J. Brian Sarvis,

Ed.D. (Sarvis), Superintendent of the Santa Barbara School Districts (District).1

Robert A. Bartosh, Attorney at Law, represented Sarah Ashton, John Bailey, J. Daniel
Barnett, Marsha Barr, Rick Ceriale, Elizabeth Checketts, Kayleen Chilton, Elizabeth Christen,
Marcelo Cruz, Shannon Curtis, Jill Dixon, Ursula Ferrall, Jennifer Flick (Flick), Magda Flores,
Beth Fuste, Crystal Gabel-Peterson, Hozby Galindo, Michael Gerken, Kathleen Glenn, Janet
Goode, Lisa Howard-Hoffman, Heather John (John), Veronica Johnson, Valerie lent, Brian
Malcheski, Ramona Marten, Nancy Mathison, Magdeline Mikhail, Lauren Minadeo, Matt
Moran, Helen Murdoch, David O’Donnell, Casandra Ornelas, Rebecca Penrose, Deborah
Pentland (Pentland), Marcy Porter, Genevieve Quinn, Bilha Raygoza, Athena Sims, Jennifer
Slemp, Kelly Thasher, Amy Wolfslau, and Laura Wooster, who are collectively referred to as
Respondents.

Jeremy Vaa (Respondent Vaa, who is included in collective references to Respondents)

represented himself.

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and has
given Respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2011-2012 school year.
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not
reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

1 The District is composed of two separate districts, an elementary school district and
a secondary school district, which have consolidated certain administrative and operating
functions.

The hearing in this matter was initially scheduled for April 25, 2011. On April 12, 2011,
Presiding Administrative Law Judge Michael A. Scarlett granted a continuance, thereby
extending by eight days the deadlines set forth in Education Code2 sections 44949, subdivision
(c), and 44955, subdivision (c). (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (e).)

Oral and documentary evidence, and evidence by written stipulation, was received at the
hearing. The record was left open for the submission of closing briefs. On May 9, 2011, the
District and Respondents submitted their briefs, which have been marked as Exhibits 19 and B,
respectively. Respondent Vaa did not submit a closing brief. The matter was submitted for
decision on May 9, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Superintendent Sarvis filed the Accusation in his official capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

a.

3.

On March 1, 2011, the Governing Board of the District (Governing
Board), following the recommendation of Superintendent Sarvis, adopted Resolution Number
2010/11-43, reducing or discontinuing the following services for the 2011-2012 school year:

FTE3 Reduction

Service

English/Theatre
Math
Health
Life Science
Physical Science
PE
Social Science
Music
Art
Technology
French
Latin
Spanish
Nurses
Counselors

8.6
5.3
.2
.6
.8
1.0
1.4
1.0
4.0
.6
.8
.6
2.0
5.0
9.2

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

3 Full-time equivalent position.

2

b.

On March 22, 2011, the Governing Board, following the decision by
Superintendent Sarvis on March 8, 2011, revised Resolution Number 2010/11-43, by making
the following, additional, service reductions for the 2011-2012 school year:

FTE Reduction

Secondary Librarians
Elementary Librarian Trainer
Assistant Principals
Elementary
Special Education Site Based Specialists
Elementary Music
Child Development (225-day schedule)
Child Development (185-day schedule)

Total

Service

English
Math
Health
Life Science
Physical Science
PE
Social Science
Art
French
Spanish

Total

2.1
1.0
2.8
20.0
2.0
1.0
6.5
3.0

79.5

1.4
1.2
.4
.4
.4
.4
1.2
.4
.2
.4

6.4

c.

The District and Respondents, with the exception of Respondent Vaa,
stipulated that
the foregoing are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or
discontinued within the meaning of section 44955 and that the Governing Board timely
amended and adopted resolution 2011/11-43. Respondent Vaa did not offer any contrary
evidence or argument.

4.

Superintendent Sarvis thereafter notified the Governing Board that he had
recommended that notice be provided to Respondents that their services will not be required for
the 2011-2012 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

3

Respondents.

6.

7.

8.

9.

5.

On March 4, March 14, and March 15, 2011, the District provided notice to
Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year due to the
reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services.

Respondents thereafter timely requested a hearing to determine if there is cause

for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

On April 18, 2011,

the District

issued the Accusation, and served it on

On April 20, 2011, Respondents filed timely notices of defense.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

10.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.

11.

The Governing Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth
in factual finding number 3 because of the uncertainty surrounding future funding. The District
estimates a revenue shortfall anywhere from $10,000,000 to $17,000,000, depending on the
actions taken to reduce the State budget deficit. The decision to reduce the particular kinds of
services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District's
discretion.

12.

The reduction of services set forth in factual finding number 3 is related to the
welfare of the District’s schools and its pupils, in the context of the potential loss of revenue
and the need to continue providing services to students in the District, and it has become
necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the Governing
Board.

13.

On March 1, 2011, the Governing Board adopted criteria for breaking seniority
ties for employees with the same first date of paid service. The following criteria were used:
experience in the discipline, clear credential, preliminary credential, and emergency/intern
credential. A lottery was employed to break any remaining ties. The tie-breaking criteria are
reasonable in that
they relate to the skills and qualifications of certificated employees.
Respondents did not challenge the application of the criteria.

a.

14.

The District skipped certain employees in the following special, hard-to-
staff programs or services: Speech/Language Pathologists; Deaf and Hard of Hearing Teachers;
Orientation and Mobility Specialist; Visually Impaired Teachers; Computer Science (DPEA)
IB-Trained Teachers; Pre-K Core Knowledge Program; LaCuesta
Teachers; Preschool
Continuation/Alta Vista/Middle College Teachers; Home and Hospital Planner; and CORE

4

Knowledge Content Teachers. Respondents did not dispute the District’s needs in these areas or
the retention of any of the individuals expected to provide the foregoing services.

b.

Respondents Flick and John teach in one of the areas selected for
skipping, CORE Knowledge Content. They received notices because they are the most junior
employees teaching the subject, and the District was concerned that the budget shortfall might
necessitate increase in the class size in the CORE classes, which would lead to Respondents’
actual layoff.

15.

The District plans to layoff five full-time nurses. It has retained one full-time
nurse, the “Lead District Nurse” (LDN), and plans to offer mandated nursing services under the
overall supervision of the LDN, using classified health assistants, contract nurses, and
volunteers. In the past, it has relied on qualified contract nurses and volunteers to provide
services. Superintendent Sarvis testified that the District plans to meet State mandates using
qualified personnel.

16.

The LDN position was created in 2010, following the recommendation of a
statewide special education advisory group. A job description was created, and the job was
advertised for competitive bidding. The position required specifically-identified knowledge of
health services and procedures, skills in nursing, communication, and management, a minimum
of a Bachelor of Science degree in Nursing, a valid school nurse credential, and five years of
experience in the nursing field. After a selection process that included interviews, District
officials chose the incumbent head nurse. The effective date of the assignment was July 1,
2010.

17.

The position description lists the LDN’s assignment as, “Under the direction of
the Executive Director or Director(s), Special Education the Lead School Nurse develop and
implement program policies and procedures related to health services and will oversee and
coordinate the comprehensive health services program and the delivery of services across all
district schools.” (Exhibit 18, at p. 1.) The “Primary Function” of the LDN is listed as follows:
in collaboration with the Executive Director, or
“While not an administrative position,
Director(s) of Special Education, the Lead School Nurse will plan, organize, monitor and direct
the Health Services program for the District, assess program effectiveness and compliance with
all relevant laws, ensure effective and efficient program functioning and work closely with the
School Nurses to ensure appropriate delivery of services.” (Ibid.)
“Major Duties and
Responsibilities” include serving as a consultant to school nurses, administrators and other
health related positions regarding school health information and programs; assigning,
arranging, and monitoring the work schedule of school nurses; providing training; coordinating,
monitoring, and overseeing mandated screening programs; preparing compliance and other
reports; and visiting sites to monitor and participate in health-related activities. Direct provision
of health services does not appear to constitute a primary or significant function of the LDN
position.

5

18.

Respondent Pentland testified that State-mandated health functions cannot be
performed with only one certificated nurse. Based on her understanding of the State
requirements, the recommendations of various statewide bodies, the number of students in the
District, and the time it takes her to perform the particular task(s), she presented figures to
support her testimony. Respondent Pentland concluded that a minimum of seven nurses would
be required to fulfill the State mandates.

19.

No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to render a

service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and

44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 9.

2.

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are determined to be particular
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3
and 10.

3.

Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the District to reduce or
discontinue the particular kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause
relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of factual finding
numbers 1 through 19.

4.

Respondents argue that the District may not layoff five nurses and continue to
provide mandated State services. They cite the following provisions as creating mandates for
health services: section 49452 (sight assessments); sections 49452 and 49454 (hearing
assessments); section 49452.5 (scoliosis screening); 49403 (immunization compliance); 56324,
subdivision (b) (health assessments); 44923.5 (specialized health care services, including
catheterization, gastric tube feeding, suctioning, and other services); and 49427 (districts to
maintain health services at levels adequate to preserve a pupil’s ability to learn). However,
these statutes do not require that the mandated services be provided exclusively by certificated
nurses. For instance, section 49403 permits the following health care practitioners to provide
immunizations under the supervision of a physician and surgeon: physician assistants; nurse
practitioners; registered nurses; licensed vocational nurses; and nursing students acting under
the supervision of registered nurses. Respondents have not cited any provision of law that
mandates employment of nurses. On the contrary, as the District notes, districts “may” employ
properly certificated persons to provide for the health and physical development of pupils. (Ed.
Code, § 49400.)

6

As set forth in factual finding number 15, the District plans to provide all mandated
services under the supervision or coordination of the LDN. While all the specifics of the plan
were not yet in place at the time of the hearing, provision of services is contemplated with the
use of classified employees, volunteers, and contract employees. Superintendent Sarvis testified
that the District plans to meet required State mandates using qualified personnel. Respondents
may be correct in their assertion that the same level of services now being provided cannot be
provided with five fewer certificated employees, but it does not follow that mandated services
will not be provided during the 2011-2012 school year, albeit in a different manner by different
qualified individuals. Accordingly, the District has established that it will provide mandated
health services for the 2011-2012 school year.

5.

Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondents Sarah Ashton, John Bailey,
J. Daniel Barnett, Marsha Barr, Rick Ceriale, Elizabeth Checketts, Kayleen Chilton, Elizabeth
Christen, Marcelo Cruz, Shannon Curtis, Jill Dixon, Ursula Ferrall, Jennifer Flick, Magda
Flores, Beth Fuste, Crystal Gabel-Peterson, Hozby Galindo, Michael Gerken, Kathleen Glenn,
Janet Goode, Lisa Howard-Hoffman, Heather John, Veronica Johnson, Valerie lent, Brian
Malcheski, Ramona Marten, Nancy Mathison, Magdeline Mikhail, Lauren Minadeo, Matt
Moran, Helen Murdoch, David O’Donnell, Casandra Ornelas, Rebecca Penrose, Deborah
Pentland, Marcy Porter, Genevieve Quinn, Bilha Raygoza, Athena Sims, Jennifer Slemp, Kelly
Thasher, Amy Wolfslau, and Laura Wooster, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through
19, and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 4.

ORDER

The Accusation is sustained and the District may notify Respondents Sarah Ashton,
John Bailey, J. Daniel Barnett, Marsha Barr, Rick Ceriale, Elizabeth Checketts, Kayleen
Chilton, Elizabeth Christen, Marcelo Cruz, Shannon Curtis, Jill Dixon, Ursula Ferrall, Jennifer
Flick, Magda Flores, Beth Fuste, Crystal Gabel-Peterson, Hozby Galindo, Michael Gerken,
Kathleen Glenn, Janet Goode, Lisa Howard-Hoffman, Heather John, Veronica Johnson, Valerie
lent, Brian Malcheski, Ramona Marten, Nancy Mathison, Magdeline Mikhail, Lauren Minadeo,
Matt Moran, Helen Murdoch, David O’Donnell, Casandra Ornelas, Rebecca Penrose, Deborah
Pentland, Marcy Porter, Genevieve Quinn, Bilha Raygoza, Athena Sims, Jennifer Slemp, Kelly
Thasher, Amy Wolfslau, and Laura Wooster, that their services will not be needed during the
2011-2012 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

DATED:___________________

SAMUEL D. REYES
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

