BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
SOUTH WHITTIER SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Accusations Against:

THE CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
LISTED IN ATTACHMENT 1,

OAH No. 2011030575

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Eric Sawyer, Administrative Law Judge, Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 13, 2011, in Whittier. The record was
closed and the matter was submitted for decision at the conclusion of the hearing.

Aaron V. O’Donnell, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented the

South Whittier School District (District).

Kent Morizawa, Esq., Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented Respondents, who are

identified in Attachment 1.1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Parties and Jurisdiction

in his official capacity.

1.

2.

Dr. Erich Kwek, the District’s Superintendent, made and filed the Accusations

Respondents were at all times mentioned certificated District employees.

3.

On March 8, 2011, the Governing Board of the District (Board) adopted
Resolution No. 10-11-17, which proposed to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of
services encompassing 25.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions for the 2011-2012 school
year.

4.

By no later than March 15, 2011, the Board and certificated employees of the

District, including Respondents, were given preliminary notice that those certificated
employees’ services would not be required for the following school year, pursuant to
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.

1 Myrna Sanpascual was initially named a Respondent, but her preliminary layoff

notice was rescinded by the District before the hearing commenced.

1

5.

Respondents timely requested a hearing to determine if there is cause for
terminating their services. Each was thereafter served with an Accusation. Respondents
timely filed Notices of Defense, which requested the instant hearing.

6.

Various individuals, including five Respondents, served the District pursuant

to a temporary contract. Prior to the hearing, they were non-reelected and released from
employment separately and independently from the layoff process. The District contends that
such individuals do not possess any such rights to this hearing process. However, those
individuals were provided with a preliminary notification of layoff as a precaution, in order
to permit them to participate and exercise any claimed rights to the hearing process. The
District stated in correspondence that “it is not our intent to convert your temporary
employment status to that of a probationary or permanent employee.” The Respondents
treated in this way are identified in Attachment 1 as “Precautionary Respondents.”

7.

During the hearing, the District withdrew the Accusations against Respondents

Greta Benevides and Christopher Losoya.

The Decision to Reduce or Eliminate Particular Kinds of Services

Resolution No. 10-11-17 specifically provides for the reduction or elimination

of the following particular kinds of services:

Middle School English/Language Arts
Middle School Science
Middle School History/Social Science
Middle School Math
School Community Counselor
K-6 Classroom Teaching

TOTAL:

2.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
19.0 FTE

25.0 FTE

9.

The decision to reduce or eliminate 25.0 FTEs was the result of financial

difficulties experienced by the District.

10.

Prior to sending out the preliminary notices mentioned above, the Board

considered all known assured attrition.2

8.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

///

///

2 A school district is not required to account for circumstances that occur

after March 15th when implementing layoff decisions. (Lewin v. Board of Trustees (1976)
62 Cal.App.3d 977, 982.)

2

11.

Resolution No. 10-11-17 also established that the District has a specific need

to hire and retain highly qualified teachers in core academic areas for purposes of the No
Child Left Behind Act (NCLB), and therefore authorized the District to deviate from
terminating certificated employees in order of seniority (skipping) with regard to those who
possess that specific skill and training. No challenge was made to this part of the Resolution.

12.

Resolution No. 10-11-17 also defined competency for purposes of bumping

and rehire rights. No challenge was made to this part of the Resolution.

13.

A. The Board also adopted Resolution No. 10-11-11, which established tie-

breaking criteria to determine the relative seniority of certificated employees who first
rendered paid service on the same date. The tie-breaking criteria was used in this matter to
resolve ties in seniority amongst certificated personnel. The criteria were listed in priority
order; each criterion was used only if the preceding one did not resolve the tie.

B. The validity of the tie-breaking process was subject to dispute by one
Respondent, who argued that the District only required NCLB compliance for the first
criterion regardless of the date that compliance was obtained, while the seventh, eighth and
ninth criteria use the date the credentials in question were obtained in establishing priority.

C. The challenge is unconvincing. Districts have discretion in developing tie-
breaking criteria. The first few criteria used by the District are based on specific skills, i.e.,
NCLB compliance and bilingual ability. The last few criteria are based on more general
skills. With regard to the first few criteria, it is clear that the District highly values those
skills involved. What is important is that teachers are NCLB compliant or bilingual, not the
date upon which they became so. In contract, the last few general criteria tend to be a proxy
for greater tenure. Also, there is a likelihood that ties would still remain even when applying
the last few criteria by simply analyzing whether the credential were obtained or not.
Establishing a priority within that criteria based on the date the general credentials were
obtained is a sound way to address that problem, especially given that those remaining ties
would tend to be broken based on tenure. Under these circumstances, it was not an abuse of
discretion for the District to formulate the tie-breaking criteria as it did.

Overall Findings

14.

The reduction or elimination of the FTE positions in question will not reduce

services below mandated levels.

15.

The District maintains a seniority list containing employees’ seniority dates,

current assignments and locations, credentials and authorizations. Cecilia Laidemitt, the
District’s Associate Superintendent of Administrative Services and Personnel Management,
and other District administrators, were responsible for compiling the seniority list. To assure
the accuracy of the seniority list, certificated employees were notified in writing of the
District’s records regarding their employment history with the District, in order to allow
them to confirm or challenge the accuracy of that information. The seniority list was updated

3

based on new information obtained from certificated employees that was verified. It was
established that the information on the seniority list is accurate.

16.

The District used the seniority list to implement and determine the proposed
layoffs. In determining who would be subject to layoff, the District counted the number of
reductions, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.
The District then determined whether the least senior employees held other credentials or
were otherwise competent to render services being rendered by junior employees. The
District determined that none of the certificated employees subject to layoff through the
above-described process were able to bump junior employees.

17.

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the above-described particular

kinds of services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its
discretion.

18.

The cause for reducing and/or eliminating the above-described particular kinds

of services relates solely to the welfare of the schools in the District and its pupils.

19.

No permanent certificated employee with less seniority will be retained to

render a service that the Respondents are certificated and competent to render.

Precautionary Respondents

20.

The five Respondents who are in the above-described precautionary status are

Carmona, Friedman, Ponce, Avelar-Romo, and Carrasco-Tolentino. These “precautionary”
Respondents are all temporary employees. None of these individuals testified or presented
evidence establishing that the District improperly classified them as temporary. The
District’s method of accounting for their positions for purposes of the layoff was proper.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The party asserting a claim or making charges in an administrative hearing
generally has the burden of proof. (Brown v. City of Los Angeles (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th
155.) For example, in administrative hearings dealing with personnel matters, the burden of
proof is ordinarily on the agency prosecuting the charges (Parker v. City of Fountain Valley
(1981) 127 Cal.App.3d 99, 113); in personnel matters concerning the dismissal of a teacher
for cause, the burden of proof is similarly on the discharging school district (Gardner v.
Commission on Prof. Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035). As no other law or statute
requires otherwise, the standard of proof in this case requires proof to a preponderance of the
evidence. (Evid. Code, § 115.)

2.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements of Education Code sections 44949

and 44955 were met. (Factual Findings 1-7.)

4

3.

The services identified in Resolution No. 10-11-17 are particular kinds of

services that can be reduced or discontinued pursuant to Education Code section 44955. The
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Services will not be reduced below
mandated levels. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of those particular services
relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of
Education Code section 44949. (Factual Findings 1-19.)

4.

Temporary teachers may be released at the pleasure of the governing school

board. (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (a).) The statutory layoff provisions therefore do not apply
to them. (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (a); Zalac v. Governing Board of the Ferndale Unified
School District (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.) The Respondents whom the District classified as
temporary employees are not subject to the protections of Education Code sections 44949
and 44955. The Accusations against them should be dismissed, as the District has already
provided them with appropriate notices of non-reelection for the following school year.
(Factual Findings 1-20.)

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due

to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. (Factual Findings 1-20.)

No junior certificated employee will be retained to perform services that a

more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. (Factual Findings 1-20.)

5.

6.

ORDER

1.

The Accusations against Respondents Greta Benevides and Christopher

Losoya are dismissed. The District shall not give them final layoff notices for the next school
year.

2.

Respondents Carmona, Friedman, Ponce, Avelar-Romo, and Carrasco-
Tolentino are temporary employees who are not subject to this layoff proceeding. The
Accusations against them are dismissed for that reason.

3.

The Accusations are sustained as against the remaining Respondents. The

Board may give a final notice of layoff to those Respondents. Notice shall be given to those
Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year, and such
notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

Dated: April 21, 2011

________________________________
ERIC SAWYER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

ATTACHMENT 1: LIST OF RESPONDENTS & PRECAUTIONARY RESPONDENTS

Christina Carmona (Temporary Employee – Precautionary)

Juliawati Friedman (Temporary Employee – Precautionary)

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Ruby Acosta

Greta Benavides

Robyn Blake

Marjorie Codding

Sophia Fontes

Carrie Galloway

James Hamilton

Yolanda Holguin

Janette LaCourse

Barbara Llamas

Christopher Losoya

Lisa Palomino

Kimberly Pauls

Kristen Ryan

Connie Sava

Denise Zazueta

Odelisa Orellana

16. Mariella Elena Ponce (Temporary Employee – Precautionary)

Violet Avelar-Romo (Temporary Employee – Precautionary)

Sheril Carrasco-Tolentino (Temporary Employee – Precautionary)

6

