BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD
NORTH MONTEREY COUNTY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

RACHELLE MORGAN-LEWIS,

OAH No. 2011031402

Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

Mary-Margaret Anderson, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Moss Landing, on April 18, 2011.

Kevin R. Dale, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo,

represented the North Monterey County Unified School District (District).

Respondent Rachelle Morgan-Lewis represented herself.

The record closed on April 18, 2011.

SUMMARY

The Governing Board of the North Monterey County Unified School District decided

to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by certificated employees for
the 2011-2012 school year for financial reasons. The decision was not related to the
competency and dedication of the employees whose services were proposed to be reduced or
eliminated. Although a competency criterion was invalid, implementation of the Resolution
was not affected. The selection process otherwise complied with Education Code
requirements.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Sergio Montenegro filed the Accusation in his official capacity as

Superintendent of the District.

2.

Respondent Rachelle Morgan-Lewis is a certificated employee of the District.

1

3.

On March 10, 2011, the Governing Board of the District adopted Resolution

No. 2010-1119, in which the Board resolved to reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds
of services (PKS) for the 2011-2012 school year and directed the Superintendent or his
designee to send notice to all employees whose positions may be affected by the action.

The reduction of services is as follows:

Elementary Classroom
Instructional Services
Multiple Subject Teaching
Services - Grades K-6

High School Classroom
Instructional Services
Biology Teaching Services

Social Science Teaching
Services

Special Education
Classroom Instructional
Services
Special Education Teaching
Services

Alternative Education
Classroom Instructional
Services
Alternative Education
Teaching Services

Other Positions
Migrant Education Teaching
Services

Total:

3.0
FTE

1.0
FTE
1.0
FTE

1.0
FTE

1.0
FTE

2.00
FTE

9.0
FTE

4.

On March 14, 2011, Superintendent Montenegro mailed written notice to 19

certificated employees that it had been recommended that notice be given them that their
services would not be required for the 2011-2012 school year. Many of the noticed
employees, including Respondent, filed timely requests for hearing, and an Accusation was
filed and served. All of the noticed employees who requested a hearing filed a notice of
defense, except Respondent.

2

5.
withdrew them.

Prior to the hearing, all of the employees who filed notices of defense

6.

At hearing, District objected to proceeding because Respondent had not filed a
notice of defense. Respondent explained that she had been unclear about how to answer the
questions stated in the notice form. She attempted to obtain help from the Association of
California School Administrators, but was unsuccessful. District acknowledged that it had
not been prejudiced by Respondent’s failure, was aware of the issues she would raise and
was ready to proceed.

In the interest of fairness and because there was no prejudice to the District, the
motion to disallow Respondent’s participation was denied. Government Code section 11506,
subdivision (c), provides in pertinent part: “The respondent shall be entitled to a hearing on
the merits if the respondent files a notice of defense . . . . Failure to file a notice of defense
shall constitute a waiver of respondent’s right to a hearing, but the agency in its discretion
may nevertheless grant a hearing . . . .”

7.

The Resolution contains competency criteria to be used to determine whether a

senior employee is entitled “bump” (replace) a junior employee. The District has a position
entitled instructional coach. The instructional coach position is a type of alternative teaching
assignment for teachers. Among other duties, the coaches present professional development
training and then go into classrooms and debrief the teachers about what they observe. The
District describes the position as “at will.” It is filled through a competitive process that
includes a minimum level of training and experience and an interview.

The Resolution contains the following competency criteria for the instructional coach

position:

In order for an employee to be eligible for reassignment to an
Instructional Coach position held by an employee with less
seniority, the senior employee must be both credentialed and
competent to render the service currently being performed by
the junior employee. For purposes of implementing this
Resolution, a more senior employee is defined as competent for
reassignment into an Instructional Coach position currently held
by a more junior employee if he or she currently possesses a
clear or preliminary credential in the subject matter, has special
training and experience to provide those services, and has at
least one (1) year of experience within the preceding three (3)
years serving in the assignment for the District.

8.

The District’s written job description of the instructional coach position sets

out the job’s functions and qualifications. Essential functions of the position include
“Provide support and assistance to school site teachers in the implementation of the District’s

3

Instructional Programs including the pacing guides and the periodic assessments in all
content areas” and “Deliver professional development to groups of teachers as needed by
sites.” The required qualifications include “Experience in collaborative planning and
delivery of differentiated staff development to classroom practitioners.” Desirable
qualifications include “Prior content coaching experience.”

9.

Jamie Marantz is the District’s Assistant Superintendent of Curriculum and

Instruction. She was directly involved in hiring the present instructional coach, Bridget
Fitzgerald. The hiring process was extensive. First, the position was posted. Then, there
was a “paper cut” of applicants based upon written materials that the applicants provided.
The committee was looking for people with extensive training and experience in coaching
teachers.

10.

Respondent is presently an elementary school principal. She has been released

from that position and been reassigned to an elementary classroom teaching position based
upon her multiple subject credential. Respondent’s position on the seniority list causes her to
fall within the three FTE positions slated for reduction; therefore, she received a preliminary
notice.

11.

Respondent is senior in position to Fitzgerald and believes that the

competency criteria were written so as to protect Fitzgerald’s job and prevent Respondent
“from even applying.” Respondent objects primarily to the portion of the criteria that defines
competency as least one year of experience in the assignment within the preceding three
years. She correctly points out that this prevents her from bumping into the position.

12.

Respondent also represents that she is qualified to be an instructional coach by

virtue of her experience as a principal and training she has received in coaching. She,
however, presented no evidence other than her own very brief testimony about her education,
training, and experience. On this record it cannot be determined whether Respondent is
qualified for the position of instructional coach.

13.

No certificated employee junior in seniority to Respondent is being retained by

the Board to perform services that Respondent is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and

44955 have been provided as required. The District has therefore established jurisdiction for
this proceeding as to Respondent.

2.

When a district seeks to disregard seniority order in a layoff proceeding, it

bears the burden to prove that more senior employees do not have the necessary training or
experience. (Davis v. Gray (1938) 29 Cal.App.2d 403, 408; Duax v. Kern Community
College Dist. (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 566-567.) In this matter, the District established
appropriate competency requirements of a credential and special training and experience for
the position of instructional coach. The third criterion, however, is too narrowly drawn.

4

The court in Duax approved the standard of one year of experience in ten years.
More recently, the court in Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th
127, 142, suggested that one year within the past five years is valid. But the analysis in both
cases focuses on the minimum level of experience needed to competently teach the subject,
in contrast to a time period that would enable the selection of the most recently hired, lowest
paid, or “best” teacher available. And the Duax court approved one year in ten by
contrasting it to one in the last two or three years: a standard which the court deemed “too
narrowly defines competency.” Accordingly the criterion here of working in the position for
one year in the last three shall be invalidated.

3.

Respondent argues that the competency criteria were unfair, and as stated

above, she is correct as to one of the criterion. This does not change the outcome for
Respondent, however, as she did not demonstrate that she has the training and experience
required by the District for the instructional coach position. Accordingly, the District may
serve her with a final layoff notice.

4.

Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to reduce

the number of certificated employees in nine full-time equivalent positions due to the
reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The decisions made relate solely
to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code
section 44949.

5.

All contentions made by Respondent not specifically addressed above are

found to be without merit and are rejected.

ORDER

1.

Notice may be given to Respondent Rachelle Morgan-Lewis that her services

will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year because of the reduction or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services.

2.

The following competency criterion for the position of instructional coach is
invalidated: “at least one (1) year of experience within the preceding three (3) years serving
in the assignment for the District.”

DATED: _________________________

_____________________________
MARY-MARGARET ANDERSON
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

