BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD
OF THE PANAMA-BUENA VISTA UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF KERN, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH Case No. 2011031474

Roberto Becerra, et al.,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

The hearing in the above-captioned matter was held on April 12, 2011, at
Bakersfield, California. Joseph D. Montoya, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office
of Administrative Hearings (OAH), presided. Complainant was represented by
Christopher W. Hine, Esq., Schools Legal Service. Ernest H. Tuttle III, Tuttle &
McCloskey, represented Respondents.

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing. However, the

matter was continued until April 18, 2011, so that the parties could file briefs.
Complainant’s Post Hearing Brief was timely received, and is marked as Exhibit 17
for identification. Respondents’ submitted their brief in letter form in a timely
manner, and it shall be identified as Exhibit F.

Thereafter, the ALJ set a telephonic hearing on an issue that was raised in the
case by Respondent Wendy Cooper. That hearing was held on May 6, 2011. At that
time it was stipulated that the deadlines under the Education Code were set back six
days, the length of the continuance granted for the submission of briefs, so that the
Proposed Decision was due May 13, 2011, and the District was required to send final
notices by May 21, 2011. (See Education Code sections 44949, subdivision (c), and
section 44955, subdivision (c).)

The ALJ hereby makes his factual findings, legal conclusions, and orders, as

follow.

//

//

//

//

FACTUAL FINDINGS

The Parties

1. Complainant Michael L. Brouse filed the accusations1 in this proceeding in

his official capacity as Assistant Superintendent of the Panama-Buena Vista Union
School District (District).

2. The following persons are certificated employees of the District, and are
hereafter referred to as Respondents: Roberto Becerra, Dorothy Burgess, Barbara
Buchholz, Tom Clarke, Wendy Cooper, Martha Cossio, Jared Coyle, Jose J. Garza,
Jr., Dustin Maxey, Tammy Pritchard, Leslie Raney, and Marie Woodard.

Jurisdictional Findings and Procedural History

3.

(A) On March 8, 2011, the Board of Trustees (Board) of the District

adopted resolution number 11-14, entitled “Reducing or Eliminating Certain
Certificated Services for the 2011-2012 School Year” (Reduction Resolution). The
purpose of the Reduction Resolution was to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of
certificated services no later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year.
Specifically, the resolution requires the reductions of 40 “FTE”—Full Time
Equivalent positions—by reducing various types of services.

(B) The FTE’s that the Board determined to reduce are described in the

Reduction Resolution, as follows:

Self-Contained Classroom Instruction, Grades K-6
Music Teacher
EL Support
Title I Teacher
Parent Resource Specialist
Elementary/Jr. High P.E.

Departmentalized Instruction, Junior High:

English/Language Arts Teacher

14 FTE
3 FTE
1 FTE
1 FTE
1 FTE
4 FTE

3 FTE

1 The term “accusation” refers to a type of pleading utilized under the
Administrative Procedure Act, Government Code sections 11500 and 11503, which
provides the procedural framework for hearings of this type. It should be made clear
that the Respondents are not “accused” in the every-day sense of that word; they have
done nothing wrong. Instead, it might be said that they are accused of not having
enough seniority or qualifications to retain their positions with the District in the face
of a resolution to reduce positions.

2

Math Teacher
Science Teacher
Social Science (History) Teacher
Life Skills Teacher

Total FTE to be Reduced:

3 FTE
4 FTE
4 FTE
2 FTE

40 FTE

4. The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are particular

kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section
44955.2

5. The decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was neither
arbitrary nor capricious, but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s discretion
given uncertainty regarding the state budget and the District’s financial resources.
The evidence established that the District faces a significant budget deficit for the
2011-2012 school year unless expenditures are reduced.

6. The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of

the District’s school and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the
number of certificated employees as determined by the Board. No legally-mandated
services will be reduced as a result of the planned reduction or discontinuance of
services.

7. The Board adopted tie-breaking criteria on March 8, 2011, to be utilized in
the event that more than one teacher subject to layoff shared the same seniority date,
that is, both had the same first paid date of service in a probationary capacity. The
tie-breaking criteria were adopted in Resolution number 11-15. The specific criteria
to be used were credentialing, experience, extracurricular activities, training, special
education needs, competence, and evaluations. The tie-breaking criteria were within
the Board’s discretion.

8. On or about March 11, 2011, each Respondent was given written notice

that pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, their services would not be required in the
2011-2012 school year (hereafter the preliminary notices).

9. Respondents requested a hearing, and on or about April 1, 2011, each was
served with an Accusation and other documents, including a blank notice of defense.
Thereafter, each Respondent filed a notice of defense.

10. In the course of the reduction in force process, the District created a

seniority list. That seniority list took into account a number of factors, the primary

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

3

factor being each certificated employee’s seniority date.3 However, other factors,
such as credential types, current assignment, supplemental authorizations, and major
course of study, were set forth on the seniority list.

The Defense Raised by Respondent Tom Clarke

11.

(A) Respondent Tom Clarke (Clarke) is a fifth/sixth grade teacher,

with a seniority date of August 19, 1997. Given that the layoffs of elementary school
teachers otherwise end with those having a seniority date in 2007, he is far senior to
similar teachers who are being retained by the District. Clarke holds a Ryan Multi-
Subject credential, and the seniority list indicates that he has a master’s degree.

(B) The reason Clarke is being laid off is because he did not have a

CLAD certificate—Cross Cultural Language and Academic Development
certificate—as of March 1, 2011. However, on March 9, 2011, he obtained his
CLAD, and transmitted it to the District that same day, which was one day after the
Reduction Resolution was adopted. His transmission of the CLAD certificate to the
District occurred prior to issuance of the Preliminary Notices. (See Factual Findings
3(A) and 8.) The certificate is deemed issued on February 28, 2011, the date he
applied for it.4

(C) The District points to the fact that on February 4, 2011, Mr.

Birkhauser, the Director of Personnel Services, circulated a memo, reminding staff to
turn in a form which set out their dates of hire and credentials by March 1, 2011. In a
highlighted part of the memo, it states that the personnel section should be notified of
credential changes by March 1, 2011, and that information sent after that date would
not be included in the 2010-2011 seniority list.

(D) Clarke has endeavored to obtain his CLAD for a period of months,

a fact known to Mr. Birkhauser. For example, the two met with the principal of the
school where Clarke teaches in October 2010, and Mr. Birkhauser stressed that Clarke
needed to obtain the CLAD. At that time, he did not communicate a particular
deadline. By the early part of 2011, Clarke had some notice that failure to hold a
CLAD could affect his status in a layoff proceeding. (See Ex. B.)

3

It should be noted that the list uses the term “start date.” Other documents

used by the District, such as the letters to the staff asking for verification of their
credentials, use the term “date of hire.” (E.g., Ex. 16.) Technically, these terms are
not the same as seniority date, the term usually used in these proceedings. Under
section 44845, one’s “employment date” is the first date of paid service in a
probationary position. Throughout the hearing, however, the “start date” was treated
as the employment or seniority date.

4 This issuance date is shown on Exhibit A.

4

(E) The record establishes that Clarke had faced many hurdles in
obtaining the CLAD certificate. One college had stopped issuing the credential.
Another would not give him credit for work he had already done. Finally, a retired
professor was able to assist Respondent, and another local college issued the
certificate. That process was further hampered, however, by the fact that a key person
was on vacation in late February and early March 2011; thus Clarke was able to get
the application in by February 28, but could not meet with the person until March 9,
2011, to complete the application and issuance process.

(F) The record does not disclose that failure to hold a CLAD was an
authorized basis for layoff. Thus, while failure to be NCLB Highly Qualified was
indicated as a basis for layoff in the Reduction Resolution, no such authority was
granted to the Superintendent regarding CLAD. Likewise, there is no evidence that
some competency criteria were formulated which mandated CLAD. There was no
evidence that lack of a CLAD amounted to a skip criteria.

(G) It was not established that the District was prejudiced by receiving

Clarke’s CLAD certificate before the preliminary notices issued, and prior to March
15, 2011.

The Defense Raised by Respondent Wendy Cooper

12.

(A) Respondent Wendy Cooper5 (Cooper) teaches fourth grade and
has a seniority date of August 10, 2005. She holds a Clear Ryan Multiple Subject
Credential with CLAD, and she has a master’s degree. She is senior to at least three
teachers holding similar assignments, who are not being laid off. The District’s
justification for laying off this more senior teacher is that she is not “Highly
Qualified,” under the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB). The District asserts she
must pass the CSET test. Ms. Cooper asserts that she is Highly Qualified, in that
when she was employed in another school district, the San Ramon Valley Unified
School District (San Ramon), she was deemed Highly Qualified by that District, and
that status is sufficient to resolve the issue.

(B) Respondent Cooper received her credential effective December 2,
2002. She was then working in San Ramon. In 2005, San Ramon deemed her to be
Highly Qualified, although the basis of that decision is confused by various similar
documents that make up part of Exhibit C.6 For example, in one Certificate of
Compliance, generated in June 2005, Cooper marked herself as “not new” to the

5 When Respondent Cooper was hired by the District, it was under her former

name Wendy Raguza, which name appears in some of the relevant exhibits.

6 A number of the pages of Exhibit C duplicate each other. They were hand-

paginated by the ALJ after the case was submitted for decision.

5

teaching profession (Ex. C, pp. 2, 3) and she signed that document. However, on
other such documents she is shown as a teacher “new” to the profession, although she
does not appear to have signed those documents, which may be indicative of
corrections to be made after she left the San Ramon district. (Ex. C, p. 3.)

(C) In her original Certificate of Compliance, Cooper stated she had

completed HOUSSE, the state Highly Objective Uniform State Standard of
Evaluation, in the core subject she taught. This was coupled with the claim that she
was a “not new” to the profession teacher. (Ex. C, p. 2.) It should be noted that in
that document, her “Core Academic Area Assignment” is shown as “Core 6.”

(D) After Cooper came to work for the District, it took the position that

she would have to take and pass the CSET, a competency test, to be deemed Highly
Qualified. This is indicated in a letter written by Cooper in December 2006 to the
former Director of Personnel Services, Mr. White. In that letter Cooper notes that
when she came to work for the District, she understood that her prior employer’s
determination that she was Highly Qualified held true in the District. She goes on to
state that when told by Mr. White she would have to take the exam, she was
disappointed, but had taken the exam, had not passed it, and was continuing in her
efforts to do so. (Ex. 15.)

(E) On March 10, 2011, Cooper received an e-mail from San Ramon’s
Human Resources staff regarding Cooper’s NCLB status. Ms. Melissa Rude-Mahar,
from San Ramon’s staff, stated that after reviewing Cooper’s records, she found that
Cooper was “HOUSSE incorrectly and unnecessarily (sic). You are considered a
New Teacher with the undergraduate major equivalent in the core subject that you
taught. Please see the attached corrected NCLB compliant form and the original
incorrect forms. Our Director of Certificated Personnel, Rick Caldera, has signed off
on the correction.” (Ex. E.)

(F) The attachment to Ms. Rude-Maher’s e-mail is found at page 1 of
Exhibit C. It shows Cooper as a “new” to the profession teacher, who has completed
core academic subject area competence by way of coursework, as opposed to the
other options, examination (including the CSET), advanced certification, or
HOUSSE.

(G) During his testimony, Mr. Birkhauser indicated that Ms. Cooper

had Highly Qualified status in a junior high setting in her previous district; it is
inferred he was referring to San Ramon.

Respondent Woodard’s Seniority Date

13. Respondent Marie Woodard (Woodard) is shown on the seniority list as
having a seniority date of August 16, 2007. She had worked for the District prior to
that time, in a permanent position, but had resigned her position in 2007. However,

6

she had a change of circumstances, and came back to work for the District, in August
2007. The period between her resignation and her reemployment lasted from
sometime in the spring of 2007 until August of that year.

14. Woodard does not dispute the fact that her seniority date must begin from

when she came back to work for the District. However, she objects that she is now
junior to persons who were newly-hired by the District in August 2007, and who were
required to report on August 8 of that year. Because she had previously spent 11
years teaching in the District (despite resigning in the spring of 2007, she completed
that school year) Woodard reported on a later date, the date that then-existing staff
was to report. The then-new hires, by dint of paid service for attending the meeting
on August 8, have a higher seniority date than Woodard. Had Woodard known the
implication of coming a week later, she would have attended the new hire sessions to
cement an earlier seniority date.

Attrition by Retirement and Leave

15. The District is reducing music teaching from 24 to 21 FTE, for a net
reduction of 3 FTE. (Ex. 1.) In the course of the hearing, the District acknowledged
that two music teachers have given notice of their retirement; one of them, Mr.
Herbst, had submitted his retirement papers before March 1. A third music teacher,
Ms. Allen, will be on maternity leave.

16. Three of the Respondents are music teachers, and they assert that this

known attrition should account for the three FTE reduction in music teaching.

Other Findings Necessary to Resolve the Case

17. The District retained—skipped—some junior teachers who had special

qualifications, credentials, experience, or training needed by the District, which were
not possessed by more senior teachers. A prime example of such skipping was the
retention of junior teachers with special education background.

18. The District teaches sixth grade as an elementary school class. The
District’s junior high schools are based on the seventh and eighth grades. Classes in
the seventh and eighth grades, and the high school, are not taught in a “CORE”
manner, where a teacher instructs on two subjects, and another instructs on others.
Teachers can not be assigned to the junior high and high schools if they only have
multi-subject credentials; such teachers must have single-subject credentials.

19. Except as otherwise determined below, no certificated employee junior to

any Respondent was retained by the District to render a service for which a
Respondent was certificated and qualified to render.

7

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. Jurisdiction was established to proceed in this matter, pursuant to sections

44949 and 44955, based on Factual Findings 1 through 10.

2.

(A) A District may reduce a particular kind of service (PKS) within the

meaning of section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type
of service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may
‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent
because fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) The Court of
Appeal has made clear that a PKS reduction does not have to lead to fewer
classrooms or classes; laying off some teachers amounts to a proper reduction. (Zalec
v. Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 853-
858; see also San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 631, 637
[reduction of classroom teaching can be a reduction of a PKS; as long as there is a
change in the method of teaching or in a particular kind of service in teaching a
particular subject; any amount in excess of the statutory minimum may be reduced];
California Teachers Assn. v. Board of Trustees (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)

(B) The services to be discontinued are particular kinds of services

within the meaning of section 44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue
the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise
of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely
to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section
44949. This Conclusion is based on Factual Findings 4 through 6 and the foregoing
authorities.

3. A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a

continuing position which he or she is certificated to fill. In doing so, the senior
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)

4.

(A) Respondent Clarke can not be laid off due to his seniority and his
possession of a CLAD certificate, and the Accusation against him must be dismissed,
based on Factual Findings 11(A) to 11(G), and the following authorities.

(B) As pointed out by Respondent Clarke, March 15 has been treated

as the cut-off date for holding a credential, certificate, or other qualification and
providing notice of that fact to an employing District. Respondent cited Brough v.
Governing Board of El Segundo Unified School District (Brough) (1981) 118
Cal.App.3d 702 for that proposition. Other authorities cited in Brough for that
proposition are Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689, 698-699, and
Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn. Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 746, 814-
816. The reason for using March 15 as the cut-off date is that preliminary notices

8

must be issued by that date, and a district’s position could be jeopardized if a teacher
could show some qualification after that key jurisdictional date.

(C) To be sure, those cases do not proscribe an earlier cut-off date, but
in this case the District cannot demonstrate prejudice by Clarke’s inability to provide
the certificate before March 1. Mr. Birkhauser was aware of Clarke’s ongoing efforts
to complete and obtain the CLAD, and Clarke transmitted the certificate to the
District before the preliminary notices were served. Plainly, a few minutes work
would have produced a modification to the seniority list—one box in one column
opposite Clarke’s name would have changed based on the CLAD certificate—a small
matter in this day of computer-based spreadsheets. A few minutes of scrutiny would
have disclosed who was the next most junior teacher exposed to layoff, and a few
more minutes of work with a word processing program would have produced a
Preliminary Notice with that person’s name on it, rather than the vastly senior
Clarke’s. It is settled that once a school district can show the economic necessity of a
reduction in force, then seniority is the most important single factor in the layoff
process. (See Cousins v. Weaverville Elementary School Dist. (1994) 24 Cal.App.4th
1846, 1855.) Adhering to District’s position would do violence to that cardinal
principle.

(D) As noted in Factual Finding 11(F), it is not clear just why the lack

of a CLAD certificate exposed Clarke to layoff. It was not shown on the Reduction
Resolution as a basis for lay-off, in the manner that NCLB status was. This is in
contrast to the situation involving Respondent Cooper, where the issue was disclosed
early in the process. No competency criteria were established, and no skip criteria
were enunciated, either. Therefore, the authority of the District to terminate Clarke
for not having a CLAD by March 1, but having it by March 9, was not demonstrated.

5. Respondent Woodard’s seniority date cannot be changed. When a
permanent teacher resigns, but is reemployed within 39 months, they retain all of their
rights, except for their seniority date. Under section 44848, the new seniority date is
the first date the teacher renders paid service following her or his reemployment.
(San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 641.) The District
was under no obligation to send Woodard to an orientation so that she could improve
her seniority date, nor was it obligated to inform her that not attending the class might
have an effect on her future employment status. This Conclusion is based on Factual
Findings 13 and 14.

6. The District was not obligated to consider attrition in this proceeding

because it is a “PKS” proceeding. The authority cited by Respondents, Santa Clara
Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School District
(1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, does not support their position. That decision, like others
that have addressed the issue, holds that positively assured attrition must only be
considered in cases where the reduction in force results from a decline in attendance.
(See also Brough, supra, 118 Cal.App.3d at 712-714.)

9

7.

(A) Respondent Cooper can not be deemed Highly Qualified as a

fourth grade teacher. However, she is Highly Qualified as a sixth grade core
assignment teacher, or as a junior high teacher, based on her former employer’s
determination. (Factual Findings 12(A) through 12(G).)

(B) In her post-hearing brief, Cooper relies on California Code of

Regulations, title 5, section 61207, which provides:

Once a school district has determined that a teacher meets the
NCLB Teacher Requirements for the grade span and/or subject
taught, that teacher will not be required to demonstrate that they
meet the requirements again for the same grade span and/or
subject taught, even if they are later hired by another school
district in California.

(C) The District relies on other regulations, asserting, essentially, that

since Cooper was a “new” teacher when credentialed, she was required to take the
CSET test; and that not having done so, she is not Highly Qualified. The District’s
Post Hearing Brief, asserting that Cooper is not Highly Qualified, tends to contravene
CCR section 6120. That position, taken to its logical limits, would have the ALJ and
then the Board nullify the determination that was made by San Ramon.

(D) The District cites part of the regulation that establishes definitions

for establishing Highly Qualified as a cornerstone of its argument. That provision,
CCR section 6100, subdivision (m), provides:

“Teacher New to the Profession” means a teacher is new to the
profession if they have graduated from an accredited institution
of higher education and received a credential, or began an
approved intern program, on or after July 1, 2002.

Conversely, CCR section 6100, subdivision (n), provides that a teacher
graduating or receiving a credential before July 1, 2002, is a teacher who is “not new
to the profession.”

(E) The relevance of these definitions is revealed by two other

regulations cited by the District, CCR sections 6101 and 6103. The former provides
that:

A teacher who meets NCLB requirements at the elementary level is one
who:

7 All further references to the California Code of Regulations (CCR) shall be

to title 5.

10

(1) Holds at least a bachelor's degree, and
(2) Is currently enrolled in an approved intern program for less
than three years or has a credential, and
(3) Meets the applicable requirements in Section 6102 or 6103.

CCR section 6102 provides that:

A teacher who meets the NCLB requirements and is new to the
profession at the elementary level, in addition to having at least
a bachelor's degree and either being currently enrolled in an
approved intern program for less than three years or holding a
credential, must have passed a validated statewide subject
matter examination certified by the Commission on Teacher
Credentialing, including, but not limited to the California
Subject Examination for Teachers (CSET) Multiple Subjects,
Multiple Subject Assessment for Teachers (MSAT), and
National Teaching Exams (NTE).

CCR section 6103, pertaining to teachers not new to the profession at the
elementary level, provides that they must either pass a test or HOUSSE as provided in
section 6104.

(F) Pointing to the fact that Cooper was credentialed in December

2002, the District argues that she was “new to the profession” and therefore could not
utilize the HOUSSE process, as allowed to teachers not new, but instead was
obligated to take the CSET as required by CCR section 6102. Because of her
credential date, Cooper was in fact a teacher new to the profession. (Factual Finding
12(B).) Based on the foregoing, she would not be able to utilize the HOUSSE
process to become Highly Qualified as an elementary school teacher. Instead, she
would have to take the CSET exam, and pass it.

(G) The analysis does not end at this point. It should be noted that

CCR section 6110 provides somewhat different rules for NCLB compliance for
middle and secondary school, as opposed to elementary school. NCLB Highly
Qualified compliance for the middle and secondary schools are not controlled by
sections 6102 and 6103, but rather by sections 6111 or 6112. The first of those
regulations, section 6111, subdivision (a), provides:

A teacher who meets NCLB requirements and is new to the
profession at the middle and high school levels, in addition to
having at least a bachelor's degree and either being currently
enrolled in an approved intern program for less than three years
or holding a credential in the subject taught, must have passed
or completed one of the following for every core subject
currently assigned:

11

(1) A validated statewide subject matter examination
certified by the Commission on Teacher Credentialing,
(2) University subject matter program approved by the
Commission on Teacher Credentialing,
(3) Undergraduate major in the subject taught,
(4) Graduate degree in the subject taught, or
(5) Coursework equivalent to undergraduate major.

(Emphasis added.)

(H) When Cooper sought NCLB status with San Ramon, she

incorrectly took the position she was “not new” to the position and that she had
completed the HOUSSE. It also shows that the academic subject area assignment was
“Core 6.” (Ex. C, p. 2.) However, she was new to the profession within the meaning
of CCR section 6100, subdivision (m), which was enacted in 2004. The “corrected”
version of the Certificate of Compliance Worksheet, Exhibit C, p. 1, shows her to be
“new,” and utilizes the coursework option, which, the form provides, is only available
to middle and high school teachers. (Factual Findings 12(C), 12(E), & 12(F).)

(I) It is concluded that San Ramon properly certified Respondent

Cooper as Highly Qualified for CORE 6 assignments and for middle school
assignments in that district. To find that she is so certified is consistent with section
6120, which provides in part that a teacher will not be required to demonstrate that
they meet the requirements again for the same “grade span and/or subject taught.” To
be sure, in his testimony, Mr. Birkhauser stated that Cooper was NCLB compliant for
junior high school, which testimony was almost lost in the tangle of regulatory
provisions.

(J) However, it was disclosed during the telephonic hearing that in the

District, sixth grade is not considered a junior high school class.8 The District
requires single subject credentials for assignments there and in the middle school. Its
sixth grade classes are self-contained, requiring a multiple subject credential. They
are not staffed with two or more teachers teaching core classes. (Factual Finding 18.)

(K) Based on all the foregoing, Cooper can not maintain her

elementary school assignment because she is not NCLB Highly Qualified for
elementary school. And, it has not been demonstrated that she can bump into a junior
high school assignment with her multiple subject credential, even if she is deemed
highly qualified for that “grade span.”

8 CCR section 6100, subdivision (f), provides: “‘Grade Span’: The local

educational agency shall determine, based on curriculum taught, which grades shall
be included in the elementary, middle, or high school grade spans.”

12

8. No Respondent established that they had the right to bump a junior

employee, based on Legal Conclusion 3, and the Factual Finding 19.

9. Once the Accusation against Clarke is dismissed, it will be established that
no junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services which
a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render, based on all the
foregoing.

10. The Respondents, other than Clarke, may receive final layoff notices.

ORDER

1. The Accusation against Respondent Tom Clarke is hereby dismissed.

2. The following Respondents may receive final layoff notices in inverse
order of seniority, Roberto Becerra, Dorothy Burgess, Barbara Buchholz, Wendy
Cooper, Martha Cossio, Jared Coyle, Jose J. Garza, Jr., Dustin Maxey, Tammy
Pritchard, Leslie Raney, and Marie Woodard.

May 10, 2011

_______________________________
Joseph D. Montoya
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

13

14

