BEFORE THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
RIVERBANK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STANISLAUS COUNTY

In the Matter of the Accusation/Non-
Reemployment of Certificated Employees of
the Riverbank Unified School District:

OAH No. 2011030518

Karen Baker
Zac Wilkins
Rebecca Camarena
Charlotte Bowden
Isela Wesley
Norma Ramirez
Marianne Goularte
Alice Solis

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Ann Elizabeth Sarli, Office of Administrative

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter in Riverbank, California, on
April 4, 2011.

Thomas E. Gauthier, Attorney at Law, represented the Riverbank Unified

School District (District).

Heidi Primack Talbot, Attorney at Law, represented Alice Solis.

Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law, represented Karen Baker, Zac Wilkins

Rebecca Camarena, Charlotte Bowden, Isela Wesley, Norma Ramirez and
Marianne Goularte.

Oral and documentary evidence was presented and the parties offered oral

closing arguments. The record remained open to allow parties to file written briefs.
The District’s brief was filed on April 13, 2011 and was marked for identification as
Exhibit 9. Respondent Alice Solis’s brief was filed on April 13, 2011 and was
marked for identification as Exhibit G. The matter was submitted for decision on
April 13, 2011.

1

FINDINGS

1.

Ken Geisick is the District Superintendent. Norma Gonzalez is the
District Manager of Human Resources. Their actions, and those of the District’s
governing body, the Board of Trustees (Board), were taken solely in their official
capacities.

2.

The District serves approximately 2,750 students in kindergarten
through 12th grade. The District has seven school sites and approximately 125
certificated employees. There is one alternative education (continuation) high school.

The District is facing a budget shortfall for the 2011-2012 school year

of at least $900,000.

3.

4.

On March 8, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution # 10-11-18

(Resolution) reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services (PKS) affecting 8.3
Full Time Equivalent (FTE) certificated positions.

5.

The Resolution was based on the Superintendent’s recommendation

that it was necessary to reduce or discontinue PKS no later than the beginning of the
2011-2012 school year. In making his recommendation, the Superintendent took into
account all positively assured attrition.

6.

The Resolution states that the Board determined that it was necessary to

reduce the following PKS of the District not later than the close of the current school
year:

Services

Number of FTE Positions

1. Multiple Subject
2. Counselor
3. Social Science
4. Mathematics
5. Special Projects (Formerly
RHS SIP Coordinator)

Total

5.0 FTE
1.5 FTE
1.0 FTE
0.6 FTE

.2 FTE

_________
8.3 FTE

2

7.

As a result of the above PKS reductions and/or eliminations, the Board

determined that it was necessary to decrease 9 FTE positions for certificated
employees in the District no later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year, in
accordance with Education Code section 44955.1

8.

The Resolution directed the Superintendent or his designee to send

appropriate notices to all employees whose services would be terminated by virtue of
the Board’s action.

9.

Before March 15, 2011, Ms. Gonzales served a letter entitled “Notice

of Recommendation That Services Will Be Terminated” (Preliminary Notice) on each
of the employees affected by the PKS reductions and/or eliminations set forth in the
Resolution. The Preliminary Notice advised that the Superintendent had
recommended to the Board that the recipient be given preliminary written notice that
his/her services would be terminated at the close of the current school year due to
reductions in PKS.

10.

The respondents timely filed a Request for Hearing to determine

whether there was cause for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

11.

On March 22, 2011, the Superintendent made the Accusation, and

caused it to be served on respondents or their legal counsel. Respondents timely filed
Notices of Defense.

Implementation of LayOff

12.

In September 2010, Ms. Gonzales and her staff updated the District’s
seniority list in connection with a computer system upgrade. Certificated staff were
notified by letter to update their files. An updated seniority list was created and
submitted to the Riverbank Teachers Association so that the teachers could review the
seniority list and bring any proposed changes to the attention of the District.

13. Ms. Gonzales used this seniority list in identifying those employees

affected by the PKS reductions. District staff identified the individuals serving in the
positions affected by the PKS reductions. District staff then identified the least senior
persons occupying the positions affected by the PKS reductions.

14. When the least senior persons occupying the positions affected by the
PKS reductions were identified, District staff looked at each individual’s credentials
to determine whether he or she could displace any less senior certificated employees.

1 All statutory references are to the California Education Code unless

otherwise indicated.

3

15.

Before March 15, 2011, District staff served the Preliminary Notice on

the most junior employees affected by the PKS reduction.

16.

The District identified Karen Baker, Zac Wilkins, Rebecca Camarena,

Charlotte Bowden and Isela Wesley, as the least senior certificated employees
occupying the Multiple Subject positions affected by the FTE reductions. The
District determined that no junior certificated employee was being retained in the
2011- 2012 school year to provide services for which any of these five employees
were certificated and competent to provide.

17.

The District identified Norma Ramirez (1.0 FTE) and Marianne

Goularte (.5 FTE) as the least senior certificated employees whose positions were
affected by the 1.5 FTE reductions in Counseling Services. The District determined
that no junior certificated employee was being retained in the 2011- 2012 school year
to provide services for which Norma Ramirez or Marianne Goularte were certificated
and competent to provide.

Challenges by Alice Solis

18.

The District identified Alice Solis as the least senior certificated

employee affected by the 1.0 reduction in Social Science. Ms. Solis is a permanent
certificated employee with a seniority date of March 8, 2008. She holds a Clear
Single Subject Teaching Credential in Social Science. She also holds a Clear
Administrative Services Credential. Ms. Solis contends that a junior teacher, Carl
Hughes, is being retained in the 2011- 2012 school year to provide teaching services
which she is certificated and competent to render.

19. Mr. Hughes is a permanent certificated employee with a seniority date
of August 18, 2008. He holds a Life Standard Secondary Teaching Credential with a
Supplemental Authorization in History and a Subject Authorization in Political
Science. He is currently assigned to teach at the Adelante Continuation High School
and is expected to teach in this assignment in the 2011-2012 school year. He teaches
American government, political science and world history, and will be teaching these
subjects next year.

20.

The District maintains that Ms. Solis is not competent to teach the

classes assigned to Mr. Hughes for three reasons: (1) She is not NCLB (No Child Left
Behind) compliant in the core academic subjects: civics and government, political
science and history; (2) She does not possess the experience necessary to teach in a
continuation high school; and (3) Mr. Hughes possesses special skills and experience
necessary to teach in a continuation high school, skills and experience which Ms.
Solis does not possess.

4

NCLB Compliance

21.

It is uncontroverted that a teacher assigned to teach core academic
subjects in Adelante Continuation High School, including American government,
political science and world history, must be NCLB compliant in the core subject areas
of civics and government, and history. It is uncontroverted that Mr. Hughes is NCLB
compliant in the core subject areas of civics and government, because he holds an
undergraduate major in political science, and that he is NCLB compliant in the core
subject area of history, because he has an “undergraduate major equivalent” of 32
non-remedial semester units in history.

22. Ms. Solis maintains that her Single Subject Teaching Credential in
Social Science qualifies her as NCLB compliant in civics and government and in
history because she obtained the credential after completing the Social Sciences
Waiver program through California State University Stanislaus (waiver program) in
1992. The waiver program required the student to complete at least 16 courses, a
minimum of three credits per course, in the subjects of economics, geography,
California history, United States history, world history and political science.

23.

Lynda Nicholas is the Title 2 Coordinator for the California

Department of Education. In this capacity, she is responsible for overseeing the
State’s compliance with the Federal NCLB Act. Ms. Nicholas testified that NCLB
requires appropriate state authorizations to teach history, economics, government and
geography. California has a “composite credential” which allows teaching in all four
of these domains. A Single Subject Teaching Credential in Social Science which is
based upon completion of the waiver program renders the holder NCLB compliant in
these domains. This is because the waiver program requires that subject matter
competency be established in all four domains in order to grant the credential through
the program. Ms. Nichols confirmed that California State University at Stanislaus has
an approved subject matter waiver program for social science. She testified that the
federal government questioned the California State composite credential in 2005
during a federal audit, but ultimately accepted this composite credential in satisfaction
of NCLB compliance in these subjects.

24.

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasive that Ms. Solis is NCLB
qualified to teach the subjects Mr. Hughes is teaching, American government,
political science and world history. Thus she is certificated to teach these subjects.
But questions remain whether she is competent to teach in Adelante Continuation
High School. If so, has the District established that it needs to retain Mr. Hughes
because he has special skills and experience necessary to teach in Adelante
Continuation High School, skills and experience which Ms. Solis does not possess?

5

Competency to Teach in Alternative Education

25.

The District maintains that certificated employees are not competent to

teach in Adelante Continuation High School unless they have, at a minimum, six
months2 of teaching experience in an alternative education environment in the
previous six to seven years. This is because Adelante is a unique and challenging
educational setting. The school provides a “second chance” to high school students
who are having a difficult time in the typical high school settings. The students have
intensive social, academic and learning issues that have prevented them from being
successful in a traditional educational setting. Currently, there are 60 students who
take modular classes in six-week sessions. Curriculum is personalized and intensive,
and there are challenging classroom management issues.

26. Ms. Solis has never held a teaching assignment, much less an
assignment teaching it an alternative education setting. She has been a Principal at
Cardozo Middle School for the last five years. Between 2002 and 2006, she was
employed as the Principal at Robertson Road Elementary (K-6), a Modesto City
school. Between 2000 and 2002 she was employed as a Vice Principal at Orville
Wright Elementary ( K-6), a Modesto City school. In 2000, she was employed as the
Summer School Principal at Orville Wright Elementary. Prior to 2000, she was a
social worker, a healthy start coordinator and a family self-sufficiency specialist for a
housing authority. These positions were not certificated teaching positions.

27. Ms. Solis testified at length about her experience with teaching classes

for teachers, substituting for elementary and middle school classroom teachers,
preparing classroom curriculum, supervising teachers and assessing their instructional
techniques, and teaching two summer school sessions with middle and some high
school students. She has extensive experience in these areas, and she has extensive
experience as a principal and social worker, working with challenging students and
their families.

28. Ms. Solis has never been assigned as a classroom teacher. Her
administrative experience has been in elementary and middle schools. Although the
“profile” of the continuing education high school student may be familiar to Ms.
Solis, the District determined that she “has not delivered five hours of instruction all
day every day with these students for a minimum of six months.”

2 The testimony varied as to whether six months or one year of teaching in a
continuation program would satisfy the minimum requirement of competency. The
six month period was chosen for the purpose of this analysis, in keeping with the
legislative intent of the Education Code to retain senior employees.

6

29. Ms. Solis plainly does not meet the District’s minimum requirement for

competency in teaching high school students at Adelante Continuation High School.
The question remains, though, whether the competency criteria established by the
District is reasonable and warranted. As set forth in Finding 25, the District has
demonstrated that the student population at Adelante Continuation High School
requires skilled and experienced high school level classroom instruction. Ms. Solis
has never provided this. The District has demonstrated that the student population at
Adelante High School requires instructors who are skilled and experienced in
managing behavioral, social and academic problems, while delivering high school
level instruction. Even though Ms. Solis has worked in the field of social work, she
has not employed this experience while delivering high school level instruction.
Accordingly, Ms. Solis is not competent to render the services that the junior Mr.
Hughes is being retained to render.

Skipping Mr. Hughes

30.

The District maintains that it may deviate from terminating (skip) Mr.

Hughes pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), because the
District has a specific need for Mr. Hughes to teach the courses he teaches at Adelante
Continuation High School, and Mr. Hughes has special training and experience
necessary to teach these courses, which others with more seniority do not possess.
Ms. Solis is the only respondent who maintains that she would be retained if Mr.
Hughes were not skipped.

31.

As set forth in Findings 25 to 29, Ms. Solis is not competent to render
the services Mr. Hughes is performing, and thus the fact that he was skipped does not
impact her layoff. Nevertheless, the District demonstrated that it has a specific need
for Mr. Hughes to teach at Adelante Continuation High School because he has been
successfully teaching at Adelante Continuation High School for the last three years
and had previously taught adult education for 15 years and general education for 15
years. The District also demonstrated that there was no certificated teacher with more
seniority, subject to layoff, who possesses the special training and experience
necessary to teach these courses.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

As set forth the Findings, all notice and jurisdictional requirements set

forth in sections 44944 and 44945 were met. The notices sent to respondents
indicated the statutory basis for the reduction of services and, therefore, were
sufficiently detailed to provide them due process. (San Jose Teachers Association v.
Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing
Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The description of services to be reduced, both
in the Board Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe particular kinds of

7

services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838. See, also, Degener v.
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)

2.

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular

kind of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another
manner. (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California
Teachers Association v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132
Cal.App.3d 32.) A school board may reduce services within the meaning of the
statute either by determining that a certain type of service shall not be performed at all
or by reducing the number of district employees who perform such services.
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167.)

3.

The services identified in Resolution # 10-11-18 are particular kinds of

services that may be reduced or discontinued under sections 44949 and 44955. The
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary
nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or
discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and
pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

4.

As set forth in the Findings and Legal Conclusions the District has

established that no employees junior to respondents are being retained to perform the
services which respondents are certificated and competent to render.

5.

The District’s reductions and discontinuances of particular kinds of

services relate solely to the welfare of its schools and pupils.

RECOMMENDATION

The Accusations are sustained.

The District may give notice to respondents in the inverse order of seniority

that it will not require their services for the 2011-2012 school year.

DATED: April 15, 2011

_____________________________
ANN ELIZABETH SARLI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

8

