BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF
LEMON GROVE SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of
Certain Employees of Lemon Grove School
District Identified in Appendix A.

OAH No. 2011030915

PROPOSED DECISION

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Lemon Grove, California, on April 21,
2011.

William Diedrich, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Rudd & Romo, Attorneys at Law,

represented Lemon Grove School District (“District”).

Georgiana D’Alessandro, Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax, represented all of the
Respondents listed in Appendix A, except for those identified immediately below. Attorney
D’Alessandro also represented three temporary teachers who the District sought to release.

Respondent Larry Buchanan appeared and represented himself.

Respondent Irma Poulin requested a hearing but did not appear and was not

represented.

Respondent Susan Farnsworth was served with a precautionary layoff.

Each Respondent is a certificated employee of the district.

The matter was submitted on April 21, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Ernest Anastos, Superintendent, Lemon Grove School District, made and filed

the accusation in his official capacity.

1

2.

The respondents that the District identified as permanent certificated

employees are listed in Appendix A, attached hereto and by this reference are incorporated
herein. Each respondent is a certificated employee of the District.

3.

On March 8, 2011, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 10-11-19
reducing particular kinds of services and directing the Superintendent to give appropriate
notices to certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the action. Attached
to the Resolution as Exhibit A was a list of the services that were being reduced, consisting
of 9.0 regular certificated FTEs and 35.76 temporary FTEs. The District sought to release its
temporary employees and noted that the “inclusion of temporary services within this
Resolution is not intended to grant these individuals who are impacted any rights greater then
provided by law, nor to nullify any provisions within each individual’s employment contract,
nor to supersede any other Resolution by this Governing Board to release or otherwise
terminate the services of any impacted individual.”

4.

The Resolution contained “skipping criteria” directing the District to use

“criteria within Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)” to “deviate from terminating
a certificated employee in order of seniority” as follows:

“WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a significant
population of English language learners with specialized educational needs, a
specific and compelling need exists to retain certificated employees who have
Bilingual Cross-cultural Language Arts Development (“BCLAD”)
authorization to teach English language learners and the special training and
experience that comes therewith; and

“WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a significant
population of English language learners with specialized educational needs, a
specific and compelling need exists to retain certificated employees who teach
in the District’s bilingual dual immersion program and therefore possess the
special training and experience that comes therewith; and

“WHEREAS, this Board has determined that there is a significant and

compelling need to retain teachers who have attained National Board
Certification, and therefore possess the training and experience that comes
therewith…”

5.

Resolution No. 10-11-19 contained tie-breaking criteria to determine the order

of termination for those employees who shared the same seniority dates. The District was
not required to use these criteria to break any actual ties in this proceeding.

6.

Resolution No. 10-11-19 contained a bump analysis to determine which

employees could bump into a position being held by a junior employee. A senior teacher
whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or

2

she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior employee may displace or
“bump” a junior employee who is filling that position. (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School
District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.) Resolution No. 10-11-19 defined “competency” for
the purposes of bumping as:

“possession of: (1) a valid credential in the relevant subject matter

area; (2) “highly qualified” status under the No Child Left Behind Act in the
position to be assumed; (3) if displacing an employee who possesses a
BCLAD certification, possession of a BCLAD certification; (4) special
training and experience necessary to meet the job requirements of specialized
positions (such as AVID teachers, EDP lead teachers, Dual Immersion
teachers); (5) if displacing an employee who possesses a National Board
Certification, possession of a National Board Certification; (6) for
elementary (K-5) teaching positions, or a self contained 6th grade classroom
teaching position, at least (1) year of experience in the past five (5) years
teaching at the elementary level or in a sixth grade self contained classroom;
and (7) for positions involving instruction to 6th, 7th and/or 8th grade
students, other than a self contained 6th grade classroom, at least one (1) year
of experience in the position or assignment within the last five (5) years.”

7.

On March 8, 2011, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 10-11-20

determining that 62 presently employed temporary certificated employees, identified by
employee number in Resolution No. 10-11-20, shall not be reemployed for the 2011-2012
school year and directing the Superintendent to give appropriate notices to certificated
employees whose positions would be affected by the action. The District sought to release
those temporary employees in this proceeding.

8.

Consistent with the Governing Board’s Resolutions, the District identified

certificated employees for layoff. The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of
service is a matter reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in
this proceeding. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service
will be upheld unless it is fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (San Jose Teachers Association
v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 637.)

9.

The District considered attrition, including resignations, retirements and
requests for transfer, in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be
delivered to its employees. No evidence was presented that any known positively assured
attrition was not considered.

10.

On or before March 15, 2011, the District timely served on Respondents a

written notice that the Superintendent had recommended that their services would be
terminated at the close of the current school year. The reasons for the recommendation were
set forth in these preliminary layoff notices.

3

11.

The District also issued precautionary layoff notices to ensure that it could

reduce its force in sufficient numbers as ordered by the Governing Board. There was nothing
improper in the District taking this precaution.

12.

An accusation was served on each respondent. All prehearing jurisdictional

requirements were met.

13.

The layoffs will not reduce any of the District’s offerings in code mandated

courses below the level required by law.

BCLAD and Dual Immersion Skipping Issue

14.

Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c), set forth a general rule
requiring school districts to retain senior employees over more junior employees and to retain
permanent employees over temporary employees. Any exception to this general rule must be
based on statute. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d) provides:

“(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1)

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific
course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential with
a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that
the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that
course or course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority
do not possess.

(2)

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with constitutional

requirements related to equal protection of the laws.”

15.

Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the District may skip a

junior teacher being retained for specified reasons. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 131.) Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior
teachers only if the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more
senior counterparts lack. (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing
Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) A
junior employee possessing special competence can be retained over a senior employee lacking
such competence. (Alexander v. Delano Joint Union High School District (1983) 139
Cal.App.3d 567.) The Resolution skipped certificated employees who possessed a BCLAD
certification or taught the Spanish portion of the dual immersion program who were junior to
respondents.

16.

Superintendent Ernest Anastos testified that forty percent of students in the

4

District are English language learners, making it necessary to offer bilingual education to its
students. Accordingly, the Resolution permitted the District to “skip” teachers who
possessed a BCLAD or taught in the dual immersion program. The goal of the dual
immersion program is to have students achieve bilingualism in Spanish and English.
Superintendent Anastos testified that the District skipped teachers who taught in the Spanish
portion of the dual immersion program.

17.

The testimony of Superintendent Anastos established that the needs of the

District required it to skip the certificated employees with a BCLAD or who taught Spanish
in the dual immersion program.

Other Issues

18.

During the hearing, the District determined that respondent Larry Buchanan’s
assignment was incorrectly identified on the seniority list as an assistant principal and should
properly identify him as a principal. It is recommended that District make that correction on
its seniority list. This correction did not affect the District’s ability to lay him off in this
proceeding and he cannot bump into a teaching position.

19.

During the hearing, the District determined that respondent Kyle Griffith

teaches a sixth, seventh and eighth grade curriculum, not a self-contained sixth grade
assignment as previously presumed. Owing to that fact, the District determined that
respondent Sarah Slade, who was more senior to Griffith and who possessed a supplemental
authorization which would allow her to teach at the middle school level, could “bump” into
Griffith’s teaching position. No respondent more senior to Slade was certificated and
competent to bump Slade. As a result of Slade’s “bump,” respondent Susan Farnsworth,
who initially received a precautionary layoff, will now be terminated from employment with
the District as she has less seniority and cannot bump into any position held by a more junior
employee.1

20.

No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any

services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955,

and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,

1

Susan Farnsworth declined to testify in this proceeding when given the opportunity by

the Administrative Law Judge to do so.

5

thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3.

Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant
to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be
required for the 2011-2012 school year. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. The
district has identified the certificated employees who are providing the particular kinds of
services that the Governing Board directed be reduced or discontinued. It is recommended
that the Governing Board give respondents notice before May 15, 2009, that their services
will not be required by the District for the school year 2011-12.

4.

A preponderance of the evidence sustained most of the charges set forth in the

accusation.

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the respondents whose
names are set forth below that their employment will be terminated at the close of the current
school year and that their services will not be needed for the 2011-2012 school year.

It is recommended that the District release the temporary employees identified in
Resolution No 10-11-20 by employee number and who were identified by name in exhibit 12
introduced at hearing.

It is recommended that the Accusation served on respondent Sarah Slade be dismissed

and her layoff notice be rescinded.

DATED: ______________________

________________________________
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

Appendix A

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Buchanan, Larry
Erlendson, Shari
Farnsworth, Susan
Griffith, Kyle
Moudry, Teresa
Poulin, Irma
Smith, Cynthia
Stack, Trisha

7

