BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD
MONTEREY PENINSULA COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT
COUNTY OF MONTEREY, CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

KEVIN BRANSFIELD, A.J. FARRAR,
CAROLYN HANSEN, KIMBERLY
CHRISTOFF-MANSFIELD, DAVID
MICHAELS, DANIEL PHILLIPS,
NANCY PREDHAM, WALTER WHITE
and JANINE WILSON,

Respondents.

OAH No. 2011031098

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Nancy L. Rasmussen, State of California, Office of
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 28, 2011, in Monterey, California.

Louis T. Lozano, Attorney at Law, Lozano Smith, represented the Monterey

Peninsula Community College District.

Priscilla Winslow, Attorney at Law, California Teachers Association, represented

respondents Kevin Bransfield, Carolyn Hansen, David Michaels, Nancy Predham and Walter
White, who were present, and A.J. Farrar, Daniel Phillips and Janine Wilson, who were not
present.

There was no appearance by or on behalf of respondent Kimberly Christoff-

Mansfield.

The matter was submitted on April 28, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Douglas R. Garrison made and filed the accusation in his official capacity as

Superintendent/President of the Monterey Peninsula Community College District.

Respondents Kevin Bransfield, Kimberly Christoff-Mansfield, A.J. Farrar,

Carolyn Hansen, David Michaels, Daniel Phillips, Nancy Predham, Walter White and Janine
Wilson are academic employees of the district.

3.

On March 8, 2011, the district’s Governing Board adopted Resolution No.

2010-2011/96, reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services for the 2011-2012
academic year and directing the superintendent/president to give appropriate notices to
academic employees whose positions will be affected by the action.

4.

Prior to March 15, 2010, Superintendent/President Garrison gave written

notice to respondents and other academic employees of the recommendation that their
services will not be required for the 2011-2012 academic year. The reasons for the
recommendation were set forth in these preliminary layoff notices.

5.

Respondents filed timely requests for hearing to determine if there is cause for

terminating their services for the 2011-2012 academic year. An accusation was served on
respondents, and all respondents are deemed to have filed timely notices of defense. All
prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

6.

On March 8, 2011, in order to address a projected budget shortfall, the board
took action to reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of services (PKS) for the
2011-2012 academic year:

PKS
Academic Support Center Services
Administration of Justice Courses
Coaching services/Physical Education Courses
Dance Courses
Horticulture Courses
Interior Design Courses
International Students Program Services
Photography Courses
Physics/Astronomy Courses
American Sign Language Courses
Counseling Services

FTE1
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
2.0

TOTAL 12.0 FTE

7.

Respondents argue that the district’s financial situation does not justify the

PKS reductions and proposed layoffs. Although the district expects a reduction in funding
next year, it intends to maintain a 10 percent budget reserve, in accordance with board
policy. The current budget for the district is approximately $36 million, meaning that the
reserve is approximately $3.6 million. This reserve amount is well in excess of the $1.9
million projected salary savings from layoffs required under the worst-case financial
scenario. Respondents are not persuasive in their argument that the proposed layoffs should
be disallowed, i.e., the district should be forced to use its budget reserve to keep from making
the PKS reductions. The board has a duty to assure the fiscal solvency of the district, and its

1 FTE stands for full-time equivalent position.

-2-

policy of maintaining a 10 percent budget reserve is a proper exercise of its discretion in
fulfilling this duty, particularly in these times of economic uncertainty.

8.

Education Code section 877432 is the statute which authorizes community
college districts to lay off academic employees when such layoffs are necessitated by the
reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services for the following academic year. That
statute provides:

However, the services of no tenured employee may be
terminated under this section while any probationary employee,
or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a
service in a faculty service area in which the records of the
district maintained pursuant to Section 87743.4 reflect that the
tenured employee possesses the minimum qualifications
prescribed by the board of governors and is competent to serve
under district competency criteria. [Italics added.]

Section 87743 requires a district to “make assignments and reassignments in a manner
that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications
entitle them to render.”

9.

In 1991, the district and the Monterey Peninsula College Teachers Association
(MPCTA) negotiated provisions of their contract regarding placement of faculty members in
faculty service areas (FSAs). The preamble to these provisions explained: “The function of
Faculty Service Areas (FSAs) is to provide a rational and workable framework within which
seniority and ‘bumping’ rights can be exercised by faculty when a reduction-in-force (RIF),
or layoff, is being effected.” Under the contract provisions, the district places a faculty
member in an FSA at the time of initial employment, and the faculty member is deemed
permanently competent in such FSA unless he or she receives an unsatisfactory evaluation in
that FSA. After initial employment, a faculty member may apply for placement in an FSA
for which he or she has the minimum qualifications. To establish and maintain competency
in an employee-initiated FSA, the faculty member must have taught or provided the service
in the FSA for two semesters within the past three years and received at least one satisfactory
evaluation. Disputes over the denial of an FSA are subject to grievance. The contract
incorporates an agreed list of FSAs.

10.

Section 87743.4, which is referenced in section 87743, provides:

Each district shall maintain a permanent record for each faculty
member employed by the district of each faculty service area for
which the faculty member possesses the minimum qualifications
for service and in which he or she has established competency

2 All statutory references are to the Education Code.

-3-

pursuant to district competency standards. The record shall be
maintained in the faculty member’s personnel file.

11.

Several of the respondents were unaware of FSAs until recently, and they

testified that had they known about FSAs and their importance in a layoff, they would have
pursued placement in another FSA. Also, two respondents testified that their personnel files
do not show their FSAs. These respondents are all members of MPCTA and have received a
copy of the union contract containing the provisions on FSAs.

12.

In 2008, a faculty committee made recommendations to update the 1991 FSA
list, but the recommendations were not adopted. In October 2009, MPCTA President Mark
Clements requested a copy of the current FSAs, seniority list and hiring dates from Barbara
Lee, Associate Dean of Human Resources. In his e-mail to Lee, Clements stated: “While we
are not in the position of other colleges in lay-offs. [Sic.] I want to be proactive in protecting
our members and do what we can to be prepared.” Lee believes she provided Clements with
the items he requested.

13.

Respondents challenge the proposed layoffs on the grounds that the district
violated their due process rights by failing to notify them of their FSAs. However, there is
no legal requirement that the district notify faculty members of their FSAs or their rights
relating to FSAs under the contract negotiated with their union. The district apparently did
not have FSAs in all faculty personnel files, as required by section 87743.4, but any faculty
member who did not know his or her FSA could have obtained that information by asking
the district. Also, the faculty union could have provided information to its members about
FSAs.

14.

Respondent Carolyn Hansen, who has a seniority date in 1980, teaches

American Sign Language full-time in the World Languages Department. Hansen has a
special education teaching credential, and prior to 1995 she provided counseling and other
supportive services for deaf/hearing impaired students and physically disabled students.
When a list of faculty members and their FSAs was compiled in 1991, Hansen was listed as
having FSAs in Sign Language and Special Education. However, the Special Education FSA
has an asterisk after it, denoting “Employee Initiated and/or Must Maintain Competency to
Retain FSA.” Hansen was not aware of her FSAs, and she never applied for the Special
Education FSA. She was also not aware that she had to do something to maintain her
competency in Special Education.

15.

Respondents’ counsel seemed to be asserting that Carolyn Hansen should have

bumping rights in the Special Education FSA, since the asterisk on the FSA list must have
been a mistake. But even if Hansen did not apply for her Special Education FSA (i.e., the
FSA was not employee-initiated), the asterisk could mean that for some other reason she was
required to maintain competency to retain the FSA. Since she has not provided services in
Special Education since 1994, Hansen is no longer competent in that FSA, and she has not
established that she should be deemed permanently competent. Hansen does not have
bumping rights in the Special Education FSA.

-4-

16. Most of the services to be reduced or eliminated next year have only one
full-time faculty member in that FSA, and those employees are subject to layoff in this
proceeding. Respondents contend that these PKS reductions and layoffs should be
disallowed because the college did not follow its Procedure for Academic Program
Discontinuance. However, the college does not plan to discontinue any of the programs
included in the PKS reductions, so respondents’ contention is without merit. Some programs
may be suspended, but in others the college will offer some courses next year (but not a
full-time load). Adjunct faculty will not be hired to teach these courses before the courses
are offered to laid-off faculty members.

17.

Superintendent/President Garrison testified that determining the areas for PKS

reductions was a difficult process that involved consultation with senior officers of the
college and consideration of many factors. To the extent possible, the district wants to
preserve general education transfer courses and courses in career and technical education.
Enrollment trends, awards of certificates, and job placement were among the factors
considered. Ultimately, hard choices had to be made; as Garrison testified, “no courses have
no merit.”

The PKS reductions include general education transfer courses, career and technical
education courses, and popular courses with stable or increasing enrollment. The reductions
include International Students Program Services, the FSA in which respondent Nancy
Predham is the sole faculty member. Predham’s program brings international students to the
college, generating revenue from the out-of-state tuition they pay.

Garrison hopes that the worst-case financial scenario will not happen and the district

will be able to avoid the PKS reductions and reinstate faculty members subject to layoff.

18.

Respondents contend that the district has not established that the layoffs are

“related to the welfare of the colleges and the students thereof” as required by section 87740,
but this contention is without merit. In determining how to allocate its resources, a
community college district is given discretion to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of
services. While any reduction or elimination of services is arguably detrimental to at least
some students (not to mention college employees), in the absence of a showing that the
district’s decision is arbitrary or capricious, its action is related to the overall welfare of the
college and its students. In this case, the decision to reduce or discontinue the services set
forth in Finding 6 is neither arbitrary nor capricious but rather a proper exercise of the
district’s broad discretion.

19.

All contentions made by respondents not specifically addressed above are

found to be without merit and are rejected.

20.

No employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained by the

district to perform services in a faculty service area for which any respondent has met the
minimum qualifications and competency criteria.

-5-

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.
87740 and 87743.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections

2.

Cause exists because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of

services pursuant to Education Code section 87743 to give notice to respondents that their
services will not be required for the 2011-2012 academic year. The cause relates solely to
the welfare of the college and the students thereof within the meaning of Education Code
section 87740.

ORDER

Notice may be given to respondents that their services will not be required for the

2011-2012 academic year because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of
services.

DATED: May 3, 2011

________________________________
NANCY L. RASMUSSEN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

-6-

