BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD
OF THE ACTON-AGUA DULCE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Layoff of:

OAH No. 2011030982

Marilyn Alford, Lela Anderson, Danielle
Cancasci, Misty Cervantes, Melissa
Crawford, Danielle Johnson, Ariel Levitch,
Charmony Murray, Kelly Oliver, Daniel
Tirozzi, Melissa Trusel, Lonnie Woodley,
Gilbert Yoon,

Respondents

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter came on regularly for hearing before Janis S. Rovner,

Administrative Law Judge of the Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, in
Acton, California, on April 19, 2009.

Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP, by Maggy M. Anthanasious, Attorney at

Law, represented the Superintendent of the Acton-Agua Dulce Unified School District
(District).

California Teachers Association Representative Penny Upton represented

Marilyn Alford (Alford), Lela Anderson Harrison (Anderson), Danielle Cancasci (Cancasci),
Danielle Johnson (Johnson), Ariel Levitch (Levitch), Charmony Murray Martin (Murray),
and Kelly Oliver (Oliver) (Respondents), who were present at the hearing. Respondent
Lonnie Woodley appeared on his own behalf. Respondents Melissa Crawford (Crawford),
Misty Cervantes, Daniel Tirozzi (Tirozzi), Melissa Trusel (Trusel), and Gilbert Yoon did not
appear at the hearing, nor did anyone appear on their behalf.

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and
has given Respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2011-2012 school year.
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not
reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

Oral and documentary evidence was received, and closing argument was heard

on April 19, 2011. The record was left open to allow Respondents to submit a post-hearing
brief addressing whether they agreed with the District that school counseling is not a legally

mandated service. The District was permitted to file a reply brief no later than April 26,
2011, only if Respondents’ brief disagreed with the District on this issue. Respondents’
letter brief, agreeing in substance with the District, was submitted on April 22, 2011, and is
identified as Exhibit D. The matter was submitted for decision on April 22, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdiction and Governing Board’s Actions

1.

Brent Woodard is the Superintendent of the District.

2.
District.

Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of the

3.

On March 10, 2011, the Governing Board of the Acton-Agua Dulce Unified
School District (the Board) resolved to reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds
of services for the 2011-2012 school year:

Particular Kinds of Service

Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)
Positions Eliminated

Elementary Classroom Teacher, K-6

Secondary Classroom Teacher-Social Science

Secondary Classroom Teacher-Biological Science

Secondary Classroom Teacher-Physical Education

Special Education Teacher-Special Day Class, Preschool

Special Education Teacher-Special Day Class

Speech & Language Pathology

School Psychologist

School Counselor

6.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

.5

1.0

.5

1.3

1.0

Total Full Time Equivalent Reduction:

13.3

FTE

2

4.

On or before March 15, 2011, in accordance with Education Code sections

44949 and 44955, Superintendent Woodard gave written notice to the Board and to
Respondents that it has been recommended that notice be given to Respondents that their
services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year due to the reduction or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The written notice (March 15th notice)
included the reasons for the recommendation and also notified Respondents of their right to
request a hearing to determine if cause exists for not employing each Respondent for the
2011-2012 school year.

5.

Ten Respondents timely and properly filed a written request for hearing to

determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

6.

Superintendent Woodard filed the Accusation in his official capacity. The
Accusation was timely and properly served on the ten Respondents who had requested a
hearing and on Respondent Melissa Crawford, who had not requested a hearing.1

7.

Eleven Respondents, including Respondent Crawford, filed a notice of

defense, and were notified of the hearing date.2 This proceeding ensued. All prehearing
jurisdictional requirements have been satisfied.

8.

The Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth in Factual

Finding 3, due to the District’s fiscal crisis and need to reduce services to balance its budget.
The District estimates that for the 2011-2012 school year it will incur a substantial operating
deficit if it does not reduce these services. The decision to reduce or discontinue the particular
kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious, and is a proper exercise of the District's
discretion. The reduction or discontinuation of services set forth in factual finding number 3 is
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the
number of certificated employees as determined by the Board.

1 The District gave a March 15th notice to two other certificated employees. Karen
Atkinson Mayo filed a request for hearing; the other teacher did not. (See Education Code
section 44944, subdivision (a).) By letter dated March 31, 2011, the District notified both
Ms. Mayo and the other teacher that as it pertained to them the March 15th notice was
incorrect in stating that they had a right to a hearing. The letter further stated that as
university interns they did not have a right to a “layoff hearing” pursuant to Education Code
section 44464, and that the District would not include them in any further mailings related to
the layoff proceedings. Consequently, the District did not give the two teachers notice of this
hearing or serve an Accusation on them, the two teachers did not appear at the hearing, and
they are not Respondents or parties in this proceeding.

2 Respondents Gilbert Yoon and Misty Cervantes did not request a hearing or file a

notice of defense.

3

9.

The Board considered all known attrition, including vacancies, resignations
and retirements, in reducing the services and determining the actual number of necessary
March 15th notices to be delivered to its employees.

10.

The District’s seniority list contains certificated employees’ seniority dates

(first date of paid service), current and previous assignments, credentials held, authorizations,
and major and minor subjects. Ms. Maxine Griffin, the District’s Director of Human
Resources, implemented the technical aspects of the reduction on behalf of the District. She
used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the least senior employees currently
assigned in the various services being reduced. In determining who would be laid off for
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by
known vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.
Using a selection process involving a review of credentials, seniority, assignment and
reassignment of certificated employees, and breaking ties between certificated employees
with the same first dates of paid service, the District identified the certificated employees to
whom it sent March 15th notices.

11.

The Board’s Resolution No. 10-11.8 established tie-breaker criteria for

determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to
the District on the same date. The Board’s tie-breaker resolution consists of a point system
based on four factors: type of credential (2 points for Clear and 1 point for Preliminary);
number of teaching and/or special service credentials (1point per credential); number of
supplementary authorizations (1 point per supplementary authorization); and earned degrees
beyond the BA/BS level (1 point per degree). If a tie continues to exist after the District applies
the four rating factors, a lottery would be utilized to break ties. The District used information
from the District’s seniority list to apply the tie-breaker criteria. The criteria were reasonably
conceived and applied based on the needs of the District and its students.

Tie- Breaker Issue

12.

(A)

The District hired Ariel Levitch on August 31, 2009. His current

teaching assignment is seventh grade history. He has a preliminary single subject credential.
Kathy Her has the same hire date as Mr. Levitch. She possesses a clear single subject
credential and is currently teaching eighth grade history in the District. Mr. Levitch and Ms.
Her were the least senior social sciences teachers. In implementing the reduction of one FTE
secondary social sciences classroom, the District had to break the seniority tie between them
to determine which one would receive a March 15th notice of termination.

(B)

On March 11, 2011, Mr. Levitch and Ms. Her were invited into the

school office to participate in a lottery to determine their relative placement on the seniority
list as between the two of them. A union representative and Maxine Griffin, the District’s
Director of Human Resources, were also present. At that point, neither Mr. Levitch nor Ms.
Her had received a March 15th notice of termination. When Mr. Levitch won the lottery,
Ms. Griffin told him that Ms. Her would be receiving a March 15th notice of termination,
and Mr. Levitch would not. Ms. Griffin readily admitted at hearing that she was mistaken in

4

applying the lottery before applying the other tie-breaker criteria. She used the lottery as the
only means of breaking the tie and had not applied apply the primary rating criteria before
conducting the lottery. She did not realize that the lottery was to be utilized if, and only if, a
tie still existed after applying the four rating factors.

(C) Mr. Levitch was not aware of the four rating factors as the primary

means of breaking seniority ties, and left the school office on March 11, 2011, believing that
he would not receive a March 15th notice based solely on the lottery result. When the
District discovered its error, it applied the four rating factors in the tie breaker criteria
correctly to determine the order of termination as between Ms. Her and Mr. Levitch. In
applying the four rating factors, Ms. Her prevailed based on the point system. Therefore, it
was not necessary for the District to use the lottery. As a result, Ms. Her was treated as being
senior to Mr. Levitch in determining their relative order of termination. Consequently, Mr.
Levitch was given a March 15th notice; and Ms. Her was not.

(D)

Although the accidental error that temporarily misled Mr. Levitch
about his layoff prospects was unfortunate, Mr. Levitch did not contest that the District
provided him with the March 15th notice on a timely basis. According to Ms. Griffin, the
March 15th notice was given to Mr. Levitch on or before March 15, 2011. The District was
able to mail a March 15th notice to him on a timely basis, as required by Education Code
section 44949, subdivisions (a) and (d). It was also deposited in the United States mail by
certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to his last known address. On March 16, 2011, he
filed with the District his request for hearing. Understandably, Mr. Levitch believes that the
District should rescind its March 15th notice based on the lottery error. The District has no
basis for doing so in that Mr. Levitch did not rely on the District’s erroneous representation
to his detriment and the District’s error was quickly corrected.

School Counseling

13.

Lela Anderson Harrison has been a school counselor with the District since

August 1, 2007. She holds a Clear Pupil Personnel Services credential and is the only school
counselor in the District. She worked previously for other employers as a licensed social
worker and a school-based therapist, conducting psychological assessments and evaluations.
The District sent her a March 15th notice because of its decision to reduce or discontinue
school counselor services.

14. Ms. Anderson Harrison believes the District will continue to offer counseling

services using other personnel. The District is currently advertising an administrative
position for a dean of students for the next school year. The dean of students will work
under the superintendent’s supervision in assisting the principal carry out his or her duties,
and among other qualifications, must have the ability to “counsel with students,”
communicate effectively, utilize appropriate management and leadership skills, organize
time efficiently, and successfully communicate with all types of children, and must possess
technical knowledge of student and master scheduling. The advertised position also requires
the applicant to possess or be working toward an administrative services credential.

5

15.

Contrary to Ms. Anderson Harrison’s belief, Superintendent Woodard’s

testimony supports a finding that the dean of student’s position will not replace the school
counselor; nor will any other position. It has been advertised in previous years, but has not
been filled. At this time, the District has no plans to offer school counselor services during
the next school year; nor is the District legally mandated to offer these services.3

Opportunity High School

16.

As part of Resolution No. 10-11.7, the Board determined that for purposes of

assignment and reassignment to a position of teacher in the Opportunity High School
pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), those persons assigned or
reassigned must have one year of full-time experience within the last five years teaching in
an opportunity school. The District did not issue a March 15th notice to a junior employee who
is assigned to teach at the Opportunity High School and is the only teacher at that school. His
first date of paid service with the District was December 1, 2007, and he has taught at the
Opportunity High School for more than one year. He holds an internship single subject
credential in health science and is listed as a probationary teacher with no seniority.

17.

The opportunity school is for students from 7th to 12th grades. They tend to

be “at risk” students who have problems with attendance, behavior, and academic
performance in the general school setting and need specialized assistance. The District’s
opportunity program is taught in a self-contained setting at a separate campus. The student
population consists of 20 to 30 students. Instruction is delivered differently, often on a one-
to-one basis, because the students are working at different grade levels. A teacher must have
outstanding classroom management skills and the ability to deal with students who try to
intimidate the instructor. The teacher must also be able to teach a variety of subjects and
possess a high level of knowledge in all subjects. Unique skills and experience are
necessary to teach in this highly-stressful and challenging program. The junior employee
who now teaches in the program has being doing so for between one and two years. The
skills, training and experience he gained during this time give him the special skills and
qualifications that are necessary for an instructor in the District’s opportunity program.

18.

No senior teacher asserted that he or she was certified and competent to teach

at the Opportunity High School.

Other Findings

19.

The services to be discontinued or reduced are “particular kinds of services” that

may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. The
reduction of services set forth in Factual Finding 3, and the decrease in certificated employees
necessitated by the reduction of services, are related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.

3 See Education Code section 52378.

6

20.

No permanent or probationary certificated employee with less seniority than

Respondents is being retained to render a service that Respondents are certificated and
competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections

44949 and 44955 were met.

1.

2.

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code

section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are
made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) A school district’s decision to reduce or discontinue particular
kinds of services must not be “an arbitrary decision arrived at through the exercise of mere
caprice, but rather . . . a decision supported by a fair and substantial reason.” (Campbell
Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.)

3.

The services identified in Board Resolution No. 10-11.7 are particular kinds of

services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion, as specifically provided in Factual
Findings 3, 4 and 8.

Respondent Anderson Harrison contends that the District should rescind her March

15th notice of termination because the District does not really intend to reduce school
counselor services because it plans to offer them in a different manner. As provided in
Factual Finding 15, the District does not presently plan to offer these services during the next
school year and does not know whether they may be offered in a different manner. Even so,
the Board may reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services and then provide the service
in a different manner. (Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Abbott, supra, 76
Cal.App.3d 796, 812.)

It is true that a district may not dismiss an employee . . . and yet
continue the identical kind of service and position held by the
terminated employee. [Citations.] But the particular kind of
service of the employee may be eliminated even though a
service continues to be performed or provided in a different
manner by the district. [Citations.] (Id. at page 812.)

The Board does not intend to provide school counseling services in the same manner
during the next school year. It acted in a fair and reasonable manner in discontinuing those
services.

7

4.

In applying the tie-breaker criteria, the Board determined the order of termination

solely on the basis of the needs of the District and the students thereof pursuant to Education
Code section 44955, subdivision (b), based on Factual Findings 11 and 12.

Mr. Levitch argued that the Board should rescind its March 15th notice and be estopped
from terminating him based on the error they made in initially applying the tie-breaker criteria
to him incorrectly (see Factual Finding 12) . The doctrine of equitable estoppel is available in
certain circumstances to those who detrimentally rely on representations made by another. In
order for equitable estoppel to apply, the following requirements must be met: “(1) the party to
be estopped must be apprised of the facts; (2) he must intend that his conduct shall be acted
upon, or must so act that the party asserting the estoppel had a right to believe it was so
intended; (3) the other party must be ignorant of the true facts; and (4) he must rely upon the
conduct to his injury.” (Lentz v. McMahon (1989) 49 Cal.3d 393, 399, quoting City of Long
Beach v. Mansell (1970) 3 Cal.3d 462, 489.) Although the doctrine can be applied against the
government “where justice and right require it,” it cannot be applied against the government
where to do so would effectively nullify a “strong rule of policy, adopted for the benefit of the
public . . . .” (City of Long Beach v. Mansell, supra, 3 Cal.3d at p. 493.) Nor can estoppel be
applied where to do so would enlarge the power of a governmental agency or expand the
authority of a public official. (Longshore v. County of Ventura (1979) 25 Cal.3d 14, 28.)

The evidence did not show that Respondent Levitch relied to his detriment upon the
District’s error when the District initially told him on March 11, 2011, that he would not be
terminated. Accordingly, the District is not required to rescind its March 15th notice and is not
estopped from terminating Mr. Levitch. After discovering its error, the District properly and
timely gave a March 15th notice to Mr. Levitch, as required by Education Code section 44949,
subdivisions (a) and (d).

5.

Cause exists to reduce certificated employees of the District due to the
reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services by reason of the Factual
Findings and Legal Conclusions 1 through 4. The District’s decision to reduce or
discontinue particular kinds of services, and to implement the reduction or
discontinuation of services by reducing the number of certificated employees, relates
solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of
Education Code section 44949.

6.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part that “the services of

no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a
service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.” (Italics
added.)

“Certificated” is defined by the provisions of the Education Code as relating to
credentials. “Competent” is not specifically defined. In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994)
164 Cal.App.3d 13, 19, the court defined “competent” in the context of a reemployment

8

proceeding under Education Code section 44956, in terms of the teachers’ skills and
qualifications, specifically, as “relating to special qualifications for a vacant position, rather
than relating to the on-the-job performance of the laid-off permanent employee.” In doing
so, the court noted that courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing
Board (1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze
(1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, had interpreted the term in a similar manner.

Courts have recognized a school district’s discretion to establish rules defining

teacher competency. In Duax v. Kern Commuinty College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d
555, 565, the court wrote: “Hence, from these authorities we conclude that a board’s
definition of competency is reasonable when it considers the skills and qualifications of the
teacher threatened with layoff.” (See Martin v. Kentfield School District (1983) 35 Cal.3d
294, 299-300.) In Duax, the board established a standard of competence that required one
year’s full time teaching in a subject area within the last ten years. The court found the
standard reasonable because it “clearly related to skills and qualifications to teach.” (Duax,
supra, 196 Cal. App.3d 555, 567.) The court also concluded that the standard did not define
competency too narrowly.

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a
continuing position, which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)

Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior

teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack.
(Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), states that the “governing board shall

make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be retained to
render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.”

The District has the initial duty to examine a teacher’s academic and professional

experience and make a determination of competency or lack thereof. Once the district finds
the teacher lacks competence by way of skills and qualifications, the burden shifts to the
teacher to present evidence of competency. (See Davis v. Gray (1938) 29 Cal.App.2d 403,
406-408; Krausen v. Solano County Junior College District (1974) 42 Cal.App.3d 394, 402-
404.)

Here, the Board retained a junior employee who is currently assigned to teach in the
opportunity program (Opportunity High School), rather than reassigning a senior employee
to the position. It did so in carrying out its duties to “make assignments and reassignments”
to retain certificated employees to “render any service which their seniority and
qualifications entitle them to render.” (Italics added.) (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (c).) The
junior employee who was retained met the Board’s “assignments and reassignments”

9

standard of having one year of full-time experience within the last five years in an
opportunity school. The standard the Board conceived for determining whether a teacher
possesses qualifications in the context of teaching in the opportunity school is reasonable and
is similar to “competence” standards approved, or not rejected, in other reported cases. (See
Duax v. Kern Commuinty College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565-567; Bledsoe v.
Biggs Unified School District (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 135-137, 142.) It is an objective
standard which does not impermissibly narrow the meaning of the term “qualifications,” as
used in the statute. Based on the testimony of Superintendent Woodard and Director of
Human Resources Griffin, the junior employee also possesses other the skills, training and
qualifications for the position, some of them gained during his more than one-year period as
the opportunity school teacher (see Factual Findings 16-18). The Board’s standard, and the
manner in which it was applied, was not arbitrary or capricious. Notably, no senior
certificated employee asserted the right to “bump” the junior opportunity school teacher at
hearing.

8.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services

which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

ORDER

The Accusation is sustained as to all Respondents. The District may notify

Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year because of
the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.

Dated: May ___, 2011

________________________________
Janis S. Rovner
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

