BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
FONTANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE
FONTANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
LISTED ON EXHIBIT A,

OAH No. 2011031169

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

On May 3, 2011, in Fontana, California, Alan S. Meth, Administrative Law Judge,

Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, heard this matter.

Melanie A. Petersen and Kelly Anne Owens, Attorneys at Law, represented the

Fontana Unified School District.

Marianne Reinhold, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents set forth on Exhibit

A attached hereto.

At hearing, the District withdrew the layoff notices against Kimberly Moyer and

Jacqueline Rookwood Brooks.

The matter was submitted on May 3, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

On April 6, 2011, William W. Wu, J.D., Assistant Superintendent Human

Resources, of the Fontana Unified School District (hereafter, “the District”), made and filed
the accusations against respondents in his official capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

2.

3.

Before March 15, 2011, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and

44955, Mr. Wu notified the Governing Board (hereafter, “the Board”) of the District of his

1

recommendation that respondents be notified their services will not be required for the
ensuing school year. Mr. Wu’s notification to the Board set forth the reasons for the
recommendation.

4.

On or before March 15, 2011, each respondent was given written notice that
Mr. Wu had recommended that notice be given to respondents, pursuant to Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955, that their services will not be required for the ensuing year. Each
written notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation. The notices satisfied the
requirements of sections 44949 and 44955. San Jose Teachers Association, Inc. v. Allen
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 632; Campbell Elementary Teachers Association v. Abbott
(1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 803-04, distinguishing Karbach v. Board of Education (1974) 39
Cal.App.3d 355, 360-63.

5.

Each respondent timely requested in writing a hearing to determine if there is

cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year. Accusations were timely served
on respondents, and each respondent filed a timely Notice of Defense. All pre-hearing
jurisdictional requirements have been met.

6.

The Board took action in a series of resolution to discontinue the following

services for the 2011-12 school year:

In Resolution No. 11-13:

Services

Elementary Counselor
Elementary Instructional Support Teacher

1.
2.
3. Middle School Counselor
4. Middle School EL Intervention Teacher
5. Middle School Computers
6. Middle School English/Language Arts
7. Middle School Mathematics
8. Middle School Physical Education
9. Middle School Science

10. Middle School Social Science
11. High School Biology
12. High School Business
13. High School Chemistry
14. High School Computer Science
15. High School Earth Science
16. High School English
17. High School Foreign Language: Spanish
18. High School Mathematics

2

Number of Full-
Time Equivalent
Positions

.50 FTE
3.40 FTE
.50 FTE
1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
3.00 FTE
5.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
5.00 FTE
4.00 FTE
2.00 FTE
2.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
2.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
5.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
2.00 FTE

19. High School Physical Education
20. High School TEAM Academy: Education
21. High School Smaller Learning Community Coordinator
22.
23. Head Start Teacher
24.
25.

Infant/Toddler Teacher
Early Education Program Specialist

Continuation High School Mathematics

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reductions

50.40 FTE

Also in Resolution No 11-13:

20.

High School TEAM Academy: Education

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reductions

In Resolution No. 11-36:

1.
2.
3.

Adult Education Coordinator
Adult Education Counselor
Adult Education Special Education/SH Teacher

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reductions

In Resolution No. 11-37:

1.

Teacher-Librarian

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reductions

In Resolution No 11-38:

1.
2.

Alternative Education Coordinator
Independent Study Teacher

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reductions

In Resolution No. 11-39:

1. Alternative Education Coordinator
2. Alternative Learning Center Teacher

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reductions

In Resolution No. 11-41:

3

1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
2.00 FTE
2.00 FTE
2.00 FTE

1.00 FTE

1.00 FTE

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

3.0 FTE

2.0 FTE

2.0 FTE

1.0 FTE
2.0 FTE

3.0 FTE

1.0 FTE
2.0 FTE

3.0 FTE

Elementary School Counselor

1.
2. Middle School Counselor
3. High School Counselor
4.
5.

Continuation High School Counselor
Child Welfare & Attendance Counselor

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reductions

6.0 FTE
20.0 FTE
38.0 FTE
4.0 FTE
.5 FTE

68.5 FTE

There were several duplications in the above resolutions. After taking them into

account, the total number of full-time equivalent reductions called for by the Board’s
resolutions is 128.9.

The services set forth above are particular kinds of services which may be reduced or

discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. California Teachers
Association v. Board of Trustees of the Goleta Union School District (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d
32, 34-37 and cases cited therein. See also San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen, supra at
635-38, in which the court specifically rejected the reasoning of Burgess v. Board of
Education (1974) 41 Cal.App.3d 571; Zalac v. Governing Board (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838,
853-54.

Furthermore, these services may be reduced because of budgetary difficulties. Zalac

v. Governing Board, supra, and cases cited therein. The decision to reduce or discontinue
the services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but rather a proper exercise of the District's
discretion.

7.

No certificated employee junior to any respondent is retained to perform

services which any respondent is certificated and competent to render.

8.

The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the
District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated
employees of the District as determined by the Board.

9.

The Board considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements and
requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be
delivered to its employees.

10.

The Board established a tie-breaker rating system for determining the relative

seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date. The
Board provided the order of termination shall be based on the needs of the District and its
students. The system provided:

“A. Total Number of Credentials, Subject Matter Authorizations and
Supplemental Authorizations

4

B. Credential Status (Clear, Preliminary, Intern, Permit)

C. Total Number of Years of Teaching Experience in the Fontana Unified School
District

D. Total Number of Verified Years of Teaching Experience post Bachelor’s
Degree

TIE-BREAKING PROCEDURE

In the event that common day hires have equal qualifications based on application
of the above criteria, the District will then break ties by utilizing a lottery.”

11.

The District created a Seniority List which contains employees’ seniority dates
(first date of paid service), status, location, position description, EL authorization, credential
term, credential title, subject, supplemental authorizations and credentials, and notes. The
District determined whether senior employees held credentials in another area and were
entitled to “bump” other employees.

12.

The District intends to eliminate the entire counselor program, and allowed

senior counselors with teaching credentials to bump into teaching positions if the counselor
had an authorization of some form to each English Learners (EL). In the District’s view,
allowing a teacher to teach in the classroom, without an appropriate EL authorization, given
the large number of Hispanic students and EL students, would constitute a misassignment
and a violation of Federal law, and subject the District to sanctions.

13.

Eduardo Valencia (seniority date of 3/21/2003) is a counselor and works at
two elementary schools. He has a clear PPS credential. He testified at the hearing that he
can perform the functions of an ASB director because in the last five years, he has been in
charge of ASB functions at the elementary school level. Those activities include attending
pep rallies, assisting teachers, supervising career days, field trips and so forth. In addition, he
has helped ASB keep track of the funds it raises from banquets and sales, and in the past,
when he has worked at a high school in another school district, worked at the student store as
well as coaching sports and assisting various clubs. He testified that he teaches leadership
skills and he meets with students during lunch or after school.

Mr. Valencia pointed to the job Gary Gonzalez (seniority date of 8/18/10) held and
testified he could perform that job. Mr. Gonzalez holds a single subject teaching credential
in social science with a Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Development (CLAD), a
supplemental in math, and an administrative services credential. He teaches at Fontana High
School and his assignment is ASB. He is the full time ASB director and is responsible for
funds that have been raised and the student store and all ASB activities at the school. He
also teaches leadership.

5

Joan Fields has worked in human resources for the District for 13 years, has been

involved in this and other layoffs, and is familiar with classroom assignments and the
requirements of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC). She pointed to
the Administrator’s Assignment Manual, C-11, revised in 2007, published by the CTC. The
manual provides that where there is an elective class and no credential exists that authorizes
the curriculum, then the District is required to select “the credentialed teacher whose
knowledge and training best fulfills the needs of the students…Title 5 §80005(b) allows an
employing agency to select an individual that holds a credential based on a bachelor’s degree
and a teacher preparation program including student teaching and approved subject area
knowledge and training.”

Ms. Fields testified that the District determined that the position of ASB director at

the high school level required a teacher to be able to teacher leadership, and therefore
required a teaching credential. Mr. Gonzalez works as the ASB director under his teaching
credential. Mr. Valencia does not hold a teaching credential but rather a PPS credential. Ms.
Fields testified he serves as a counselor at the elementary school and his work relating to
ASB takes place outside the regular school day and is on a smaller scale than the position at
the high school which is a full-time teaching position.

Based upon the administrative manual and Ms. Fields’ testimony, the District
established that it had the authority to determine that the position of ASB director at the high
school level required a teaching credential, and that determination was not an arbitrary one
but rather a reasonable one. Accordingly, the District established the Mr. Valencia was not
competent to serve in that position, and he has no right to bump Mr. Gonzalez.

14.

Cheryl Gonzales (seniority date of 3/21/2003) is a counselor at Fontana High
School and holds a PPS Credential in school counseling. She also holds a PPS credential in
school psychology and has two masters degrees, including one in educational psychology.
Ms. Gonzales testified at the hearing that she worked as an intern in school psychology for
the District for three months during the 2003-04 school year, and while in that position,
tested students, wrote report, attended IEP meetings, presented information, and worked
under the supervision of the school psychologist. She believes she can perform the duties of
a school psychologist.

Richard Crane (seniority date 3/9/1987) is a counselor at AB Miller High School and
holds a Basic PPS credential and a school psychology credential. He has a masters and Ph.
D. He testified at the hearing that he interacts with the school psychologist daily and
believes he could perform the functions of a school psychologist based on his training. He
does not believe that the position of school psychologist is “management” because it is not
part of a management team and there are no supervisory responsibilities such as evaluating
teachers or staff.

Maria Burciaga (seniority date 2/20/2007) is a counselor at Citrus Continuation High

School and holds PPS credentials in school counseling and school psychology. She has a
masters degree in psychology. She performed her school psychology internship during the

6

summer of 2009 when she worked for the District evaluating and interviewing students,
writing reports and evaluations, reviewing records including medical records, attending IEP
meetings, working with the school psychologist, and so forth.

There are more than three school psychologists with the District who are less senior

than Ms. Gonzales, Mr. Crane, and Ms. Burciaga. The less senior school psychologists have
PPS credentials in school psychology and no other credentials.

The District did not contend that these counselors did not have the credentials

necessary to serve as school psychologists.

15.

The District considers the position of school psychologist a “management

position.” In its July 19, 2010 “Job Vacancy” posting, the District described the position. It
required a PPS credential authorizing school psychology and a masters degree. In its
description of the position, the District indicated: “Utilize specialized training and diagnostic
skills to provide psycho educational evaluations, consultations to staff and parents, and
counseling support.” The posting contains a list of essential functions and additional
qualifications. In none of the listed essential functions or qualifications is there a
requirement that a candidate for the position have what would typically be considered
managerial or administrative training or experience.

In the District’s view, school psychologists have been treated as management

employees for many years and they are recruited and hired as management. As such, the
District believes that others do not have the right to bump into this position.

16. Mark Quick (seniority date of 7/31/1989) has a PPS credential and a multiple

subject teaching credential. He currently serves as a counselor, but worked as a teacher in
the District for seven years, from 1989 to 1996. He does not have a CLAD but is working on
it and expects to complete his coursework and take the examination in June. He began
taking classes a week after the Board meeting in early March and informed his principal that
he had begun taking classes.

Mr. Quick testified at the hearing that he was concerned about the elimination of all

the counseling position and believed it would be illegal. He felt that the Board’s action
would violate the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (Public Law 107-110) as well as other
state and federal laws, and laws requiring the counselors perform certain services.

Mr. Wu testified at the hearing that there was no law that required a school district to
employ counselors and that No Child Left Behind required that services be provided, but not
necessarily by counselors. He testified the District expects to provide the requisite services
in other ways, although the Board had not yet determined how.

17.

Diana Rasmussen (seniority date of 8/30/89) is a counselor at Kaiser High

School. In addition to a Basic PPS, she has a standard secondary teaching credential in
history and English and taught English from 1989 to 1995. She testified at the hearing that

7

she has completed 42 hours of continuing education in preparation for taking the
examination that, if she passed, would give her a CLAD authorization. The test is scheduled
for June. She also testified that she met with Mr. Wu shortly before she received her layoff
notice and asked him for an emergency waiver so she could return to the teaching pool. She
testified he told her that was not possible.

In June 2010, the District obtained an emergency CLAD for Julie Emma Watanabe.

Ms. Watanabe obtained a clear CLAD in September 2010 and is teaching this school year
under the clear authorization. According to Mr. Wu, the District has the discretion whether
to apply for an emergency CLAD and it has decided it will not apply for them for counselors
with teaching credentials.

Ms. Fields explained that Ms. Watanabe had been teaching high school English with
an ESL supplement but without a CLAD and she believed that was appropriate, but she was
informed by the County Department of Education that it was a misassignment. As a result of
that information, the District obtained the emergency CLAD

18.

Rekha Bakshi (seniority date of April 27, 1998) is an elementary school

counselor and also holds a multiple subject credential and a special education credential. She
taught three years in special education starting in 1998 and then became a counselor. She
completed her CLAD coursework on March 17 and received a CLAD authorization on
March 24, 2011.

19.

Amy Keeling (seniority date of 8/7/2008) has a single subject credential in

English and teaches English at Kaiser High School. She received a layoff notice. There are
two other teachers with the same seniority date who have similar credentials who were not
laid off. The tie among them was broken on the basis of the tiebreaker criterion that ranks a
clear credential higher than a preliminary credential. The District’s records indicated that
Ms. Keeling had a preliminary credential at the time the layoffs were made.

Ms. Keeling testified at the hearing that she completed the coursework necessary to

obtain a clear credential in May 2010 and that upon completion of the program, the
Beginning Teacher Support and Assistance (BTSA) office was supposed to submit a certain
form to the human resources department showing completion of the program which in turn
would submit the form to the state so that she could obtain her clear credential. Ms. Keeling
testified that she did not know that the paperwork had not been properly submitted until after
she received the layoff notice. In early April 2011, she went to the BTSA coordinator,
showed her the information, the information was submitted to human resources, and on April
16, 2011, she obtained a clear credential. She indicated the process took 12 days.

Ms. Keeling received a draft of the seniority list in January 2011 and was asked,

along with all other certificated employees of the District, to submit any information that
might change the information contained on the list. Ms. Keeling did not submit any
additional information. The draft seniority list indicates a seniority date of August 7, 2008

8

and under the heading “Cred Term” there is an entry of “P5” which indicates a five-year
preliminary credential.

20.

Lynn Evans (seniority date of 8/23/2010) teaches pre-school part-time. She

has a multiple subject teaching credential. She also works as a substitute teacher for the
District. By letter dated April 26, 2011, the District informed her that she had a reasonable
assurance of returning to work in the 2011-12 school year in her usual capacity.

21.

Sammy Montiel (seniority date of July 26, 2004) has a single subject teaching

credential in biological science. He is a member of the California National Guard and has
been serving on active duty intermittently since he was hired. According to the District’s
records, he is considered a probationary employee and the District proposes to lay him off.
Ms. Fields complied a list of all the days Mr. Montiel worked as a teacher for the District and
the periods of time he was on military leave of absence. The records show that he worked 21
days during the 2004-05 school year, 91 days during the 2005-06 school year, 79 days during
the 2006-07 school year, 169 in paid status during the 2008-09 school year, and 41 days
during the 2010-11 school year.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter relating to the elimination of 84.2 full-time

equivalent positions exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. All notices and
jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides in relevant part:

. . .

“(b)
[W]henever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not
later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in the opinion of
the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary . . . to decrease the
number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate
the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school
year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render. . . As
between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on the same date,
the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of
needs of the district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any employee
whose order of termination is so determined, the governing board shall furnish in
writing no later than five days prior to the commencement of the hearing held in
accordance with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the criteria in ranking each

9

employee relative to the other employees in the group. This requirement that the
governing board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for determining
the order of termination shall not be interpreted to give affected employees any legal
right or interest that would not exist without such a requirement.

(c)

. . .

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a

manner that the employees shall be retained to render any service which their
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. . .

. . .

(d)
Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following
reasons:

(1)

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a

specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services
credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a
school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, which
others with more seniority do not possess.

(2)

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with

constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.”

To put it more succinctly, a senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the

right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.
In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling
that position. See Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469. Junior
teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess
superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack. See Poppers v.
Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; see also Santa Clara
Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School
District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.

3.

There are three counselors, Ms. Gonzales, Mr. Crane, and Ms. Burciaga, who

are certificated and competent to fill the position of school psychologist for the District.
Each has the same credential as junior school psychologists, and each satisfies the
requirements for the job set forth by the District in it job vacancy posting. The District does
not dispute that they hold the necessary credential to perform the job. Factual Findings 14
and 15.

10

The District argues that the seniority rules of section 44955, subdivision (b) should

not apply because school psychologists are considered management employees and have
been so considered for many years. As such, the District argues, others do not have the right
to bump into this administrative position.

It is well established that a school district has broad discretion in defining positions

and establishing requirements for employment, and this includes determining the training and
experience necessary for particular positions. Hidlebrand v. St. Helena Unified School
District (2009) 172 Cal. App. 4th 334, 343 and cases cited therein. But this discretion
afforded to school districts is limited by the terms of section 44955, subdivision (b), which
provides that “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent
employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which
said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render….”

There is nothing in the District’s posted job description of school psychologist to

suggest it is a position other than or more than a school psychologist. The credential
required by the District is a PPS authorizing school psychology and the education required is
a masters degree. There is no management component to this job, as shown on the posted
vacancy, and the District offered no evidence to show that it was an administrative position
or required administrative training or skills. On the contrary, Ms. Gonzales, Mr. Crane, and
Ms. Burciaga all testified they knew the job and two of them had performed it as interns,
they had contact with school psychologists, and knew of nothing in the job that made it a
management or administrative position. It is not enough to put a label on a position and
thereby shield it from the plain language of section 44955, subdivision (b). The District
offered no authority to support its view that by calling the position of school psychologist a
“management position,” the seniority provisions of section 44955, subdivision (b) did not
apply. It is concluded that Ms. Gonzales, Mr. Crane, and Ms. Burciaga were certificated and
competent to render the services of a school psychologist for the District and the District
erroneously prevented them from bumping junior employees employed as school
psychologists. Therefore, the layoffs of Ms. Gonzales, Mr. Crane, and Ms. Burciaga must be
set aside and the accusations against them dismissed.

4.

The District has chosen to eliminate all its counseling positions, and Mr. Wu
testified that the District intends to provide the requisite services in ways other than through
the use of employed counselors. Factual Finding 16. As noted in Hidlebrand v. St. Helena
Unified School District, supra, “Similarly, school districts have the discretion to determine
particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, “‘even though a service continues to be
performed or provided in a different manner by the district.’”

Mr. Wu’s testimony that there was no law which required a school district to employ
counselors was more persuasive than the contrary testimony of Mr. Quick. Based upon Mr.
Wu’s representation that the Board would provide the counseling services currently provided
by its own employees, Mr. Quick’s argument is rejected.

11

5.

It is well established that in considering a teacher’s credentials and

qualifications in a layoff proceeding, a District may ignore credentials acquired by an
employee or registered by an employee after the March 15 deadline for issuing layoff
notices. Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal. App. 3rd 555, 567-68;
Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal. App. 3rd 796, 815.

Mr. Quick, Ms. Rasmussen, and Ms. Bakshi (Factual Findings 16, 17, and 18) seek to

avoid the consequences of this rule for various reasons, but ultimately, their efforts must be
rejected. The District was not required to obtain emergency CLADs for them, although it
had the discretion to do so. The District was not required to hold open a teaching position
for any counselor on the chance that some might obtain a CLAD. The District was not
required to extend a helping hand to any of its counselors, even though some had worked for
the District for more than 20 years. The layoffs of Mr. Quick, Ms. Rasmussen, and Ms.
Bakshi must therefore be upheld.

Ms. Keeling (Factual Finding 19) is in a different position but the decision regarding
her plight must be the same as the counselors. It appears that both she and the District are at
fault for the negligent manner in which they handled her credential. Ms. Keeling cannot pass
on the responsibility for the failure when she was notified by the District in the draft seniority
list circulated in January that her credential was preliminary. If she had any questions, she
could have asked at that time. The cases clearly place the burden on the teacher to ensure
that the District is aware of all of his or her credentials and authorizations, and the failure to
do so is placed on the teacher. Ms. Keeling’s layoff must be upheld.

6.

Mr. Montiel argues that the Uniformed Services Employment and

Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA), 38 U.S.C. sections 4313 et. seq., and the
regulations implementing the Act, require the District to treat him as a permanent employee,
not probationary, and if he were treated as a permanent employee, he would be senior to
other employees with similar credentials who were not laid off. He argues that under
USERRA, and in particular, sections 4313 and 4316, he should be treated as if he were not
deployed, and if he were not deployed, he would have acquired tenure and would not be
subject to layoff.

38 U.S.C. section 4313 provides in part:

“(a) Subject to subsection (b) (in the case of any employee) … a person entitled to
reemployment under section 4312, upon completion of a period of service in the
uniformed services, shall be promptly reemployed in a position of employment in
accordance with the following order of priority:

…

(2) Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), in the case of a person whose period
of service in the uniformed services was for more than 90 days--

12

(A) in the position of employment in which the person would have been employed if
the continuous employment of such person with the employer had not been
interrupted by such service, or a position of like seniority, status and pay, the duties of
which the person is qualified to perform….”

38 U.S.C. section 4316 provides in part:

“(a) A person who is reemployed under this chapter is entitled to the seniority and
other rights and benefits determined by seniority that the person had on the date of the
commencement of service in the uniformed services plus the additional seniority and
rights and benefits that such person would have attained if the person had remained
continuously employed.

(b)(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) through (6), a person who is absent from a position of
employment by reason of service in the uniformed services shall be--

(A) deemed to be on furlough or leave of absence while performing such service; and

(B) entitled to such other rights and benefits not determined by seniority as are
generally provided by the employer of the person to employees having similar
seniority, status, and pay who are on furlough or leave of absence under a contract,
agreement, policy, practice, or plan in effect at the commencement of such service or
established while such person performs such service.”

20 C.F.R. section 1002.210 provides:

“1002.210 What seniority rights does an employee have when reemployed
following a period of uniformed service?

The employee is entitled to the seniority and seniority-based rights and benefits that
he or she had on the date the uniformed service began, plus any seniority and
seniority-based rights and benefits that the employee would have attained if he or she
had remained continuously employed. In determining entitlement to seniority and
seniority-based rights and benefits, the period of absence from employment due to or
necessitated by uniformed service is not considered a break in employment. The
rights and benefits protected by USERRA upon reemployment include those provided
by the employer and those required by statute. For example, under USERRA, a
reemployed service member would be eligible for leave under the Family and
Medical Leave Act of 1993, 29 U.S.C. 2601-2654 (FMLA), if the number of months
and the number of hours of work for which the service member was employed by the
civilian employer, together with the number of months and the number of hours of
work for which the service member would have been employed by the civilian
employer during the period of uniformed service, meet FMLA's eligibility
requirements. In the event that a service member is denied FMLA leave for failing to

13

satisfy the FMLA's hours of work requirement due to absence from employment
necessitated by uniformed service, the service member may have a cause of action
under USERRA but not under the FMLA.”

20 C.F.R. section 1002.7 provides in part:

“§ 1002.7 How does USERRA relate to other laws, public and private contracts,
and employer practices?

(a) USERRA establishes a floor, not a ceiling, for the employment and reemployment
rights and benefits of those it protects. In other words, an employer may provide
greater rights and benefits than USERRA requires, but no employer can refuse to
provide any right or benefit guaranteed by USERRA.

(b) USERRA supersedes any State law (including any local law or ordinance),
contract, agreement, policy, plan, practice, or other matter that reduces, limits, or
eliminates in any manner any right or benefit provided by USERRA, including the
establishment of additional prerequisites to the exercise of any USERRA right or the
receipt of any USERRA benefit. For example, an employment contract that
determines seniority based only on actual days of work in the place of employment
would be superseded by USERRA, which requires that seniority credit be given for
periods of absence from work due to service in the uniformed services.”

The District points to the following relevant regulations contained in 20 C.F.R.in

support of its position that Mr. Montiel should not be granted tenure:

“§ 1002.149 What is the employee's status with his or her civilian employer
while performing service in the uniformed services?

During a period of service in the uniformed services, the employee is deemed to be on
furlough or leave of absence from the civilian employer. In this status, the employee
is entitled to the non-seniority rights and benefits generally provided by the employer
to other employees with similar seniority, status, and pay that are on furlough or leave
of absence. Entitlement to these non-seniority rights and benefits is not dependent on
how the employer characterizes the employee's status during a period of service. For
example, if the employer characterizes the employee as “terminated” during the
period of uniformed service, this characterization cannot be used to avoid USERRA's
requirement that the employee be deemed on furlough or leave of absence, and
therefore entitled to the non-seniority rights and benefits generally provided to
employees on furlough or leave of absence.”

“§ 1002.150 Which non-seniority rights and benefits is the employee entitled to
during a period of service?

14

(a) The non-seniority rights and benefits to which an employee is entitled during a
period of service are those that the employer provides to similarly situated employees
by an employment contract, agreement, policy, practice, or plan in effect at the
employee's workplace. These rights and benefits include those in effect at the
beginning of the employee's employment and those established after employment
began. They also include those rights and benefits that become effective during the
employee's period of service and that are provided to similarly situated employees on
furlough or leave of absence.

(b) If the non-seniority benefits to which employees on furlough or leave of absence
are entitled vary according to the type of leave, the employee must be given the most
favorable treatment accorded to any comparable form of leave when he or she
performs service in the uniformed services. In order to determine whether any two
types of leave are comparable, the duration of the leave may be the most significant
factor to compare. For instance, a two-day funeral leave will not be “comparable” to
an extended leave for service in the uniformed service. In addition to comparing the
duration of the absences, other factors such as the purpose of the leave and the ability
of the employee to choose when to take the leave should also be considered.

(c) As a general matter, accrual of vacation leave is considered to be a non-seniority
benefit that must be provided by an employer to an employee on a military leave of
absence only if the employer provides that benefit to similarly situated employees on
comparable leaves of absence.”

“§ 1002.151 If the employer provides full or partial pay to the employee while
he or she is on military leave, is the employer required to also provide the non-
seniority rights and benefits ordinarily granted to similarly situated employees
on furlough or leave of absence?

Yes. If the employer provides additional benefits such as full or partial pay when the
employee performs service, the employer is not excused from providing other rights
and benefits to which the employee is entitled under the Act.”

In addition, the District points to Education Code section 44929.21 which provides in

part:

“(b) Every employee of a school district of any type or class having an average daily
attendance of 250 or more who, after having been employed by the district for two
complete consecutive school years in a position or positions requiring certification
qualifications, is reelected for the next succeeding school year to a position requiring
certification qualifications shall, at the commencement of the succeeding school year
be classified as and become a permanent employee of the district.

The governing board shall notify the employee, on or before March 15 of the
employee's second complete consecutive school year of employment by the district in

15

a position or positions requiring certification qualifications, of the decision to reelect
or not reelect the employee for the next succeeding school year to the position. In the
event that the governing board does not give notice pursuant to this section on or
before March 15, the employee shall be deemed reelected for the next succeeding
school year.

This subdivision shall apply only to probationary employees whose probationary
period commenced during the 1983-84 fiscal year or any fiscal year thereafter.”

Finally, Education Code section 44975 provides:

“No leave of absence when granted to a probationary employee shall be construed as
a break in the continuity of service required for the classification of the employee as
permanent. The time during which the leave of absence is taken shall not be
considered as employment within the meaning of Sections 44882 to 44891, inclusive,
Sections 44893 to 44900, inclusive, Sections 44901 to 44906, inclusive, and Sections
44908 to 44919, inclusive.”

USERRA is a many-faceted effort by Congress to prevent employment discrimination

based upon military service. As it relates to this case, section 4316 is the most relevant, and
in particular, the provision that grants a service member seniority and other rights and
benefits, “…plus the additional seniority and rights and benefits that such person would have
attained if the person had remained continuously employed.” Section 1002.210 of the
regulations makes the same point. In addition, the provision in section 1002.210 that the
period of absence from employment for to uniformed service is not considered a break in
employment is consistent with Education Code section 44975.

In terms of Mr. Montiel’s seniority, the District satisfied the provisions of USERRA.

His seniority date of July 26, 2004 is presumably his first date of paid service in a
probationary position, and that has not changed despite the several leaves of absence that
occurred as a result of his military service. The question presented in this case is whether
USERRA requires that Mr. Montiel be considered a permanent employee, and that question
is separate from seniority.

A probationary teacher in order to acquire tenure must first have worked a sufficient
amount of time. See generally Griego v. Los Angeles Unified School Dist. (1994), 28 Cal.
App. 4th 515 as to how Education Code sections 44929.21 and 44975 interact. Mr. Montiel,
based upon the interaction of those two statutes, plus section 1002.210 of the federal
regulations, satisfies the time component for the acquisition of tenure.

However, there is a performance component of tenure that vests in school districts the

discretion to decide whether to reelect a probationary employee. As the court observed in
Summerfield v. Windsor Unified School Dist. (2002) 95 Cal. App. 4th 1026, 1029:

“School districts have complete discretion regarding the reelection of probationary

16

employees. They may choose not to reelect a second-year probationary teacher
without any showing of cause or statement of reasons, so long as they notify the
teacher no later than March 15 of the teacher's second year of the decision not to
reelect. ( Board of Education v. Round Valley Teachers Assn. (1996) 13 Cal.4th 269,
279, 52 Cal.Rptr.2d 115, 914 P.2d 193; § 44929.21, subd. (b).) Any employee not
given notice of non-reelection by March 15 “shall be deemed reelected for the next
succeeding school year.” (§ 44929.21, subd. (b).)”

In order for a school district to properly exercise its discretion and determine whether
to re-elect probationary teachers, it must have the ability to observe that teacher’s work in the
classroom. The statutes give a school district two years to determine whether it will allow a
teacher to achieve permanent status, and the district has opportunities at the end of the first
probationary year and at the end of the second probationary year to make that decision.

In Mr. Montiel’s case, the District has not had two years to observe his work as a

teacher nor has it exercised its discretion and decided whether to reelect him or not. If Mr.
Montiel were given permanent status based on the amount of work he has performed as a
teacher for the District in conjunction with USERRA, the effect would be that Mr. Montiel
would not have been subjected to the scrutiny that other probationary teachers were
subjected to and the District’s ability to decide whether to reelect him or not would have
been circumvented. He would thus be in a better position for having worked less for the
District than a teacher who did not serve in the military. USERRA contemplates that an
employee serving in the military receive equal treatment, not be treated better than other
employees.

Equality is particularly important in a layoff proceeding. Mr. Montiel’s status as a

probationary or a permanent employee effects not only him and his relationship to his
employer, it could have a direct bearing on whether another employee will keep his or her
position. Giving Mr. Montiel tenure would place him far higher on the seniority list than he
deserves. It is one thing to insure that an employee who serves intermittently in the military
is accorded all the rights and benefits that employee would receive and would attain had he
or she not served in the military, but it is quite another to accord that employee additional
rights and benefits to which the employee is not entitled and which negatively impact another
employee. Accordingly, it is concluded that Mr. Montiel has not achieved permanent status
as a teacher for the District.

Any additional arguments offered by respondents have been considered and

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the District

to discontinue particular kinds of services relating to 128.9 full-time equivalent positions.
The cause for the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to
the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. A preponderance of the evidence sustained

are rejected.

7.

8.

17

the charges set forth in the Accusation. It is recommended that the Board give respondents
notice before May 15, 2011, that their services will no longer be required by the District.

ORDER

1.

2.

3.

The Accusation served on respondents Kimberly Moyer and Jacqueline

Rookwood Brooks are dismissed.

The Accusations served on respondents Cheryl Gonzales, Richard Crane, and

Maria Burciaga are dismissed.

The Accusations served on the respondents listed on Exhibit A are sustained.

Notice shall be given to each respondent before May 15, 2011 that his or her services will not
be required for the 2011-12 school year pursuant to the Board’s resolution because of the
reduction of particular kinds of services.

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: May 5, 2011

______________________________
ALAN S. METH
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

18

EXHIBIT “A”

FONTANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

FINAL LAYOFF LIST

The following certificated personnel will receive a final layoff notice:

LAST NAME

FIRST NAME

AGUILAR
ARROYO
BAHLING
BAKSHI
BRADSHAW
BRISTEL
BRONGERSMA
BRUST
BUNTEN
BUOYE
CALLANTA
CAMACHO
CAMPBELL
CARDOSI
CHERNISS
CIFELLI
CIPRIAN
CLARIDGE-WEBER
CRANE
CRISWELL-FISHER
DE LA ROSA
DEGRAFFENREID
DEL CASTILLO-GARCIA
DELA-PAUL
DERNE
DICAMILLO
DRAGNA
DUFFIELD
EACRET
ECHAVARRIA
EVANS

CRIS
DEBORAH
JESSICA
REKHA
JESSICA
RENEE
ALBERT
REGINA
MICHAEL
DIANA
ANNA
WENDY
KATHRYN
WILLIAM
REBEKAH
JESSICA
ERENDIRA
CYNTHIA
JONATHAN
KEYA
EMMANUEL
STEPHANIE
ANEL
NINA
JANICE
KIMBERLY
DESIREE
ALLISON
MEGAN
JOANN
LYNN

19

TEACHER/
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER

EWERS
FULLER
GALDAMEZ
GALLARDO
GAXIOLA
GAY
GEETER
GEPFORD
GONZALES
GOTTE
GROENHEIM
HARRIGER
HASENAUER-LOPEZ
HERRERA
HICKE
HOMME
HORNADAY
HUTCHINGS
IBARRA
JOHNSON
KAVIANIAN
KEELING
KIGGINS
KING
KNOTT
KOEHLERBROOKS
KOOLIS
LASSONDE
LEACH
LOPEZ
LUSZECK
MAKKAWI
MARROQUIN
MARTIN
MC CONNELL
MONTIEL
MOORE
MORIN
MURILLO
NAVA
NEGOSE

TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR

TRAVIS
KRISTEN
LILIANA
RICHARD
REUBEN
AMBER
LEDINA
TIMOTHY
JESSICA
MARY
RUSSELL
SUZANNE
REBECCA
GABRIEL
HOLLY
DOUGLAS
DEBRA
JENNY
MARCO
MATTHEW
REZA
AMY
MELIA
LATEEFAH
JAMES
JANET
STACIE
KRISTIN
CHRISTOPHER
NICK
REID
JIHAD
ERICK
DESIREE
BEVERLY
SAMMY
KENT
ELIZABETH
ALBERT
ROBERT
LAVERN

20

PACHOT
PARKER
PASCUAL
PEREZ ZAMORA
PILGRIM
QUICK
RANNIS
RASMUSSEN
RENTERIA
RICKS
RILEY
ROJAS
SAHL
SALAZAR
SALAZAR
SAMSON
SANCHEZ RAYGOZA
SANFORD
SARREAL
SCHUSTER
SIMNJANOVSKI
SIMPSON
ST ANDRE
SULLENGER
TOPOR
TUTTLE
VALDEZ-FLYNN
VALENCIA
VEDO
WHITCOMB
YUMORI

COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
COUNSELOR
TEACHER
TEACHER
TEACHER

TABATHA
ANNETTE
EDWARD
NADINE
JOANNE
MARK
DINO
DIANA
SANDRA
SHAUNA
LORI
MELISSA
ERIC
CELENA
ROSALIE
HEATHER
EDGAR
LAPRICE
RACHEL
JILL
RISTE
SAMANTHA
VIRGINIA
AMANDA
EMILY
MICHELE
VERONICA
EDUARDO
MICHAEL
KRISTI
NICOLE

21

1

