BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
SARATOGA UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

ELIZABETH BELLES, et al.,

OAH No. 2011030669

Respondents

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Ruth S. Astle, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of

California, heard this matter on April 28, 2011, in Saratoga, California.

John R. Yeh, Attorney at Law, represented the School District.

Christopher E. Schumb, Attorney at Law, represented all respondents whose names

are listed on Attachment A except Judy Wolthausen, who was present, but declined to
represent herself.

The matter was submitted on April 28, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Lane Weiss made the accusation in his official capacity as the Superintendent

of the Saratoga Union School District.

2.

Respondents listed on Attachment A are certificated employees of the district.
The district rescinded the March 15 notice issued to Laurie Brandt, Carol Chun, Julie Paolini,
Vernon (Manny) Steffen, Eric Witter, and Assaf Josh Henig (.5 FTE.)

3.

On March 9, 2011, the Governing Board of the Saratoga Union School District

adopted Resolution No. 378.2/11. The Board resolved to reduce or discontinue particular

1

kinds of services for 2011-2012 school year, and directed the Superintendent to give notice
to the certificated employees whose positions would be affected.

4.

On March 15, 2011, the superintendent gave written notice to respondents that,

pursuant to the Education Code, it was being recommended that their services would be
reduced or eliminated for the 2011-2012 school year. All jurisdictional requirements were
met.

5.

In its resolution, the Board resolved to reduce or discontinue the following

particular kinds of services:

Kindergarten
First Grade
Third Grade
Fifth Grade
Sixth Grade Core (English/Social Science)
Seventh Grade Core (English/Social Science)
Math (6th and/or 7th Grade)
Physical Education (6th and/or 7th Grade)
Science (6th and/or 7 th Grade)
Electives (Spanish, Study Hall, Tutorial)
Literacy Coach
Math Coach
SVNTP Mentor
School Counselor
Technology Specialist (TOSA)
Assistant Superintendent
Director of Special Education
Vice Principal

2.0 FTE1
2.0
1.0
1.0
2.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.47
2.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

Total:

22.47 FTE

6.

The services set forth in the Board’s PKS resolution are particular kinds of

services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of the Education Code. No
service is being reduced below a mandated level. Any mandated service being performed by
the counselors will be performed by other certificated personnel.

7.

The Board established by separate resolution criteria for determining the order
of termination among certificated employees who have the same seniority date. The criteria
were applied to certificated employees who share the same seniority date in 2005, 2006,
2007, 2008, and 2009. Carol Chun and Kerry Goddard are both Math teachers who share the
same first date of paid service (August 19, 2009). After application of the tie-breaking

1 Full-time equivalent.

2

criteria, it was determined that Carol Chun is senior to Kerry Goddard. Carol Chun will be
retained and Kerry Goddard will receive a final notice.

The district has released all temporary employees.

8.

9.

The district will take into account all positively assured attrition prior to

issuing the final notices. There has been one recent retirement that the district will take into
account before issuing the final notices.

10.

The district has a number of probationary employees who have greater

seniority than some of its permanent employees. In order to effectuate the PKS resolution
reductions, services of probationary employees must be reduced or eliminated before
services of permanent employees may be reduced or eliminated (Ed. Code, section 44955,
subd. (b).) These employees2 account for 2.4 FTE in multiple subject credentialed teachers.
A corresponding number of multiple subject credentialed teachers who are permanent must
be retained3.

11.

The district plans to retain or place senior teachers into elementary teaching
positions who do not have CLAD certificates. A teacher without such a certificate cannot
teach English Language Learners.4 The district is not required to only employ teachers with
CLAD certificates. There are 15 ELL students in the district. The district must make sure
that all of those students will be taught by teachers with the appropriate certificate. What the
district cannot do is get an emergency CLAD certificate for a teacher who is retained while
there is a teacher with a CLAD certificate who has been reduced or eliminated.

12.

Jon Jow is one of the music teachers. He retains a .4 FTE because of a

temporary teacher who was released.

13.

Denyelle Chapman is presently assigned to teach .5 FTE in 6th grade science.
She has a multiple subject credential and an Education Code section 44256, subdivision (b)
temporary authorization to teach science based on her minor. This temporary authorization
will terminate at the end of the 2010-2011 school year. Ms. Chapman was not given notice.
Shannon McQuaide (who received a 1.0 FTE notice) is presently assigned .5 FTE 7th grade
science. She has a clear single subject credential in science. The PKS resolution calls for a
1.0 reduction in 6th and/or 7th grade science. Ms. McQuaide retains .5 FTE since Ms.

2 Judy Wolthausen, Meg Ebner, Linda Rosiak, Debbie Willheim, and Jennifer Woel-

3 Based on the Tie-Breaking Chart and seniority date those teacher are identified as

Susan Jacobs, Christie Nielsen and Sheridan Kurtz-Fenster (.4 FTE).

4 An English Language Learner is defined in Education Code section 306, subdivision

fel.

(a).

3

Chapman’s position must account for .5 FTE reduction of the 1.0 FTE reduction in science
called for in the PKS resolution.

14.

All contentions made by respondents not specifically addressed above are

found to be without merit and are rejected.

15.

Except as stated above, no permanent employee is being terminated while a

permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service
which the permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.

15.

The cause for the reduction in particular kinds of services relates to the welfare

of the schools and the pupils thereof.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections

44949 and 44955 were met.

1.

2.

The services identified in the Board Resolution are particular kinds of services

that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The Board’s
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious,
and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of
services relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils within the meaning of
Education Code section 44949.

3.

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due

to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The District identified
the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board directed
be reduced or discontinued.

4.

Except as identified in the Findings above, no junior certificated employee is

scheduled to be retained to perform services which a more senior employee is certificated
and competent to render.

4

ORDER

1.

Except as set forth above, notice may be given to certificated employees that

their services will be reduced or eliminated for the 2011-2012 school year.

2.

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

Dated: _____________________

________________________________
RUTH S. ASTLE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

