BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
WOODLAND JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
YOLO COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

SCOTT COPPENGER et al.,

OAH No. 2011030180

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Melissa G. Crowell, State of California, Office of

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Woodland, California, on April 21, 2011.

Terry Filliman, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Adelson, Loya, Rudd & Romo,

represented complainant Michael Stevens, Associate Superintendent, Woodland Joint
Unified School District.

Peter M. McEntee, Attorney at Law, Beeson, Tayer & Bodine, APC, represented all

respondents with the exception of Christina Lambie and Maxwell Shelnut, who were self-
represented.

The record was left open until April 29, 2011, for submission of post-hearing briefs.

The district’s brief was received and marked as Exhibit 21. Respondent’s brief was received
and marked as Exhibit E. The record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision
on April 29, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Michael Stevens made and filed the Accusation in his official capacity as
Associate Superintendent, Human Resources, Woodland Joint Unified School District.

2.

Respondents Scott Coppenger, Monica Craggs, Angelica Farias, Karen Flory,

Piper Guthrie, Christina Lambie, Lola Renda, David Scolari, Maxwell Shelnutt, Samuel
Solis, Shannon Torgeson, and Noel West are certificated employees of the district.

3.

On March 1, 2011, the district’s Board of Trustees adopted Resolution

No. 26-11 reducing particular kinds of services and directing Superintendent Debra LaVoi,
Ph.D., or her designee, to give appropriate notice to certificated employees whose positions
will be affected by the action.

1

4.

On March 11, 2011, Associate Superintendent Stevens gave written notice to

certificated employees, including respondents, of the recommendation that their services
would not be required or would be reduced for the 2011-2012 school year. Each notice set
forth the reasons for the recommendation.

5.

Twenty certificated employees filed a timely request for hearing to determine

if there is cause for reducing or terminating their services for the 2011-2012 school year.

6.

An accusation was served on respondents. All respondents, with the exception
of one, timely filed a notice of defense. The district does not raise any challenge with respect
to any respondent appearing in this hearing. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were
met as to each of these respondents.

7.

The district has since withdrawn the accusations it issued against the following

certificated employees: Tara Althausen, Helen Campen, Marisol Clark, Veronica Davalos,
Neluka DeSilva, Lisa Gaskill, Elizabeth Lorda, and Julianne Lohr Shelton. The services of
these employees are being retained for the 2011-2012 school year.

8.

In its resolution, the board took action to reduce or eliminate the following

particular kinds of services for the 2011-12 school year:

Services

FTE1 Reduction

A.

Elementary Instructional Services:

1.

Grades K-6 Elementary Classroom Teachers

15.0

B.

Middle School Instructional Services (Grades 7-8):

Industrial Technology - Wood
Leadership
AVID
Art
Social Science (Spanish)
Computers
Social Science
Science
English

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10. Math
11.

Physical Education

0.2
0.2
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.4
1.0
1.4
2.0
1.0
0.6
8.4

Total:

1 Full-time equivalent positions.

2

C.

High School Instructional Services (Grades 9-12):

Art
Health
Foreign Language (Spanish)
Foreign Language (French)
Technology 9
Science – Bio
Physical Science
Social Science
Physical Education

English
Agriculture
Industrial Technology – Welding
Industrial Technology – Auto
Business

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10. Math
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16. Music

D.

Instructional Support Services:

Total:

Counselors (Project AWARE)
Counselors
Counselor (Prairie El.) Cat. funds .5 & VP Alloc. .5
Program Specialist

E.

Administrative Services:

Director, Student Services
Coordinator, Academic Enrichment and Intervention
Elementary Vice-Principal – Prarie Elem.
Elementary Vice-Principal – Tafoya Elem.
Administrators on Special Assignments
Secondary Vice-Principals - PHS
Secondary Vice-Principals - WHS

1.0
1.0
(D.3 above 0.5)
0.5
2.0
3.0
3.0

1.
2.
3.
4.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Total:

1.4
1.0
0.6
0.6
0.6
1.2
0.2
1.0
1.0
1.0
3.0
1.4
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.8
14.6

3.0
5.0
1.0
1.0

58.5

9.

Associate Superintendent Stevens described that his recommendation and the

board’s resolution were required by the district’s budget situation. The district projects a
$3.9 million budgetary shortfall. The bulk of the district’s budget is in personnel costs.

3

10.

In determining which employees would receive a layoff notice, the district

applied tie-breaking criteria for employees with the same first date of paid service. There are
no issues with respect to the application of the criteria to respondents.

Piper Guthrie

11.

The district also determined which senior employees were entitled to bump

into positions held by junior teachers. In its resolution, the board adopted a number of
competency criteria. One criterion provides:

A teacher with a multiple subject credential and a supplemental
authorization authorizing instruction up to the ninth grade (e.g.
Intro Math) may not bump to teach at the high school because of
the limited ability to be assigned high school courses.

Based on this provision in the board’s resolution, the district determined that
respondent Guthrie was not entitled to bump into a position held by Kari Cramer, a teacher
junior to her. Guthrie claims this determination was in error.

12.

Respondent Guthrie is a permanent certificated employee with the district with

a seniority date of August 22, 2005. She holds a Clear Multiple Subject Credential and a
Supplemental Authorization in Business. Guthrie holds a full 1.0 FTE position teaching
Computers at the middle school. With a Supplemental Authorization in Business, Guthrie
may teach up to the ninth grade, only. She is not authorized to teach the tenth, eleventh or
twelfth grades. As such, the only class Guthrie is authorized to teach at the high school level
is Technology 9. Technology 9 is not being taught currently, and the service is being
eliminated by the Board’s resolution for the 2011-2012 school year, which reduces
Technology 9 by 0.6 FTE.

13.

The district proposes to layoff Guthrie a full 1.0 FTE. This is a result of the

board’s resolution, which reduced Middle School Instructional Services in Computers by 0.4
FTE, and a bump by a teacher senior to her, Sandra Calhoun, for the remaining 0.6 FTE of
her position. (Calhoun’s position is being eliminated under the board’s resolution.)

14.

Guthrie seeks to bump Kari Cramer. Cramer is a permanent certificated
employee with a seniority date of January 17, 2007, which makes her junior to Guthrie.
Cramer holds a Single Subject Credential in Business, and is assigned to Prairie High School.
By virtue of this credential, Cramer may teach in all grades of high school, and may teach all
classes offered at the high school level.

15.

The board’s bumping criterion set forth above does not allow for Guthrie to

bump Cramer because Cramer holds a single subject credential and Guthrie holds only a
supplemental authorization. A board possesses broad discretion in determining competency
criteria. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b); Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987)
196 Cal.App.3d 555, 564-565.) The competency criterion at issue here is reasonable, and it

4

meets the board’s stated purpose of allowing for maximum flexibility in high school
assignments. Guthrie is not entitled to bump Cramer.

Post March 15 Retirement

16.

The board’s resolution reduces a total of nine FTE in counseling services. The

district had four vacancies in counseling positions, and thus issued five layoff notices. (The
district also issued a precautionary notice to Elaine Cummings, as discussed, infra.) The
district took into consideration all positively assured attrition prior to issuing the preliminary
notices to the counselors.

17.

Since issuing the preliminary notices, the district has been advised that a high
school counselor will be submitting to the board an application for an early retirement. An
early retirement application must meet certain criteria and be approved by the board. The
application will be an agenda item for the board’s next meeting on April 28. Associate
Superintendent Stevens does not know whether the board will accept the resignation.
Associate Superintendent Stevens further suggested that even if the retirement is approved,
the board may elect not to fill the vacancy created by the retirement as a means of salary
savings.

18.

Respondent counselors argue that the district must take this retirement into
account when issuing its final notices. The case law is clear, however, that in a particular
kinds of services layoff, the district is not required to consider attrition after March 15. (San
Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 327.) In short, the district may
elect to consider the retirement when determining the number of counselors it will send final
notices to, but it is not required to under the law.

Skipping of Counselor Elaine Cummings

19.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the governing

board of the district resolved to deviate from terminating employees in the order of seniority, i.e.,
the board resolved to skip over a counselor within the district with particular qualifications and
terminate more senior counselors who do not possess those qualifications. A district may skip a
junior counselor only if the counselors with more seniority do not possess the special training
and experience necessary to provide the service.

20.

The board resolved as follows:

The Superintendent and/or his designee is authorized to deviate
from terminating in order of seniority for teachers current
assigned to the below listed programs based upon their unique
training, qualifications and skills related to the required
responsibilities for the course/job.

A. . . .

5

B. One counselor currently assigned to Cache Creek
Continuation High School who, in addition to her counseling
credential and experience in alternative programs including
WASC Reviews, is being required to use her experience as a
classroom teacher and additional Bilingual skills to serve an
alternative school population with is 80% Hispanic (Elaine
Cummings).

21.

Associate Superintendent Stevens applied the skipping criteria and proposes to

skip Elaine Cummings, who presently holds the counseling position at Cache Creek.2
Cummings is a permanent employee with a seniority date of August 10, 2007.

22.

Associate Superintendent Stevens noted that Cache Creek has a unique

program in the district. Cache Creek has approximately 180 students, and is 80 percent
Latino, with a large percentage of monolingual Spanish-speaking parents. Students are
referred to Cache Creek from the district’s comprehensive high schools because they are at
risk of not graduating. The risk can be based on many reasons, including class credit
deficiencies, drug or alcohol problems, truancy, emotional or social issues. The instructional
program has less offerings. The instructional approach is different than in a traditional high
school, and the teachers teach many subjects. There are 10 teachers at Cache Creek, a
principal, and one counselor. In general, a counselor at a continuation high school is utilized
differently than a counselor at a regular comprehensive high school. At a continuation high
school the counseling is more intensive on social or emotional counseling, outreach, and in
working with families.

23.

Olga Neverez has been the principal of Cache Creek for 12 years. She was a

Vice Principal at Woodland High School for six years, and worked as a high school
counselor in a comprehensive high school in another district. Neverez testified that it is
imperative for the school to have a bilingual counselor as the school has 71 students who are
limited English speakers. The school needs a counselor who is bilingual in order to
communicate with students and parents. (Cummings estimate that 50 percent of her parent
contacts are in Spanish.)

Neverez believes that the counseling duties at Cache Creek are different than at a

comprehensive high school in that 100 percent of the students are at risk for not graduating.
Counselors at Cache Creek do a great deal more than what is listed in the job description.
Cummings develops the master schedule for the school; she schedules each student’s classes
by hand (as there is no computer program for such scheduling); and she enters the data into
the ARES systems upon completion of each course.

Cache Creek is accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges

(WASC). The last accreditation was in the 2009-2010 school year. The term of the

2 The district did issue Ms. Cummings a precautionary March 15 notice.

6

accreditation is six years. Cummings had experience as a parent working on a WASC
committee at her son’s continuation high school before she was hired by the district. Since
being at Cache Creek she has served on two evaluation teams for other alterative schools.
Neverez has appointed Cummings to chair the school’s team for the 2013 WASC revisit.

This year, Cummings obtained a 30-day emergency credential and has been assigned

by Neverez to teach an elective credit class, Strategies for Success. Neverez approved
Cummings to teach this class because she has had teaching experience under emergency
teaching credential in the past.

24.

Respondents David Scolari, Lola Renda, Angelica Farias and Samuel Solis are
counselors in the district who are senior to Cummings. Each senior counselor is willing to be
assigned to the continuation high school. Respondent David Scolari has been a counselor at
Pioneer High School for seven years. He has a seniority date of October 25, 2004.
Respondent Lola Renda has a seniority date of August 22, 2005. She spent four years as a
counselor at Woodland High School. This year she has been assigned to five elementary
schools. Respondent Angelica Maria Farias has been a counselor at Pioneer High School for
five years. She has a seniority date of October 18, 2006. Respondent Samuel Solis has been
a counselor at Pioneer High School for four years. He has a seniority date of August 1, 2007.

25.

It is concluded that the district has failed to establish that Ms. Cummings has

special training and experience necessary for the position the district has identified for
skipping. The district has identified four criteria in support of skipping Ms. Cummings:
bilingual ability; teaching experience; WASC experience; and experience with alternative
education.

All counselors at the district are subject to the same job description, which does not

require bilingual ability. When Cummings’s position at Cache Creek was posted at the
district, the announcement listed bilingual ability as a desirable qualification, it was not listed
as a mandatory qualification. Moreover, even if this were a valid criterion, two of the more
senior counselors (Farias and Solis) are bilingual.

The service being provided by Cummings under the PPS credential she holds is

counseling. In order to skip a junior counselor pursuant to Education Code section 44955,
subdivision (d)(1), the training and experience must relate to the credentialed service being
provided. Ms. Cumming’s teaching experience and her WASC experience do not relate to
her PPS credential. As such, neither of these experiences can be relied on to deviate from
seniority and skip Ms. Cummings.

There is no question that Cummings has had experience working with the at risk

youth at Cache Creek. The district has not established, however, that the counselors more
senior to her do not have equivalent training and experience. The high school counselors
work with a large numbers of students who are at risk for not graduating, utilizing many
community resources for referral for social and emotional programs, and utilizing many of
the same alternative education resources. The counselors communicate regularly with

7

parents, both in English and in Spanish. They work on class scheduling, and they help
develop a master schedule. Their experiences are not identical to those of Ms. Cummings,
but it has not been demonstrated that they lack some special training or experience that Ms.
Cummings possesses.

Other Matters

26.

All contentions made by respondents not specifically addressed above are

found to be without merit and are rejected.

27. With the exception noted above, no permanent or probationary employee with
less seniority is being retained to render a service for which respondents are certificated and
competent to render.

28.

The cause for the layoff relates to the welfare of the schools and their pupils.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections

44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been
provided as required.

2.

Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to

reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction of
particular kinds of services.

3.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), provides, in part, that a

district may deviate from terminating employees according to seniority if the “district
demonstrates a specific need for personnel . . . to provide services authorized by a services
credential with a specialization in . . . pupil personnel services” and demonstrates that a
junior “employee has special training and experience necessary . . . to provide those
services, which others with more seniority do not possess.” By reason of the matters set
forth in Findings 19 to 25, the district has not established cause to skip Elaine Cummings
pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). The district may not deviate
from seniority with respect to Ms. Cummings in effectuating the reduction of counseling
services.

4.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provided that “Except as

otherwise provided for by statute, the services of no permanent employee may be terminated
under the provisions of this section while . . . any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.” The district shall follow the requirements of this section in issuing its final notices
to effectuate the reduction in counseling services.

8

5.

Cause exists because of the reduction of particular kinds of services pursuant

to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to all respondents, except the most senior
counselor, that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year. The cause
relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of
Education Code section 44949.

RECOMMENDATION

Except as set forth above, notice may be given to respondents that their services will

be reduced or eliminated for the 2011-2012 school year because of the reduction of particular
kinds of services. The district shall follow the requirements of Education Code section
44955, subdivision (b), in issuing its final notices to effectuate all reductions in services.

DATED: May 4, 2011

_______________________________________
MELISSA G. CROWELL
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

9

