BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
FORTUNA UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT
HUMBOLDT COUNTY
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

MICHELLE CHAFFIN, SARA DIXON,
ALICE OLIPHANT, BRETT ROSLOSNIK,
CANDICE RUSS, and JULIE SLATER,

Respondents.

OAH No. 2011031521

PROPOSED DECISION

Perry O. Johnson, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings,

State of California, heard this matter on April 14, 2011, in Eureka, California.

Margaret M. Merchat, General Counsel, School and College Legal Services of

California, 5350 Skylane Boulevard, Santa Rosa, California 95403, represented Glen
Senestraro, Superintendent, Fortuna Union High School District.

Paul Hagen, Attorney at Law, of Bragg, Perlman, Russ, Stunich & Eads, LLP,

1036 Fifth Street, Suite E, Eureka, California 95501, represented respondents Michelle
Chaffin, Sara Dixon, Alice Oliphant, Brett Roslosnik, Candice Russ and Julie Slater. Only
respondents Chaffin, Roslosnik and Slater appeared at the hearing of this matter.

On April 14, 2011, the parties submitted the matter and the record closed.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

On March 23, 2011, in his official capacity, Glen Senestraro, Superintendent

for the Fortuna Union High School District (the superintendent), made and filed the
respective accusations regarding respondents Michelle Chaffin, Sara Dixon, Alice Oliphant,
Brett Roslosnik, Candice Russ, and Julie Slater.

2.

Respondents are certificated employees of the Fortuna Union High School

District, who contest the instant proposed teacher layoff action. And the respondents are all
tenured (permanent) teachers with the District.

3.

On March 8, 2011, the superintendent presented the District’s Board of
Trustees a recommendation that the District give notice that particular kinds of services

-

-1

(PKS), then offered through the District, be reduced or eliminated by the District for the
ensuing school year (2011-2012).

4.

On March 8, 2011, the District’s Board of Trustees adopted Resolution No.

6. The resolution recites that, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, it has
become necessary for the District to eliminate, no later than the beginning of the 2011-2012
school year, particular kinds of services in the form of nineteen point eight (19.8) full-time
equivalent (FTE) certificated positions as well as 20 hours per week Adult Education (ESL)
and 20 hours per week Adult Education (CCC) positions as follows:

2.8 FTE
2.4 FTE
0.4 FTE
0.2 FTE
0.52 FTE
0.2 FTE
2.8 FTE
1.6 FTE
1.2 FTE
1.0 FTE
0.6 FTE
0.6 FTE
0.4 FTE
0.6 FTE
0.4 FTE
1.2 FTE
20 hrs./wk.
20 hrs./wk
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
0.2 FTE
1.0 FTE

English Teacher positions;
Math Teacher positions;
Biology Teacher position;
Chemistry Teacher position;
Anatomy Teacher position;
Physical Science Teacher position;
Social Science Teacher positions;
Resource Teacher positions;
Physical Education Teacher positions;
Counseling/Pupil Services positions;
Art Teacher position;
Music Teacher position;
Agriculture Teacher position;
Spanish Teacher position;
Wood/Metal Shop Teacher position;
Strongs Creek CDS Teacher positions;
Adult Ed. Teacher position (CCC) position;
Adult Ed. Teacher postion (ESL) position;
Academy SSC (Core Support) Teacher position;
Director of Alternative Education position;
WASC/Testing Coordinator;
Continuation High School Teacher.

5.

The written preliminary notice to each respondent from the District’s

superintendent states legally sufficient reasons of the District Board’s determination to
eliminate or reduce services provided by respondents.

6

7.

Respondents each timely requested in writing a hearing to determine whether

or not cause exists for not reemploying each respondent for the ensuing school year.

The District’s superintendent timely served upon each respondent the

Accusation, dated March 23, 2002, and related documents. Each respondent filed a timely
notice of defense.

8.

All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

-

-2

9.

At the hearing of this matter, the District rescinded the layoff notice and

withdrew the resultant accusation against Respondent Alice Oliphant. By its withdrawal of
the accusation and rescission of the layoff action against that respondent, the District will
retain the services of Alice Oliphant.

Respondents’ Contentions

10.

Respondent Michelle Chaffin contends that the District has miscalculated the
number of special resource teachers that will be required to teach special education classes
for the coming school year. Also respondent Chaffin avers that with the reduction of special
resource teachers for the ensuing year, high school students impaired by developmental
disabilities and other learning impairments will not be appropriately educated because of an
anticipated large number of incoming freshmen with Individual Education Plans (IEP’s) that
will lead to existing teachers monitoring exceedingly large classrooms.

But respondent Chaffin’s contentions are without merit.

And respondent Chaffin provided no competent evidence that the District has retained

any teacher junior to her for a position which Ms. Chaffin possesses a credential
and is currently competent to teach. Nor did respondent Chaffin establish that the
Superintendent committed a procedural error in the initiation of the layoff action that
adversely affects her teaching position with the District. Moreover, respondent Chaffin
offered no competent evidence regarding the precise number of special education students,
that is pupils with prescribed IEP’s, who will enroll as incoming freshmen with the District.
And the superintendent persuasively asserted that should the District find that the incoming
number of freshmen students, who have IEP’s, will cause the existing teachers to have class
sizes that approach the statutorily prescribed class size then special resource teachers who
have received layoff notices will be implored to return to the district.

11.

Other than respondent Michelle Chaffin, no other respondent offered evidence,
under oath, at the hearing of this matter. Nor did respondents call any expert witness to offer
evidence in support of the contentions argued by respondent Chaffin that would affect the
layoff action.

12.

Respondents offered no argument or presentation of evidence that suggests the

District’s action is improper insofar as the prospective elimination of 19.8 FTE positions as
well as 20 hour per week for teacher positions in Adult Education (CCC) and 20 hour per
week for teacher positions in Adult Education (ESL). Respondents did not present evidence
that the corresponding layoff of credentialed employees, relative to the elimination of the
subject FTE positions of the District, is contrary to law and unnecessary.

-

-3

Acts by the District’s Superintendent and the Assistant Superintendent

13.
this matter.

The superintendent offered credible and persuasive evidence at the hearing of

The prospective elimination of particular kinds of services for the 2011-2012 school

year directly results from a prospective shortfall in money for the District’s budget.

In order to partially aid the District in crafting a reasonable budget for the ensuing

school year, the superintendent reasonably decided that certain certificated positions be
eliminated due to a shortfall of revenue.

The superintendent in his official capacity was reasonable in the exercise of discretion

in executing the procedures associated with lay-offs required by the subject resolution.

With regard to the mandated service that are subject to elimination, the District will

have sufficient teaching resources to meet the state required level for the provision of service
for those reductions for the ensuing year.

Ultimate Findings

14.

No competent and credible evidence establishes that as a result of the proposed
elimination of the full-time equivalent positions respectively held by respondents, the District
will retain any teacher who is junior to respondents to perform services for which
respondents have been certificated or found to be competent to teach in such FTE positions
for the next school year.

15.

The decision of the District’s Board to eliminate or discontinue a total of 19.8

FTE positions as well as teacher positions in Adult Education as specified in Resolution 6,
including the positions held by each respondent, was neither arbitrary, inexact nor capricious.
Rather, the District’s determination was within the proper exercise of the discretion bestowed
by law upon the District.

16.

The Board’s proposed elimination or discontinuation of the subject full-time

equivalent positions, including the positions respectively held by respondents, for the
ensuing school year, is related to the welfare of the District and its overall student
population.

17.

The Board determined that it will be necessary, due to the elimination of

particular kinds of services, to decrease the number of teachers before the beginning of the
next academic year. At the direction of the Board, the superintendent lawfully directed the
notification to respondents of the elimination of the certificated positions held by each
respondent.

-

-4

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.
44949 and 44955.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections

2.

The District provided all notices and other requirements of Education Code

sections 44949 and 44955. This conclusion of law is made by reason of the matters set forth
in Factual Findings 1 and 8.

3.

Judgments entered by a tribunal on the stipulation of the parties have the same

effect as acts tried on the merits. (John Siebel Associates v. Keele (1986) 188 Cal.App.3d
560, 565.) The District stipulates to withdraw the Accusation against the certificated
employee named in Factual Finding 9. The stipulation is binding on the parties.

4.

Evidence Code section 664 establishes a presumption that the action or official

duties of a public entity, such as the District and its governing board, have been regularly
performed. Respondents offer no evidence to rebut the presumption that the District has
properly performed actions related to the procedures that seek the non reemployment of
respondents.

5.

Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 cause exists to
give respondents notice of the discontinuation of full-time equivalent positions in the
particular kinds of services rendered by respondents, by reason of the matters set out in
Factual Findings 13 through 15 and 17.

6.

The discontinuation of the subject particular kinds of service provided by each
respondent relates solely to the welfare of the District and its students within the meaning of
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, by reason of the matters in Factual Finding 16.

RECOMMENDED ORDER

1.

The Accusation served on respondents Michelle Chaffin, Sara Dixon, Brett

Roslosnik, Candice Russ, and Julie Slater is sustained, except that the accusation is dismissed
as to respondent Alice Oliphant.

2.

Final notice may be given to respondents Michelle Chaffin, Sara Dixon, Brett

Roslosnik, and Julie Slater, that their respective services will not be required for the 2011-
2012 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of the particular kinds of
services by the Fortuna Union High School District. And the district may reduce the 0.6 FTE
Spanish position held by respondent Candice Russ.

DATED: April 25, 2011

___________________
PERRY O. JOHNSON
Administrative Law Judge

-

-5

