BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
WINTERS JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction or Elimination of
Particular Kinds of Certificated Services for the
2011-2012 School Year:

OAH No. 2011020721

DOROTHEA BELL
GUADALUPE CLANTON
JENNIFER HOOVER
RAENA LAVELLE
SUSAN REYCROFT
RAQUEL ULLOA-MENDOZA
NORMA ROBLES

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Rebecca M. Westmore, Administrative Law Judge,

Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, in Winters, California, on April 26,
2011.

James Scot Yarnell, Attorney at Law, represented the Winters Joint Unified School

District (district).

Peter McEntee, Attorney at Law, represented respondents, Dorothea Bell, Guadalupe

Clanton, Jennifer Hoover, Raena Lavelle, Susan Reycroft, Raquel Ulloa-Mendoza, and
Norma Robles.

There were no unrepresented respondents.1

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for

decision on April 26, 2011.

1 At hearing, respondent Guadalupe Clanton was represented by counsel for purposes
of challenging the district’s application of the competency criteria; however, she represented
herself for the purpose of asserting her right to inverse bumping.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The district serves kindergarten through twelfth grade students and has five

sites: K-third grade primary school; fourth and fifth grade intermediate school; sixth through
eighth grade middle school; ninth through twelfth grade comprehensive high school; and
continuation high school.

2.

On March 3, 2011, the Board of Trustees (board) of the District adopted

Resolution No. 863-11, entitled “Resolution of the Winters Joint Unified School District
Board of Trustees Relative to the Reduction or Elimination of Particular Kinds of
Certificated Services” (Resolution). Pursuant to the Resolution, the board determined that it
was necessary for the district to reduce or eliminate certain particular kinds of services (PKS)
and to decrease a corresponding number of certificated district employees not later than the
beginning of the 2011-2012 school year. In the Resolution, the board directed the
Superintendent to send notices to all employees affected by the PKS reductions or
eliminations. The board also directed the Superintendent or her designee to make
assignments and reassignments of certificated employees following implementation of the
PKS reductions or eliminations to ensure that each remaining certificated employee is
assigned to a position for which he or she is properly credentialed to perform pursuant to
Education Code section 44955.2

3.

The Resolution identified the following particular kinds of services for

reduction or elimination:

I. Classroom Teaching Services:

A. Grade K-3 Elementary Teachers
B. Grade 405 Elementary Teachers
C. Grade 405 Special Ed (RSP) Teacher
D. Middle School Science Teacher
E. Middle School 7th Grade ELA Teacher
F. Middle School 7th Grade Math
G. Middle School Math Teacher
H. High School Social Science Teacher
I. High School English Teacher
J. High School Student Government Teacher
K. High School Math Teacher
L. High School Spanish for Spanish Speakers I/II
M. High School Language Lab Teacher
N. High School Foreign Language (Spanish) Teacher
O. High School ELD Teacher

2.00 FTE3
1.50 FTE
.50 FTE
.57 FTE
1.00 FTE
.28 FTE
1.00 FTE
.50 FTE
.33 FTE
.17 FTE
.33 FTE
.33 FTE
.33 FTE
.17 FTE
.17 FTE

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless indicated

otherwise.

3 “FTE” stands for full-time equivalent.

2

P. High School Earth Sciences Teacher
Q. K-12 Independent Study Teacher
R. Teacher-on-Assignment (Wolfskill)

II. Classroom Support Services:

A. Counselor (elementary)

III. Administrative Services:

.17 FTE
.50 FTE
.50 FTE

.50 FTE

A. Continuation High School Principal

.25 FTE

TOTAL:

11.10 FTE

Competency Criteria

4.

The Resolution set forth the district’s competency criteria as follows:

That “competency” for the purposes of Education Code
sections 44955, 44956 and 44957 shall be met based upon: (1)
current possession of a preliminary or clear credential and
“highly qualified status under the No Child Left Behind Act for
each subject matter in second teaching assignments and/or grade
level in a self-contained class to which the employee will be
assigned at the beginning of the 2011-12 school years; and (2)
the employee must have taught at least one subject within the
department of the proposed secondary assignment, or taught in a
self-contained classroom for a proposed elementary assignment,
or taught the specific course of AVID, Student Government,
Leadership or Invention classes for assignment to one of those
courses, for at least one full year within the District in the past
five (5) school years (e.g., 2006-2007 or later) while classified
as a probationary or permanent employee. If the proposed
assignment is in alternative education, the employee must be
highly qualified under NCLB in each academic subject currently
assigned to the position and have taught in alternative education
within the District for at least one full year within the past five
(5) school years (e.g., 20060-2007 or later) while classified as a
probationary or permanent employee.

Bumping Restrictions

5.

The Resolution also set forth the district’s “bumping” restrictions as follows:
That due to the differences in number of classes per day, length
of class periods, staring and ending times and unique “block
schedule (rotating classes every two days) between the

3

Tie-Breaking Criteria

6.

The Resolution also set forth the district’s tie-breaking criteria as follows:

elementary schools, middle school and high school, it is
impractical to allow “partial bumping” (e.g. high school teacher
bumping one classes period at middle school) of assignments
between the elementary schools, middle school and high school.
Further allowing a more senior teacher, to “bump” into a portion
of an elementary classroom teaching assignment forcing the
class to be taught by two or more teachers who did not plan a
“team teaching” assignment is not educationally sound. As a
result, senior teachers who are otherwise qualified may not
bump into a portion of an elementary classroom teaching
assignment and/or bump between elementary schools, middle
school and/or high school.

That as between employees who first rendered paid service on
the same date, the order of termination and reemployment
pursuant to Education Code sections 44955 and 44846 shall be
based solely on the needs of the District and the students
thereof, as determined by applying the point system described
herein. This system shall be applied only where the
implementation of layoffs or reemployment rights actually
impacts two or more employees with the same first date of paid
service and is applied only to those employees. In case of each
tie, points shall be granted to each affected employee based
upon all the following criteria. The points for each employee
shall be totaled and the employees ranked from highest to
lowest with the lowest being subject to layoff and the next
lowest being subject to layoff, etc. For reemployment, the
employee with the highest total shall be reemployed first and so
on. In the case that two or more employees remained tied by
point total after totaling points for criteria a-e and the tie must
be broken to determine a layoff, then criteria f shall be invoked.

Record on file (in the Human Resources Office) of a

A)
currently valid preliminary or clear California teaching
credential relevant to the current assignment (excludes Intern
permit, PIP/STSP or performing assignment on a Board
authorization): two (2) points.

B)
Record on file of multiple valid preliminary or clear
California teaching credentials (excluding authorizations or
certifications): one (1) point per additional credential.

4

Record on file of one or more of the following currently

C)
valid subject matter certifications or authorizations on a
preliminary or clear credential: Special Education, Reading
Certificate, Speech Therapy, Math or Science: two (2) points per
certification, not to exceed a maximum total of four (4) points.

Possession of one or more post graduate degree(s): not to

D)
exceed a maximum total of two (2) points.

Record on file of supplemental authorizations not listed

E)
in paragraph c on a currently valid preliminary or clear
credential: one (1) point for each authorization.

F)
In the event of a tie after totaling the points, those
employees still tied shall have their relative seniority determined
by comparison of the last four digits of the persons social
security number with the highest number being the most senior,
and the next highest number being next most senior and
continuing by highest number.

7.

On March 4, 2011, pursuant to the Resolution, Rebecca D. Gillespie, Ed.D.,
Superintendent of the district, sent preliminary layoff notices to the certificated employees
identified for layoff. The preliminary layoff notices enclosed a copy of the resolution and
informed the certificated employees of their right to request a hearing. In response to the
preliminary layoff notices, the district received seven requests for hearing. On March 24,
2011, Dr. Gillespie sent letters to the certificated employees who requested a layoff hearing,
serving upon them the Accusation, Statement to Respondent, form Notice of Defense, Notice
of Hearing and copies of relevant sections of the Education and Government codes, and
informing them of their right to file a notice of defense if they desired a hearing. Between
March 28 and 31, 2011, Notices of Defense were timely served on the district by the seven
certificated employees who are respondents in this matter.

Stipulations

8.

At hearing, the parties stipulated that respondents Susan Reycroft and Raquel
Ulloa-Mendoza withdrew their requests for hearing, and that the district dismissed the layoff
notice served upon respondent Jennifer Hoover.

9.

At hearing, the parties further stipulated that the seniority ranking of non-

respondent Linda Fox should be corrected on the district’s Exhibit 4.b. to reflect a seniority
ranking of “3” instead of “2.”

5

Challenge to the Competency Criteria – Guadalupe Clanton

10.

Guadalupe Clanton has a seniority date of 8/19/03. She holds a Clear Multiple
Subject: General Subjects credential, BCLAD in Spanish, and Clear Single Subject: Foreign
Language: Spanish credential. She currently teaches .17 FTE of English Language
Development, .33 FTE of Language Lab, .16 FTE of Spanish I, and .34 FTE of Foreign
Language: Spanish at Winters High School (WHS). Ms. Clanton is being laid off 1.0 FTE
pursuant to the Resolution reductions of High School Spanish Speakers I/II, Language Lab,
Foreign Language: Spanish and English Language Development. Ms. Clanton claims that
the board’s competency criteria requiring that employees teach a subject “within the district
for one full year within the past five (5) school years,” is unreasonable, and improperly
prevents her from bumping junior teachers.

11.

According to Dr. Gillespie, the board’s competency criteria were “established

to most effectively capture our mission to meet students’ educational needs in the most
effective way.” Dr. Gillespie asserted that the requirement that employees teach a subject
“within the district” recognizes the uniqueness of the district’s contacts, demographics,
diverse population, the high needs of students with language needs, and the fact that they are
a program improvement district. Dr. Gillespie also asserted that the requirement that
employees teach a subject within the district “for one full year within the past five (5) school
years,” recognizes the district’s need to employ teachers who have recent training and
successful experience in the classroom. According to Dr. Gillespie, respondent Clanton was
considered for bumping into an elementary school assignment, but her prior years of
experience as an elementary school teacher were not considered because the board’s criteria
called for employment “within the district,” and “for one full year within the past five (5)
school years,” and Ms. Clanton had not worked as an elementary school teacher in their
district since 2003 when she started working at WHS.

12.

Anietta Tice has been the district’s administrative secretary/personnel

technician since March 15, 2010. Her responsibilities include maintaining the employees’
personnel files; ensuring that the employees’ credentials are updated; and maintaining the
seniority list for all employees. Ms. Tice is aware that respondent Clanton’s credential
permits her to teach elementary school assignments. At hearing, Ms. Tice admitted that the
following six junior teachers did not receive layoff notices, and are being retained to teach
elementary school classes:

a.

Ambi Gardner (#60)4 has a seniority date of 8/16/04. She holds a Clear
Multiple Subject: General Subjects credential, and an English Learner
Authorization. She currently teaches first grade at Waggoner Elementary
School (WES).

4 Wherever possible, employee seniority numbers will be included for ease of

reference.

6

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

Mary Stewart (#65) has a seniority date of 9/27/05. She holds a Clear
Multiple Subject: General Subjects credential, and a CLAD. She currently
teaches fifth grade at Shirley Rominger Intermediate School (SRIS).

Alejandro Delgadillo (#75) has a seniority date of 8/1106. He holds a clear
Multiple Subject: General Subjects credential, CLAD, and an Educational
Specialist: Mild/Moderate certificate. He currently teaches RSP at WES.

Griffin George (#77) has a seniority date of 7/1/07. He holds a Clear
Multiple Subject: General Subjects credential, BCLAD: Spanish, Clear
Single Subject: Spanish credential, and Clear Administrative Services
certificate. He currently teaches Kindergarten at WES.

Mariaelena Ochoa (#82) has a seniority date of 8/10/07. She holds a Clear
Multiple Subject: General Subjects credential, and BCLAD: Spanish. She
currently teaches third grade Dual Immersion at WES.

Anita Enriquez (#86) has a seniority date of 8/11/08. She holds a Clear
Multiple Subject: General Subjects credential, BCLAD: Spanish, and SA:
English, Spanish certificate. She currently teaches second grade Dual
Immersion at WES.

13.

The evidence established that respondent Clanton has been teaching students

from first grade through high school since August 1990. She was a first grade bilingual
student teacher at Rosedale Elementary School in Chico, California from August 1990
through December 1990; an English Language Development teacher at Gridley High School
in Gridley, California from January 1991 through June 1991; a second grade bilingual
teacher at Wyandotte Avenue School in Oroville, California from 1991 through 2003; and a
Spanish and English Language Development teacher at Winters High School from 2003 to
present. In addition, respondent Clanton received Compelling Conversations and Sheltered
Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) training through the district “up through last year.”
According to respondent Clanton, the training courses apply in both elementary and high
schools.

14.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part,

that, “the services of no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this
section while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.”

15.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides that:

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments
in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any
service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to
render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any

7

certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not
previously taught, and for which he or she does not have a
teaching credential or which is not within the employee's major
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject
matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

16.

Despite being senior to six junior teachers and having elementary school
teaching experience, respondent Clanton received a layoff notice based on the district’s
application of the competency criteria. However, no evidence was presented to demonstrate
that teachers who have not taught in a particular subject in five years or who have not taught
to the same level in five years have ineffective teaching skills and strategies. Furthermore, a
district may not defeat the clear intent of legislation designed to retain senior teachers in the
event of layoffs, by defining competency in a narrow manner, applying the criteria in a
wholesale manner and declaring those senior teachers who do not meet the criteria
incompetent to teach in their areas of credentialing.5 The competency criteria adopted by the
board does not consider the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff,
and prevent senior teachers from bumping junior teachers. Therefore, it violates the
provisions of Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c).

17.

Guadalupe Clanton is certificated and competent to teach the elementary

classes that six junior teachers are being retained to teach. Therefore, her layoff notice must
be rescinded.

Challenge to the Tie-Breaking Criteria – Dorothea Bell

18.

Dorothea Bell has a seniority date of 8/11/08. She holds a Clear Multiple

Subject: General Subjects credential, Clear Reading Certificate, and CLAD. She is currently
teaching fourth grade at SRIS. Ms. Bell is being laid off 1.0 FTE pursuant to the Resolution
reductions of Grade 4-5 Elementary Teachers. Ms. Bell claims that the district failed to give
her credit for possession of a master’s degree in teaching, prior to applying the tie-breaking
criteria, and as a result, she was improperly noticed for layoff.

19.

On or before February 2, 2011, Ms. Tice sent a form to respondent Bell

requesting that she update and verify her date of hire of 8/11/08, tenured contract status, 1.0
FTE, and possession of a Multiple Subject: CLAD credential with an expiration date of
7/1/14, and reading certificate. On February 2, 2011, respondent Bell confirmed that the
information on the form was correct. According to Ms. Tice, in its Resolution, the board
established February 10, 2011 as the last date on which certificated employees “must have
filed documents … evidencing credentials … in order to be considered.” On February 28,
2011, Ms. Tice applied the board’s tie-breaking criteria to determine teacher bumping rights.

5 See Duax v. Kern Community College Dist. (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555.

8

20.

After applying tie-breaking criteria A) through F), Ms. Tice determined the
seniority rankings for certificated teachers with a seniority date of 8/11/08 and who hold a
Multiple Subject credential to be as follows:

Anita Enriquez (#86)
Dorothea Bell (#88)
Norma Robles (#85)

-
-
-

4 points
4 points
2 points

-
-
-

Rank 1
Rank 2
Rank 3

According to Ms. Tice, as a result of the application of the tie-breaking criteria, Anita

Rodriguez did not receive a notice of layoff.

21.

At hearing, Ms. Tice asserted that at the time of her application of the tie-
breaking criteria, she was unaware that respondent Bell was in possession of a master’s
degree because “it was not on her skills screen.” According to Ms. Tice, she first became
aware of the master’s degree when respondent Bell brought the transcript to her in March
2011, and Ms. Tice added the master’s degree to respondent Bell’s skills screen. However,
Ms. Tice also admitted that she may have had email exchanges with respondent Bell
regarding her master’s degree prior to February 2011.

22.

In an email dated September 20, 2010, respondent Bell requested and notified

Ms. Tice of the following:

Is there any way for me to see a copy of the sheet that records
my units, OR for you to tell me the last units that have been
recorded?

I completed a Reading Certificate over the past two years, and I
don’t think any of those units have yet been recorded.

I believe you have a transcript of my Master’s degree, which I
received in 2009. If you are missing everything after that, then I
will send you a transcript of the reading certificate classes.

The sheet I sent to you is the sheet from your personnel file.
There is a piece of paper that has a list of schools and the
number of units earned that Linda B. wrote up. There are a
bunch of transcripts attached. You are welcome to come over
and look at the paperwork or I can make copies of everything I
have and send them to you via intra-district mail. Let me know.
I do not see the Master’s degree transcript.

23.

In her response on September 20, 2010, Ms. Tice stated, in pertinent part:

9

24.

In her response on September 20, 2010, respondent Bell stated, in pertinent

part:

If it wouldn’t be too much trouble, please send copies of what
you have via district mail. I will add the Master’s degree and
reading certificate coursework transcripts if that’s all that is
missing.

25.

The evidence established that Ms. Tice was aware of respondent Bell’s

possession of a master’s degree, yet neither sought to verify or confirm possession of the
master’s degree, nor include it when applying the board’s tie-breaking criteria. Credit for the
master’s degree would have given respondent Bell six points, and the number one seniority
ranking, which would have protected her from layoff. Therefore, her layoff notice must be
rescinded.

26.

There was no evidence that the District proposes to eliminate any services that

are mandated by state or federal laws or regulations.

27.

Any other assertions put forth by the parties at the hearing and not addressed

above are found to be without merit and are rejected.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

The district complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth

in sections 44949 and 44955.

The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services that

may be reduced or eliminated under section 44955. The board’s decision to reduce or
eliminate the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper
exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or elimination of services relates solely to the
welfare of the district’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

As set forth in Factual Findings 16 and 17, the district shall rescind the

preliminary layoff notice served upon respondent Guadalupe Clanton.

As set forth in Factual Finding 25, the district shall rescind the preliminary

layoff notice served upon respondent Dorothea Bell.

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 3 and 4, cause exists to reduce

certificated employees of the district due to the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of
services. Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 3 and 4, the district properly identified the
certificated employees to be laid off as directed by the board.

10

6.

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 3 and 4, no junior certificated

employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services that a more senior respondent is
certificated and competent to render.

7.

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 3 and 4, cause exists to give notice to

the remaining respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the
2011-2012 school year because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.

RECOMMENDATION

1.

2.

3.

Pursuant to Legal Conclusion 3, the district shall rescind the preliminary layoff

notice served upon Guadalupe Clanton.

Pursuant to Legal Conclusion 4, the district shall rescind the preliminary layoff

notice served upon Dorothea Bell.

Except as provided in Recommendations 1 and 2, notice may be given to the

remaining respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the
2011-2012 school year. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: May 3, 2011

____________________________
REBECCA M. WESTMORE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

11

