BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
NAPA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF NAPA, CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES,

OAH No. 2011030473

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Diane Schneider, Administrative Law Judge, State of

California, Office of Administrative Hearings, in Napa, California, on April 28, 2011.

Sally Jensen Dutcher, Attorney at Law, Kronick, Moskovitz, Tiedemann and Girard,

represented the Napa Valley Unified School District.

David Weintraub, Attorney at Law, Beeson, Tayer & Bodine, represented the

respondents identified in Attachment A, who were not present at the hearing.

There was no appearance by or on behalf of the respondents identified in Attachment

B.

The matter was submitted for decision on April 28, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Patrick J. Sweeney, Ed.D., made and filed the Accusations in his official

capacity as Superintendent of the Napa Valley Unified School District (district).

2.

On March 3, 2011, the district’s Governing Board (board) adopted Resolutions
A and B, which set forth the board’s determination that it will be necessary for the district to
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2011-2012 school year, for a
total of 88.45 full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated positions. (Resolutions A and B are set
forth in Attachment C.)

3.

All notices were timely and properly served. All notices and other

jurisdictional requirements contained in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 have
been provided or satisfied.

4.

At the hearing, the district rescinded layoff notices issued to a number of

employees. The employees whose layoff notices were rescinded on the day of the hearing
are identified in Attachment D. As result, the employees listed in Attachment D who
requested a hearing, are no longer respondents in this proceeding.

5.

6.

At the hearing, the district presented a “Final Layoff List” of employees, who

are identified in Attachment E.

The district took into account all positively assured attrition as of March 15 in

determining how many teachers should receive preliminary layoff notices. Following the
issuance of the preliminary layoff notices, the district learned that about 70 teachers were
retiring. The district did not rescind any preliminary layoff notices in response to this
information. Respondents contend that the district erred when it failed to take into account
the retirements that were announced after March 15. This contention is without merit. A
school district is not required to consider positively assured attrition that occurs after it issues
its preliminary layoff notices. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627,
635.)

7.

Respondents argue that the board’s action to reduce or discontinue particular

kinds of services was unreasonable. This contention is without merit. In determining how to
allocate its resources, a school district is given broad discretion to reduce or discontinue
particular kinds of services and lay off teachers. In the instant case, the board acted to reduce
or discontinue particular kinds of services due to budgetary concerns and uncertainty
surrounding future funding. This was a proper exercise of discretion, and was related to the
welfare of the district and its pupils.

8.

Respondents Michelle Davis and Amy Smith each assert, based upon similar

facts, that the district is eliminating more services than is rendered necessary pursuant to
board Resolution A.

Davis occupies a .60 FTE position teaching science.1 Pursuant to the terms of
Resolution A, the positions of High School Science Department Chairs were reduced by .40
FTE.2 Because these positions were held by teachers more senior to Davis, the High School

1 Davis also occupies a .40 FTE position teaching physical education that was subject
to the PKS reductions set forth in Attachment C. She does not raise any issues with respect
to the elimination of her .40 FTE position teaching physical education.

2 There are two department chairs who each occupy a .20 FTE.

2

Science Department Chairs bumped into .40 FTE of Davis’ position, thereby reducing her
remaining FTE to .20.

A similar set of facts applies to respondent Amy Smith, who occupies a .60 FTE

position teaching world language. Pursuant to the terms of Resolution A, the positions of
High School World Language Department Chairs were reduced by .40 FTE. Because these
positions were held by teachers more senior to Smith, the High School World Language
Department Chairs bumped into .40 FTE of Smith’s position, thereby reducing her remaining
FTE to .20. Smith and Davis are both at the bottom of the seniority list. For this reason,
neither of them has the right to bump into another .20 FTE position.

Davis and Smith do not contest the validity of senior teachers bumping into .40 FTE
of their .60 FTE positions. For this reason, they do not challenge the propriety of reducing
their positions by .40 FTE. Rather, they contend that the district should not be allowed to
eliminate .20 of their FTE positions because such action will result in eliminating more
services than is authorized by Resolution A. They are correct. A district may not eliminate
more services than is required by a PKS reduction. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) The
board’s resolution did not deem it necessary to eliminate .20 FTE positions in either high
school science or high school math. As such, the district exceeded its authority when it
eliminated Davis’ and Smith’s .60 FTE positions in science and world language,
respectively. Davis and Smith are entitled to each retain a .20 FTE position in these subject
areas.

The district does not presently have a .20 FTE position in either high school science

or high school world language. This understandably poses a challenge to the district;
however, this challenge does not authorize the district to eliminate services in excess of what
is required by the PKS reduction. To hold otherwise would contravene the provisions of
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b).

9.

No junior employee is being retained to render a service that any respondent is

certificated and competent to perform.

10.

All contentions made by respondents not specifically addressed above are

found to be without merit and are rejected.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The services identified in Attachment C are particular kinds of services that

may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The board’s decision
to reduce or discontinue the identified services complied with the guidelines set forth in
Education Code section 44955. The board’s decision was neither arbitrary nor capricious,
and was a proper exercise of its discretion.

2.

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusion 3, cause exists because of the

reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code section

3

44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012
school year. The cause relates to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the
meaning of section 44949.

3.

In accordance with Factual Finding 8, cause exists only to give respondent

Davis notice that her services will be reduced by .80 FTE. (Cause to reduce Davis’ services
exists for a total of .80 FTE based upon the reduction of her .40 FTE position in physical
education and the reduction of her .40 FTE position teaching high school science.) Cause
exists only to give respondent Smith notice that her services will be reduced by .40 FTE.

ORDER

1.

In accordance with Factual Finding 8 and Legal Conclusion 3, the district may

give notice to Davis that her services will be reduced by .80 FTE, and to Smith that her
services will be reduced by .40 FTE, for the 2011-2012 school year.

2.

Notice may be given to the remaining respondents identified in Attachment E

that their services will be reduced or eliminated for the 2011-2012 school year because of the
reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services.

DATED: _____________________

________________________________
DIANE SCHNEIDER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

List of Attachments
Attachment A: Respondent’s represented by David Weintraub
Attachment B: Respondent’s who are unrepresented
Attachment C: Board Resolutions A and B
Attachment D: List of Certificated Employees Whose Layoffs are Rescinded
Attachment E: Final Layoff List of Respondents

4

