BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
MORENO VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

The respondents listed in Appendix “A”

OAH No. 2011030912

PROPOSED DECISION

Roy W. Hewitt, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Moreno Valley, California on April
14 and 18, 2011.

Melanie A. Petersen, Esq. and Kelly Anne Owens, Esq. of Fagen, Friedman &

Fulfrost, LLP represented the Moreno Valley Unified School District (the District).

All of the respondents who were present at the hearing, except for Raul

Galvan, were represented by Carlos R. Perez Esq. of Reich, Adell & Cvitan.

Respondent Raul Galvan represented himself.

All respondents who failed to appear for the hearing were properly noticed of

the date, time and place of hearing.

The record remained open until April 29, 2011 so that the parties could submit

written closing arguments. The written closing arguments were received and the
matter was deemed submitted on April 29, 2011.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

2.

3.

1.

Henry H. Voros, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, made
and filed the Accusation, dated March 24, 2011, while acting in his official capacity
as Assistant Superintendent of the District.

The 155 respondents listed in Appendix “A” all received Accusation

packets. All 155 respondents are certificated District employees.

On February 22, 2011, the District’s Governing Board (Board) adopted

Resolution No.2010-11-38, determining that it would be necessary to reduce or
discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of the current school year. The
Board determined that the particular kinds of services that must be reduced for the
2011-2012 school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE) positions:

Particular Kind of Service (PKS)

Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)

Art
Avid
Business
Computer
Consumer Science
School Counselor
Dance
Drama
EL Specialist
ELD
Elementary
English/Language Arts
French
Independent Study
Industrial Technology
Math
Physical Education
Read 180
Science (Bio/Life)
Science (Earth)
Science (General)
Science (Health)
Sixth Grade
Social Science
Spanish
Work Experience

Total FTE’s

2

5.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
5.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
1.60
71.00
35.00
1.00
4.00
2.00
33.00
2.0
0.50
1.00
4.00
6.00
3.00
18.00
23.00
5.00
1.00

240.10

The services listed above are particular kinds of services, which may be

reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.

4.

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services listed in
Finding 3, above, is neither arbitrary nor capricious; rather, it is due to substantial
decreases in the operating budget, and is, therefore, a proper exercise of the Board’s
discretion. The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of
the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of
certificated employees as determined by the Board. No particular kinds of services
were lowered to levels less than those levels mandated by state or federal law.

5.

The District considered all positively assured attrition, including

resignations, retirements and requests for transfer, in determining the actual number
of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.

6.

The District timely notified all respondents listed in Appendix “A”,
pursuant to California Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, of the District’s
intent not to reemploy them for the upcoming school year. Accordingly, respondents
received written notice, on or before March 15, 2011, notifying them that the Board
had recommended they not be re-employed in the upcoming, 2011-2012 school year.1

7.

All of the respondents listed in Appendix “A” were properly served
with a copy of the Accusation, a blank Notice of Defense, a Notice of Hearing and
other related materials.

All of the respondents were properly noticed of the date, time and place

of the instant hearing.

8.

9.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

10.

Respondents have been selected for notice of layoff pursuant to their
seniority date, which is based on the first day of paid service of each respondent in a
probationary position. Respondents were ranked for layoff in the inverse order of
their seniority dates.

1 Numerous respondents contended that they were not timely noticed (by March 15th)
of their layoffs. A question concerning the date stamp on the notices arose during the
hearing due to hearsay information certain respondents received that led them to
believe that the date stamp of March 14, 2011, did not conform to the actual date the
registered notices were presented to the post office. Testimony during the hearing,
however, established that the notices were hand delivered for registered service, to the
post office, on March 14, 2011. Thus, pursuant to Education Code section 44949,
subdivision (d) the notice is deemed “sufficient . . . when it is deposited in the United
States registered mail . . . .”

3

11.

During the hearing the District rescinded the layoff notices concerning

the following respondents: Patrice Banks; Gary E. Doubleday; Kristina Strathman;
Katherine Klager; and Carole E. Young. Consequently, the Accusation shall be
dismissed as to those five respondents.

RESOLUTION OF ISSUES RAISED DURING THE HEARING

12.

At the outset of the hearing respondent Raul Galvan (Galvan) filed a
motion to compel discovery. Galvan had been working in an administrative position
with the District. Sometime prior to March 11, 2011, the “District Cabinet” made the
decision to reduce the number of administrators in the District. As part of that
process, Galvan was removed from his administrative position and placed back in the
classroom. Then, as a certificated employee teaching in the classroom, Galvan was
notified of the District’s intent to lay him off in the instant reduction in force (RIF)
proceedings. Galvan disputes the District’s decision to move him from an
administrative position back to the classroom. Galvan has requested information from
the District concerning administrative positions and the decision making process used
in determining to cut his administrative position. Galvan claims that the District has
not provided him any discovery concerning the decision making process associated
with his removal as an administrator. Galvan’s motion to compel discovery was
denied based on lack of jurisdiction and timeliness. The decision to cut an
administrative position does not fall under Education Code section 44955, which
controls the instant proceedings. Consequently, Galvan must pursue discovery
pursuant to writ proceedings in the superior court, not in this forum. Additionally,
Galvan filed his motion to compel discovery on the date the instant hearing
commenced; thus, the motion was not timely.

13.

On March 11, 2011, all of the District’s university interns were sent

notices of termination of services. In the termination letters the university interns
were advised of the following: “Due to your status as a university intern and
pursuant to Education Code [section] 44464, you are not entitled to a hearing to
contest your layoff.” (Exh. B, emphasis in original) Counsel for respondents argued
that the university interns should have been considered as probationary employees
and afforded hearing rights pursuant to Education Code section 44949. Not so.
Education Code section 44464 provides, in pertinent part: “. . .the rights provided by
Sections 44948 and 44949 shall not be afforded to interns.” Accordingly, the
university interns were properly excluded from these Education Code section 44949
proceedings.

14.

The following respondents testified concerning their beliefs that they

should be allowed to “bump” into positions held by less senior teachers because they
hold supplemental credentials in the subject area being taught by the less senior
teachers: Denise Chavez; Liliana Rosas; Rosanna Bravo; Maria Reynoso; Christine
Rightnar; Alma Escobedo Rueda; Shani Cigarroa; Monica Blanchette; Maria Perez;
Allison Soileau; Traci Goodrich; and Aimee Porter. The evidence, however,

4

established that the less senior teachers holding the positions in question are “highly
qualified,” while the respondents asserting their “bumping” arguments are not2. If
someone who is not “highly qualified” is placed into one of the contested teaching
positions then the County Office, which audits proper placements for credentialed
staff, would issue the District a notice of “misassignment” and require the District to
correct the situation. The supplemental credential plus 32 unit requirement is not a
requirement set by the District. It is a requirement established by the County and the
District has no discretion to deviate from the County mandated requirement.
Consequently, the District acted properly by not “bumping” these respondents into the
positions they believed they should have been allowed to “bump” into.

15.

Respondents Denise Chavez, Daisy Salazar, Joshua Parsons, George

Pulido, Matthew King, Brittany Pierce, Lyndsey Presnell, Frida Lamas, Sandra Haro,
and Carrissa Marin questioned why they received RIF notices while other teachers
with the same seniority dates did not. The evidence revealed that although these
respondents shared seniority dates with certain teachers who did not receive layoff
notices these respondents were selected for layoff based on the proper application of
Board established tie breaking criteria/points. In each instance the retained teachers
had more tie breaking points than the respondents listed herein.

16.

Respondents Andrea Fingerson, Brittany Pierce, Natasha Leacock-

Harris, and Tiffany Gilmore believe their seniority dates should be changed to reflect
the date they first attended the “New Teacher Orientation” when they were first hired
at Vista del Lago High School. (See Exh. 3) However, the orientation was not
mandatory and the respondents were paid a “stipend” as opposed, for example, to a
pro rata share of their regular contract salary. (See e.g., Exh. 4) Consequently the date
the respondents first attended the orientation is not their first date “in paid
probationary service” and does not establish/change their seniority dates. Similarly,
George Pulido and Carol A. Nelson attended pre-school year trainings that were not
mandatory and for which they were paid a stipend. Therefore, their seniority dates are
accurate also.

17.

Liliana Rosas (Rosas) believes she should be allowed to “bump” based

on a supplemental English credential she received on March 4, 2011. The evidence,
however, revealed that Rosas was mistaken about the date she received her credential.
She received notification of the granting of her credential from the Commission on
Teacher Credentialing on April 4, 2011, not March 4, 2011. Accordingly, the
credential she received after March 15, 2011 was properly disregarded by the District
(if the District was even aware of the credential which Rosas received after the March
15, 2011 cutoff date). It is well settled that only credentials and qualifications that

2 In order to be highly qualified to teach subjects in a departmentalized middle school
or high school a teacher must hold a supplemental authorization with at least 32 units
of college or university classes.

5

exist on or before March 15th, and of which the District is made aware, need be
considered. (Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689, 698.)

18.

Tiffany Gilmore (Gilmore) began working for the District at the

beginning of the 2007-2008 school year as a Probationary I English teacher. She
worked for the entire school year and then was noticed of her “non-reelection.” She
was given the opportunity to resign in lieu of being non-reelected. On February 12,
2008, Gilmore signed her notice of resignation indicating that her last date of service
would be June 13, 2008. The Board considered June 14, 2008 as her resignation date.
On July 21, 2008, Gilmore was “rehired” by the District to work at a “different site.”
Gilmore re-commenced working for the District on August 11, 2008 and has worked
full-time for the District ever since. Based on these facts, Gilmore contends that her
seniority date should be her first date of paid service as a Probationary I English
teacher, August 13, 2007, instead of her “rehire” date of August 11, 2008. The
District, however, takes the position that Gilmore’s “resignation” constituted a break
in service, and that therefore, her seniority date is August 11, 2008 instead of August
13, 2007. The District’s position lacks merit. Gilmore only resigned based on District
personnel’s representation that a resignation would look better on her employment
history than would a non-reelection. There was no actual break in Gilmore’s service.
She worked the entire 2007-2008 school year and returned at the beginning of the
2008-2009 school year. Gilmore has worked for the District continuously since 2007.
The fact that she was erroneously led to believe that she would not be re-elected after
the 2008 school year should not create a form over substance situation. The only fair
and equitable resolution is to change Gilmore’s seniority date to August 13, 2007.3
Another English teacher with the seniority date of August 13, 2007, and the same tie
breaking points (12), Traci Bulanek (#1436), did not receive a RIF notice.
Accordingly, it is impossible to tell whether Gilmore or Bulanek should have been
laid off and, since Bulanek did not receive a RIF notice she can not now be laid off.
Consequently, the Accusation is dismissed as to respondent Tiffany Gilmore.

19.

Leah Alldredge (Alldredge) is listed as a Probationary 2 employee and
believes she should be considered a permanent employee. Alldredge began working
for the District during the 2008-2009 school year; however, she did not work 75%
(138 days) of the school year. Alldredge acknowledged that she was “4.82 days short
of the required 138 days” of service. Alldredge testified that three of the 4.82 days
resulted from “cancer treatment” and she contends that she should be given credit for
the “cancer treatment” days because denial of credit for those days would run afoul of

3 The District argued that Gilmore failed to correct her seniority date in response to an
inquiry the District made to every employee concerning the accuracy of their
employment history, including their seniority date. The District’s argument is
unavailing given the fact that there is no evidence concerning when Gilmore came to
believe that her seniority date should be changed. It was the District that led Gilmore
to believe she had a break in service when, in actuality, she had not, and Gilmore
should not be prejudiced by the District’s mistake.

6

the American’s With Disabilities Act (ADA). Her contention lacks merit. Any teacher
with any illness who missed the requisite days of service due to their illness would be
in the same position as Alldredge. Alldredge is not being discriminated against based
on her bout with cancer, she is being treated the same as any teacher who missed the
requisite number of days due to illness. Furthermore, even assuming arguendo that
Alldredge is correct and should be credited with the three days she missed due to
cancer treatment, she still falls 1.82 days short of the 75% requirement. Consequently,
Alldredge is properly classified as a Probationary 2 teacher as opposed to
“permanent.”

20.

Four Social Science teachers, Michael Waymire (Waymire),

Christopher Leon (Leon), Thomas Proprofsky (Proprofsky), and Dejournette Shaw
(Shaw), share the same seniority dates and the same number of tie breaker points.
Leon, Proprofsky and Shaw received RIF notices; Waymire did not. During the
hearing the District candidly admitted that a lottery should have been conducted as to
these four teachers. There was no lottery and the District proposes to remedy the
situation by conducting a lottery prior to May 15th. Waymire was not noticed of the
potential for layoff so he can not now be laid off, however, the situation may be
remedied as follows: all four names will be included in a lottery; the first name drawn
is exempt from layoff; if the first name drawn is Waymire, then the remaining three
shall be notified of layoff; if the first name drawn is someone other that Waymire then
that teacher and Waymire shall be exempt from layoff; the name drawing will
continue until Waymire’s name is drawn and any names drawn before Waymire’s
shall be dismissed from the Accusation and their notices rescinded. If Waymire’s
name is the last name drawn then none of the four may be subjected to layoff.

21.

Craig Givens (Givens) believes he should be allowed to bump into the
teaching position held by Donna Soloman (Soloman). Givens holds a Clear Multiple
Subject credential and teaches 6th grade at Badger Springs Elementary School
(Math/Science core). Soloman holds a Clear Multiple Subject credential with
Supplemental English and Math authorization and teaches 6th grade at Vista Heights
Middle School. Vista Heights Middle School is a “Departmentalized Setting” and the
testimony established that one needs a supplemental authorization to teach in a
Departmentalized Setting. Soloman has the necessary authorization, while Givens
does not. Therefore, Givens is not qualified to bump Soloman.

22.

Jennifer Gysbers (Gysbers) teaches Drama & TV Production at Vista

del Lago High School. She holds a Clear Single Subject Industrial Technician
credential. Gysbers believes she should be able to bump two teachers who are
teaching engineering pursuant to “Committee on Assignment” (COA) authorizations.
The testimony established that the COA engineering assignments will not exist next
year and the two teachers now holding the positions will transfer back to their “main
credential” areas (physical science and math) to teach during the 2011-2012 school
year. Gysbers lacks the credentials to teach physical science and math so, since the

7

positions she is credentialed to teach are being eliminated, she has no ability to bump
any less senior teachers.

23.

Linda Marie Nadziejko testified about her concern that not enough fifth

grade teachers are being retained. Her belief is based on the fact that the “numbers
don’t add up.” While everyone involved in these proceedings is concerned about the
impact of the proposed layoffs, the District has broad discretion in determining the
level of service cuts. The District’s determination cannot be modified unless the
District reduces a service below the level required by law or the determination was
fraudulent or so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of
discretion as a matter of law. The evidence presented established that the District has
a good faith belief that it can remain in compliance with minimum education
requirements and there is no evidence to support a finding that, as a matter of law, the
District’s proposed cuts are fraudulent, palpably unreasonable or arbitrary.
Accordingly, the proposed cuts constitute a reasonable exercise of the Board’s
discretion.

24. Marie Alice White (White) testified about her rehire concerns. The

District objected to White’s testimony on the basis of relevance. That objection was
sustained because rehire rights are not properly considered in this RIF action.

25.

No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to

perform any services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949

and 44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections
were satisfied.

2.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board
of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

3.

Pursuant to section 44995, a senior teacher whose position is

discontinued has the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is
certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior employee may displace or
“bump” a junior employee who is filling that position. (Lacy v. Richmond Unified
School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469

8

The District has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to
determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in
an economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle
him/her to be assigned to another position. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist.,
supra. at 136-137.)

4.

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not

tied in with any statistical computation. It is within the governing authority’s
discretion to determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be
reduced or discontinued as long as the District does not reduce a service below the
level required by law. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627,
635-636.) A school district has wide discretion in setting its budget and a layoff
decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or so palpably unreasonable and
arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of law. (California Sch.
Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 318, 322.)

The services listed in Factual Finding 3 are each determined to be a

particular kind of service within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.

Based on the Factual Findings, considered in their entirety, cause exists

to reduce the number of certified employees of the District for budgetary reasons.

Cause to reduce or discontinue services relates solely to the welfare of

the District and its pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

8.

Cause exits to give all respondents listed in Appendix “A,” except for
Patrice Banks, Gary E. Doubleday, Tiffany Gilmore, Kristina Strathman, Katherine
Klager and Carole E. Young and any of the respondent’s who must have the notices
rescinded, if any, as a result of the Finding 5 lottery, that their services are not needed
for the ensuing, 2011-2012, school year.

5.

6.

7.

ADVISORY DETERMINATION

The following advisory determination is made:

Prior to May 15, 2011, notice shall be given to the respondents listed in
Appendix “A,” except for Patrice Banks, Gary E. Doubleday, Tiffany Gilmore,
Kristina Strathman, Katherine Klager and Carole E. Young and any of the
respondent’s who must have the Accusation dismissed/notices rescinded, as a result
of the Finding 5 lottery, that their services will not be required for the ensuing school
year due to the budget deficit and the resulting need to reduce and/or discontinue
certain services.

9

The Accusation is dismissed and the layoff notices are rescinded as to
respondents Patrice Banks, Gary E. Doubleday, Tiffany Gilmore, Kristina Strathman,
Katherine Klager and Carole E. Young and any of the respondent’s who must have
the Accusation dismissed as a result of the Finding 5 lottery.

DATED: May 2, 2011.

_____________________________
ROY W. HEWITT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

APPENDIX “A”

Rosanna M. Ackerson-Bravo

Marcella Agrusa

Leah Alldredge

Brandon Annette

Martha Aviles

Jennifer Baker

Deborah Bocanegra

Candace Bolles

Claudine Bond

Patrice Banks

Jamie Bernard

Kathren Brooks

Janice Carter

Denise Chavez

Aurelio Cortez

Erika Esqueda

Jamie Fiedler

Juan D. Flores

Stephanie Fortini

Sandra E. Garcia

Traci Goodrich

Jennifer Hanrahan

Linda E. Harris

Norma Hines

Joanna Barnett

Katelyn Beaman

Julie Blackmon

Monica M. Blanchette

Bradley Byers

Silvano Cantu

Nellie Castillovenitia

Rebecca Chapman

Shari A. Cigarroa

Deborah Collins

Brett Crider

Gabriel Diaz

Matthew Fairbanks

James Fenton

Andrea Fingerson

Nicole Flicking

Judy Flores

Raul Galvan

Elizabeth Florido

Adrian Garcia

Erica Garcia Ochoa

Tiffany Gilmore

Christine Graves

Jennifer Gysbers

Sandra Haro

Shonia Hayes

Nicole Harrell

Sujana Herrera

Lois Hochenauer-Fox

Christopher F. Hooper

Gary E. Doubleday

Daniel P. Dufour

LeAnn Duong

Amanda Elkhoury

Alma Escobedo Rueda

Jacquelyn Espinoza

Arthur Giovannini

Craig Givens

Horacio Gomez

Timothy Howard

Michael Hunter

Mercedes Jackson

Alejandra Jauregui

Amy Johnson

Aurora Johnson

Typasha Jones

Matthew King

Theodore Kellam

Stephen Kim

Katherine Klager

Martha Krauss

11

Carlos Labrada

Frida Lamas

Amber Largey

Sharmayne Lawson

Natasha Leacock-Harris

Lori J. Lee

Christopher Leon

Dawnn Lindsey

Stephanie Luddington

Elsa Magana

Jonathan Martin

Erin Mangold

Carissa Marin

Liseth Martinez

Sharon Mendonsa

Almario Mendoza, Jr.

Michelle Montemayor

Sara Montti

Zarina Moreno

Yolanda Mouton

Linda Marie Nadziejko

Nadakia Neal

Khola Nevels

Julie Nikniai

Theresa Orozco

Maria S. Perez

Brittany Pierce

Lyndsey Presnell

Valerie Putnam

Christine Rightnar

Charlene Saenz

Jeanine Schutze

Salma Shehto

Allison Soileau

Joann Valencia

Gabriel Vega

Carol A. Nelson

Marlies Nelson

Hieu M. Nguyen

Hung Nguyen

Pedro Nuno

Erik Parry

Lara Petersen

Kyle Polston

Sharon Olson

Joshua Parsons

Melinda Petersen

Aimee Porter

Thomas Proprofsky

George Pulido

Maria Reynoso

Sherry Rice

Gabriela Romo

Daisy Salazar

Liliana Rosas

Juan Sanchez

Curt Sell

April Simon

Khunara Sok

Dejournette Shaw

Jennifer Smith

Janeia Sotomayor

Michelle Vandenburgh

Howard Vargo

Russell Venegas

Sandra Vilas

Ruben Sarabia, Jr.

Deborah Saravia

Isaac Saucedo

Kristina Strathman

Cherie L.Suchan

Megan Tuntland

Bernice Vivanco

Dat Vo

Denise West

Maria Alice White

Katherine Willers

Carole E. Young

12

Marissa Zarate

Chloe Zhwa

13

