BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
SACRAMENTO CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SACRAMENTO
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL
EMPLOYED BY THE SACRAMENTO
CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,

OAH No. 2011010622

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Catherine B. Frink, Office of Administrative Hearings,

State of California heard this matter in Sacramento, California on April 26-29, 2011.

Sarah Levitan Kaatz, Attorney at Law, and Dulcinea Grantham, Attorney at Law,

represented the Sacramento City Unified School District (District).

Margaret Geddes, Attorney at Law, Beeson, Tayer, & Bodine, APC, and A. Eugene

Huguenin, Jr., Attorney at Law, Huguenin Law Office, represented 266 respondents
identified in Exhibit A attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the parties made oral closing

argument. The record was held open to allow the parties to submit further argument
concerning the applicability of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(2), to these
proceedings.1 Respondents’ Post-Hearing Brief was filed electronically on April 30, 2011,
and was marked as Exhibit FF. The District’s Post-Hearing Brief was received on May 2,
2011, and was marked as Exhibit 37. The record was closed and the matter submitted on
May 2, 2011.

1 All statutory references are to the California Education Code, unless otherwise

specified.

1

Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Robert R. Garcia is the Chief Human Resource Officer for the District.

Jonathan P. Raymond is the Superintendent of the District. Mr. Garcia is the
Superintendent’s designee for the certificated layoff process. The actions of Mr. Raymond
and Mr. Garcia, and the actions of the District’s Board of Education (Board), were taken in
their official capacities.

2.

On March 3, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2647, which reduced

and/or discontinued particular kinds of certificated services no later than the beginning of the
2011-2012 school year in the amount of 355.6 full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated
employees.

3.

The Board further determined that it shall be necessary by reason of the

reduction and/or discontinuance of services to decrease the number of permanent and/or
probationary certificated employees at the close of the 2010-2011 school year by a
corresponding number of FTE positions, and directed the Superintendent or his designee to
proceed accordingly by notifying the appropriate employees to implement the Board’s
determination.

4.

On or before March 15, 2011, the District served 496 affected certificated

employees, including respondents, with written notice, pursuant to sections 44949 and
44955, that their services would not be required for the next school year (Notice). Each
Notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation. The Notice attached and incorporated
by reference Resolution No. 2647, which listed the services to be reduced or discontinued,
resulting in a proposed reduction in the certificated staff by 355.6 FTE positions.

5.

Requests for Hearing were timely filed by 309 certificated employees to

determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the next school year. Any
certificated employee who failed to file a request for hearing has waived his or her right to a
hearing, and may be laid off by the District.

6.

On March 3, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No 2011-C, in which the

Board resolved pursuant to section 44954 to release or nonreelect 127 certificated employees
which it identified as temporary. Prior to March 15, 2011, those 127 certificated employees
received a Notice of Release from the District. 2 Of those employees designated as
temporary, 105 also received a Notice of Recommendation that Services Will Be
Terminated, which was served by certified mail on March 14, 2011 (double notice). The
double notice notified the recipients that they had been released as temporary employees by
the District; however, in the event the recipient was determined to have layoff rights, he or

2 Except as otherwise noted, certificated employees released by the District pursuant

to section 44954 are not parties to this layoff proceeding.

2

she was being given notice of layoff pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, and could request
a hearing to determine if there was cause for not reemploying him or her for the 2011-12
school year. Of the 105 certificated employees who received the double notice, 13 filed
timely requests for hearing; of those 13, seven filed timely notices of defense and were
respondents in this proceeding.3

7.

Mr. Garcia made and filed Accusations against each of the certificated

employees who requested a hearing. The Accusations with required accompanying
documents and blank Notices of Defense (Accusation packet) were timely served on the
respondents.

8.

9.

The parties stipulated that the respondents identified in Exhibit A filed timely

individual or group Notices of Defense.

Any certificated employee who received an Accusation packet, other than the

respondents listed in Exhibit A, either did not file a Notice of Defense or did not appear at
hearing, and was determined to be in default pursuant to Government Code section 11520.
These individuals may be laid off by the District.

10.

Except as noted in Finding 6, each respondent is presently a certificated

permanent or probationary employee of the District.

11.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and

44955.

12. With respect to the temporary certificated employees who received double

notices including the seven respondents identified in Exhibit A, no challenge to their
temporary status was raised at hearing. The District properly determined them to be
temporary employees, who were not entitled to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in
sections 44949 and 44955. The District indicated its intention to rescind the Notices to these
certificated employees and release them pursuant to section 44954.

Services to be Reduced or Eliminated

13.

The District is a large urban school district that provides services to

approximately 41,000 students at 85 school sites in and surrounding the City of Sacramento.
The District employs approximately 2,200 certificated employees.

14.

The District has experienced declining enrollment, increasing costs, as well as

projected funding cuts from the State, which have continued over the past several years.
Because of uncertainties surrounding the State budget for the 2011-12 fiscal year, the District
has planned for the “worst-case scenario,” a projected budget deficit of between $24 million

3 The “dual noticed” respondents are designated with an asterisk on Exhibit A.

3

and $28 million for the 2011-12 school year. More than 80 percent of the District’s budget is
comprised of personnel costs (salaries and benefits for certificated and classified staff). As a
consequence of the anticipated budget shortfall, the District recognized that programs and
services would need to be reduced for the 2011-12 school year. The District held public
forums in early 2011 to obtain community input into proposed program cuts.

15.

Through a process referred to as “one-stop staffing,” Mr. Garcia directed his

staff to provide each school site and/or department with its projected budget and staffing
allocation, from which staffing cuts were determined. Human Resource Services
Department analysts met with site administrators and department heads about staffing
decisions for 2011-12, and a “surplus list” of staffing reductions was created. Additional
reductions were recommended, based on the reduction or elimination of programs and
services to help close the budget gap.

16. Mr. Garcia presented his findings and alternative recommendations to the

Board at a meeting on March 3, 2011, along with proposed resolutions specifying criteria to
be used to deviate from terminating certificated employees in order of seniority (skipping
criteria) and to determine the order of termination of certificated employees with equal
seniority (tiebreaker criteria). As a result of the District’s current financial situation, the
Board determined that it must reduce particular kinds of services throughout the
organization. The Board approved the recommendations and, following the adoption of the
Resolution set forth below, directed the Superintendent to implement the recommendations.
The Board also charged the Superintendent or his designee to identify an equivalent number
of certificated personnel and give those certificated employees notice in writing of the
recommendation that their services would not be required for the ensuing school year. The
recommendation that certificated personnel be identified for layoff from employment with
the District was not related to the work performance of the affected teachers.

17.

On March 3, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2647, Resolution of
Intention to Terminate Certificated Employees due to a Reduction in Particular Kinds of
Services (PKS Resolution). The PKS Resolution authorized the Superintendent to take
action to reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2011-12
school year, as were itemized in “Exhibit A” attached to the PKS Resolution:

Particular Kind of Service (PKS)

Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)

Assistant Principals
Elementary Teachers (K-6)
Counselors
Computers
Middle School Core
Art
English
Japanese
Spanish

4

4.0
FTE
118.0 FTE
FTE
14.6
FTE
9.0
FTE
3.0
FTE
4.0
FTE
29.0
FTE
2.0
FTE
5.0

Math, High School
Math, Middle School
Home Economics
Physical Education (PE)
Elementary Resource Teacher
Science: Biology
Science: Physical Science
Science: Earth Science
Science: Physics
Science: Chemistry
Music
Social Science
Social Worker
Librarian

All Adult Education Teachers

Total FTE Reduction

19.0
12.0
2.0
15.0
6.0
20.0
4.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
4.0
17.0
10.0
2.0

FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE

50.0

FTE

355.6 FTE

Sub-Total:

305.6 FTE

18.

The services set forth in the PKS Resolution are “particular kinds of services”

that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955. There was no
evidence that the Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was
arbitrary or capricious. The reduction or elimination of the services set forth in the PKS
Resolution constituted a proper exercise of the Board’s discretion, within the meaning of
section 44955.

19.

In arriving at the number of certificated employees to be noticed for layoff, the

District considered all “positively assured attrition” which had occurred as of the date the
Notices were sent to certificated employees, i.e. resignations, retirements, and other
permanent vacancies and leaves of absence.

20.

Prior to or at the hearing, the District rescinded the preliminary notice of layoff

to respondent Gricelda Jaime, who shall be retained for the 2011-12 school year.

21.

The PKS Resolution stated in part that, “for the purposes of Education Code

section 44955, subdivision (b), ‘competent’ shall be defined as described in Exhibit ‘B.’”
“Exhibit B” listed the following criteria for an individual to be deemed competent under
section 44955, subdivision (b) (Competency Criteria):

(1) Highly Qualified status, as required by the No Child Left
Behind Act [NCLB];

5

22.

On March 3, 2011, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2649, Resolution to
Determine Criteria for Deviation from Terminating a Certificated Employee in Order of
Seniority (Skipping Resolution). “Exhibit A” to the Skipping Resolution (Skip Criteria)
stated:

(2) Possession of a BCLAD, CLAD or other equivalent English
Language Learner Authorization to the extent required by the
position;

(3) At least one (1) year of experience in the past five (5) years
working under the credential or authorization;

(4) In order to work in a Priority School, training and/or
experience teaching in a Priority School setting;

(5) In order to work in a Waldorf School, formal
training/coursework in the Waldorf method of teaching;

(6) In order to work in the Accelerated Academy, training in
Accelerated Academy programs and experience relevant to
working with the Accelerated Academy student population;

(7) In order to work in a Dual Immersion program, one (1) year
of experience in the past five (5) years teaching in a Dual
Immersion program

For the 2011-12 school year, to meet the requirements of
Education Code section 44955, the Board of Education
determines the needs of the District and the students by
establishing the following skipping criteria:

A.

B.

C.

Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in classes
requiring Bilingual Cross-Cultural Language and
Development (“BCLAD”) certification, to the extent
necessary to staff BCLAD required positions.

Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in a Special
Education assignment.

Individuals fully-credentialed to teach the full breadth of
high school math assignments up to calculus, to the
extent required to staff high school math positions.

6

D.

E.

F.

G.

H.

Individuals currently serving in a Priority School
assignment, who will also be teaching in a Priority
School assignment for 2011-2012.

Individuals who have one (1) or more years of
experience teaching in a Dual-Language Immersion
Program.

Individuals who have two (2) or more years of
experience teaching and/or specialized training in a home
or hospital setting.

Individuals who have formal training/coursework in the
Waldorf method of teaching.

Individuals with specialized training and experience in
the Accelerated Academy Program.

For purposes of the above-referenced criteria, “fully-
credentialed” is defined to mean an employee who possesses a
preliminary, clear or internship credential.

23.

At the March 3, 2011 meeting, the Board also adopted Resolution No. 2648,

Resolution of Determination for Tie-Breaking Criteria (Tiebreaker Resolution). The
Tiebreaker Resolution set forth criteria for breaking ties when two or more certificated
employees with the same first day of paid service were facing potential layoff. The Board
listed categories for consideration, and assigned weights to each category, as follows:
Category I – Professional Preparation, including each single subject, multiple subject or
service credential (3 points per credential); each supplemental or subject matter authorization
(1 point per authorization); each limited assignment permit (1/2 point per permit); doctorate
degree (1 point per degree held), masters degree (1/2 point per degree held); and National
Board certification (1 point for certification); and Category II – Experience, defined as “Each
year of previous in-District experience as a certificated employee which reflects years of
service under contract with the District other than that determined by the established hire
date (for example, a certificated employee who may have resigned and been rehired at a later
date). For purpose of this criterion, one year of service constitutes 75% or more of the days
of a school year.” (1 point for each year of service). Each category of criteria was to be
applied independently, with criteria in Category I constituting a first level tiebreaker, and so
on. In case of ties continuing through the listed criteria, Category III – Lottery, was to be
used to break such ties.

7

Verification of Seniority Date, Employment Status, and Other Information on the District’s
Seniority List

24.

Tenure is the relationship between a teacher and the District which gives the

teacher greater job security.

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school district. Among the

teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority in the District gives a
greater legal entitlement to a position. (See Ferner v. Harris (1975) 45 Cal.App.3d 363.)

Seniority date is defined as the date upon which an employee first rendered paid

service in a probationary position. (§ 44845.)

25.

Employees were given the opportunity to correct and verify their seniority

dates. In December 2010, the Human Resource Services Department sent Verification
Statements, with attached Employee Information Report 298e, to all site and department
administrators of the District for distribution to each certificated employee. The deadline for
submission of the completed verifications statements was January 14, 2011.

26.

The Employee Information Report for each employee was generated from the

District’s ESCAPE data system. It listed the employee information, including name;
seniority date; permanency (first year probationary, second year probationary, or permanent);
school assignment; position (e.g. elementary teacher, high school, nurse); and credentials
(including issue date, expiration date, and credential title). The Verification Statement
stated, in part:

Please verify the information shown on Employee Information
Report 298e regarding your seniority date, credential, address,
and phone number, and make any corrections as needed. Attach
a copy of your credential(s) to Employee Information Report
298e and this form to correct or update our records.

Please return the Employee Information Report 298e and
this form to your site, School Office Manager, or
department administrator so that the entire school or
department staff can be returned in a single envelope to
Human Resource Services, Box 770, no later than January
14, 2011.

I certify the information shown on Employee Information
Report 298e is true and correct.

The Verification Statement contained a line for the employee to sign and date,

certifying the truth of the information provided.

8

27.

If employees made corrections to the Employee Information Report, Personnel

Analyst Terri Lauzon checked the information and, if correct, entered the corrected
information into the ESCAPE data system; these corrections were reflected in the master
seniority list.

28.

Neither the Verification Statement nor the Employee Information Report

contained information about NCLB “highly qualified” certification status (HQ), and did not
request updated information about NCLB compliance.

29.

The District relied on the verifications provided by certificated employees in

updating the District’s seniority list, which it used to determine the order of layoff.

Updates/Corrections to Information on District’s Seniority List

30.

At hearing, the District changed the employment classification of respondent

Bryan Fisher (9/7/07) to “permanent.” The District will update its records to reflect this
information.

31.

Respondent Thurrell Sanders (2/25/04) holds a multiple subjects (M/S)

credential with supplemental authorizations in Introductory Social Science and History. He
is HQ in history. The District shall update its records accordingly.

32.

Respondent Robert Walters (9/5/06) holds an M/S credential with a subject

matter authorization in Mathematics. He is HQ in history core, M/S, and mathematics. The
District shall update its records accordingly.

33.

Respondent Cassandra Woodruff (9/2/08) holds an S/S credential with a

subject matter authorization in biology by examination. She is HQ in biology. The District
shall update its records accordingly.

Seniority Issues

34.

Respondent Kenneth McPeters (9/7/04) was employed from October 1, 2001,

through August 14, 2004, in a management position with the District, as a Specialist III –
Healthy Start (Village Project). After his employment in that position ceased, he became an
elementary school counselor, and he started work on August 25, 2004, which is the day all of
the school counselors reported to work. However, the District gave him a seniority date of
September 7, 2004, the first day of school for teaching staff, because of the manner in which
he was paid. His pay stub for the period ending August 31, 2004, indicated his position as
“Village Prjct/Fmly S.” His daily pay rate was $356.78, and his gross earnings for the month
were $6,827.47. Thus, he was paid for slightly more than 19 days of service in August. His
pay stub for the period ending September 30, 2004, indicated his position as “Counselor,
Elementar[y];” his daily pay rate was $202.08, and his gross earnings were $2,303.73. Thus
this pay stub reflects that he was paid for slightly more than 11 days. From the evidence
introduced at hearing, it appears that respondent McPeters was paid for service to the District

9

between August 14 and September 7, 2004, albeit at the higher pay rate of $356.78.
Therefore, he provided paid service in a probationary capacity (as a school counselor)
starting on August 25, 2004, and his seniority date shall be adjusted accordingly.

35.

Respondent Michael Johnston (9/7/06) was initially hired by the District as a

long-term substitute at America’s Choice High School (America’s Choice). During the
2006-07 school year, America’s Choice operated on an alternate school year schedule which
tracked the local college schedule. Thus respondent Johnston began work on August 14,
2006, which was the first day of school under the alternate schedule. In late October 2006,
he was offered a probationary position, and the District gave him a seniority date of
September 7, 2006, which was the first day of school under the District’s regular school
schedule. The District did not explain why the date of September 7, 2006, was selected
rather than August 14, 2006, the date respondent Johnston actually began work for the
District. Therefore, his seniority date should be adjusted to August 14, 2006, to reflect his
first date of paid service.

Method of Effectuating the Reduction in Services and Identifying Affected Employees

36.

The Board’s Resolutions delegated to the Superintendent and his designees the
authority to implement the reduction and elimination of the listed particular kinds of services,
to identify and determine which District employees would be affected by the reductions and
to draft and serve the preliminary notices upon those identified employees. Immediately
following the passage of the Resolutions, Mr. Garcia and the Human Resource Services
Department analysts worked together to identify the services to be reduced as set forth in the
PKS Resolution. After identifying the positions to be eliminated pursuant to the PKS
Resolution, the analysts used the seniority list to identify the least senior employees
providing those services; they applied the skipping criteria and the competency criteria to
determine which employees of the District would be affected by the reduction or elimination
of the particular kinds of services set forth in the PKS Resolution. The analysts created a
“Bumping Chart” which was used to identify the certificated employees to receive
preliminary notices of layoff based on seniority. The analysts did not apply the tiebreaker
criteria to determine the relative seniority of employees with the same first date of paid
service prior to the District sending out the preliminary notices. Therefore, the District sent
out more layoff notices than were necessary in some layoff categories, and will be required
to rescind notices to employees who are deemed more senior based on the application of the
tiebreaker criteria.

Bumping and Skipping

37.

Economic layoffs are generally to be carried out on the basis of seniority. A
teacher with more seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment than a junior
teacher. A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to a position held by a
junior teacher if the senior teacher is properly credentialed and is competent to fill the
position. That displacement of a junior teacher is known as “bumping.” In general, the
District has an affirmative obligation to reassign senior teachers who are losing their

10

positions into positions held by junior teachers if the senior teacher has both the credentials
and competence to occupy such positions. The seniority rule is not absolute, and a junior
teacher with a needed credential or skills may be retained even if a more senior teacher is
terminated. Such “skipping” is recognized by statute (§ 44955, subd. (d)(1)) and appellate
law (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of the Santa Clara
Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831). In order to depart from a seniority-
based economic layoff, section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), requires the District to
“demonstrate a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study…
and that the certificated employee [to be skipped] has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study…which others with more seniority do not
possess.” In addition, section 44955, subdivision (d)(2), provides that “a school district may
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority . . . For purposes of
maintaining or achieving compliance with constitutional requirements related to equal
protection of the laws.”

38.

In Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127

(Bledsoe), the court was called upon to determine whether a school district could lay off a
more senior certificated employee when it skipped two more junior employees who were
teaching in a community day school. The court in Bledsoe determined that, even though the
more senior employee was credentialed and competent to teach in the positions that the more
junior employees occupied, the school district demonstrated that it had a specific need for the
two junior teachers to teach in the community day school, and the two junior teachers had
special training and experience necessary to teach in a community day school that the more
senior teacher did not possess. The Bledsoe court therefore found that, consistent with
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the school district could skip the two junior employees and
lay off the more senior employee.

39.

In its opinion, the Bledsoe court made clear that the determination of whether a

school district may lay off senior employees and retain more junior employees involves a
two-step analysis: (1) pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (b), the school district must first
determine whether the senior employees are credentialed and competent to render the
services that the junior employees have been retained to render; and (2) if the school district
determines that the senior employees are credentialed and competent to render these services,
the school district must then decide whether, pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1):
(i) it has a specific need for the junior employees to teach a specific course or course of
study, and (ii) the junior employees have special training and experience necessary to teach
that course or course of study that the more senior employees do not possess.

Priority Schools Skip

40.

In Paragraph D of the Skip Criteria, the Board determined that it was

necessary to skip “individuals currently serving in a Priority School assignment, who will
also be teaching in a Priority School assignment for 2011-2012.”

11

41.

In the spring of 2010, the Superintendent announced the Priority Schools
Initiative for the 2010-11 school year. The Superintendent designated the following six
schools as Priority Schools: Oak Ridge Elementary; Father Keith B. Kenney Elementary;
Jedediah Smith Elementary; Fern Bacon Basic Middle; Will C. Wood Middle; and Hiram
Johnson High School (HJHS).4 The stated purpose of establishing these Priority Schools was
to provide additional assistance and resources to focus on improving underperforming
schools. The six designated schools are among the 20 percent lowest performing schools in
California, with Oak Ridge Elementary in the lowest five percent in the state. They are
persistently underperforming, in that four of the six schools have been in Performance
Improvement status (PI) for seven years, and all have been in PI for five or more years, They
have had low yearly improvement rates in the Academic Performance Index and have failed
to meet federal and state standards in English-Language Arts (ELA) and mathematics. They
have low percentage rates of Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA and mathematics.
HJHS has the lowest rate of passage of the CAHSEE (high school exit examination) and the
lowest graduation rate of the traditional high schools in the District.

42.

The student population served in the six schools are primarily economically

disadvantaged, minority students, with more than 90 percent of the students in five of the six
schools living in or near poverty. The schools have large Title 1 (free or reduced-price
meals) participation. In addition, the schools have significant enrollment of English-
language learner (EL) students.

43.

The District intended for the six Priority Schools to be “incubators of

innovation,” through the application of intensive support strategies for teachers and students.
The District allowed teachers who did not want to undertake the training and additional time
commitment involved in working at a Priority School to transfer out of the school. The
District also added administrative staff and instructional coaches at the Priority School sites
to provide support to teachers and create a culture of success at the school sites.

44.

The District provided the following training to the entire teaching staffs at the

three elementary schools and two middle schools:

A.

DataWise Data Inquiry Training. This was a multi-day training

undertaken prior to the start of the 2010-11 school year. The training was provided
by an outside consulting firm, Transformation by Design, which did follow-up
training at each of the school sites and provided coaching and mentoring to teachers
to implement the DataWise analysis process in their classrooms. The DataWise
process involves collecting data from multiple sources to assess student
work/achievement, and requires extensive staff collaboration to identify learner-
centered problems, and to develop strategies to address these issues. Then teachers
were expected to implement strategies, perform additional assessments, and
determine whether strategies and interventions have been successful. The DataWise

4 A seventh school, Rosa Parks Middle School, has been identified as a Priority

School for the 2011-12 school year.

12

process is a “cycle of continuous improvement,” tied to the use of student
performance data analyzed in a specific way. Staff at the five schools are using
Common Planning Time (CPT) in addition to other meeting time, for additional
training and collaboration to implement the DataWise process.

B.

WriteTools training. WriteTools is training program in academic

writing. All teachers in the five schools received WriteTools training in August 2010,
before the start of the school year. They have received additional training throughout
the 2010-11 school year, with coaching in the classroom and modeling of the
WriteTools techniques, in order to integrate the training into daily classroom
teaching. This intensive training was deemed necessary to address a lack of
achievement in student literacy, because the ability to read and write at the lower
grade levels was identified as a key component of success in all subjects at the higher
grade levels.

45.

In addition to the training identified in Finding 44, the District provided

training in Culturally Responsive Teaching Strategies (CRTS) to all teachers at the three
elementary schools. This training was also provided prior to the start of the 2010-11 school
year, and addressed the various learning styles of students, and provided strategies and
techniques to design lessons to appeal to these styles of learning (visual, auditory, and
kinesthetic). The purpose of this training was to enhance the ability of teachers to deliver
content to students in a way that is accessible through different learning modalities.

46.

Due to the size of the staff at HJHS (120 teachers), the District did not provide

DataWise training to the entire staff. Rather, the District provided the multi-day DataWise
training to a team of HJHS teachers, who were then supposed to train their colleagues during
CPT. Consultants from Transformation by Design met with teachers in the English and
mathematics departments to assist with implementation of the DataWise process. The staff
at HJHS was not provided any other specialized training.

47.

The District has provided DataWise training to teams of teachers at other

District schools during the 2010-11 school year, beginning in or about October 2010, and
continuing through January 2011. Several respondents testified that they participated in this
training and provided training to the staffs at their schools during CPT. Other respondents
testified that they have received training in the DataWise process from teachers at their
schools who attended District training. The DataWise process is in various stages of
implementation at many, if not most, of the schools in the District. However, the three
elementary and two middle Priority Schools are much further along in the process, and those
teachers have received much more coaching and support to integrate the DataWise process in
their day-to-day teaching.

48. Many of the respondents testified that they have had WriteTools training in
previous years through professional development courses offered by the District, and they
have received training through various means in cultural sensitivity issues and techniques to
teach a diverse student population. However, none of this training has been to the level of

13

focused intensity, school-wide, or with the ongoing follow-up and support, which has been
given to the Priority Schools.

“Particular Course of Study” at Priority Schools

49.

Section 51002 states:

The Legislature hereby recognizes that, because of the common
needs and interests of the citizens of this state and the nation,
there is a need to establish a common state curriculum for the
public schools, but that, because of economic, geographic,
physical, political and social diversity, there is a need for the
development of educational programs at the local level, with the
guidance of competent and experienced educators and citizens.
Therefore, it is the intent of the Legislature to set broad
minimum standards and guidelines for educational programs,
and to encourage local districts to develop programs that will
best fit the needs and interests of the pupils, pursuant to stated
philosophy, goals, and objectives.

50.

Section 51014 defines “course of study” as “the planned content of a series of
classes, courses, subjects, studies, or related activities.” Section 51204 states: “Any course
of study adopted pursuant to this division shall be designed to fit the needs of the pupils for
which the course of study is prescribed.”

51.

As set forth in Finding 44 above, the implementation of the DataWise training
and WriteTools training at the three elementary and two middle Priority Schools constituted
a “particular course of study” within the meaning of section of section 44955, subdivision
(d)(1), in that it fundamentally affected the delivery of instruction to students at those schools
in an unique way. The District has further demonstrated that it has a specific need for
personnel to teach this particular course of study, and that special training and experience are
required, in the form of intensive instruction in the DataWise and WriteTools training
methodologies, the follow-up support, and the experience of collaboration to implement the
training in day-to-day classroom teaching and assessment. While other elementary and
middle school teachers, including respondents, have had portions of this training, they have
not had the intensive level of training and experience with implementation necessary to teach
this course of study at the five elementary and middle Priority Schools. Therefore, the
District’s decision to skip the teachers at the elementary and middle Priority Schools is
upheld.

52.

The evidence did not establish that the District has implemented DataWise

training at HJHS to the extent or in the manner that it did in the other Priority Schools i.e. on
a school-wide basis. Respondent Cassandra Woodruff (9/2/08) holds a single subject
credential with authorizations to teach biology and earth science. She teaches at HJHS, but
received a preliminary layoff notice due to program reductions. She disputed the District’s

14

claim that teachers at HJHS have received extensive extra training. She stated that she was
not trained in DataWise at HJHS and does not know if other staff in her department had such
training, which was not widely offered to staff. During the 2010-11 school year, the staff in
her department have met after school for CPT, during which staff looked at student
achievement and behavior to identify students having difficulty, and collaborated on
strategies to help students “get on track.” She acknowledged that the emphasis has been on
data, specifically test scores. They have looked at students who are close to the next level of
proficiency, to devise ways to “bump them up,” i.e., raise the achievement level of
“borderline” students. Mary Shelton, the District’s Accountability Officer, stated that
DataWise principles have been “embedded” in the CPT for teachers at HJHS. While Ms.
Woodruff’s testimony indicated that application of the DataWise process has begun at HJHS
to some extent, the evidence did not establish that the implementation of this program was
substantially different at HJHS than it has been at other, non-Priority Schools of the District,
as testified to by many of the respondents.5 The District did not demonstrate that there is a
“particular course of study” at HJHS that is sufficiently different from the course of study at
the District’s other traditional high schools to warrant “special training or experience,”
within the meaning of section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). Thus the District did not justify
skipping teachers at HJHS.6

Counselor and Social Worker Skips at Priority Schools

53.

Although the Skipping Resolution only refers to “teaching in a Priority
School,” the District skipped all certificated staff at the six Priority Schools, including
counselors and social workers. The District contended that counselors and social workers are
part of the “teaching team,” and thus are properly skipped under the language of the Skipping
Resolution. This contention is not persuasive. Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1)
distinguishes between “personnel to teach a specific course or course of study,” and
“personnel . . . to provide services authorized by a services credential with a specialization in
. . . pupil personnel services.” However, the District may still skip counselors and social
workers assigned to Priority Schools if it can “demonstrates a specific need for personnel to
provide services authorized by a services credential with a specialization in . . . pupil
personnel services . . . [and] the certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to . . . provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.”

5 For example, respondent Laura Shirley teaches at Rosa Parks Middle School;

respondent Kimberly Nickel teaches at Albert Einstein Middle School. Both schools have
been in PI for more than one year. Both respondents attended DataWise training during the
2010-11 school year, and provided training to teachers at their respective schools. Both
testified that the DataWise process is being implemented during CPT.

6 The District skipped three counselors (Leticia Bucio, Elxora Gray, and Jessica
Gunning) and one social worker (Anna Jiang) at HJHS. These certificated employees were
properly skipped, as set forth in Findings 53-54).

15

54.

Applying the analysis outlined in Bledsoe, there are respondents who are

certificated in pupil personnel services (PPS) who are competent to render services to
students in the Priority School program.7 Therefore, the District must demonstrate that it has
a specific need for personnel to provide counseling and social worker services, and that
personnel who were skipped have special training and experience that more senior
counselors and social workers to not possess. In this case, the evidence did not establish
whether or not counselors and social workers were given DataWise training, or the extent to
which they participate in the collaborative process during CPT at the three elementary and
two middle Priority Schools. Ms. Shelton testified about the importance of consistency and
stability in establishing rapport with students and families in chronically underperforming
schools such as the Priority Schools, where poverty, drugs, and gangs undermine family
structures. By their assignment to Priority Schools during the 2010-11 school year, the
counselors and social workers have begun the important process of building relationships of
trust that are crucial to the success of the Priority Schools Initiative. This special experience
is not possessed by more senior counselors and social workers, who have not worked in the
six Priority Schools. Therefore, the District may properly skip counselors and social workers
at the six Priority Schools.

Section 44955, subdivision (d)(2)

55.

As a separate basis for skipping certificated employees at the six Priority
Schools, the District asserted that it was entitled to deviate from terminating certificated
employees in order of seniority “[f]or purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.” (§ 44955, subd. (d)(2).)
The District noted that staff turnover at the Priority Schools has been very high in the years
prior to the 2010-11 school year, partly due to the fact that teachers with less seniority
typically are assigned to underperforming schools; thus, when layoffs take place based on
seniority, a higher percentage of the teaching staffs at underperforming schools are laid off.
The District asserted that high staff turnover has been correlated with low student
performance. Thus, the District contended that, for the six Priority Schools, the imposition
of layoffs would violate the fundamental right of the students at those schools to “basic
equality of educational opportunity” guaranteed by the State Constitution (Butt v. State of
California (1992) 4 Cal.4th 668, 685.) The District further contended that, because the
fundamental right of education is at issue, strict scrutiny is triggered. (Id., at pp. 685-686
[“heightened scrutiny applies to State-maintained discrimination whenever…the disparate
treatment has a real and appreciable impact on a fundamental right or interest.”].) For that
reason, the District claims that there must be a compelling state interest justifying seniority-

7 Paragraph (3) of the District’s Competency Criteria states that an individual shall be
deemed “competent” if he or she has “at least one (1) year of experience in the past five (5)
years working under the credential or authorization.” In this case, the affected respondents
are currently using their PPS credentials. Paragraph (4) of the Competency Criteria states:
“In order to work in a Priority School, training and/or experience teaching in a Priority
School setting.” (Bolding added.) This criterion is inapplicable to counselors and social
workers, who are not providing teaching services.

16

based layoffs at particular schools where layoffs negatively impact students’ educational
opportunities.

56.

The District’s argument is not persuasive. In particular, the District failed to

show that layoffs affecting the six Priority Schools will result in an unconstitutional
deprivation of an equal education, when compared to other schools of the District. The
evidence at hearing established that 44 of the District’s 85 schools are currently in PI status,
and have been for two years or more. Approximately 68 percent of the District’s students
live at or near the poverty line, and an estimated 60 to 65 schools are designated as Title 1
schools. The testimony of many of the respondents demonstrated the devastating effect that
layoffs will have on District programs with demographics similar to the Priority Schools that
are not being “skipped.”

For example, the District operates Sacramento New Technology High School (New

Tech), a small dependent charter high school. The curriculum at New Tech is based on
integrated projects, with career focused learning outcomes to achieve technical and academic
proficiency. The teachers have undergone extensive specialized training in project-based
learning. The demographics at New Tech are similar to other schools in the District,
including the six Priority Schools: the student population is 74 percent minority and 61
percent low income, with a large percentage of EL students. There are gang involvement
issues among the student body, and New Tech provides an alternative environment to the
comprehensive high school, where many of the New Tech students were not successful. Of
the 18 teachers at New Tech, four have received layoff notices, or 22 percent of the teaching
staff. The loss of nearly one-quarter of the teaching staff will have a serious detrimental
effect on the program, which relies on continuity of staff relationships with students as a key
to success. Similarly, Albert Einstein Middle School is in its second year of PI. It has a
diverse student population and high poverty levels. Of the six math teachers at Einstein, five
have received layoff notices. As the testimony of respondents Kimberly Nickel and Gary
Prentice established, the loss of all but one of the math teachers will decimate the department
and undermine the efforts of staff to improve student achievement.

57.

The District did not establish that the conditions at the six Priority Schools

were such that the entire certificated staff needed to be skipped to provide equal educational
opportunity to those students. Moreover, the District did not explain how it justified placing
a disproportionate burden on other low-performing schools with similar demographics,
whose staff received additional layoff notices as a result of the skipping of the six Priority
Schools. Layoffs are clearly disruptive and detrimental to the academic programs of all low-
performing schools, not just the Priority Schools. The Priority School skip cannot be
justified based on section 44955, subdivision (b)(2).

Other Issues Pertaining to the Priority School Skip

58.

In preparation for the hearing, the District created a list of Employees Skipped

for Priority School (Exhibit 22). According to Ms. Lauzon, this list was not used by the
District’s personnel analysts to decide who would receive layoff notices, and she was unable

17

to state how many teachers were actually skipped. Ms. Lauzon stated that the analysts
skipped all certificated employees in Priority Schools unless the position was eliminated, the
teacher was a probationary release, or the teacher has initiated a voluntary transfer out of the
Priority School.

A.

Respondents to be Retained Because of the Disallowance of the Skip at HJHS.

59.

The following teachers listed on Exhibit 22 were not noticed for layoff as a

result of the Priority School skip at HJHS: Janet Lee; Michael Moore; Leticia Moran;
Fernando Rodriguez; Cynthia McPhail; Stefan Villegas; Taudine Andrew; Brendan Murphy;
Jessica Salomon; and Christopher Watkins. In addition, respondents identified the following
teachers from HJHS that are not identified on Exhibit 22 as having been skipped, but were
not give layoff notices: Nhu Tran; Kerry Vaughan-Bechtol; Sonia Page; Susan Kizer; Hillary
Jones; and Casey Hollingsworth.

60.

Under section 44955, subdivision (b), the District may not terminate the

services of a permanent employee if a probationary employee, or any other employee with
less seniority, is retained to render a service which the permanent employee is certificated
and competent to render. Paragraph (4) of the District’s Competency Criteria provides that,
in order to be deemed competent to work in a Priority School, an individual must “have
training and/or experience teaching in a Priority School setting.” Mr. Garcia and Ms.
Shelton both testified that this competency criterion was tied to the Skip Criteria pertaining
to Priority Schools. Inasmuch as the skip for teachers at HJHS was not upheld, this
competency criterion cannot be invoked to allow the termination of any respondent who is a
permanent employee of the District and is more senior to an individual who is being retained
to perform a service at HJHS for which the respondent holds the proper credential, and where
the respondent has at least one year of experience in the past five years working under that
credential (paragraph (3) of the Competency Criteria). As set forth below, the respondents
identified to be retained are permanent employees; they are the most senior respondents with
the applicable credential; and all have worked under the credential for at least one year in the
past five years.

61.

Janet Lee, Michael Moore, Leticia Moran, and Fernando Rodriguez all have

seniority dates of September 7, 2010, and all hold S/S math credentials. Susan Kizer (9/2/08)
holds an S/S math credential. There is no respondent who is a permanent employee who has
more seniority than any of the above-listed individuals who holds an S/S credential.8

8 Respondent Jennifer Graziano (10/12/09) holds an S/S math credential, and is more
senior to Ms. Lee, Mr. Moore, Ms. Moran, and Mr. Rodriguez; however, Ms. Graziano is a
second year probationary employee of the District, not a permanent employee.

18

62.

Kerry Vaughan-Bechtol and Casey Hollingsworth both have seniority dates of
September 2, 2008, and both hold S/S foundational math credentials. Grace Yates (8/23/05)
and Kimberly Nickel (9/5/06)9 are the most senior permanent employees of the District who
are respondents in this proceeding with S/S credentials in foundational math. They have
more seniority than Ms. Vaughan-Bechtol and Mr. Hollingsworth, who are being retained by
the District. Therefore, Ms. Yates and Ms. Nickel shall be retained, and their layoff notices
rescinded.

63.

Cynthia McPhail (9/7/10) and Stephan Villegas (9/21/09) both hold S/S PE
credentials. Respondents Matthew Craine (1/8/07), Jennifer Cleland-Brinzer (1/29/07) (.8
FTE), and Nadine Nouchi (8/23/07) (.8 FTE), are permanent employees of the District with
S/S PE credentials, and have greater seniority than Ms. McPhail and Mr. Villegas. Mr.
Craine and Ms. Cleland-Brinzer shall be retained for 1.8 FTE, and their layoff notices
rescinded. Ms. Nouchi shall be retained for .2 FTE of her .8 FTE position, and she shall be
laid off for no more than .6 FTE.

64.

Taudine Andrew (9/4/07) holds an S/S credential in home economics with a

supplementary authorization in social science; she is teaching social science at HJHS.
Brendan Murphy (9/4/07), Jessica Salomon (2/25/10), and Christopher Watkins (9/2/08) all
hold S/S social science credentials. Respondents Christopher Gosney (11/1/06), Jason Elkins
(11/16/06), and Jose Garcia (3/7/07), are permanent employees who have S/S social science
credentials and have greater seniority than Ms. Andrew, Mr. Murphy, Ms. Salomon, and Mr.
Watkins. Therefore, Mr. Gosney, Mr. Elkins, and Mr. Garcia shall be retained, and their
layoff notices rescinded. Respondent Lynn Samaan (9/4/07) has the same seniority date as
Ms. Andrew and Mr. Murphy, as do the following employees who hold S/S social science
credentials: Bryan Fisher, David White, Patrick Reilly, Elizabeth Johnson, and Katrina
Figueroa. Ms. Andrew and Mr. Murphy were not included in the tiebreak for September 4,
2007 social science. Therefore, the District shall include Ms. Andrew and Mr. Murphy and
re-do the tiebreak, and shall retain the most senior respondent after application of the
tiebreak criteria, if that individual has greater seniority than either Ms. Andrew or Mr.
Murphy.

65.

Nhu Tran (11/3/08) and Hillary Jones (9/2/08) both have S/S credentials in

English. Michael Johnston (9/7/06) and Elissa Christensen (1/29/07) are permanent
employees who have S/S English credentials and have greater seniority than Mr. Tran and
Ms. Jones. Therefore, Mr. Johnston and Ms. Christensen shall be retained, and their layoff
notices rescinded.

66.

Sonia Page (9/2/08) has an S/S credential in Spanish. Respondents Scott

Preston and Rebekah Campbell are permanent employees with a seniority date of September
2, 2008. They both hold S/S Spanish credentials. Ms. Page was not included in the tiebreak
for September 2, 2008 Spanish. The District shall include Ms. Page and re-do the tiebreak,

9 Due to application of tiebreak.

19

and shall retain Ms. Campbell after application of the tiebreak criteria, if it is determined that
she has greater seniority than Ms. Page.10

B.

Respondents to be Retained Because of Transfers out of Priority Schools,
Where Employees were not given Layoff Notices.

67.

The following employees have initiated transfers (“self-surplused”) out of

Priority Schools, and were identified as having been skipped by the District for their Priority
School assignments: Ebony Benzing, Janet Spilman, and Sandra Pedley. These individuals
are not being “skipped” by the District; however, they did not receive notices of layoff and
are being retained by the District for the 2011-12 school year.

68.

Ebony Benzing (9/7/10) has an S/S credential in foundational math.

Respondent Kevin Burrill (9/5/06) is the next most senior respondent11 who is a permanent
employee and holds an S/S credential in foundational math. He has more seniority than Ms.
Benzing, who is being retained by the District. Mr. Burrill shall be retained, and his layoff
notice rescinded.

69.

Janet Spilman (9/3/02) has a PPS credential in counseling, an S/S credential in

social science, and a Learning Handicap-Specialist special education credential. She is
currently assigned as a counselor at HJHS. There is no respondent with greater seniority
than Ms. Spilman who holds a PPS counseling credential.

70.

Sandra Pedley (9/7/04) has an M/S credential. Thomas Wolthius (9/23/03) is a

permanent employee who holds an M/S credential, and who has greater seniority than Ms.
Pedley, who is being retained by the District. Mr. Wolthius shall be retained, and his layoff
notice rescinded.

BCLAD Skip –Dual-Language Immersion Program Skip

71.

In Paragraph A of the Skip Criteria, the Board determined that it was

necessary to skip “individuals fully-credentialed to serve in classes requiring Bilingual
Cross-Cultural Language and Development (‘BCLAD’) certification, to the extent necessary
to staff BCLAD required positions.”

72.

According to Personnel Analyst Terri Lauzon, individuals with BCLAD

credentials were skipped if they were using the BCLAD in their current teaching assignment,
i.e., in the Dual Language Immersion Program (DLIP) or in the District’s Bilingual Early
Exit Transition Program (Bilingual Program). During the “one stop staffing” process, no
positions were reduced in either of those programs.

10 Respondent Preston is being retained as part of the Waldorf skip; Conseulo Millard

is a probationary employee of the District.

11 Due to application of tiebreak.

20

73.

The evidence established that a BCLAD credential is necessary to teach DLIP;
however, special training and experience are also required, in that the teacher must be able to
present content in the “world language,” not just be able to speak, write, and read in that
language. The evidence did not establish that any respondent was certificated and competent
to render the services provided by the DLIP and Bilingual Program teachers. The District
properly skipped the following certificated employees, who are currently using their BCLAD
credentials in positions where BCLAD certification is required: Nancy Lopez, Teresa
Martinez, Cristina Rios, and Shannon Zavala (DLIP); and Gricelda Jaime (Bilingual
Program).

74.

In Paragraph E of the Skip Criteria, the Board determined that it was necessary

to skip “individuals who have one (1) or more years of experience teaching in a Dual-
Language Immersion Program.” As set forth in Finding 73, special training and experience
are necessary to teach DLIP, and the individuals who were skipped by the District (Lopez,
Martinez, Rios, and Zavala) have special training and experience that individuals with more
seniority do not possess. The District’s skip of DLIP teachers is upheld.

75.

Yee Vang (9/4/07) has a BCLAD in Hmong. For reasons that were not

explained by the evidence, he does not appear on the District’s seniority list. According to
Ms. Lauzon, Mr. Vang is not using his BCLAD credential for the DLIP at Edward Kemble
Elementary, and was skipped erroneously. Mr. Vang did not receive a layoff notice.
Although his credential type was not established by the evidence, it is most likely that he
holds an M/S credential in order to teach in an elementary school. There are respondents
with greater seniority than Mr. Vang, who hold M/S credentials and are competent to
perform the services for which he was retained by the District. The District will therefore be
required to rescind the layoff notice of a more senior respondent with an M/S credential.

Special Ed Skip

76.

In Paragraph B of the Skip Criteria, the Board determined that it was necessary

to skip “individuals fully-credentialed to serve in a Special Education assignment.”

77.

The District demonstrated a need for teachers with special education

credentials. The District skipped special education teachers in the 2010 layoff. However,
despite retaining all District certificated employees with special education credentials, there
were still vacant positions for special education certificated employees at the start of the
2010-11 school year. Based on data collected from past years, it has been difficult for the
District to fully staff special education positions at the beginning of the school year.

78.

According to Ms. Lauzon, teachers with special education credentials were

skipped if they could demonstrate competency, i.e., that they had taught using their special
education credential for at least one year in the past five years.

21

79.

The District established that teachers with special education credentials had
special training and experience necessary to teach special education, that individuals with
more seniority do not possess. The District’s skip of special education teachers is upheld.

80.

Respondent Adam Eisner (9/4/08) teaches PE at Edward Kimble Elementary

School. He holds an S/S credential in PE with a supplemental authorization in Health
Science, and a Special Education Adapted PE Specialist credential. In the 2008-09 school
year, he taught .8 FTE regular PE. He also filled a .2 FTE position in adapted PE from
January through June 2009. He was not skipped because he was not deemed competent by
the District under paragraph (3) of the District’s Competency Criteria, which requires that a
certificated employee have at least one year of experience in the past five years working
under the credential or authorization. Respondent Eisner did not establish that he should
have been skipped under the terms of the District’s Skipping Resolution, or that he is
credentialed and competent to bump a less senior certificated employee with an Adapted PE
Specialist credential.

Math Skip

81.

In Paragraph C of the Skip Criteria, the Board determined that it was necessary

to skip “individuals fully-credentialed to teach the full breadth of high school math
assignments up to calculus, to the extent required to staff high school math positions.”

82.

Based on data collected from past years, it has been difficult to fully staff high

school mathematics positions at the start of the school year. The District views this as an
equity and access issue, in that a lack of fully qualified math teachers may deprive students
of the opportunity to take high level math courses needed to fulfill college preparatory
requirements at particular high schools. The District established a need for math teachers
capable of teaching mathematics through calculus at the high school level, which it defined
as teachers holding S/S math credentials.

83.

In the 2010 layoff, the District skipped all credentialed math teachers,

including those with credentials to teach foundational math (through algebra II, but not
trigonometry, math analysis, or calculus), and M/S credentialed teachers with math
supplemental authorizations (who can teach math up to the ninth grade). At the start of the
2010-11 school year, the District was over-staffed with lower level math teachers, but still
had lacked sufficient single-subject-credentialed math teachers to fully staff upper level math
courses at the District’s high schools.

84.

As a result of overall staff reductions, including a 19.0 FTE reduction in high
school math, the District determined that it would need six fewer math teachers to staff high
level math courses through calculus. It therefore identified the six least senior certificated
employees with single subject math credentials and issued preliminary notices to them.

85.

Respondents challenged the District’s proposed skip of S/S credentialed math
teachers, claiming that the District sought to retain junior teachers to teach lower level math

22

courses that senior certificated employees with S/S foundational math credentials or M/S
credentials with supplemental authorizations in math could teach. This contention was not
supported by the evidence. The District demonstrated that it had a specific need for math
teachers able to teach the full range of mathematics, through calculus, and that the employees
who were skipped had the special training and experience necessary to teach these courses
that more senior certificated employees did not possess.

86.

Respondent Gavin Williams (9/7/99) holds an S/S credential in math, with a

supplemental authorization in computer concepts and applications. His teaching assignment
with the District for the past five years has been in a small information technology learning
community, where his courses have focused on technology and computer applications. He
has incorporated math concepts into his program during the past five years. He has created
Power Point presentations for geometry enrichment materials, and developed computer
formats for student-to-student math content. He taught geometry in summer school in 2006
or 2007, and taught algebra 1 in the fall semester of 2010. Apart from the courses previously
identified, he last taught math during the school year in 2005-06. Mr. Williams contended
that he has the special training and experience to teach math up through calculus. He
acknowledged that District employees who have taught math in the past five years have had
training in instructional methods focused on algebra I and geometry, which he has not had.
However, he claimed that such training would not be necessary to teach upper level courses
such as math analysis, trigonometry, or calculus.

87.

Respondent Williams has not demonstrated that he is certificated and

competent to teach math, in that he does not have at least one year of experience in the past
five years working under his math credential. The purpose of the competency requirement of
recent teaching experience using the credential or authorization is to insure that the employee
has had training in state standards and current pedagogical techniques. Since respondent
Williams is not competent to teach math, he is not eligible to be skipped under Paragraph C
of the Skipping Resolution, and is not eligible to bump a less senior math teacher.

Home and Hospital Skip

88.

In Paragraph F of the Skip Criteria, the Board determined that it was necessary

to skip “individuals who have two (2) or more years of experience teaching and/or
specialized training in a home or hospital setting.”

89.

Paulette Meeks is the Director of Health Services for the District. Ms. Meeks

oversees the District’s Home Teaching Program and Hospital Teaching Program. The
District provides teachers for three hospitals: Sutter Hospital; U.C. Davis Medical Center;
and Sutter Psychiatric Hospital. According to Ms. Meeks, the hospital teacher at Sutter
Psychiatric Hospital must provide educational services to students of various ages. This
teacher must be prepared to respond rapidly to changing circumstances, and must be “astute”
in dealing with medically fragile and potentially dangerous students.

23

90.

Sharon Rickert (9/2/08) holds an M/S credential. She has been assigned to
Sutter Psychiatric Hospital as a teacher in the District’s Hospital Program since the fall of
2008. Ms. Meeks is Ms. Rickert’s immediate supervisor and is familiar with her training,
experience and qualifications. Ms. Rickert has specialized training in dealing with
aggressive behaviors, which she has obtained through in-services given by medical staff at
Sutter Psychiatric Hospital. She has additional training in CPR, first aid, and HIPAA12
compliance. Ms. Rickert is trained in therapeutic modalities to actuate learning, such as
puppet therapy. Based upon Ms. Meeks’ personal observations, Ms. Rickert has the ability
to react calmly in volatile situations, interpret body language as well as verbal cues in
severely disturbed and traumatized students, give instruction in a clear and concise manner,
and provide instruction in short periods if necessary. Ms. Rickert has training that would
permit her to put a child in therapeutic restraints if necessary. Ms. Meeks has spoken to Ms.
Rickert’s work coordinator at Sutter Psychiatric Hospital, who also confirmed her skills and
training.

91.

The District demonstrated that it has a specific need for personnel to teach in
its hospital program, and that Ms. Rickert has special training and experience necessary to
work as a hospital teacher which others with more seniority do not possess. Respondents
provided no evidence that any certificated employee noticed for layoff with an M/S
credential, and with greater seniority than Ms. Rickert, possessed the special training and
experience necessary to serve as a hospital teacher at Sutter Psychiatric Hospital. The
District may skip Ms. Rickert.

Waldorf Skip

92.

In Paragraph G of the Skip Criteria, the Board determined that it was

necessary to skip “individuals who have formal training/coursework in the Waldorf method
of teaching.”

93.

The District operates two Waldorf method schools, George Washington

Carver School of Arts and Sciences (Carver), and Alice Birney Elementary School (Birney).
The two Waldorf schools offer a course of study delivered in a method that differs
substantially from other schools in the District. Allegra Alessandri, the principal at Carver,
and Mechelle Horning, the principal at Birney, each testified convincingly that a Waldorf
course of study infuses every aspect of the curriculum with the Waldorf method, which is
based on linking critical thinking (the head), creative expression (the heart), and wholesome
action (the hands). The District requires staff members that are trained in and supportive of
the Waldorf philosophy in order to run the program at these two schools. The evidence
established that there are formal training programs for elementary and secondary teachers
that are necessary to be able to deliver instruction in the Waldorf method.

94.

The District proposes to skip the following certificated employees who work

in the Waldorf program: Philip Roberto (8/13/07); Diana Smith (1/8/07); Bryon Soules

12 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996.

24

(9/5/06); Keith Sabini (9/2/09); Vicky Schroeder (9/2/08); and Scott Preston (9/2/08).13 All
of these individuals have had extensive instruction in the Waldorf teaching method. Diana
Smith testified about her experience as a teacher at Birney in the 2009-10 school year, when
she did not have training in the Waldorf teaching method, and the difficulties she
encountered due to her lack of knowledge about how to present a Waldorf curriculum. She
stated convincingly that without formal training, she “would not be able to make it” as a
Waldorf teacher.

95.

The evidence established that the Waldorf schools provide instruction in a

unique manner, and that the District has a specific need for instructors to teach in this
program who have training and experience in the Waldorf method. The certificated
employees that the District proposes to retain have special training and experience necessary
to teach the Waldorf method. Respondents did not establish that there are any certificated
employees with seniority greater than the individuals proposed to be skipped by the District
who have the training and experience necessary to teach in the Waldorf program. The
District may skip the above-identified employees and retain their services for the 2011-12
school year.

Accelerated Academy Skip

96.

In Paragraph H of the Skip Criteria, the Board determined that it was

necessary to skip “individuals with specialized training and experience in the Accelerated
Academy Program.”

97.

The District’s Accelerated Academy is a credit recovery program serving

primarily high school juniors and seniors. This is a course of study designed to allow
students, who otherwise would be unable to graduate from a comprehensive high school due
to credit deficiency, to graduate on time. The Accelerated Academy program addresses the
needs of students who are not successful in a comprehensive high school environment for
various reasons, including behavior issues. The program has been effective to address drop-
out prevention. The students complete courses on the internet. Aventa is the vendor that
provides the curriculum and on-line instruction. Students come to school five days per week,
and attend class from 8:00 a.m. to noon, or from noon to 4:00 p.m. While at school, they
access class materials using the Aventa on-line computer software system. The system is
available to students 24-hours per day, if they have computer access. The District operates
four classrooms/computer labs, with 30 students in each four-hour class; a total of 240
students participate in the two sessions of the program. District teachers are present to
provide one-on-one assistance to students while they are working on-line. These teachers
also build a close relationship with the students, acting as counselor, mentor, and friend.
This relationship is a key element to the success of the program. The assigned teachers have
experience dealing with behavior problems and gang issues. They also build relationships
with families, through home visits, meetings, and frequent telephone contact. There is a

13 All of these teachers received precautionary layoff notices and are respondents in

this proceeding.

25

“lead teacher” who oversees the day-to-day operation of the program, and a total of five
teachers are assigned to the program.

98.

The District proposes to skip the following certificated employees who teach
in the Accelerated Academy program: Corey Fukuoka (9/5/06), Jennifer Healey (10/31/07),
and Sarah Taylor (9/2/08).14

99.

David Rodriguez is the Director of the District’s Student Hearings and
Placement Department, which is ultimately responsible for the Accelerated Academy
program. According to Mr. Rodriguez, Accelerated Academy teaching staff received two
days of training in the Aventa software system before the start of the school year, and they
are engaged in ongoing training throughout the year. He confirmed that it takes several
months to become proficient in the use of the online program software. Moreover, he
confirmed that many of the current students enrolled in the Accelerated Academy are juniors
and will continue in the program in the 2011-12 school year. He stated that the relationships
that have been developed between the current teaching staff and these students are crucial to
ultimate student success in the program. He testified persuasively that the loss of three out of
five staff would be devastating to the program.

100. The District established that it has a specific need for personnel to teach in the

Accelerated Academy program, and that special training and experience are necessary to
teach this particular course of study.

101. Respondents challenged the District’s decision to skip teachers in the

Accelerated Academy program. Several respondents with greater seniority than the proposed
skipped employees testified that they have the necessary credentials and experience in
alternative education programs to be able to serve as Accelerated Academy teachers.
However, none of the respondents have had the special training in the Aventa computer
software program, or the experience working with the online program, that is necessary to
teach in the Accelerated Academy. The skipped teachers have special training and
experience necessary to teach this specialized course of study which individuals with greater
seniority do not possess. The District may skip the above-identified employees and retain
their services for the 2011-12 school year.

Talent Transfer Initiative Skip

102. Although not set forth in the District’s Skipping Resolution, the District
proposes to skip three certificated employees who are teaching in the Talent Transfer
Initiative (TTI) program. TTI is an experimental program supported by funds from the
federal Department of Education (USDOE), which began in the 2010-11 school year, and is

14 All of these teachers received preliminary notices of layoff. Mr. Fukuoka and Ms.

Healey did not file requests for hearing. Ms. Taylor filed a request for hearing and was
served with an Accusation, but did not file a Notice of Defense. These individuals are not
respondents in this proceeding.

26

scheduled to continue through the 2011-12 school year. The purpose of the program was to
identify the most “talented” teachers and place them in underperforming schools, in order to
determine whether such skilled teachers could increase student achievement through
excellence in teaching methods. Teachers who were accepted into the TTI program agreed
to transfer from their current school assignment to an underperforming school and stay for
two years. Teachers were placed in the 15 lowest performing schools in the District. The
student achievement data for their students is being collected by the USDOE and analyzed to
determine if there is improvement that can be attributable to the skills of the teacher. The
teachers are paid a stipend for their participation in the TTI program. If teachers are forced
to leave the program before its completion due to layoff, it will jeopardize the data being
collected by the USDOE and will undermine the results of the study.

103. The District proposes to skip the following certificated employees who are

teaching in the TTI program: Staci DiSantis (9/7/04); Ryan Fernald (9/7/04); and Lily Ngo
(3/31/05).15

104. Respondents contended that the District’s attempt to skip certificated

employees without including them as part of the Board’s Skipping Resolution deprived
respondents of their right to notice and an opportunity to respond to the District’s layoff
action, in violation of sections 44949 and 44955. Respondent’s argument is not persuasive.
In Bledsoe, the court upheld the district’s right to skip less senior employees with special
training and experience to teach a particular course of study without the district’s governing
board having adopted a resolution authorizing the skip. Thus, the District may skip teachers
in the TTI program if it can “[demonstrate] a specific need for personnel to teach a specific
course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee has special training and
experience necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which others with more
seniority do not possess.” (§ 44955, subd. (d)(1).)

105. The District has demonstrated the need for personnel currently participating in
the federal study to continue in the study for the 2011-12 school year, in order to preserve the
validity of the study data. There are no respondents with the experience necessary to
participate in the second year of the study, who can displace the study participants. The
District may skip the above-identified employees and retain their services for the 2011-12
school year.

Application of the District’s Tiebreaker Criteria

106. Ms. Lauzon and the other personnel analysts in the Human Resource Services

Department applied the criteria of the Tiebreaker Resolution to determine the order of
seniority of certificated employees affected by the layoff with the same seniority date. Under

15 All of these teachers received preliminary notices of layoff. Mr. Fernald and Ms.
Ngo did not file requests for hearing. They are not parties to this proceeding. Ms. DiSantis
is a respondent in this proceeding.

27

“Category 1 – Professional Preparation,” the first criterion states: “(1) Each single subject,
multiple subject or service credential – 3 points per credential.” The second criterion states:
“(2) Each supplemental or subject matter authorization – 1 point per authorization.” In
applying the first criterion, Ms. Lauzon stated that the analysts did not give any employee
more than three points for an S/S credential, regardless of the number of subject areas in
which the employee was credentialed. For example, an employee who held an S/S credential
in English and Foreign Language: Spanish received a total of four points, three for an S/S
credential, and one for the second subject, which Ms. Lauzon characterized as a subject
matter authorization. An employee with an M/S credential, with a supplemental
authorization in mathematics, also received a total of four points. An employee with an M/S
credential and an S/S credential in any subject received a total of six points.

107. The analysts determined the order of seniority based on points awarded under

the tiebreaking criteria. Where individual employees had the same number of points after
application of all other criteria, the analysts conducted a lottery within each PKS category to
determine which employee(s) would be subject to layoff.

108. Respondents objected to the District’s interpretation of criteria (1) and (2) and
their application to certain respondents. Respondent contend that each S/S subject area is its
own S/S credential, and should be awarded three points; under this interpretation, an
employee with an S/S credential in English and Foreign Language: Spanish would receive
six points, while an employee with an M/S credential, with a supplemental authorization in
mathematics, would receive four points. Respondents’ argument is not persuasive. As was
demonstrated by credential information submitted on behalf of respondent Sonia Rambo
(Exhibit T), she was originally issued an S/S credential in music with CLAD, with an
expiration date of July 1, 2012. Thereafter, she became credentialed to teach Foreign
Language: Spanish by examination. The Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC)
issued her a new S/S credential which listed the “Authorized Subject(s)” as “Music
(Examination); Crosscultural, Language & Academic Development Emphasis; [and] Foreign
Language: Spanish (Examination),” with an expiration date of April 1, 2015. Under
“Authorization Code(s) R1S,” it states: “This document authorizes the holder to teach the
subject area(s) listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, an in classes
organized primarily for adults.” The information contained in the CTC’s Administrator’s
Assignment Manual and Glossary is consistent with the above analysis. The District’s
interpretation is reasonable, and it was not demonstrated that the interpretation is arbitrary or
capricious.16

16 Respondent Brian Fisher (9/4/07) challenged the District’s calculation of his points
on the tiebreaker for Social Science. Mr. Fisher has an S/S credential which authorizes him
to teach social science and Japanese, for which he was awarded four points. Respondent
Lynne Samaan has an S/S credential which authorizes her to teach home economics and
social science, for which she was awarded four points. Mr. Fisher and Ms. Samaan were
tied, and a lottery was conducted in which Ms. Samaan was #1 (deemed more senior) and
Mr. Fisher was #2. If respondents were awarded three points for each S/S “credential,” Mr.
Fisher and Ms. Samaan would still be tied, with six points each, and a lottery would have

28

109. At hearing, the District identified errors in the application of the tiebreaker

criteria, and it made the following corrections:

A.

Music (9/7/10): Respondent Elizabeth Hernandez holds an S/S

credential which authorizes her to teach music and social science. She also has a
master’s degree. She was initially awarded six points under Category 1 for
credentials held, and one point for the master’s degree, for a total of seven points.
She should have been awarded five points (three points for the S/S credential, one
point for the second subject matter, and one point for the master’s degree).
Respondent Sonia Rambo holds an S/S credential which authorizes her to teach music
and Spanish. She was initially awarded six points under Category 1 for credentials
held, for a total of six points. She should have been awarded four points (three points
for the S/S credential and one point for the second subject matter). After
recalculating the points, Ms. Hernandez is still #1 (deemed most senior), but now a
tie is created between Ms. Rambo and Patricia Wassum, who also has four points.
The District shall be required to do a lottery to determine their positions on the
seniority list for purposes of recall from layoff.

B.

Spanish (9/2/08): Respondent Scott Preston holds an S/S credential
which authorizes him to teach Spanish and English. He also has a master’s degree.
He was initially awarded six points under Category 1 for credential held, and one
point for the master’s degree, for a total of seven points. He should have been
awarded five points (three points for the S/S credential, one point for the second
subject matter, and one point for the master’s degree). After recalculating the points,
Mr. Preston is tied with respondent Rebekah Campbell, who also has five points.
However, Mr. Preston is being retained because of the Waldorf skip (Findings 92-96),
and Ms. Campbell is being retained because the District over-noticed teachers for the
Spanish PKS reduction (Finding 114), so it is not necessary to determine which of
them is more senior.

C.

K-6 (7/30/04): Respondent Craig Burkhouse holds an M/S credential,

for which he was awarded 3 points. However, he has two years of prior teaching
experience with the District, and should have been awarded two points under
Category II of the Tiebreaking Criteria, for a total of five points. After recalculating
the points, Mr. Burkhouse is #1 (deemed most senior). A lottery was previously
conducted to determine the positions of the three employees on this tiebreaker list.
Therefore, respondent Jaymee Nazari is now #2, and respondent Christopher Taylor
remains #3.

been necessary to break the tie. Thus, Mr. Fisher’s position on the layoff list would be
unchanged.

29

Failure to Apply Tiebreaker to Brian Campbell Bump

110. Brian Campbell (9/5/06) is currently assigned to teach business at Albert

Einstein Middle School. He holds an S/S credential with authorizations to teach math and
computer concepts and applications. His position was identified as one of the 9.0 PKS
reductions in computers. On the District’s Bumping Chart – Computers, it states that Mr.
Campbell “Bumps Math.” There are eight certificated employees on the District’s Bumping
Chart – Math with seniority dates of September 5, 2006, including the following
respondents: Kevin Burrill; Rory Jones; Kimberly Nickel; Julio Olivares; Gary Prentice;
Laura Shirley; and Robert Walters. However, all of these individuals have M/S credentials
with supplemental authorizations in math, or S/S foundational math credentials. Thus, he
was properly excluded from the “SU Math (9-5-06)” tiebreak. Mr. Campbell was not served
with a preliminary layoff notice, and will be retained by the District for the 2011-12 school
year. There is no respondent who has greater seniority than Mr. Campbell who also holds an
S/S credential in math, who could render the service for which Mr. Campbell is being
retained.

Over-Noticing

111.

In some instances, the District sent preliminary notices of layoff to more
individuals than were necessary to effectuate the reduction in PKS identified in the PKS
Resolution, as addressed in further detail below.

Art – 4.0 FTE PKS Reduction

112. The District sent layoff notices to certificated employees occupying 5.4 FTE

positions in Art. The most senior of these employees, Philip Roberto, will be retained by the
District as a result of the Waldorf skip, leaving 4.4 FTE, which exceed the PKS reduction by
.4 FTE. Ryan Varrelman is the next most senior respondent noticed for layoff in Art. He
shall be laid off for .6 FTE, and shall be retained for .4 FTE.

Counselors – 14.6 FTE PKS Reduction

113. The District sent layoff notices to certificated employees occupying 14.8 FTE

counselor positions, which exceed the PKS reduction by .2 FTE. Kenneth McPeters is the
most senior respondent noticed for layoff in counseling. He shall be laid off for .8 FTE, and
shall be retained for .2 FTE.

Spanish – 5.0 FTE PKS Reduction

114. The District sent layoff notices to certificated employees occupying 8.4 FTE

positions in Spanish. The most senior of these employees, Scott Preston, will be retained by
the District as a result of the Waldorf skip, leaving 7.4 FTE, which exceed the PKS reduction
by 2.4 FTE. Rebekah Campbell (9/2/08), Esmerelda Tapia (9/23/08), and Laura Brislow

30

(9/8/09) are the next most senior respondents noticed for layoff in Spanish.17 The layoff
notices issued to Ms. Campbell and Ms. Tapia shall be rescinded, and they shall be retained
by the District. The notice to Ms. Brislow shall be rescinded for .4 FTE, and she shall be laid
off for .6 FTE.18

Mathematics – 31.0 FTE PKS Reduction

115. The District sent layoff notices to certificated employees occupying 31.6 FTE

positions in math. However, due to rescissions and skipping, as reflected in the Factual
Findings above, the District is laying off fewer than 31.0 FTE certificated employees.

Music – 4.0 FTE PKS Reduction

116. The District sent layoff notices to certificated employees occupying 4.3 FTE

music positions, which exceed the PKS reduction by .3 FTE. After application of the
tiebreak, Elizabeth Hernandez (9/7/10) (.8 FTE) is the most senior respondent noticed for
layoff in music. She shall be laid off for .5 FTE, and shall be retained for .3 FTE.

Social Science – 17.0 FTE PKS Reduction

117. The District sent layoff notices to certificated employees occupying 24.6 FTE

positions in Social Science. Respondent Sarah Taylor will be retained by the District as a
result of the Accelerated Academy skip, leaving 23.6 FTE, which exceed the PKS reduction
by 6.6 FTE. As was set forth in Finding 64 above, the notices to respondents Christopher
Gosney, Jason Elkins, and Jose Garcia shall be rescinded by the District, leaving the notices
for an additional 3.3 FTE certificated positions occupied by respondents to be rescinded. As
was further set forth in Finding 64, the District must re-do the tiebreak for certificated
employees with S/S social science credentials with a seniority date of September 4, 2007,
and shall retain the most senior respondents occupying 3.3 FTE positions.

K-6 – 121.0 FTE PKS Reduction

118. The District sent layoff notices to certificated employees occupying 175.6 FTE

positions in kindergarten through sixth grade (K-6). Respondents Bryon Soules and Diana
Smith will be retained by the District as a result of the Waldorf skip, and respondents Ryan
Fernald, Staci DiSantis, and Lily Ngo will be retained by the District as a result of the TTI
skip, leaving 170.6 FTE, which exceed the PKS reduction by 49.6 FTE. As was set forth in
Finding 70 above, the notice to respondent Thomas Wolthius shall be rescinded by the

17 Consuelo Millard (9/2/08) did not file a request for hearing, and is not a respondent

in this proceeding. She may be laid off by the District.

18 If the layoff notice to Ms. Campbell is rescinded after the tiebreak is redone,
pursuant to Finding 66, then Ms. Brislow shall be retained, and her layoff notice rescinded;
Sonia Rambo (9/7/10) shall be laid off for .6 FTE, and retained for .4 FTE.

31

District, leaving the notices for an additional 48.6 FTE certificated positions occupied by
respondents to be rescinded. The District is instructed to identify the most senior
respondents occupying 48.6 FTE certificated K-6 positions. Those respondents shall be
retained, and their layoff notices rescinded.19

Individual Respondents

119. Cheryl Sims (2/2/04) holds an M/S credential, with supplemental
authorizations in Introductory Spanish, Business, and English. She is assigned to C.P.
Huntington Elementary, a PI school site. Ms. Sims is the only African-American certificated
employee at her school. She argued that her civil rights will be violated if she is laid off, and
that she should be retained under section 44955, subdivision (d)(2) in order to maintain or
achieve compliance with constitutional requirements pertaining to equal protection of the
laws. Ms. Sims received a layoff notice as a consequence of the reduction of 121 FTE K-6
teachers. As set forth in Finding 118, Ms. Sims will be retained by the District because she
has a seniority date prior to September 30, 2004. Therefore, it is unnecessary to address her
constitutional argument.

120. Miles Krier (11/2/07) holds an S/S PE credential, with a supplemental
authorization in biology. He is HQ in biology. He is currently the PE prep teacher at
Bowling Green Elementary School – McCoy Campus (Bowling Green), a dependent charter
school. In 2008-09 and 2009-10, he taught biology and life sciences at Will C. Wood, a
Priority School. For the 2011-12 school year, Bowling Green is planning to have a PE prep
period for primary grades (K-3), and a science prep period for grades 4-6. Mr. Krier is in the
process of developing a curriculum for the science prep period, and because he holds the
necessary credentials to teach science and PE, he asserted that he should be retained to
provide these services, since none of the more senior retained PE teachers have both
credentials. At this time, it is not certain what the curriculum will be for the teacher prep
period at Bowling Green for the 2011-12 school year. The evidence was insufficient to
establish that Mr. Krier should be retained by the District.

Additional Arguments Raised by Respondents

Reassignments to Child Development or Preschool Programs

121. The District operates child development and/or preschool programs that are

governed by section 8366, which states in pertinent part:

Each person employed by a public or private agency . . . in a
position requiring a child development permit for the

19 Although the District shall be required to make an exact determination of the
individuals who shall be retained (to omit employees who are not respondents in this matter),
it is clear that respondents occupying K-6 positions who have seniority dates on or before
September 30, 2004, will be retained by the District.

32

supervision and instruction of children, or for service as a
physician, dentist, or nurse, or in the supervision of the child
development program, shall be deemed to be employed in a
position requiring certification qualifications.

Each other person employed by an agency in a child
development program under the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed for all purposes, including retirement, to be a person
employed by the agency in a position not requiring certification
qualifications.

[¶] . . . [¶]

A district may lay off an employee required to have such a
permit at any time during the school year for lack of work or
lack of funds or may provide for his employment for not to
exceed 90 days in any one school year on an intermittent basis
which shall not be deemed probationary service. The order of
layoff shall be determined by length of service. The employee
who has served the shortest time shall be laid off first, except
that no permanent employee shall be laid off ahead of a
probationary employee. A permanent employee who has been
laid off shall hold reinstatement rights for a period of 39 months
from the date of layoff.

Service performed prior to September 18, 1959, shall not be
included in computing the service required as a prerequisite for
attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a permanent
child development employee.

A person who is employed by an agency as a probationary
employee in a position requiring a child development permit for
the supervision and instruction of children, or for service as a
physician, dentist, or nurse, or in the supervision of the
children's program and who has served in such a position for
three complete consecutive school years as defined in Sections
44908 or 87468 and 44975 or 87776 immediately prior to
September 18, 1959, may be dismissed only in accordance with
the provisions of Section 44949 or 87740.

Other persons who are employed as probationary employees in
positions requiring such permits on or after September 18, 1959,
may be dismissed in accordance with the provisions of Section
44949 or 87740.

33

122. The District did not issue layoff notices to any child development center or

preschool employees with child development permits as part of this layoff proceeding.

123. The following respondents have M/S credentials and also possess child

development site supervisor permits: Michele Schlenker (10/11/06); Ka Yang (10/6/08);
Christel Cruz (11/12/08); and Nathalie Damaso (1/5/09). In closing argument, respondents
identified six permanent and seven probationary certificated staff who, according to the
District’s seniority list, have less seniority than the four identified respondents, and who are
currently assigned to work in child development programs as teachers. However,
respondents provided no evidence to establish that any of the identified respondents had
taught in a child development program for at least one year in the past five years. Therefore,
assuming that such displacement rights exist, none of the respondents is deemed competent
under the Competency Criteria to bump a less senior certificated employee working in a
child development center or preschool.

Post- March 15, 2011 Attrition

124. The District has received information after March 15, 2011, that individuals
are resigning or retiring effective at the end of the 2010-11 school year. As of the date of
hearing the District had not rescinded any layoff notices to account for this attrition. The
District is committed to its stated goal of rescinding as many notices as possible. It intends
to consider post-March 15, 2011 attrition, though not required to do so.

Welfare of the District and Its Students

125. Other than that set forth particularly above, the Superintendent’s designees

correctly identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that
the Board directed be reduced or discontinued. No junior certificated employee is scheduled
to be retained to perform services which a more senior employee is certificated and
competent to render, unless skipped, as set forth above.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections
44949 and 44955. All notices and other jurisdictional requirements of sections 44949 and
44955 were met.

2.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to

34

deal with the pupils involved.”20 The burden is on the District to demonstrate that the
reduction or elimination of the particular kinds of services is reasonable and that the District
carefully considered its needs before laying off any certificated employee.21

3.

The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next school

year is an appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955. As stated in San
Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of
particular kinds of services on the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that
section, and, “in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated
staff, section 44955 is the only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate
that reduction.” The District must be solvent to provide educational services, and cost
savings are necessary to resolve its financial crisis. The Board’s decisions were a proper
exercise of its discretion.

4.

Legal cause exists to reduce or eliminate 355.6 FTE of particular kinds of

services offered by the District as set forth in detail in the Factual Findings. Cause for the
reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and
pupils, within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

5.

Legal cause also exists to accordingly reduce the number of certificated

employees of the District due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of
services.

Hearing Issues

6.

The preliminary notices of layoff issued to the following employees shall be

rescinded, and the certificated employees shall be retained for the 2011-12 school year:
Gricelda Jaime (Finding 20); Grace Yates and Kimberly Nickel (Finding 62); Matthew
Craine and Jennifer Cleland-Brinzer (.8 FTE) (Finding 63); Christopher Gosney, Jason
Elkins, and Jose Garcia (Finding 64); Michael Johnston and Elissa Christensen (Finding 65);
Kevin Burrill (Finding 68); Thomas Wolthius (Finding 70); Rebekah Campbell and
Esmerelda Taipa (Finding 114).

7.

The preliminary notices of layoff issued to the following employees shall be

rescinded in part, and the certificated employees shall be retained for the 2011-12 school
year as indicated: Nadine Nouchi (.8 FTE): laid off .6 FTE, retained .2 FTE (Finding 63);
Ryan Varrelman: laid off .6 FTE, retained .4 FTE (Finding 112); Kenneth McPeters: laid off
.8 FTE, retained .2 FTE (Finding 113); Laura Brislow: laid off .6 FTE, retained .4 FTE
(Finding 114); and Elizabeth Hernandez (.8 FTE): laid off .5 FTE, retained .3 FTE (Finding
116).

20 Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.

21 Campbell Elementary Teachers Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796,

807-808

35

8.

The District shall update its records to reflect the following information:

change the employment classification of Brian Fisher to permanent (Finding 30); Thurrell
Sanders is HQ in history (Finding 31); Robert Walters is HQ in M/S, math, and history core
(Finding 32); Cassandra Woodruff is HQ in biology (Finding 33); Kenneth McPeters’
seniority date shall be changed to August 25, 2004 (Finding 34); and Michael Johnston’s
seniority date shall be changed to August 14, 2006 (Finding 35).

9.

The Priority School skip is upheld for teachers at Oak Ridge Elementary;

Father Keith B. Kenney Elementary; Jedediah Smith Elementary; Fern Bacon Basic Middle;
and Will C. Wood Middle Schools (Findings 40-45, 48-51).

10.

The Priority School skip is not upheld for HJHS teachers (Findings 40-43, 46-

50, and 52).

11.
(Findings 53-54).

The Counselor and Social Worker skip is upheld at all six Priority Schools

12.

The evidence did not support skipping the six Priority Schools on the basis of

section 44955, subdivision (d)(2) (Findings 55-57).

13.

14.

15.

16.

The BCLAD/DLIP skip is upheld (Findings 71-74).

The Special Education skip is upheld (Findings 76-79).

The S/S Math skip is upheld (Findings 81-85).

The Home and Hospital skip is upheld (Findings 88-91).

17.

The Waldorf skip is upheld (Findings 92-95). The District shall rescind the
preliminary notices of layoff to Philip Roberto, Diana Smith, Bryon Soules, Keith Sabini,
Vicky Schroeder, and Scott Preston, and they shall be retained for the 2011-12 school year.

18.

The Accelerated Academy skip is upheld (Findings 96-101). The District shall

rescind the preliminary notices of layoff to Corey Fukuoka, Jennifer Healey, and Sarah
Taylor, and they shall be retained for the 2011-12 school year.

19.

The Talent Transfer Initiative skip is upheld (Findings 102-105). The District
shall rescind the preliminary notices of layoff to Staci DiSantis, Ryan Fernald, and Lily Ngo,
and they shall be retained for the 2011-12 school year.

20.

The District shall re-do the tiebreak for teachers with a seniority date of

September 4, 2007, with S/S social science credentials, and shall comply with Finding 64.

36

21.

The District shall re-do the tiebreak for teachers with a seniority date of

September 2, 2008, with S/S Spanish credentials, and shall comply with Findings 66 and
114.

22.

The District shall perform a lottery to break the tie between Sonia Rambo and

Patricia Wassum, teachers with S/S music credentials whose seniority date is September 7,
2010 (Finding 109.A).

23.

In accordance with Finding 75, the District shall identify and rescind the layoff

notice of the respondent with the greatest seniority who is senior to Yee Vang (9/4/07) who
is credentialed and competent to perform the services Mr. Vang is providing to the District.

24.

In accordance with Finding 117, the District shall identify and rescind the

layoff notices of the most senior respondents occupying 3.3 FTE positions after re-doing the
tiebreak for teachers with a seniority date of September 4, 2007, with S/S social science
credentials (Finding 64 and Legal Conclusion 20).

25.

In accordance with Finding 118, the District shall identify and rescind the

layoff notices of the most senior respondents occupying 48.6 FTE K-6 positions, after taking
into account skipped and retained employees.

26.

Corrections to the District’s tiebreaker matrix set forth in Finding 109 are

upheld.

27.

Other than the foregoing, no employee with less seniority than any respondent

is being retained to render a service which any respondent is certificated and competent to
render. Except as set forth above, the Board may give the remaining respondents whose
preliminary notices have not been rescinded final notice before May 15, 2011, that their
services will not be required for the ensuing school year, 2011-12.

1.

The District shall comply with Legal Conclusions 6 through 26.

2.

Except as noted above, notices shall be given to respondents identified in
attached Exhibit A that their services will not be required for the 20011-12 school year
because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. Notice shall be
given to respondents in inverse order of seniority.

ORDER

37

3.
and are DENIED.

All other contentions and claims not specifically mentioned were considered

DATED: May 6, 2011

_____________________________
CATHERINE B. FRINK
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

38

EXHIBIT A

LIST OF RESPONDENTS

Respondents marked with an asterisk (*) received “dual notices” as temporary employees.

1 Aandahl, Heidi
2 Abrahams, Anna Lisa
3 Acton, Chris
4 Adams, Tracy
5 Ahmadzai, Zolaikhs
6 Ainslie, Thomas
7 Allison, Christina
8 Anderson, Teresa
9 Androlowicz, Stanley
10 Angove, Amy
11 Ashat, Loveleen
12 Avis, Heidi
13 Azevedo, Margaret
14 Baker, Jeris
15 Baradat, Nicole
16 *Barber, Lindsay
17 Barsotti-Hopson, Rhonda
18 Bautista, Larisa
19 Beckett, Erik
20 Beutler, Carolyn
21 Boe, Jeri
22 Boettner, Julie
23 Borgman, Christina
24 Borrelli, Hillary
25 Bradshaw, Patricia
26 Bristow, Laura
27 Brown, Amy
28 Bruce, Michael
29 Budge, Peter
30 Bujalski, Lisa
31 Burkhouse, Craig
32 Burrill, Kevin
33 Calderon, Carmen
34 Campbell, Rebekah
35 Campos, Ramon
36 Cannady, Will
37 Carapiet, Arita

38 Cariveau, Carol
39 Castaneda, Luz
40 Catlett, Emily
41 Causley, Monique
42 Cazel-Mayo, Michelle
43 Cerezo, Diana
44 Chadwell, Norma
45 Chaidez, Luis
46 Chang, Edison
47 Chang, Ying
48 Chen, Wendy
49 Choi, Amie
50 Choy, David
51 Christensen, Elissa
52 Chu, Christopher
53 Chufar-Comstock, Bonnie
54 Cleland-Brinzer, Jennifer
55 Cluff, Kristen
56 Cochrane, Joan
57 Cole, Whitney
58 Conklin, Beth
59 Conner, Brandie
60 Cooperman, Jody
61 Corona, Alejandro
62 Craine, Matthew
63 *Crumbley, Edward
64 Cruz, Christel
65 Damaso, Nathalie
66 De Anda, Sandra
67 DelAgua, Julie
68 DiSantis, Staci
69 Doll, Lorraine
70 Dresser, J. Michael
71 Duong, Allie
72 Dyer, Monica
73 Edwards, Camica
74 Eid, Diane

39

75 Eisner, Adam
76 Elkins, Jason
77 Ellerman, Jennifer
78 Enrico, Teresa
79 Erickson, Katherine
80 Faughn, Tami
81 Feagins, Char
82 Feliciano, April
83 Ferreira, Amber
84 Ferreira, Steve
85 Fisher, Bryan
86 Fong, Adrienne
87 Frishman, Andrew
88 Galarza, Maria
89 Gallardo-Martinez, Leticia
90 Galvan, Katrina
91 Garcia, Jose
92 Garibay, Pedro
93 Gill, Bhupinder
94 Goetz, Kristin
95 Goodwin, Michelle
96 Gordon, Julie Ann
97 Gosney, Christopher
98 Graser, Jennifer
99 Grassinger, Carley

100 Graves, Kelly
101 Graziano, Jennifer
102 Greer, Antawn
103 Hack, Brandy
104 Hanafee, Jennifer
105 Hansen, Barbara
106 Hardin, Onisha
107 Harding, Donja
108 Harris, Kathryn
109 Harrison, Courtney
110 Heavin, David
111 Hensley, Katherine
112 Hernandez, Elizabeth
113 Hill, Megan
114 Horton, Lynda
115 Howard, Patricia
116 Hunt, Monica
117 Hunt, Pamela
118 Huynh, Sandra
119 Jackson, Adriane

120 Jaime, Griceldo
121 Jarvis, Lisa
122 Jensen, Erika
123 Johnson, Audrey
124 Johnson, Cristopher
125 Johnson-Bidwell, Maria
126 Johnston, Michael
127 Jones, Phillip, Marc
128 Jones, Rory
129 *Kadry, Jennifer
130 Keating, Nancy
131 Kerns, Patricia
132 Kirk, Aundrea
133 Krier, Miles
134 Lam, Christina
135 Lanzaro, Christina
136 Lee, Danny
137 Lee, Mary
138 Lim, Jade
139 Liow, Joe
140 Lobese, Robert
141 Lofton, Kristi
142 Lofton, Louise
143 Lopez, Maria
144 Maestas, Frank
145 Main, Davin
146 Manuel, Brent
147 Marquez, Tomás
148 Martin, Danielle
149 Martinez, Juan
150 Mashinini-Nigl, Siphiwe
151 Matoba, Margie
152 Matolo, Hazel
153 McCord, Yvonne
154 McGee, Jim
155 McPeters, Kenneth
156 *Means, Dale
157 Middleton, Juliana
158 Miller, Kristie
159 Mitchell, Brian
160 Moore, Brian
161 Mora, Carolina Avina
162 Moua, Si
163 Moua-Yang, Mai
164 Nakamura, Howard

40

165 Navarette, David
166 Navarrete, Ray
167 Nazari, Jaymee
168 Nevarez, Jackie
169 Newman, Jean
170 Newman, Minden
171 Nguyen, Phuong
172 Nickel, Kimberly
173 Noma, Lisa
174 Norris, Claire
175 Nouchi, Nadine
176 Olivares, Julio
177 Patterson, Pamela
178 Pattow-Vigil, Barbara
179 Peltz-Planchon, Tiffany
180 Pérez, Mirna
181 Perez, Rafael
182 Philipps, Theresa
183 Pickering-Pick, Sara
184 Power, Deborah
185 Prentice, Gary
186 Preston, Scott
187 Pullano, Jacquelyn
188 Rambo, Sonia
189 Reilly, Patrick
190 Reinke, Jennie
191 Reyes, Kim
192 Roberto, Philip
193 Roberts, Matthew
194 Roberts, Steven
195 Rocha, Araceli
196 Ruftus, Raelyn
197 Rule, Daniel
198 Ryan, Kelly
199 Sabini, Keith
200 Saldana, Juanita
201 Salk, Heidi
202 Samaan, Lynne
203 Sánchez, Debra
204 Sanders, Thurrell
205 Saxton, Joycelyn
206 Schlager, Matthew
207 Schlenker, Michelle
208 Schon, Julie
209 Selseleh, Mary

210 Shirley, Laura
211 Simonsen, Nicole
212 Sims, Cheryl
213 Slagle, Antonia
214 Smith, Diana
215 Smith, Nicole
216 Smith, Philip
217 Soules, Bryon
218 Springmeyer, Shannon
219 Stafford, David
220 Stephens, Joyce
221 Stincelli, David
222 Tapia, Esmeralda
223 Taylor, Christopher
224 *Taylor, Kathryn
225 Teweles, Benjamin
226 Thao, Shoua
227 *Thompson, Kelly
228 Thomson, Gregory
229 Tran, Linda
230 Turko, Kamala
231 Udell, Bertha
232 Vanderklay, Beth
233 Vang, Ching
234 Vang, Chong
235 Vang, Jade
236 Vang-Her, Yee
237 Varrelman, Ryan
238 Vidovich, Peter
239 Viggiano, Linda
240 Voss, Lisa
241 Vue, Vanessa
242 Wagers, Heather
243 Wagner, Sarah
244 Walker, Bonita
245 Walters, Robert
246 Webb, Terri
247 Weis, Mary
248 Wells-Artman, Christine
249 Wenell, Nital
250 White, David
251 White-Andrews, Rhiannon
252 Williams, Gavin
253 Willover, Valerie
254 Willow, Ellen

41

255 Winick, Judy
256 Wolthuis, Thomas
257 Woodruff, Cassandra
258 Yaangh, Stacy
259 Yang, Chong
260 Yang, Hlao

261 Yang, Julia
262 Yang, Ka
263 Yates, Grace
264 *Yun, Elsie
265 Zierenberg, Carolyn
266 Schroeder, Vicky

42

