BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
CALEXICO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
IMPERIAL COUNTY, CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
Proceeding Involving Those Calexico
Unified School District Certificated
Employees Impacted by Governing Board
Resolution No. 31-03-11,

OAH No. 2011030604

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of

California, heard this matter in Calexico, California, on April 29, 2011.

Clifford D. Weiler, Attorney at Law, represented the Calexico Unified School

District.

John W. Breeze, Attorney at Law, represented respondents. He was assisted by Ernie

Bristow, a UniServe Director with the California Teachers Association.

The matter was submitted on April 29, 2011.

The Calexico Unified School District

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Calexico Unified School District is located in Imperial County. The

District serves approximately 9,200 Kindergarten through 12th grade students. The District
maintains two comprehensive high schools, an adult program, a 9th grade academy, two
junior high schools, and seven elementary schools. The District employs approximately 450
certificated employees. The District’s currently operating budget is about $77 million.
Ninety-three percent of the District’s annual budget pays employee salaries and benefits.

1

2.

The District is governed by an elected five-member Board of Education (the

Governing Board). Richard Fragale is the Acting Superintendent of Schools and the
District’s Chief Executive Officer. Acting Superintendent Fragale is assisted by an
administrative staff that includes Teresa Estrada, the Director of Human Resources. Ms.
Estrada is a member of the Superintendent’s Cabinet.

The Fiscal Crisis

3.

After Proposition 13 was implemented in 1978, public schools have obtained

financing primarily from the State of California. A school district cannot determine the level
of state funding it will receive until the state budget is chaptered, an event that is supposed to
occur each year in late June. Before then, a school district’s governing board, which has the
duty to produce a balanced budget and to file an annual budget with the County Office of
Education, must take steps to make certain that financial ends will meet if the worst-case
financial scenario develops.

California’s recent budget problems have had a crippling impact on the Calexico

Unified School District and other public school districts. If the District is unable to meet its
financial obligations, a “negative” certification will be assigned that will authorize the
Imperial County Office of Education to intervene and take over the District’s operations.

With regard to the budget for the 2011-12 school year, the District has projected an

$11 million shortfall. The District currently has a qualified certification on file with the
Imperial County Department of Education, which means that the District may not be able to
meet its financial obligations this fiscal year or in the next fiscal year.

The District’s Response

4.

In response to the anticipated budgetary shortfall for the 2011-12 school year,
the District carefully reviewed its operations. Several cost-cutting matters were considered;
expenses were frozen for the 2010-11 school year; categorical funds were maximized; the
District sought to obtain financial relief for damages caused by the 7.2 magnitude earthquake
occurring on Easter 2010; and the District is appealing from an attendance penalty imposed
by the State of California resulting from the District’s inability to provide services to students
immediately after the 2010 earthquake as a result of damage done by that tremor. Declining
student enrollment was not a factor in the Governing Board’s very difficult decision to
reduce certificated staffing as one of several methods required to balance its budget for the
2011-12 school year.

Before the Governing Board’s meeting on March 8, 2011, Acting Superintendent
Fragale recommended to the Governing Board that 33.2 full-time equivalent certificated
employee positions be eliminated for the 2011-12 school year and that a corresponding
number of certificated employees be given notice that their services would not be required
for the 2011-12 school year.

2

5.

On March 8, 2011, following Acting Superintendent Fragale’s

recommendation, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 33-01-11. It provides:

WHEREAS, because of financial realities such as budget
and revenue considerations state-wide and the resulting
revenue limitations to this school district and financial
constraints resulting from revenue being insufficient to
maintain current levels of programs and services
including particular kinds of certificated services, and
because of the desire and need to reassess educational
priorities, and it being necessary to commence
implementing program changes in a timely fashion
within the current structure of the law, this District’s
Governing Board determines that it is in the best interest
of the District and the welfare of the schools and the
pupils thereof, to commence certificated layoff
proceedings to reduce particular kinds of services
(“PKS”) as hereinafter enumerated and to reduce the
corresponding number of certificated staff no later than
the beginning of the 2011-2012 school year;

WHEREAS, the cause of this reduction in certificated
services is not the separate statutory basis involving
declining average daily attendance during either of the
past two years;

WHEREAS, this discontinuance and reduction of
certificated services shall result in layoffs of certificated
personnel in accordance with Education Code sections
44955 and 44949 which provide a process whereby
particular decisions, actions and notifications must be
undertaken beginning no later than March 15 of each
school year regarding layoffs of certificated personnel in
order to reduce the number of certificated staff, and this
Board desires to reduce certificated staff as permitted by
law;

WHEREAS, this Governing Board desires to discontinue
and reduce the particular kinds of certificated services as
listed in Exhibit A, attached, and to that extent of full
time equivalents (“FTEs”) not later than the beginning of
the 2011-2012 school year (in addition to the release of
temporary certificated employees and/or the expiration
of their contracts without renewals or re-issuances);

3

WHEREAS, in the opinion of the Governing Board, it
will be necessary as a result of the discontinuances and
reductions of these particular kinds of services reflected
in Exhibit A to decrease the number of certificated
permanent and/or probationary employees by a
corresponding number of full-time equivalent positions;

WHEREAS, in determining the extent of staff FTE
reductions and services to be discontinued and reduced,
as noted in Exhibit A, the Governing Board has
considered all assured and/or known attrition as of this
time to the extent required by law (including but not
limited to resignations and retirements received and to be
effective not later than the close of this current school
year, non-reelections of certificated employees, if any,
for reasons unrelated to these discontinuances and
reductions of services, and the release of temporary
certificated employees and the expirations of their
contracts), so that the total referenced above and in
Exhibit A has already accounted for such attrition; but
for that attrition, this Board would have found it
necessary to discontinue or reduce additional particular
kinds of certificated services and/or full time equivalents;

NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED,

DETERMINED AND ORDERED by this Governing
Board, as follows:

1.

All of the above recitals are true and correct;

2.
The particular kinds of services as listed in
Exhibit A are hereby to be and will be discontinued and
reduced and otherwise eliminated to the described extent
not later than the beginning of the 2011-2012 school
year, within the meaning of Education Code section
44955, subdivision (b);

It is the opinion of this Governing Board, in view

3.
of the reductions of these particular kinds of services,
that it is necessary to decrease the number of permanent
and/or probationary employees serving in positions
requiring certification qualifications within this school
district at the close of this school year by a

4

corresponding number of full-time equivalent positions
as set forth within Exhibit A, and that such decrease in
number of certificated staff be implemented by the
termination of employment of certificated employees
above and beyond attrition and the termination or
expiration of employment of temporary and substitute
employees;

Due to the discontinuances and reductions of
4.
particular kinds of services set forth herein, the legal
number of employees of the District, pursuant to
Education Code Section 44955, shall not be reemployed
for the 2011-2012 school year;

Subject to requirements (if any) within the

5.
Educational Employment Relations Act, that for
purposes of “competency” as to “bumping”
(displacement) rights within the meaning of Education
Code section 44955(b) and as to reemployment rights
within the meaning of Education Code sections 44956
and 44957, to the extent such might apply, “competency”
shall be based upon the following: possession and
current filing of a preliminary or clear credential for the
subject matter into which the employee would bump for
the 2011-2012 school year or be reemployed;

For purposes of seniority tie-breaking criteria

6.
within the context of layoff and reemployment within the
meaning of Education Code section 44955, subdivision
(b) (third paragraph), section 44846 (second paragraph),
section 44956 and section 44957, the Governing Board
determines that seniority ties shall be broken in
accordance with the criteria listed within Exhibit B, said
criteria being based solely upon the current needs of the
District and the students thereof;

7.
The Acting Superintendent or the Acting
Superintendent’s designee(s) is(are) instructed to take the
steps necessary pursuant to the Education Code
including, in part, sections 44955 and 44949, to
implement the above and to reduce the certificated staff
as set forth hereinabove;

5

The actions of this Governing Board will not, in

8.
any way, be considered to prejudice the rights of any
certificated employee to whom notice will be given of
the Acting Superintendent’s recommendations of layoff,
should any employee request a hearing to contest this
matter and a recommended decision of an administrative
law judge be presented to this Board for consideration.

Above is as adopted by the Governing Board of the
Calexico Unified School District at a special meeting
held on March 8, 2011, in Calexico, Imperial County, by
the following vote:

Ayes: Trustee; Duarte, Aguilar and Valenzuela

Nayes: Trustee; Romo, Kim

6.

Exhibit A, which identified the particular kinds of services and full time

equivalents, provided:

IDENTIFICATION OF
PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES (PKSs)
AND
FULL TIME EQUIVALENCIES (FTEs)
TO BE DISCONTINUED OR REDUCED NOT LATER THAN THE BEGINNING OF
THE 2011-2012 SCHOOL YEAR

Particular Kind of Service

Discontinuance or Reduction

Full time Equivalents

Assistant Principal Services

discontinuance

Assistant Principal Services

discontinuance

Assistant Principal/Coordinator
of Academics and Instruction/

Director of Special Education
and Guidance Services

Kindergarten through sixth grade
teaching services

reduction

reduction

6

5.0

1.0

0.2

1.0

Biology, high school,
teaching services

Counseling services
(excludes 1.0 migrant program
counselor services and 1.0 student
well-being facilitator services)

Physical education, junior high
school, teaching services

English teaching services,
high school

English Language Arts (ELA)
high school teaching services

CAHSEE preparation,
high school, teaching services

Math (foundational) high school
teaching services

Math (foundational)
teaching services, De Anza

Math (foundational) junior high
school teaching services

Special education teaching services
mild/moderate, special day class

School psychologist services

Physical science, eighth grade
teaching services

Agriculture Biology/agriculture science
teaching services

Spanish teaching services

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

7

1.0

7.0

1.0

1.2

1.2

0.6

1.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Spanish teaching services, Grade 9*

reduction

1.0*

Home instruction teaching services*

reduction

Special education teaching services
mild/moderate, special day class*

reduction

TOTAL FTE

1.0*

1.0*

33.2

7.

Exhibit B, which set forth the tie-breaking criteria, provided:

*
Inclusion within this Resolution of these services
which are being provided by certificated employees who
were previously laid off, is not intended to grant those
individuals who are impacted any rights greater than
provided by law, nor to nullify and provisions within
each impacted individual’s temporary employment
contract, nor to supersede any other action by this Board
to release or otherwise terminate the services of any
impacted individual, nor to extend the pre-existing rights
to reemployment as contained in Education Code
sections 44956 (permanent) and 44957 (probationary).

CRITERIA FOR BREAKING SENIORITY TIES

Subject to requirements (if any) within the Educational
Employment Relations Act, this Governing Board
determines, based solely on the needs of this District and
the students of this District, that seniority ties within the
meaning of Education Code sections 44955, subdivision
(b) (third paragraph) and section 44846, shall be resolved
by applying the following criteria:

The following rating system shall be applied in
determining the order of termination of certificated
employees, such that a tie will be broken in favor of the
employee with a greater number of total points:

A. Clear Professional, Standard, or General

Teaching Credentials. Rating: +3 points per
credential

B. Preliminary Teaching Credentials. Rating: +2

points per credential

8

C. Supplementary Authorization, issued by the

California Commission on Teacher
Credentialing: Rating: + 1 point per area of
supplementary authorization

D. Earned degrees beyond the BA/BS level.

Rating: +1 point per degree

E. Credentials and experience to teach in a

special categorical program (e.g., bilingual,
special education). Rating: +1 point per
credential, +1 point per year of experience

F. Complete years of teaching experience in any

California school district under a full
credential. Rating: +1 point per year

G. Number of complete years of service in the

District in a position requiring an
administrative services credential. Rating: +1
point per year

The above-referenced determinations shall be
based upon information and data which exists in the
District’s possession and within the employee’s
personnel file as of the date of this Resolution.

TIE-BREAKING PROCEDURE FOR EQUAL POINT
TOTALS

In the event that a tie still exists following

application of the above criteria, the District will then
break ties by utilizing a lottery.

8.

Resolution No. 33-03-11 did not contain a “skipping” provision under Education

Code section 44944, subdivision (d)(1), authorizing the retention of a junior employee over a
more senior employee on the basis that the junior employee possessed special training or
experience necessary to teach a particular course of study that a more senior employee did not
possess.

As specifically noted in the Resolution No. 33-03-11, the Governing Board
“considered all assured and/or known attrition as of this time to the extent required by law
(including but not limited to resignations and retirements received and to be effective not
later than the close of this current school year, non-reelections of certificated employees, if

9

any, for reasons unrelated to these discontinuances and reductions of services, and the release
of temporary certificated employees and the expirations of their contracts) . . .” Thus, the
total number of particular kinds of services referred to in Exhibit A already accounted for
such attrition as existed on March 8; but for that attrition, this Board would have
discontinued or reduced additional particular kinds of certificated services and/or full time
equivalents. Attrition included the retirements of Juan Orduna, a Math/Calculus instructor
who is certified to teach AP classes, and the retirement of Ray Alvarado, a Physical
Education instructor. The Governing Board accepted Mr. Orduna’s and Mr. Alvarado’s
applications for retirement of these individuals before March 8, 2010.

9.

On March 10, 2010, two days after the Governing Board adopted the resolutions

referred to herein, Sabino Camacho, an General Science and Earth Science instructor who
teaches Earth Science under a discretionary waiver, submitted his application for retirement.

10.

Before March 15, 2010, the Governing Board was unaware that Norma Garcia,

an elementary school teacher, Maria C. Martinez, an elementary school teacher, and other
credentialed employees intended to retire. Not one of these individuals submitted a retirement
application before March 15, 2011, the date on which the District was required to serve
preliminary layoff notices.

The Particular Kinds of Services

11.

The kinds of services identified in Resolution No. 33-03-11 were services that
could be reduced lawfully under the Education Code. The adoption of Resolution No. 33-03-
11 was neither arbitrary nor capricious; it was well within the Governing Board’s discretion.
No particular kind of service was lowered to a level below that mandated by state or federal
law. Resolution No. 33-03-11 was related solely to the economic crisis and the Governing
Board’s duty to balance the budget.

The District’s Seniority List

12.

The District maintains a seniority list, a constantly evolving document that is

updated as new certificated employees are hired and as other employees retire, resign, or
otherwise become separated from service with the District. The seniority list is a spreadsheet
that is organized from the most senior credentialed employee to the most recently hired
credentialed employee. The spreadsheet contains the school site where the employee
provides certificated services, the employee’s status (permanent or probationary), the
employee’s assignments, the grade taught, the employees name, the number of full time
equivalent services provided by the employee, the employee’s seniority date (the first date of
paid probationary service), the employee’s English Language Learner authorization, the
employee’s credential(s), and any supplemental authorization(s).

13.

The District encourages credentialed employees to review the seniority list and

to provide staff with updated information concerning new credentials and authorizations as

10

soon as possible to enable the District to make assignments and reassignments in an
appropriate manner.

The Issuance of Preliminary and Precautionary Layoff Notices

14.

Using the updated seniority spreadsheet, Resolution No. 33-03-11, and the tie-

breaking, Ms. Estrada and District staff identified those certificated employees who should
receive preliminary layoff notices and those who should not. Whenever an employee was
tentatively identified as being in line to receive a layoff notice, that employee’s seniority and
credentials were carefully examined to determine if that employee could “bump” into a
position held by a more junior employee. Before March 15, 2011, 25 certificated employees
were served with preliminary layoff notices and other required documents. Of these, Isaac
Murillo Estrada, Gerado G. Roman, Glenn F. Sarot (0.2 FTE), Analy M. Torres, and
Gabrielle E. Williams Ballesteros did not request a hearing.

All prehearing jurisdictional documents were met.

15.

To take into account the possibility of error, the District issued “precautionary
layoff notices” to three certificated employees who provided the kinds of services that were
being reduced and who might be impacted by the layoff proceeding. The District carefully
examined the seniority and competency of these employees before issuing precautionary
layoff notices. Before March 15, 2011, precautionary layoff notices and other required
documents were served upon Maura Perez, Carmen Moncada, and Vanessa Santillanes.
These individuals did not request a hearing.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

The Administrative Hearing

16.

On April 29, 2011, the record in the reduction in force proceeding was opened.

Jurisdictional documents were introduced. The caption was amended. Opening statements
were provided. Sworn testimony was taken and documentary evidence was received. Ms.
Estrada testified about the District, its funding, the impact of California’s financial crisis
upon the District and its operations, the manner in which the District was attempting to
remedy the problem, Acting Superintendent Fragale’s recommendations to the Governing
Board, the Governing Board’s adoption of the resolutions, how attrition was considered in
the adoption of those resolutions, how bumping worked, and why the services of two
teachers with multiple subject teaching credentials were being terminated when only one
elementary teaching PKS was being reduced and why the services of a social science teacher
was being terminated when the PKS resolution did not mention the reduction of service for
social science. The two elementary school employees and the social science instructor were
bumped by assistant principals, each of whom had more seniority than these employees and
each of whom was credentialed and competent to provide the services in the positions being
held by more junior employees.

11

17.

Eric Lopez, a Biology teacher with a seniority date of September 1, 2004, is
qualified to teach 9th grade General Science and Earth Science if a Governing Board waiver
were granted. Thus, he could fill the Science/Earth Science position being vacated by Mr.
Orduna, who retired on March 10, 2011, before layoff notices had to be issued, since the
Governing Board did not consider that attrition. However, the issuance of a waiver to teach
Earth Science is discretionary with the Governing Board and whether the Governing Board
should grant that waiver is not an issue that can be resolved in this layoff proceeding.

18. Ms. Estrada testified that Claudia Meza (seniority date September 14, 2009)

and Pollavet Hansanugrum (seniority date September 14, 2009) were credentialed and
competent to teach a Math/Calculus class that was being taught by Mr. Orduna; Ms. Estrada
was not aware which of those employees was considered to be the most senior teacher under
the District’s tie-breaking criteria. Neither Ms. Meza nor Mr. Hansanugrum is currently
credentialed to teach AP mathematics. Further, the Governing Board considered Mr.
Orduna’s retirement before reaching the decision to reduce 1.0 FTE in high school Math, so
there is no vacant position for either of them to fill.

19.

Lorena D. Rodriguez, a Physical Education teacher with a seniority date of

September 28, 2009, is credentialed and competent to teach the Physical Education position
that Mr. Alvarado held, except that the Governing Board considered Mr. Alvarado’s
retirement before reaching the decision to reduce 1.0 FTE in junior high school Physical
Education, so there is no vacant position for her to fill.

The Reduction in Force Proceeding

20.

The adoption of Resolution No. 31-03-11 was the result of a budgetary crisis,

not a decline in attendance; it was enacted in good faith; it was in the best interest of the
District and its students given the District’s present circumstances. The District complied
with all jurisdictional prerequisites. The District used seniority, credentials, and competence
as the basis for “bumping” junior employees, and the District retained the services of more
senior, competent and appropriately credentialed employees to provide services currently
being provided by more junior employees.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Statutory Authority - Reduction in Force Proceedings

1.

Education Code section 44949 provides in part:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is
given notice by the governing board that his or her
services will not be required for the ensuing year for the

12

reasons specified in Section 44955, the governing board
and the employee shall be given written notice by the
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . .
that it has been recommended that the notice be given to
the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.

. . .

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if
there is cause for not reemploying him or her for the
ensuing year. A request for a hearing shall be in writing
and shall be delivered to the person who sent the notice
pursuant to subdivision (a), on or before a date specified
in that subdivision, which shall not be less than seven
days after the date on which the notice is served upon the
employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so
shall constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a
hearing . . .

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee,
the proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section
11500) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the
Government Code and the governing board shall have all
the power granted to an agency therein, except that all of
the following shall apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of
defense, if any, within five days after service upon him
or her of the accusation and he or she shall be notified of
this five-day period for filing in the accusation.

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6

of the Government Code shall be available only if
request is made therefor within 15 days after service of
the accusation, and the notice required by Section 11505
of the Government Code shall so indicate.

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an
administrative law judge who shall prepare a proposed
decision, containing findings of fact and a determination
as to whether the charges sustained by the evidence are
related to the welfare of the schools and the pupils

13

thereof. The proposed decision shall be prepared for the
governing board and shall contain a determination as to
the sufficiency of the cause and a recommendation as to
disposition. However, the governing board shall make
the final determination as to the sufficiency of the cause
and disposition. None of the findings, recommendations,
or determinations contained in the proposed decision
prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding
on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing
board of the school district shall not constitute cause for
dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial
errors. Copies of the proposed decision shall be
submitted to the governing board and to the employee on
or before May 7 of the year in which the proceeding is
commenced. All expenses of the hearing, including the
cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid by the
governing board from the district funds . . .

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient
when it is delivered in person to the employee to whom it
is directed, or when it is deposited in the United States
registered mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the last
known address of the employee. . . .

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b)
any continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of
the Government Code, the dates prescribed in
subdivision (c) which occur on or after the date of
granting the continuance and the date prescribed in
subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which occurs after the
date of granting the continuance shall be extended for a
period of time equal to the continuance.

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides in part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or
her position for causes other than those specified . . . and
no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her
position for cause other than as specified . . .

(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be
reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of
the following school year . . . and when in the opinion of

14

the governing board of the district it shall have become
necessary by reason of any of these conditions to
decrease the number of permanent employees in the
district, the governing board may terminate the services
of not more than a corresponding percentage of the
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well
as probationary, at the close of the school year. Except
as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the
provisions of this section while any probationary
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render . . .

As between employees who first rendered paid service to
the district on the same date, the governing board shall
determine the order of termination solely on the basis of
needs of the district and the students thereof. Upon the
request of any employee whose order of termination is so
determined, the governing board shall furnish in writing
no later than five days prior to the commencement of the
hearing held in accordance with Section 44949, a
statement of the specific criteria used in determining the
order of termination and the application of the criteria in
ranking each employee relative to the other employees in
the group. This requirement that the governing board
provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for
determining the order of termination shall not be
interpreted to give affected employees any legal right or
interest that would not exist without such a requirement.

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given
before the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in
Section 44949, and services of such employees shall be
terminated in the inverse of the order in which they were
employed, as determined by the board in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845. In the
event that a permanent or probationary employee is not
given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed
for the ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and
reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be

15

retained to render any service which their seniority and
qualifications entitle them to render. However, prior to
assigning or reassigning any certificated employee to
teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught,
and for which he or she does not have a teaching
credential or which is not within the employee’s major
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the
governing board shall require the employee to pass a
subject matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district
may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in
order of seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for

personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or
to provide services authorized by a services credential
with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated
employee has special training and experience necessary
to teach that course or course of study or to provide those
services, which others with more seniority do not
possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving

compliance with constitutional requirements related to
equal protection of the laws.

Jurisdiction

3.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

4.

A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service should be
reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the governing board acted unfairly
or improperly simply because it made a decision it was empowered to make. (Rutherford v.
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.) A school board’s decision to reduce or
discontinue a particular kind of service need not be tied in with any statistical computation.
It is within the discretion of a school board to determine the amount by which it will reduce
or discontinue a particular kind of service as long as the school district does not reduce a
service below the level required by law. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144
Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)

16

5.

The Education Code leaves to a school board’s discretion the determination of
whether an employee must also be competent to be employed in a vacant position in addition
to possessing seniority. The term “competent” relates to an individual’s specific skills or
qualifications, including academic background, training, credentials, and experience, but it
does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance. (Forker v. Board of Trustees
(1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)

Competence

Attrition

6.

“Positively assured attrition” is attrition which has actually occurred and it is
distinguished from “potential attrition” which may be anticipated but is still unknown. As
noted in San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, at pages 634-635,
courts previously held that when terminating certificated employees because of a decline in a
school district’s average daily attendance (ADA), a district was required to consider all
positively assured attrition; however, in San Jose the terminations were the result of the
reduction of particular kinds of services (PKS), not ADA. The San Jose court described this
as “an issue of first impression.” The appellate court considered the previous ADA decisions
and the language of the statute in reaching the conclusion that a district need not consider
attrition occurring after March 15. The court reasoned that it is within a district’s discretion,
subject to the minimum level required by law, to determine the extent to which a reduction of
services was deemed necessary and proper under the circumstances. The decision had to be
made at the time of the final notice. In PKS cases, the determination of the amount by which
a service is to be reduced is the determination of the number of positions to be eliminated by
statute. In making a final decision on PKS reductions, the extent to which the services are
reduced inherently determines the number of positions that remain. If a service is to be
eliminated, for example, it is obvious that it is unnecessary to consider attrition in any way.
(Ibid., at 636.)

This aspect of the San Jose decision remains unchallenged. It supports the District’s
position in this matter. Attrition occurring after March 15 need not be considered in a layoff
proceeding.

Information Filed after March 15

7.

A credential recorded with the County Superintendent after March 15 cannot

be used to assert bumping or reassignment rights. The practical reason for this rule is that
layoff notices must be given, if at all, by March 15 to effect a reduction in teaching staff for
the ensuing school year. Permitting a teacher to continue employment by reason of a
credential filed after March 15 precludes a district from serving a layoff notice to a junior
teacher. This circumstance would result in the board being forced to retain an extra teacher
when the entire purpose of the layoff procedure is to allow the reduction of staff positions

17

because there are fewer services being offered. (Duax v. Kern Community College Dist.
(1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 567-568.)

Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees

8.

As a result of the Governing Board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of
service, cause exists under the Education Code for the District to give final notice to those
respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment will be terminated at the
close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed by the district for
the 2011-2012 school year.

Determination

9.

The charges set forth in the Accusation were sustained by the preponderance
of the evidence except as otherwise stated herein. The adoption of Resolution No. 31-03-11
was related to the welfare of the District and its pupils. The District made necessary
assignments and reassignments in such a manner to ensure that no permanent or probationary
employee with less seniority than any employee identified hereafter is being retained to
render a servicer that the identified employees are certificated and competent to render.

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the Calexico Unified School District

issue final notices to the following certificated employees: Antonio Buenrostro Zepeda;
Anel Bustamante; Hector Joshua Cabrera; Kristina Costa; Leticia Cota; Silvia F.
Covarrubias; Julie M. Fernandez; Roberto O. Gutierrez; Pollavet Hansanugrum; Delia
Susana Hurtado; Jorge Jimenez; Eric Lopez; Karla Magallanes; Josefina Mercado Cortez;
Claudia Meza; Jesus Antonio Ochoa; Eliza Pereda; Yordan Rivera; Lorena D. Rodriguez;
Cynthia Salgado; Maria Elena Paola Sanchez-Romero; Cherie Kay Shook; Alfredo R. Silva;
Martha Torres; and Nifa Vega.

DATED: April 29, 2011

________________________________
JAMES AHLER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

18

