BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
DOS PALOS-ORO LOMA JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusations Against:

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE
DOS PALOS-ORO LOMA JOINT
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,

Respondents.

OAH No. 2011031237

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Steven C. Owyang, State of California, Office of

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Dos Palos, California, on April 12, 2011.

Kevin R. Dale, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented the Dos Palos-

Oro Loma Joint Unified School District.

Joshua F. Richtel, Tuttle & McCloskey, represented the respondents listed in

Attachment A, with the exception of Todd Maddux and Robbie Calvert. Todd Maddux
represented himself. Robbie Calvert did not participate in the proceedings.

The parties timely filed post-hearing briefs and the matter was submitted for decision.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

3.

Dr. Brian Walker, Superintendent, Dos Palos-Oro Loma Joint Unified School

District, issued the accusation in his official capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

On March 10, 2011, the Governing Board of the Dos Palos-Oro Loma Joint

Unified School District adopted Resolution No. 10-11-25 (the “PKS Resolution”), in which it
determined that it was necessary to reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of
services of the District for the 2011-2012 school year (FTE refers Full-Time Equivalent
position):

Elementary Classroom Instructional Services
Multiple Subject Teaching Services - Grades K-5

8.0 FTE

-1-

Middle School Classroom Instructional Services
English Language Arts - Grades 6-8
Reading Intervention Specialist - Grades 6-8
English Language Development - Grades 6-8
Math - Grades 6-8
Social Studies - Grades 6-8
Instrumental Music/Choir - Grades 3-8

High School Classroom Instructional Services
English Language Arts - Grades 9-12
English Language Development - Grades 9-12
Math - Grades 9-12
Social Studies - Grades 9-12
Spanish - Grades 9-12
ROP Accounting - Grades 9-12
ROP Virtual Enterprise - Grades 9-12
Computer Applications - Grades 9-12
ROP Auto/ROP Advanced Auto - Grades 9-12
Auto Shop - Grades 9-12
Digital Design - Grades 9-12
ROP Digital Photography - Grades 9-12
ROP Art Animation - Grades 9-12
Agricultural Biology - Grades 9-12
ROP Floral Design - Grades 9-12
Wood Shop - Grades 9-12
ROP Construction - Grades 9-12
Advanced Wood Shop - Grades 9-12

Counselor Positions
Counselor - Grades 6-8

Administrative Positions
High School Vice-Principal
Middle School Vice-Principal
Alternative Education Principal

Other Positions
School Psychologist
Adult Education Teaching Services

-2-

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
2.0 FTE
3.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

2.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
2.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
.33 FTE
.17 FTE
.33 FTE
.33 FTE
.33 FTE
.50 FTE
.17 FTE
.33 FTE
.33 FTE
.50 FTE
.50 FTE
.33 FTE
.17 FTE

1.0 FTE

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

Grant Writing Services
Agricultural Related Services
Special Education - Teachers
Alternative Education Teaching Services - Wood Shop

Total:

.17 FTE
.17 FTE
3.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

38.66 FTE

The board further determined that it was necessary to decrease the number of
permanent and/or probationary certificated employees at the end of the present school year
by a corresponding number of full-time equivalent positions, and directed the Superintendent
or his designee to proceed accordingly by notifying the appropriate employees in order to
implement the board’s determination.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

The board further adopted criteria by which ties in seniority between certificated

employees would be resolved.

Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the parties reached various

stipulations. Factual Findings 5 through 9 reflect those stipulations.

The District rescinded the preliminary layoff notices that were served on

Lorenzo DeLeon, Manuel Cavazos, Tom Salles, and Nicole Carr.

The District properly applied tie-breaking criteria and the following

respondents were ranked, beginning with the highest ranking winner of the tie-breaking
criteria and proceeding downward, as follows: 1. Lorenzo DeLeon; 2. Manuel Cavazos;
3. Rosemary Jordan; and, 4. Delia Silva.

All jurisdictional requirements applicable to the certificated layoff have been

met.

District Exhibits 1 through 11 are admitted into evidence.

The following certificated employees will be assigned to positions requiring

use of their single subject credentials: Steven Hernandez; Janine Clements; and, Carrie
Wooten.

10.

At hearing, Superintendent Walker sought to discontinue an additional 3.0

FTE of services that were not listed in the PKS resolution. These services are: 2.0 FTE
Community Day School (held by Marta Stencel and Denise Hill); and 1.0 FTE (Agricultural
Mechanics .5 FTE, ROP Veterinary Sciences .17 FTE, Agricultural Welding .17 FTE, and
Agricultural Services .16 FTE) (held by Todd Maddux). Superintendent Walker will
recommend these additional discontinuances of service to the board, before May 15, 2011.

-3-

11.

Respondents Marta Stencel, Denise Hill, and Todd Maddux were properly

served with preliminary layoff notices.

12.

The services set forth in the PKS resolution and the 3.0 FTE referenced in

Factual Finding 10 are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued
within the meaning of Education Code section 44945. Respondents do not contend that any
of these reductions is of a mandated service.

13.

No permanent or probationary certificated employee with less seniority than a

respondent is being retained to provide a service that a respondent is credentialed and
competent to render.

14.

The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the

District and of its pupils.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The District rescinded the preliminary layoff notices that were served on

Lorenzo DeLeon, Manuel Cavazos, Tom Salles, and Nicole Carr. They are not subject to
layoff.

2.

The District will assign Steven Hernandez, Janine Clements, and Carrie

Wooten to positions requiring use of their single subject credentials; they are therefore not
subject to layoff.

3.

Although the additional 3.0 FTE of services now sought to be reduced were
not referenced in the District’s PKS resolution, they were not required to be. A governing
board may terminate the services of certificated employees pursuant to Education Code
section 44955 only in very limited circumstances. One circumstance is “whenever a
particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued . . . and when in the opinion of the
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of [that condition]
to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district.” (Emphasis added.) But it is
not necessary for the governing board to have any opinion about these matters in March. A
governing board is not required to take any action in March. Pursuant to section 44955,
subdivision (c), the board has until May 15 to decide to give notices of non-reemployment.

Although governing boards typically adopt a PKS resolution in March, they are not

required to do so. Section 44949 does require certificated employees to receive a
preliminary layoff notice (sometimes called the March 15 notice) and the District provided
that notice to the respondents, including Marta Stencel, Denise Hill, and Todd Maddux.

4.

The services set forth in the PKS resolution and the 3.0 FTE referenced in

Factual Finding 10 are particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued

-4-

within the meaning of Education Code section 44945. Respondents do not contend that any
of these reductions is of a mandated service.

5.

Due to the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services referenced

in Legal Conclusion 2, cause exists pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice
to respondents, including Marta Stencel, Denise Hill, and Todd Maddux, that their services
will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year. This cause solely relates to the welfare
of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

6.

No permanent or probationary certificated employee with less seniority than a
respondent is being retained to provide a service for which a respondent is credentialed and
competent to render.

The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the

District and of its pupils.

7.

8.

to “bump” Todd Maddux is moot.

Due to the Legal Conclusions above, the issue of Robbie Calvert’s eligibility

ORDER

1.

The accusations against Lorenzo DeLeon, Manuel Cavazos, Tom Salles,

Nicole Carr, Steven Hernandez, Janine Clements, and Carrie Wooten are dismissed. They
are not subject to layoff.

2.

Notice may be given to the remaining respondents, including Marta Stencel,

Denise Hill, and Todd Maddux, that their services will not be required for the 2011-2012
school year.

DATED: __________________________

______________________________________
STEVEN C. OWYANG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

-5-

ATTACHMENT A: LIST OF RESPONDENTS

Calvert, Robbie
Camara, Susan
Carr, Nicole
Cavazos, Manuel
Ceccarelli, Elizabeth
Coronel, Sherri
Crivelli, Holly
Davis, Meghan
DeLeon, Lorenzo
Gonzalez, Patricia
Guevara, Rene
Hill, Denise
Hofer, Jenna
Hunger, Jenny
Jordan, Rosemary
Maddux, Todd
Malm, Nicolette
Munger, Christopher
Pastori, Lynnette
Peterman, Tracy
Pinto, Robin
Salles, Tom
Silva, Delia
Soares, Kelly
Stencel, Marta
Strobel, Dan
Tall, Mike
Wallace, Robbie
Westbrook, Tina
Wilson, Kelly
Zavala, Laura
Zavala, Norma

-6-

