BEFORE THE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF SANTIAGO CHARTER MIDDLE SCHOOL
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against
April Keller, Jon R. Ruffridge, Brooke
Khan, and Elisha Murillo,

Respondents.

OAH No. 2011031476

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Jankhana Desai, Office of Administrative Hearings, State

of California, heard this matter on May 2, 2011, in Orange, California.

Sarah Kollman, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Middleton, Young & Minney, LLP,

represented Santiago Charter Middle School (Santiago).

Brenda Sutton-Wills, Staff Attorney, California Teachers Association, represented
Respondents April Keller (Keller), Jon R. Ruffridge (Ruffridge), Brooke Khan (Khan), and
Elisha Murillo (Murillo), all of whom were present throughout the hearing.

Santiago has decided to reduce or discontinue certain services and has given
Respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2011-2012 school year.
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not
reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and argument heard. The record was

closed and the matter submitted on May 2, 2011.

The hearing of this matter was previously continued from April 20, 2011 to May 2,

2011, at the request of Respondents. Pursuant to Education Code1 section 44949,
subdivision (e), the deadlines set forth in section 44949, subdivision (c), and 44955,
subdivision (c), are extended by 12 days.

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.
Santiago.

Mary Henry filed the Accusation in her official capacity as Principal of

2.

Respondents are certificated employees of Santiago.

3.

Santiago is a charter school. Charter schools are, with certain exceptions not
relevant here, exempt from laws governing school districts, under Education Code section
47610. Nevertheless, Santiago has agreed to comply with the requirements of Sections
44949 and 44955.

4.

On March 11, 2011,

the Governing Board (Board) of Santiago adopted
Resolution No. 23-11 (Exhibit 1). That resolution recites that, “because of the financial
levels of
constraints resulting from revenue being insufficient
programs and necessary program changes resulting therefrom,” the Board determines to
reduce or eliminate the following particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2011-2012
school year.

to maintain the current

Services

Technology

Social Science/History

Physical Education

English

Counselor

Total

FTE2

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.5

4.5

5.

The resolution reflects that the Board further determined that due to the
reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services, the corresponding number of
certificated employees of Santiago would be terminated at the end of the 2010-2011 school
year. The Board directed the Principal or her designated representative to determine which
employees’ services would not be required for the 2011-2012 school year as a result of this
reduction in services, and directed the Principal to send appropriate notices to all employees
affected by virtue of the reduction and elimination of particular kinds of services.

2 Full-time equivalent position.

2

7.

8.

9.

6.

On or before March 15, 2011, Santiago provided written notice to the affected
certificated employees, under sections 44949 and 44955, that their services would not be
required for the 2011-2012 school year. Each written notice stated that the Board had
adopted a resolution reducing or eliminating certain certificated services for the 2011-2012
school year, and attached a copy of Resolution No. 23-11, thereby identifying the Board’s
reasons and the particular kinds of services being reduced or eliminated. Respondents
thereafter timely filed requests for hearing, seeking a determination of whether cause exists
for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

On April 5, 2011, Santiago filed and served the Accusation and related

documents on Respondents. Respondents thereafter filed timely notices of defense.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

The services set forth in Factual Finding 4 are particular kinds of services that

may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.

10.

The Board took action to reduce the services set forth in Factual Finding 4,
because of severe budget cuts of future state funding. The decision to reduce or discontinue
particular kinds of services in light of the uncertainty surrounding future state funding is
neither arbitrary nor capricious, but is rather a proper exercise of Santiago’s discretion.

11.

The Board adopted a “Tie-Breaker Resolution,” containing criteria to establish
seniority dates for individuals who first rendered paid service on the same date. Santiago did
not need to utilize the criteria in order to determine the order of layoff.

Seniority List

12.

Santiago determined the order of termination of the employees serving in the
positions to be reduced or discontinued by creating a seniority list.3 (Exhibit 2) The seniority
list identified each employee’s first date of paid service in a probationary position. The
Orange Unified School District (OUSD) is Santiago’s oversight district. Santiago recognizes
seniority from OUSD. Seniority dates were established based on hire date into OUSD or
Santiago, whichever came first. If there was a break in service, seniority was established by
the rehire date. Respondents’ argument that Santiago should have only credited seniority
based on service at Santiago and not at OUSD is not persuasive as they have not shown that
Santiago’s recognition of service to OUSD constitutes an abuse of discretion.

13.

Keller and Murillo challenged the seniority dates assigned to them. Keller
asserted that her seniority date should be August 28, 2006, and not August 27, 2007, as
indicated in the seniority list. Murillo asserted that her seniority date should be October 2,
2006, and not August 27, 2007, as indicated in the seniority list. Even if both seniority dates

3 Respondent Brooke Khan is on the seniority list as Brooke Schwartz.

3

were adjusted to the asserted dates, it would not affect the order of termination; therefore, it
is not necessary to address the issue in the instant decision.

Bumping Challenges

14. Murillo is subject to layoff because she is the most junior physical education
teacher. Murillo asserted that she should be able to bump Kathyrn Napoli (Napoli). Napoli’s
seniority date is August 25, 2008. Napoli is not subject to layoff since math is not one of the
identified particular kinds of service that the Board determined to reduce or eliminate.
Napoli holds a single subject math credential and currently teaches prealgebra and algebra.
(Exhibit A) Murillo testified that she could teach Napoli’s position. Murillo holds a clear
multiple subject credential that she received in the year 2000, and also holds a supplemental
authorization in physical education. Her credential does not allow her to teach single
subjects unless students are organized into certain core classes, and the credential does not
authorize the teaching of geometry. She currently teaches physical education. She has never
taught math. Accordingly, Murillo is not certificated to teach the classes that Napoli was
retained to teach and may not bump Napoli.

15.

Ruffridge currently holds a technology teaching position and is therefore
subject to layoff. Ruffridge holds a single subject computer concepts and applications
credential as well as a single subject music credential. Ruffridge’s seniority date is August
25, 2008. He asserted that he should be able to bump into James Lorbeer’s (Lorbeer) music
position. Lorbeer holds a music credential. Ruffridge challenged Lorbeer’s seniority date of
August 27, 2007, since Lorbeer was hired by Santiago in October 2010; however, the
seniority date of August 27, 2007 is valid in as much as that is the date Lorbeer was rehired
by OUSD and Santiago honors OUSD’s rehire date with respect to seniority. Lorbeer is
more senior to Ruffridge, and therefore, Ruffridge cannot bump into Lorbeer’s music
position.

Other Findings

16.

The reduction of services set forth in Factual Finding 4, given the possible
reduction in State funding and Santiago’s need to remain solvent to serve its students, is
related to the welfare of Santiago and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the
number of certificated employees as determined by the Board.

17.

Santiago did not retain any certificated employee junior to Respondents to

render a service that Respondents are certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists under sections 44949 and 44955,

by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 8.

4

2.

The services identified in Factual Finding 4 are particular kinds of services
that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955, by reason of
Factual Findings 4 and 9.

3.

Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction of the

particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 4, which cause relates solely to the
welfare of Santiago and its pupils, by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 17, and Legal
Conclusions 1 and 2.

4.

There is no requirement in the Education Code that would mandate Santiago to

reorganize its schedule to allow Murillo to teach math. It is allowed flexibility in
establishing classes and in making assignments. In Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School
District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, the court held that school districts have discretion to
define positions and the manner in which they will be taught as long as it is done in good
faith. In determining whether the decision of a school board is reasonable or in good faith,
its action is measured by the standard set by reason and reasonable people, bearing in mind
that such as standard may permit a difference of opinion on the same subject. (Campbell v.
Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.) Santiago is not required to reorganize its classes so
that Murillo may teach a core class and its not doing so is not unreasonable.

5.

Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondents April Keller, Jon R.

Ruffridge, Brooke Khan, and Elisha Murillo, by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 17, and
Legal Conclusions 1 through 4.

ORDER

The Accusation is sustained, and the Board may give final notice to Respondents
April Keller, Jon R. Ruffridge, Brooke Khan, and Elisha Murillo, that their services will not
be required for the 2011-2012 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

DATED: May 19, 2011

___________________________
JANKHANA DESAI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

