BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD
ELTEJON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF KERN
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Layoffs Of:

Certificated Employees of the
El Tejon Unified School District,

Respondents.

OAH Case No. L2011031472

PROPOSED DECISION

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard

this matter on May 27, 2011, in Bakersfield, California.

Peter Carton, Attorney at Law, represented Katherine A. Kleier (Kleier), Superintendent

of the El Tejon Unified School District.

Joshua Richtel, Attorney at Law, represented Mark Hellman (Hellman), Charles Mullen

(Mullen), and Charles Stewart (Stewart), who are collectively referred to as Respondents.

Jeff Beigle (Beigle) and Carolyn Haynes (Haynes), who are included in collective

references to Respondents, represented themselves.

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and has
given Respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2011-2012 school year.
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not
reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

The hearing in this matter was initially scheduled for April 13, 2011. The matter was
thereafter continued to May 4, 2011, to May 10, 2011, and to the actual date of hearing, May
27, 2011, which continuances have extended by a cumulative total of 24 days the deadlines set
forth in Education Code1 sections 44949, subdivision (c), and 44955, subdivision (c). (Ed.
Code, § 44949, subd. (e).)

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

Oral and documentary evidence, and evidence by written stipulation, was received at the
hearing. The record was left open for the submission of legal citations in support of the parties’
respective legal positions. On May 31, 2011, Respondents Hellman, Mullen, and Stewart
submitted their letter brief through counsel. On June 3, 2011, the District submitted its
response. The documents have been marked for identification as Exhibits A and 13,
respectively. Respondents Beigle and Haynes did not submit any citation or argument. The
matter was submitted for decision on June 3, 2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Superintendent Kleier filed the Accusation in her official capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

3.

On March 9, 2011, the Governing Board of the District (Governing Board),
following the recommendation of Superintendent Kleier, adopted Resolution Number 11-09,
reducing or discontinuing the following services for the 2011-2012 school year:

Service

FTE2 Reduction

Self-Contained Classroom Instruction, Grades K-12
Departmentalized Instruction, Junior High and High School:

English
Physical Education
Social Science

Total

6.5

.5
1.0
1.5

9.5

4.

Superintendent Kleier thereafter notified the Governing Board that she had
recommended that notice be provided to Respondents that their services will not be required for
the 2011-2012 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

5.

On March 10, 2011, the District provided notice to Respondents that their
services will not be required for the 2011-2012 school year due to the reduction or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The notices provided by Superintendent Kleier
to Respondents stated, in pertinent part: “The governing board has adopted a resolution
reducing or eliminating certain certificated services for the 2011-2012 school year. Those
services are listed in Exhibit A attached to the resolution (copy of Exhibit A attached). It is the
opinion of the governing board that it is therefore necessary to decrease the number of
certificated employees of the district. The resolution directed me to determine which

2 Full-time equivalent position.

2

6.

7.

8.

10.

11.

employees’ services may not be required for the 2011-2012 school year as a result of this
reduction or elimination of services and to give those employees notice prior to March 15. . . .”
(Exhibit 3.) The resolution referred to in the notice and attached to it was Resolution number
11-09.

Respondents thereafter timely requested a hearing to determine if there is cause

for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year.

On March 30, 2011, the District issued the Accusation, and served it on

Respondents.

The District treated Respondents’ requests for hearing as their notices of defense.

9.

Five other certificated employees of the District, Andria Bloom, Sara Haflich,
Anna G. Hughes, Dan Penner, and Michelle A. White filed identical form documents waiving
their rights to a hearing.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.

12.

Superintendent Kleier took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth
in factual finding number 3 because of the uncertainty surrounding future State funding. The
decision of the Governing Board to approve the superintendent’s recommendation and to
reduce the particular kinds of services set forth in Resolution Number 11-09 is neither arbitrary
nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.

13.

The reduction of services set forth in factual finding number 3 is related to the
welfare of the District’s schools and its pupils, in the context of the potential loss of funds and
the need to continue providing services to students in the District, and it has become necessary
to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board.

a.

14.

On March 9, 2011, the Governing Board adopted Resolution 11-10,
setting forth its tie-breaking criteria for employees with the same seniority date. In pertinent
part, the Resolution provides: “THIS BOARD RESOLVES that the order of termination as
between employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the same date shall be
based solely on the needs of the District and the students thereof. The specific criteria used in
determining this need shall be as follows, but not necessarily listed in order of importance: [¶]
Credentialing [¶] CLAD/BCLAD [¶] Experience [¶] Extracurricular Activities [¶] Training [¶]
Special Education Needs [¶] Competence [¶] Evaluations [¶] These criteria shall be applied in
determining the order of termination.” (Exhibit 2.)

3

b.

Superintendent Kleier applied the tie-breaking criteria to select
Respondent Haynes for layoff. Respondent Haynes shares the August 18, 2002, seniority date
with J. Domke (Domke). Both hold clear single subject (social science) credentials and have
Crosscultural Language and Development (CLAD) certificates. Respondent Haynes also holds
a Supplemental Authorization to teach English. Both taught social studies in grades 9 through
12. Respondent also taught English to high school students. Domke taught some classes in a
special program, referred to as a “school within a school,” called the Academy.

c.

In explaining her decision to break the tie in favor of Domke,
Superintendent Kleier testified that the only criterion she applied was that of extracurricular
activities. She did so because the criterion was deemed the most important this year, and she did
not need to evaluate any other criteria. She viewed Domke’s Academy teaching assignment as
extracurricular, requiring extra work, and concluded that Respondent Haynes had no creditable
extracurricular activities. Superintendent Kleier did not employ any point system or other
verifiable objective system ranking the two teachers on the basis of the pertinent criteria.

d.

Respondent Haynes testified about her extracurricular activities. She has
been the faculty advisor for the Class of 2011, and has been involved in many activities,
including fundraisers, since the students were in Ninth Grade. She runs the Interact Club,
through which District students participate in community events. She has been the Social
Studies Department Head. These activities are extensive, and should have been considered in
the application of the tie-breaking criteria.

e.

Domke’s “extracurricular” activity deemed significant enough to break
the tie appears to be an instructional assignment and not an activity that takes place outside the
established curriculum. In any event, even if the Academy instruction provided by Domke is
considered an extracurricular activity, Respondent Haynes’ extracurricular activities are more
extensive and require breaking the tie in her favor. Moreover, if it is concluded that Respondent
Haynes and Domke both meet the extracurricular activities criterion, Respondent Haynes
established, in part through District records, that she objectively satisfies more criteria than
Domke. She has one more credential and regularly meets the special education needs of District
students as part of her assignment.

f.

By reason of application of the tie-breaking criteria, Respondent Haynes
is senior to Domke and is certificated and competent to teach the classes he was retained to
teach.3

3 Respondent Haynes asserts that the District improperly targeted her for layoff
because of her military service in the California Air National Guard, service which requires
her to occasionally be absent from her students. Because she has been found certificated and
is
competent
unnecessary to reach this issue.

to render a service which a junior employee was retained to render,

it

4

a.

15.

The District is not reducing or discontinuing the services provided at its
continuation school. During the 2010-2011 school year instruction was provided to all students
by a single certificated employee, Respondent Beigle. The District plans to provide
departmentalized instruction to the students and to assign several, not yet identified, certificated
employees to teach the classes as part of their regular assignments.

b.

Respondent Beigle has a seniority date of December 21, 2004, and holds

a clear single subject (art) credential.

c.

Superintendent Kleier testified that Respondent Beigle was selected for
layoff because he does not possess any credential that would authorize him to teach, in a
departmentalized setting, the core classes that will be taught in the continuation school.

d.

The District employs a certificated employee junior to Respondent
Beigle, Karen Maxwell (Maxwell), to teach art, a subject matter that Respondent Beigle is
certificated and competent to teach. However, Maxwell also possesses a special education
credential and part of her day is spent providing special education services.

e.

No certificated employee junior to Respondent Beigle was retained to

render a service which Respondent Beigle is certificated and competent to render.

a.

16.

The District is reducing physical education services by one FTE position.
It plans to discontinue departmentalized physical education instruction in the primary and
middle school grades and to require multiple subject instructors to teach physical education to
their students.

b.

Respondent Stewart has a seniority date of August 20, 1999. As of March
15, 2011, he held a clear single subject (physical education) credential and a CLAD certificate.
He has since obtained a clear multiple subject teaching credential. He teaches physical
education at the elementary and middle school levels.

c.

M. Stroh (Stroh), a certificated employee displaced by the reduction of an
administrative position, was allowed to bump into a physical education instruction position.
With a seniority date of August 28, 1985, Stroh is senior to Respondent Stewart. Stroh does not
possess a CLAD or other English Learner Student (EL) teaching certification.

d.

Respondent Stewart

the
continuation high school and consents to such assignment. He is senior to Respondent Beigle,
the current teacher at the school. However, Superintendent Kleier did not allow Respondent
Stewart to bump into the position now held by Respondent Beigle because of the District’s plan
to shift to single subject instruction and because Respondent Stewart is not credentialed to teach
the core subjects in a departmentalized setting.

is credentialed and competent

to teach at

5

a.

17.

Respondent Hellman has a seniority date of August 25, 1989, and holds a
clear multiple subject credential and a Mathematics authorization. He teaches math and science
in the Eighth grade.

b.

Respondent Mullen also has a seniority date of August 25, 1989. He
holds a clear multiple subject credential and English and Social Sciences authorizations. He
teaches a Fifth Grade class, and has taught Eighth Grade Math and Elementary School Science
classes.

c.

Respondents Hellman and Mullen are credentialed and competent to

teach multiple subject classes that more junior teachers were retained to teach.

d.

Superintendent Kleier testified that Respondents Hellman and Mullen
were chosen for layoff because they do not hold credentials to teach EL students, those who
lack proficiency in English and have special language needs. She did not explain how their
situation was different than Stroh’s, who also lacks EL certification, and no evidence was
presented that EL students were likely to be in Respondents Hellman and Mullen’s classes.

18.

The District has approximately 965 students, receiving instruction in five
schools. Superintendent Kleier was not aware of the number of District students who are
English Learners and did not estimate their number. Respondent Stewart testified without
contradiction, and his testimony is therefore credited, that the District has typically placed EL
students in classes with teachers credentialed to provide instruction to them. In some cases,
students have been reassigned to receive instruction from a teacher with an EL certification.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and

44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 10.

2.

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are determined to be particular
kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3
and 11.

3.

Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the District to reduce or
discontinue the particular kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause
relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of factual finding
numbers 1 through 13.

4.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), authorizes districts to reduce the number of
certificated employees for specified reasons: “Whenever in any school year the average daily
attendance in all of the schools of a district for the first six months in which school is in session

6

shall have declined below the corresponding period of either of the previous two school years,
whenever the governing board determines that attendance in a district will decline in the
following year as a result of the termination of an interdistrict tuition agreement as defined in
Section 46304, whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not later
than the beginning of the following school year, or whenever the amendment of state law
requires the modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the governing board of the
district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the
number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate the services
of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the district,
permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school year. . . .” The court in Cousins v.
Weaverville Elementary School (1994) 24 Cal.App.4th 1846, 1853, noted in a case involving
the non-retention of a probationary employee, that section 44955 is a narrowly prescribed
statute authorizing termination of employees for economic reasons. In this case, the Governing
Board determined to reduce particular kinds of services and to terminate the services of a
corresponding number of certificated employees as set forth in Resolution Number 11-09.

5.

Section 44949, subdivision (a), requires that, “No later than March 15 and before
an employee is given notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be required
for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section 44955, the governing board and the
employee shall be given written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee . . . that it has been recommended that this notice be given to the employee, and stating
the reasons therefor.” In Karbach v. Board of Education (1974), 39 Cal.App.3d 355, 362, the
court stated that the purpose for providing the reasons for the recommended layoff was “to
insure that before the March 15 date the affected employee be informed of facts upon which he
can reasonably assess the probability he will not be reemployed.” In this case, Superintendent
Kleier provided notice to Respondents that their services will not be required due to the
reduction of particular kinds of services and set forth the services identified by the Governing
Board.

6.

the discontinuation or

Continuation school services were not identified by the Governing Board for
discontinuation or reduction in Resolution 11-09, and, therefore, the Governing Board did not
determine to reduce the services of a corresponding number of certificated employees by reason
of any such service reduction. Nor were Respondents given notice that any of them would be
reduction of continuation school services.
laid off because of
Superintendent Kleier confirmed that the District will continue to provide continuation school
services during 2011-2012 school year, albeit through a departmentalized structure. In these
circumstances, cause does not exist for the layoff of one certificated employee providing
continuation school services. Whether such employee, other certificated employees currently
teaching at the high school, or a combination of the two, actually provides continuation school
services for the 2011-2012 school year has not been determined and is not within the purview
of this hearing.

7

7.

Section 44955, subdivision (c) provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he governing
board shall make assignments and reassignments in such manner that employees shall be
retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.”
The District failed to meet its burden in this regard, as the evidence establishes that Respondent
Stewart possesses the seniority and qualifications to teach in the continuation school, a service
which was not reduced or discontinued pursuant to Resolution 11-09. He has greater seniority
than Respondent Beigle and must be retained to render continuation school services. Because
the continuation services were not reduced or discontinued, and since Respondent Stewart was
not given notice that his services might not be needed due to such reduction or discontinuation,
he must be retained even if the District actually decides to provide continuation services in a
different manner.

8.

Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondent Beigle, by reason of factual
finding numbers 15 and 16 and legal conclusion number 7. No junior employee was retained to
render a service that Respondent Beigle is certificated and competent to render. While Maxwell
is junior and teaches art as part of her assignment, she also provides special education services,
and a district may not be forced to break up the full-time assignment of another teacher to make
a part-time position for a more junior employee. (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School
District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334; Murray v. Sonoma County Office of Education (1989)
208 Cal.App.3d 456; King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016.)

9.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides that, “[a]s between employees who first
rendered paid service to the district on the same date, the governing board shall determine the
order of termination solely on the basis of the needs of the district and the students thereof. . . .”
The tie-breaking criteria adopted by the Governing Board is based on the needs of the District
and its students and, therefore, may be used to rank teachers with the same seniority date.
However, because the Governing Board resolution did not rank the criteria in order of
importance or gave them any particular weight, it was necessary for the superintendent to
clearly explain how all the criteria were applied, or the reason(s) they were not applied, both to
ensure adherence to the statutory requirement that application be consistent with the needs of
the District and its pupils as well as to ensure fair and reasonable application of the criteria.

In this case, the criteria were not properly applied to break the ties involving Domke and
Respondent Haynes. Superintendent Kleier did not persuasively explain why it was in the best
interest of the students to break the tie using the single criterion she chose. Nor did she
adequately explain the reason(s) she disregarded Respondent Haynes’ extensive extracurricular
activities. Superintendent Kleier conclusorily testified that the Academy was the most important
extracurricular activity for the District this year, but did not explain why Respondent Haynes’
four-year journey with the Class of 2011 or her other extracurricular activities should be
disregarded. No articulated description of the extracurricular activities that were considered in
breaking seniority ties was presented at the hearing, and no objective measurement of how the
affected individuals fared against one another was presented.

8

Respondent Haynes engaged in extensive extracurricular activities, as set forth in factual
finding number 14. If Domke’s educational assignment is deemed to involve extracurricular
components, Respondent Haynes met or exceeded his extracurricular involvement. Moreover,
absent any statement regarding the quality or quantity of qualifying activities, Respondent’s
activities are of equal or greater extracurricular value. If participation in any extracurricular
activity satisfies the criterion, and both Respondent Haynes and Domke remain tied, objective
examination of the remaining criteria results in the tie breaking in her favor. At a minimum, it
must be concluded that she is just as senior as Domke. Inasmuch as she holds the same
pertinent credential as Domke and has taught the same subject matter she is certificated and
competent to teach the social studies classes at the Academy that Domke was retained to teach.
Therefore, cause does not exist to terminate her services for the 2011-2012 school year.

10.

Superintendent Kleier testified that the District laid off Respondents Hellman
and Mullen because they lacked EL certification. In some circumstances, districts are permitted
to disregard seniority, or “skip” junior employees,
in accordance with section 44955,
subdivision (d): “Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons: (1)
The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of
study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has
special training and experience necessary to teach that course of study or to provide those
services, which others with more seniority do not possess. . . .” However, a district may not
simply lay off otherwise certificated and competent individuals simply because it desires to
keep those with EL certifications. (See: Alexander v. Board of Trustees of Delano Joint Union
High School District (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567 [court disallowed retention of all bilingual
teachers regardless of whether they actually provided services in a bilingual setting].

In this case, the District did not establish that it had a specific need to skip junior
employees to teach a specific course or course of study or that any employee junior to
Respondents Hellman or Mullen was retained to provide services in such course or course of
study. No evidence was presented about the likelihood that either respondent would be teaching
any EL students. On the contrary, as established by the testimony of Respondent Stewart,
students requiring instruction by EL certified individuals have been reassigned to classes taught
by teachers with the EL authorizations. In fact, it has retained Stroh to provide instruction
despite his lack of EL certification. Cause, therefore, does not exist to terminate the services of
Respondents Hellman or Mullen.

11.

Cause does not exist to terminate the services of Respondents Haynes, Hellman,
Mullen, or Stewart, by reason of factual finding numbers 14 through 18 and legal conclusion
numbers 4 through 7, 9 and 10.

9

ORDER

1.

The Accusation is sustained in part and the District may notify Respondent
Beigle that his services will not be needed during the 2011-2012 school year due to the
reduction of particular kinds of services.

2.
Stewart.

The Accusation is dismissed against Respondents Haynes, Hellman, Mullen and

DATED:___________________

SAMUEL D. REYES
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

