BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE
ESCONDIDO UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of
Certain Employees of the Escondido Union
School District Identified in Appendix A.

OAH No. 2011020738

PROPOSED DECISION

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Escondido, California, on April 1, 2011.

Dean T. Adams, Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP, represented the Escondido Union

School District (“District”).

Jon Vanderpool, Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax, represented 26 of the Respondents

listed in Appendix A, attached hereto and by this reference incorporated herein. Each
Respondent is a certificated employee of the district.

No appearance was made by or on behalf of Respondents Diane Dewindt, Kelly
Ewing, Lorena Kirk, Kim Klockenteger, Lena Morales, Francis Quiogue, Julie Schafer,
Nancy Sotello, Kelly Thornton and Monica Trujillo.

Respondents Joseph Benson, Joseph Rota and Scott Soucy requested a hearing but did

not appear and were not represented.

Before the hearing the Accusation served on Kristen Whitney was withdrawn and her

lay-off notice rescinded. During the hearing the Accusation served on Monica Trujillo was
withdrawn and her layoff notice rescinded.

The matter was submitted on April 1, 2011.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

3.

Jennifer Walters, Superintendent, Escondido Union School District, made and

filed the accusation in her official capacity.

Respondents are identified in Appendix A, attached hereto and by this

reference are incorporated herein. Each respondent is a certificated employee of the District.

On March 7, 2011, the Governing Board of the Escondido Union School

District adopted Resolution No. 2010-11-18 (“Resolution”), reducing particular kinds of
services and directing the Superintendent to give appropriate notices to certificated
employees whose positions would be affected by the action. The resolution identified 39.4
FTEs to be reduced.

4.

The Resolution directed the District to use “criteria within Education Code

section 44955, subdivision (d)” to “deviate from terminating certificated employees who may
otherwise be terminated by order of seniority” as follows:

“Teachers of Felicita School constitute a special and specific need in this
District and shall be considered for this purpose as personnel teaching a specific
course or courses of study, and teachers teaching at Felicita have special training and
experience necessary to teach the identified goals of Felicita School for purposes of
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d).”1

5.

Consistent with the Board’s Resolution, the District identified certificated

employees for layoff. The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a
matter reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this
proceeding. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167.) A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not
be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.
App. 3d 627, 637.)

6.

The District implemented a bump analysis to determine which employees

could bump into a position held by a junior employee. A senior teacher whose position is
discontinued has the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated
and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior
employee who is filling that position. (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13
Cal.3d 469, 473-474.) No evidence was introduced that the District had improperly
“bumped” any employees.

1

There is no legal requirement mandating that skipping criteria be contained in a

governing board’s resolution.

2

7.

The District considered attrition, resignations, retirements and requests for
transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its
employees. No evidence was presented that any known positively assured attrition was not
considered.

8.

On or before March 15, 2011, the District timely served on Respondents a

written notice that the Superintendent had recommended that their services would be
terminated at the close of the current school year. The reasons for the recommendation were
set forth in these preliminary layoff notices.

9.

An accusation was served on each respondent. All prehearing jurisdictional

requirements were met.

10.

The layoffs will not reduce any of the District’s offerings in code mandated

courses below the level required by law.

Tie-Breaking Issue

11.

The District established tie-breaking criteria to determine the order of

termination for those employees who shared the same seniority dates. The District used that
criterion for a group of teachers who shared an August 23, 2006, seniority date. After
considering all tie-breaking criteria, the District identified seven teachers for whom it was
necessary to use a lottery to break the tie. The names of those seven teachers were entered
into the lottery and four teachers2 received lay-off notices.

12.

During the hearing, the District determined that respondent Sylvia Garcia’s
seniority date was incorrect and should be August 23, 2006. This correction resulted in a
determination that Sylvia Garcia should have been included in the lottery with the seven
teachers. The parties stipulated that the names of the four teachers who lost the lottery and
Sylvia Garcia’s name would be entered in a new lottery and the name drawn would have
their Accusation dismissed and lay-off notice rescinded. A lottery was performed and
respondent Monica Trujillo’s name was drawn. The District dismissed her Accusation and
rescinded her lay-off notice.

Felicita School Skipping Issue

13.

Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c), set forth a general rule
requiring school districts to retain senior employees over more junior employees and to retain
permanent employees over temporary employees. Any exception to this general rule must be

2

Those teachers were identified as respondents Veronica Carrillo, Kim Klockenteger,

Alejandra Mendoza, and Monica Trujillo.

3

based on statute. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d) provides:

“(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1)

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific
course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential with
a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that
the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that
course or course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority
do not possess.

(2)

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with constitutional

requirements related to equal protection of the laws.”

14.

Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), the District may skip a

junior teacher being retained for specified reasons. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 131.) Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior
teachers only if the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more
senior counterparts lack. (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing
Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) A
junior employee possessing special competence can be retained over a senior employee lacking
such competence. (Alexander v. Delano Joint Union High School District (1983) 139
Cal.App.3d 567.) The Resolution skipped 13 certificated employees at Felicita School who
were junior to respondents.

15.

Deputy Superintendent Robert Leon testified that in March 2010, the

California Department of Education (CDE) identified Felicita School as a “persistently
lowest-achieving school,” a designation given to the lowest 5% of schools in California.
When the CDE identifies a school as “persistently lowest achieving,” a school district must
implement remedial measures to improve the school’s performance. CDE requires that a
district implement one of four intervention models beginning the following school year.

16.

At its May 12, 2010, meeting, the Board voted to implement the “Turnaround

Model” as the model the District would use at Felicita School. That model required the
District to replace the principal at Felicita School, rehire no more than 50 percent of the
school’s staff, adopt a new governance structure, and implement an instructional program
that was research based and vertically aligned from one grade to the next, as well as aligned
with California’s adopted content standards.

17.

Deputy Superintendent Robert Leon testified that Kathy Morris was hired as

the new principal at Felicita School and about the remedial measures implemented at the
school to comply with the CDE mandates. Leon testified that no respondent could bump a
teacher at Felicita School because none had undergone the level of training or detailed kind
of work that had been implemented at Felicita School. Leon testified that all staff at Felicita

4

School were being retained. On cross-examination Leon acknowledged that both the
Administrative Regulation and the Board Policy pertaining to teacher qualifications applied
to all employees in the District, regardless of their site assignment. Nothing in those
documents contradicted Leon’s testimony regarding the District’s need to retain all staff at
Felicita School.

18.

Principal Kathy Morris testified about her hiring of new staff, the changes that

have taken place at the school and the intense training her staff have undergone. Felicita
School staff reported to school two weeks before other employees in the District to begin
their training. She testified about the numerous nightly meetings her staff has with parents as
they attempt to change the home and school environment. Principal Morris testified about
the seven Foundational Principles that were created as part of the process of improving
Felicita School. Principal Morris testified that the District has three years to improve the
school or there will be adverse consequences, although no one has ever stated what those will
be. The basis for understanding of the three year time frame is that the District’s $5.5
million grant from CDE was for three years, school years 2010-11, 2011-12, and 2012-13.
Principal Morris testified that if the District’s skip is not upheld, she will lose half of her staff
which will negatively impact the changes that have taken place at Felicita School and will
make it all but impossible to comply with the three year time frame that CDE has given the
District to turn around Felicita School. On cross-examination Principal Morris
acknowledged that six of her employees are temporary employees who are being released,
but testified that she will be able to achieve her objectives with the current staff after those
releases because of next year’s expected decline in enrollment. Principal Morris also
acknowledged that it was never publicly stated that if a teacher transferred to Felicita School
they would be exempt from layoff.

19.

The testimony of Deputy Superintendent Robert Leon and Principal Kathy
Morris and the documents introduced at hearing established that unique training has been
offered to teachers at Felicita School, training not offered elsewhere in the District; that
Felicita School is the only school in the District designated as a “persistently lowest-
achieving school;” that CDE has very stringent requirements the District must implement to
improve student performance at Felicita School; that teachers at Felicita School have
participated in a unique community outreach program; that Felicita School is the only school
in the District under the auspices of a Turnaround Model; and that the needs of the District
justified its decision to skip the certificated employees at Felicita School because of CDE’s
designation and attendant mandates.

20.

Several Respondents whose seniority date was senior to teachers skipped at

Felicita School alleged that they were certificated and competent to teach at Felicita School.
They argued that they were able to perform the same services as the junior teachers skipped
at Felicita School. However, no evidence was introduced that any of them have participated
in the training and the programs that teachers at Felicita School have undergone, although
some have participated in similar courses.

5

21.

Respondent Karen Grissom is a teacher at Pioneer Elementary, a Program

Improvement School. She testified that this is an important year for staff at Pioneer as they
must maintain student scores in order to stay off the Program Improvement list. Grissom
testified about the training she has attended and the collaboration with colleagues, similar to
the staff at Felicita School. However, although much of that training was similar or
equivalent, none of it was identical to the training and programs that Felicita School staff has
attended.

22.

Katrina Lieber is currently a teacher at Felicita School. She transferred there
from Mission Middle School seeking a new challenge. She testified that at Felicita School
she uses many of the techniques she previously employed at Mission Middle School. She
identified many of the foundational principles at Felicita School as also being implemented
at other schools, but conceded that Principle 7, Culture/School Environment, was unique to
Felicita School. Lieber’s testimony did not contradict that offered by the District’s
witnesses.

Other Issues

23.

Respondent Lisa Elliott, R.N, is a school nurse within the meaning of

Education Code section 49426. Ms. Elliott testified as to her belief that the District does not
employ a sufficient number of school nurses to maintain fundamental school health services
at a level that is adequate to accomplish the matters set forth in Education Code section
49427. Elliott testified in support of her opinion that the California average ratio is one
school nurse for every 2,200 students, but the lay-off will result in the District’s ratio being
1:6,044, ranking the District 49 out of 50 states surveyed. Elliott spoke with eloquence,
sincerity, passion, and care in support of her opinion. However, the evidence presented did
not establish that the District acted arbitrarily or capriciously with regard to its decision to
reduce its school nurses by 1.0 FTE. Instead, the District’s action constituted a proper
exercise of its discretion.

24.

The District skipped Michael De Neve, a teacher with a multiple subject

credential, who is assigned to teach eighth grade math for the current school year. Official
Notice was taken of the Board’s Decision, OAH No. 2009020583, in which it found that
“Effective July 1, 2007, pursuant to Board Resolution 2007-08-06, in accordance with
Education Code section 44256, subdivision (b), 44258.2 or 44263, Mr. De Neve was
authorized to teach math, a course outside of his major or minor. Further, Mr. De Neve has
been deemed competent to teach math pursuant to the “HOUSSE” (High, Objective, Uniform
State Standard of Evaluation) method by virtue of his five years prior experience in teaching
that subject. Respondents have neither alleged nor presented evidence that Mr. De Neve
does not have special training and experience necessary to teach math, which others with
more seniority possess, or that for any other reason the skipping of Mr. De Neve was
improper.” No evidence was introduced that the District’s decision to skip De Neve in this
proceeding was improper.

6

25.

The District skipped Carrie Toorop, a teacher at the Community Day School,

an alternative learning center for students with discipline and/or behavior issues who are
unable to attend a regular school setting. Toorop has undergone specialized training and
possesses special experience to teach at Community Day School which respondents do not
possess.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955,

and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3.

Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant
to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be
required for the 2011-2012 school year. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. The
district has identified the certificated employees who are providing the particular kinds of
services that the Governing Board directed be reduced or discontinued. It is recommended
that the Governing Board give respondents notice before May 15, 2011, that their services
will not be required by the District for the school year 2011-12.

4.

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the

accusation.

//

//

7

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the respondents whose
names are set forth below that their employment will be terminated at the close of the current
school year and that their services will not be needed for the 2011-2012 school year.

DATED: April 12, 2011

_____________________________
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

8

Appendix A

BARBANI, ASA J
BENSON, JOSEPH
BLAKE, CHRISTY
BRINKLEY, MICHAEL
CARRILLO, VERONICA
CHRISTENSEN, KRISTINE B
CUNNINGHAM, CORY
DAVIS, CHRISTINE MARIE
DEWINDT, DIANE
DWYER, MICHAEL
ELLIOTT, LISA
ESCALONA, SARAH
EUSEBIO, OSCAR
EWING, KELLY
GARCIA, SILVIA
GILARDONE, CARRIE
GRISSOM, KAREN
HUDSON, BRIAN
KIRK, LORENA
KLOCKENTEGER, KIM

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21. MENDOZA, ALEJANDRA
22. MORALES, LENA
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

ONTIVEROS, KIMBERLY
ORTIZ, BRANDI
PARK, JULIE
PRESLEY, CHARLOTTE CAROLINE
QUIOGUE, FRANCIS
REYES, LAURA
ROBERTS, MARK
RODRIGUEZ, YADIRA
ROTA, JOSEPH
SANUDO-THOMAS, MIRIAM
SCHAFER, JULIE
SOTELO, NANCY
SOUCY, SCOTT
STEWARD, ROBERT
THORNTON, KELLY
VITTEK, VANESSA

9

