BEFORE THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
MOUNTAIN VIEW SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of
Certain Employees of the Mountain View
School District Identified in Appendices A
and B.

OAH No. 2011030959

PROPOSED DECISION

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Ontario, California, on April 18, 2011.

Mark Thompson, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Rudd & Romo, Attorneys at Law,

represented the Mountain View School District (“District”).

Tamra Smith, Attorney at Law, represented Respondents Roxsana Casillas, Vivian

Hufman, Kathleen Kerins, Balijinder Sekhon, Carrie Verplancke and Sheri Henningsen.

Eileen Fetters, Regional Uniserv Staff, California Teachers Association, represented

Respondent Claudia Villavicencio.

No appearance was made by or on behalf of Respondents Kari Banuelos, Jeanne

Chamberlain, Sarah Fisher, Cathleen Gregorek, Berit Levato, Amber Long, Karin Vasquez,
and Jamie Wallace, whom the District classified as temporary certificated employees.1

Before the hearing, the District withdrew the Accusation served on Kristy Paterson

and rescinded her layoff notice.

At the conclusion of the hearing, the parties’ request to submit written closing
arguments was granted, a briefing schedule was established and the matter was submitted on
May 5, 2011.

1

The District asserted that, although temporary employees are not subject to

these proceedings, temporary teachers received layoff notices because of issues raised
regarding those individuals’ employment status.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

David Creswell, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel and Administrative
Services, Mountain View School District, made and filed the accusation in his official
capacity.

2.

The respondents whom the District identified as permanent certificated

employees are listed in Appendix A2, attached hereto and by this reference and incorporated
herein. Each respondent is a certificated employee of the District.

3.

The respondents whom the District identified as temporary certificated

employees are listed in Appendix B, attached hereto and by this reference and incorporated
herein. Respondents identified in Appendix B asserted that the District incorrectly identified
them as temporary employees and that they were permanent certificated employees of the
District.

4.

On February 22, 2011, the Board of Trustees adopted Resolution No. 2010-11-

08 reducing particular kinds of services and directing the Superintendent to give appropriate
notices to certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the action. The
resolution identified 7 regular certificated FTEs and 7.5 temporary certificated FTEs to be
reduced. The Resolution stated that,

“Inclusion of temporary teaching positions in this

reduction shall not be construed to confer any due process,
procedural or reemployment rights upon any employee unless
such rights are determined to exist under applicable statutes.
Further, such inclusion shall not supersede or nullify any other
action taken by this Board, past or future, that may affect the
employment of such employees.”

5.

Resolution No. 2010-11-08 defined “competency” for the purposes of

bumping as “possession of: (1) a valid credential in the relevant subject matter area; and (2)
highly qualified” status under the No Child Left Behind Act in the position to be assumed.”

6.

Resolution 2010-11-08 stated that “as between certificated employees with the

same seniority date, the order of termination shall be determined solely by Board-adopted
criteria.3

2

3

Respondent Claudia Villavicencio received a precautionary layoff notice.

On January 19, 2010, the Board of Trustees adopted Resolution No. 2009-10-

06 establishing tie-breaking criteria which the District used during this layoff proceeding.

2

7.

On February 22, 2011, the Board of Trustees adopted Resolution No. 2010-11-

09 determining that, pursuant to Education Code section 44954, all presently employed
temporary certificated employees shall not be reemployed for the 2011-2012 school year and
directing the Superintendent to give appropriate notices to certificated employees whose
positions would be affected by the action. The resolution further determined that any
temporary employee re-classified as a regular employee shall be afforded all applicable
rights under the Education Code.

8.

The District implemented a bump analysis to determine which employees

could bump into a position being held by a junior employee. A senior teacher whose
position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is
certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump”
a junior employee who is filling that position. (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District
(1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.)

9.

Consistent with the Board’s Resolutions, the District identified certificated
employees for layoff. The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a
matter reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this
proceeding. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167.) A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not
be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.
App. 3d 627, 637.)

10.

The District considered attrition, resignations, retirements and requests for
transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its
employees. No evidence was presented that any known positively assured attrition was not
considered.

11.

On or before March 15, 2011, the District timely served on respondents a

written notice that the Superintendent had recommended that their services would be
terminated at the close of the current school year. The reasons for the recommendation were
set forth in these preliminary layoff notices.

12.

An accusation was served on each respondent. All prehearing jurisdictional

requirements were met.

Precautionary Layoff Issues

13.

The District issued precautionary layoff notices to ensure that it could reduce
its force in sufficient numbers as ordered by the Board. There was nothing improper in the
district taking this precaution. Given the recommendations noted in this decision, at this
juncture, none of the precautionary layoff notices can be rescinded until such time as the
District complies with those recommendations. Some of the recommendations may result in
employees who initially received a precautionary layoff notice being placed on the District’s

3

final layoff notice list; others may have their notices rescinded after the recommended
actions contained in this order are completed.

Seniority Date for Respondents Who Attended Summer Training

14.

The District asserted that respondents James Serian, Vivian Huffman, and

Carrie Verplancke were part of a group of 15 teachers who shared a seniority date of
September 3, 1998. The District used the tie-breaking criteria to determine which of those
teachers were subject to layoff.

15.

Respondents James Serian, Vivian Huffman, and Carrie Verplancke contended

that the tie breaking criteria did not apply to them because their seniority date is August 24,
1998, not September 3, 1998. Each of them testified that they attended staff development
training from August 24-27, 1998, for which they were compensated. Each of them testified
that the staff development was not mandatory, was optional, but that they were encouraged to
attend.

16.

A memorandum regarding the August 24-27, 1998, staff development training
sent to “All Teachers” from Terry Weatherby, Director, Curriculum/Personnel, advised that
“teachers will be compensated for attendance at staff development . . . the actual rate of
compensation has not yet been determined due to legislative delay in state budget
finalization. No teacher can be required to attend these staff development days. However, I
believe they will be well worth your time.”

17.

Absent any evidence that the District “required” attendance at the August 24-

27, 1998, staff development training, that date cannot be used to establish Respondents’
seniority date. The District correctly identified the seniority dates of respondents James
Serian, Vivian Huffman, and Carrie Verplancke as September 3, 1998.

Issues Regarding Credentials Obtained After March 15, 2011

18.

Respondent Kathleen Kerins possesses a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching

Credential and currently teaches first grade. On February 23, 2011, she applied for her
supplemental authorization in English which she received on April 13, 2011. Kerins asserted
that, although she is not bilingual, her credential, supplemental authorization and her CLAD4
certification now authorize her to teach English to English language learners in the middle
school, thereby allowing her to retain her employment with the district.

19.

The District asserted that Kerins’ supplemental authorization does not entitle

her to a “highly qualified status” because it is not a subject matter authorization. Kerins

4

“CLAD” (Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Development) certificates

authorize instruction to English Learners.

4

admitted on cross-examination that she is three semester classes short of obtaining her
subject matter credential, thereby currently rendering her not “highly qualified.”

20.

Even assuming that Kerins’ supplemental authorization rendered her “highly

qualified,”5 she did not have her supplemental authorization on March 15, 2011, the deadline
for layoff notices to be served. A school district must issue and serve preliminary layoff
notices no later than March 15. Before then, a district must consider all information on file
that assists the district in making assignments and reassignments based on seniority and
qualifications. After March 15 the district has no authority to issue a layoff notice to an
employee who has become junior by reason of another employee’s filing proof of additional
qualifications. Thus, the District was not required to consider a supplemental authorization
for purposes of its lay-off determinations. (Degener v. Governing Board of Wiseburn School
District (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689, 698-699.) The District properly considered all
credentials existing on March 15 when determining which employees would receive notices.
There was nothing arbitrary or capricious in the District establishing this cutoff date, and the
use of that date was reasonable because the District was required by the Education Code to
serve preliminary layoff notices by then.

Temporary Teacher Issues

21.

The District identified nine certificated employees who were previously

permanent teachers in the District, who were laid off in previous reduction in force proceedings
and who were re-hired to teach in the District during the 2010-2011 under temporary contracts.
Resolution 2010-11-09 directed the District to notify all temporary teachers that they were
not being re-employed for the 2011-2012 school year. In this proceeding the District sought
to release them as temporary employees, but out of an abundance of caution had served them
with layoff notices, as well.

22.

The nine respondents asserted that the District improperly offered them

temporary contracts in violation of their rehire rights in the Education Code.

23.

Respondent Sheri Henningsen possesses a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching
Credential and possesses a supplemental authorization in Introductory English which she
received on June 4, 2010. Henningsen introduced her Certificate of Compliance signed by
the District documenting her “highly qualified” status in the District. Henningsen had prior
experience nine years ago teaching English to English language learners.

24.

Henningsen, who was previously employed by the District as a permanent

teacher with a seniority date of November 27, 2000, was laid off during last year’s reduction
in force proceeding. At the start of the 2010-2011 school year Henningsen initially job
shared 50 percent teaching eighth grade English at middle school and on November 1, 2010,
signed a temporary contract to teach first grade during the 2010-2011 school year.

5

The evidence established that Kerins was not “highly qualified.”

5

Henningsen asserted that she was incorrectly given a temporary contract and should have
been re-hired as a permanent District employee.

25.

Education Code section 44909 authorizes the District to hire temporary
employees and outlines the rights of those employees. Most notably, the code section
specifically provides that it does not apply “to any regularly credentialed employee who has
been employed in the regular educational programs of the school district as a probationary
employee before being subsequently assigned to any one of these programs.”

26.

Education Code section 44918 outlines the rights of temporary employees but

specifically holds that “permanent and probationary employees subjected to a reduction in
force pursuant to Section 44955 shall, during the period of preferred right to reappointment,
have prior rights to any vacant position in which they are qualified to serve superior to those
rights hereunder afforded to temporary and substitute personnel who have become
probationary employees pursuant to this section.”

27.
employees.

Education Code section 44954 authorizes Districts to release temporary

28.

Evidence Code section 44956 establishes the rights of permanent employees

whose services are terminated. For 39 months, those employees have a preferred right of re-
employment “in the order of original employment…if the number of employees is increased
or the discontinued service is reestablished, with no requirements that were not imposed
upon other employees who continued in service; provided, that no probationary or other
employee with less seniority shall be employed to render a service which said employee is
certificated and competent to render.” An employee may waive that right for and a district
may deviate from re-employing in order of seniority if it “demonstrates a specific need” or to
maintain or achieve “compliance with constitutional requirements.”

29.

Section 44956 further provides that when the employee is reappointed, “the
period of his absence shall be treated as a leave of absence and shall not be considered as a
break in the continuity of his service, he shall retain the classification and order of
employment he had when his services were terminated, and credit for prior service under any
state or district retirement system shall not be affected by such termination, but the period of
his absence shall not count as a part of the service required for retirement.” An employee
may be hired as a substitute teacher but the substitute service shall not affect his previous
classification and rights.

30.

Taken together, these provisions show that the Legislature recognized that

districts may need to hire and release temporary teachers, that those employees have various
rights to re-employment and seniority status, but specifically distinguished those temporary
employees from teachers who were formerly permanent or probationary employees of the
district laid off during a reduction in force proceeding and then re-hired by the district.
Former employees have rights superior to those of temporary or substitute teachers who were
not formerly employed as permanent or probationary employees.

6

31.

The District asserted that it properly labeled the nine respondents as temporary
employees because the number of employees did not increase after last year’s layoff and the
discontinued service was not reestablished. However, that argument was specifically
rejected in Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 339,
407. Citing to Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 300, the Poppers court
held that the California Supreme Court has determined that “the legislative intent underlying
section 44956 is to provide terminated employees with the same employment rights they
would have enjoyed had they been retained by the school district. (Poppers, supra at p. 405.)
As between the reappointment rights of a senior terminated teacher vis-a-vis a junior teacher
certificated and competent to perform the same services for the district, the senior teacher
prevails. (Poppers, Id. at p. 407.)

32.

Consistent with the Education Code and case law, the previously laid off

employees had re-employment rights and when re-hired were entitled to be re-instated as
though they had not been laid off. Accordingly, any of the nine respondents with sufficient
seniority may bump into a position being held by a junior employee, despite their being
improperly identified as a “temporary employee” by the District. Moreover, to allow a
district to offer only “temporary contracts” to previously laid off employees not only violates
the clear Legislative intent of the Education Code but would lead to the unjust result that an
employee re-employed for 40 months as a temporary employee would lose his rights of re-
hire, despite being re-employed each year. It was clear during this proceeding that most
respondents were unaware that their “39 month clock” was running even when re-employed
by the District because they were improperly told that they were working under a temporary
contract.

33.

Respondent Sheri Henningsen is certificated and competent to teach English at

the middle school. Henningsen was improperly noticed and not allowed to “bump” a junior
employee because Henningsen worked under a temporary contract during the 2010-2011
school year. If Henningsen is senior to a certificated employee who was not laid off, she can
bump into that junior employee’s position; her notice should be rescinded; and she should be
retained.

34.

Any of the nine respondents identified in Appendix B, who is certificated and

competent, and who is senior to a certificated employee who was not laid off, was
improperly noticed; the notice should be rescinded and that respondent should be retained.

Issue Involving Respondent Claudia Villavicencio

35.

Respondent Claudia Villavicencio has a clear multi-subject credential and
teaches English language arts, English language development and Culture at the middle
school. The District has determined that she is “highly qualified” to teach middle school
language arts. Villavicencio is the English language coordinator at her school and also
works with special education English language learners. Villavicencio is the only bilingual
coordinator left in the District; five years ago all were bilingual. She described her duties

7

which also include community outreach and family support and introduced a document
outlining her duties. She receives a stipend for her English-language coordinator work.

36.

Villavicencio admitted that there is not a credential for culture and that there

are other English language coordinators at other schools although none of them are bilingual.
Villavicencio admitted that her CLAD certification does not mean that she is bilingual, but
authorizes her to work with English language learners.

37.

Respondent Sheri Henningsen possessed the certification and competency to

teach English at the middle school and had seniority over Villavicencio. Retaining
Villavicencio and laying off Henningsen was improper as Henningsen could bump the
Villavicencio. While Villavicencio’s work in the District was certainly impressive the board
of trustees could have elected to skip her position had it chosen to do so. Not allowing
Henningsen to bump into Villavicencio's position merely because Henningsen worked under
a temporary contract during the 2010-2011 school year was improper.

Special Education Issue

38.

Respondent Baljinder Sekhon has a clear Level II education specialist

mild/moderate credential, a clear multi-subject credential, and a CLAD certification. Since
2001 she has worked as a resource specialist and beginning in 2005 has also worked in a
Special Day Class. She testified about the student teacher ratios may be waived allowing a
resource specialist to work with more students. Sekhon described the voluminous caseload
she carries and the concerns voiced during the current school year regarding the number of
special education students being assigned to employees. She testified that the District hired a
part-time specialist to assist with the special education students, but that individual is also
being released with this layoff. Sekhon was concerned that the current layoff proceeding
would make it impossible for the District to meet its student ratio requirements.

39.

David Creswell, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel and Administrative
Services, testified that the District does intend to comply with the law regarding student
teacher ratio but is currently unsure as to how the special education classes will be offered
next year as they are still awaiting information regarding the total number of special
education students requiring services next year.

40.

The services identified in the Board of Trustee’s resolution to reduce or

eliminate particular kinds of services were the kinds of educational services that properly
could be reduced or discontinued. The reduction or elimination of those services was not
arbitrary or capricious and constituted a matter within the proper exercise of the governing
board’s discretion. A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service is to
be reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the board acted unfairly or
improperly simply because it made a decision that it was empowered to make under the
statute. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.)

8

41.

A school board’s decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service
is not tied in with any statistical computation. It is within the discretion of a school board to
determine the amount by which it will reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service as
long as a district does not reduce a service below the level required by law. (San Jose
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) Because the district has not
yet determined how it will offer special education services for the 2011-2012 school year, it
cannot be concluded at this juncture that particular kinds of services were proposed to be
lowered to levels less than those levels mandated by state or federal law, especially in light
of the District’s representation that it does not intend to reduce any of the District’s offerings
in code mandated courses below the level required by law.

42.

Sekhon’s testimony did not establish that the elimination of the services being
provided by certificated elementary special education instructors was arbitrary or capricious.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955,

and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3.

Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant
to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be
required for the 2011-2012 school year. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. The
district has identified the certificated employees who are providing the particular kinds of
services that the Governing Board directed be reduced or discontinued. It is recommended
that the Governing Board give respondents notice before May 15, 2011, that their services
will not be required by the District for the school year 2011-12.

4.

A preponderance of the evidence sustained most of the charges set forth in the

accusation.

9

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the respondents whose
names are set forth below in Appendices A and B, except for those respondents identified
above in the Findings of Fact Nos. 21-37, inclusive, that their employment will be terminated
at the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed for the 2011-
2012 school year.

DATED: ______________________

________________________________
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

Appendix A

Appendix B

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Roxsana Casillas
Vivian Hufman
Kathleen Kerins
Balijinder Sekhon
James Serian
Carrie Verplancke
Claudia Villavicencio

Kari Banuelos
Jeanne Chamberlain
Sarah Fisher
Cathleen Gregorek
Sheri Henningsen
Berit Levato
Amber Long
Karin Vasquez
Jamie Wallace

11

