BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
BLACK OAK MINE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Non–Reemployment of
Certificated Employees (Accusation)
Against:

OAH No. 2012030779

SHARON ARSENITH
TAMZIN ELLSWORTH
SCOTT GILLILAND
BONNI KLEMP-SORBER
DENISE MAIMONE
AMY MCCOMB
RHONDA PHILLIPS
FRANCES RAGLE
ANGELA SCHROEDER
CHANTALLE SHUCK
BRENDAN STASIK
ZADY WIRTH

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Ann Elizabeth Sarli, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings,

State of California, heard this matter on April 18, 2012, in Georgetown California.

Kristen D. Lindgren, Attorney at Law, represented the Black Oak Mine Unified

Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, represented all respondents except Denise Maimone

School District (District).

and Brendan Stasik.

Denise Maimone represented herself.

Brendan Stasik filed a Request for Hearing and a Notice of Defense but did not

appear at the hearing.

Evidence was received and the record remained open to allow the parties to submit

written briefs. The District’s post hearing and reply briefs were duly filed and were marked

1

as Exhibits 14 and 15 respectively. Respondents’ post hearing and reply briefs were duly
filed and were marked as Exhibits E and F respectively. The matter was submitted and the
record was closed on April 29, 2012.

FINDINGS

1.

2.

Robert Williams Ed. D. is the Superintendent of the District. His actions and

the actions of the Governing Board were taken in their official capacities.

On March 8, 2012, at a regular meeting of the District’s Board of Trustees

(Board), the Superintendent recommended to the Board that 19.9 full-time equivalent (FTE)
of certificated services would not be required for the next school year. The Superintendent
stated the reasons for this recommendation and also recommended that the employees
affected by the discontinuance of these services be given notice that their services would not
be required for the 2012-2013 school year.

3.

On March 8, 2012, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2012-5 (Resolution),

providing for the reduction or elimination of the following particular kinds of services (PKS)
for the 2012/2013 school year:

Service

Grade Level

Full Time Equivalent

Elementary Education

English

Math

Science

Foreign Language –
German

Physical Education

Special Education –
Mild/Moderate

13.8

2.0

0.4

1.0

1.8

0.4

0.5

District Total

19.9

4.

The Resolution recited that the Board had considered anticipated certificated

employee attrition (resignation, retirements, non-reelections, temporary teacher releases, etc.)

K-6

7-12

9-12

7-12

7-12

9-12

9-12

2

and that nevertheless, it was still necessary to terminate certificated full-time equivalent
positions.

5.

The Resolution recited that it would be “necessary to retain the services of

certificated employees, regardless of seniority, who possess qualifications and competencies
needed in the projected educational program for the 2012/2013 school year which are not
possessed by more senior employees thereby subject to layoff. This requirement includes,
but is not limited to, the following qualifications and competencies: Teacher in Special
Program: American River Charter School.”

6.

The Resolution directed the Superintendent, or his designee, to send notice(s)

of recommendation of non-reemployment pursuant to Sections 44949 and 44955 of the
California Education Code to any employee whose services would be terminated by virtue of
the PKS reductions and eliminations.

7.

On March 9, 2012, the District served on respondents a written “Notice of
Recommendation That Services Will Not Be Required For The 2012/2013 School Year”
(Preliminary Notice). The Preliminary Notice advised that the Board had passed a
Resolution reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of services which reduced the
certificated staff by 19.9 FTE certificated positions. The Preliminary Notice stated that
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, respondent was advised that his/her
services would not be required.

Respondents timely filed Requests for Hearing.

8.

9.

The Superintendent made and filed an Accusation against respondents. The

Accusation with required accompanying documents and a blank Notice of Defense was
timely served on respondents.

10.

Respondents timely filed Notices of Defense to the Accusation.

Stipulations at Hearing

paid service with District):

11.

The parties stipulated to the following changes to seniority dates (first date of

Zady Wirth’s seniority date is changed from 9/16/05 to 9/8/05.

Rhonda Phillips’ seniority date is changed from 1/8/07 to 11/27/06.

Tamzin Ellsworth’s seniority date is changed from 2/1/08 to 11/23/07.

Chantalle Shuck’s seniority date is changed from 8/15/08 to 8/18/08.

3

12.

The parties stipulated that due to the change in Chantalle Shuck’s seniority

date, it was not necessary to employ tie-breaking criteria between Ms. Shuck and Bonni
Klemp-Sorber. Ms. Shuck now occupies position number 70 on the seniority list and Ms.
Klemp-Sorber now occupies position number 71.

13.

The District stipulated that Frances Ragle will not be laid off more than .40

FTE in the 2012-2013 school year.

Denise Maimone’s Challenges

14.

Denise Maimone is a permanent employee with a seniority date of 8/17/09.
She holds a clear single subject foundational-level math credential. Her credential entitles
her to teach math in kindergarten through 12th grade and to teach math to adults. Her
credential does not permit her to teach above the algebra 2 level. She currently teaches
seventh and eighth grade math (pre-algebra and algebra) at Georgetown School. Ms.
Maimone received a Preliminary Notice pursuant to the PKS reduction/limitation of 1.0 FTE
in math. She is the least senior employee teaching math.

15. Ms. Maimone contends that she should be retained because a senior math
teacher, Stacey Spencer (seniority date 8/20/01), with a supplemental authorization in math is
being retained to teach high school math. Ms. Maimone maintains that her single subject
credential allows her to teach a broader range of math subjects and is more valuable to the
District than a supplemental authorization. Ms. Maimone does not contend that Ms. Spencer
is teaching math courses for which she is not certificated.

16. Ms. Maimone’s contentions are rejected. District layoff procedures are
governed by Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. These sections establish a seniority-
based lay off proceeding which mandates that employees shall be terminated in the inverse
order in which they were employed. As long as a retained senior employee has the
qualifications to render a service, that senior employee may not be displaced by a junior
employee.

Challenges to “Skipping” of American River Charter School Teachers

17.

Tamzin Ellsworth, Scott Gilliland, Bonni Klemp-Sorber, Rhonda Phillips,

Frances Ragle, Chantalle Shuck and Zady Wirth contend that the District is improperly
exempting from layoff (skipping) certificated teachers at the American River Charter School
(ARCS). They maintain that they should be given the opportunity to move into (bump)
existing teaching positions at ARCS, or they should be moved into positions that are
currently being advertised for ARCS. These respondents are unable to identify specific
ARCS employees who are junior to them because the District has not assigned seniority
dates to the ARCS certificated employees.

18.

The District maintains that ARCS employees are not District employees, but
are employees of the ARCS. Therefore, the District argues, it does not have the authority to

4

make assignments and reassignments to the ARCS in conformance with Education Code
section 44955, subdivision (c).

19.

That Superintendent provided evidence that ARCS employees are hired on a

year-to-year basis, pursuant to written contracts, and they do not attain tenure or seniority
with the District. ARCS employees have no rights to employment in the District or in the
ARCS and they have a separate salary schedule from that of District employees. The ARCS
solicits employees and makes decisions regarding whom it wishes to hire. The District
Board must approve the ARCS hiring decisions and all employment contracts, because the
District Board serves as the Local Education Agency (LEA). The District collects
information and performs back-office services for the charter school such as payroll, billing
and purchasing, and is reimbursed for these services by ARCS. The District collects the
monies from the State that are allocated to the ARCS. The charter schools have a right to a
portion of taxes and lottery money as well as their block grant money from the state, and the
District may advance money to the charter school prior to receipt of these funds. All of the
money identified for the ARCS is directed to the ARCS and none is allocated to the District.

20.

The District placed in evidence the ARCS charter petition as well as its

personnel policies and staff handbook. These documents comply with the requirements of
Education Code section 47605, which details the petition process for establishment of charter
schools. ARCS was formed pursuant to this section after a petition was filed in January
2010. Education Code section 47605 gives the governing board of the school district the
power to approve a petition for establishment of a charter school. In the event of the denial,
the petitioner may submit the petition to the County Board of Education and, upon denial, to
the State Board of Education. There was no evidence as to which board approved the
petition for the ARCS. However, the superintendent testified that the District is the LEA,
and pursuant to Education Code section 47605, subdivision (k) (2), the designated LEA has
all monitoring and supervisory authority over a charter agency.

21.

The ACRS’s charter petition addresses the governance structure of the school

in Element D, at pages 8-10. Under “Structure,” it states in pertinent part:

The American River Charter School shall be governed by the Board of
Trustees of the Black Oak Mine Unified School District, which will
serve as the charter board of the American River Charter School…. the
Board of Trustees of the Black Oak Mine Unified School District has
final decision-making authority over all financial, operational
(including staffing), and other matters for the American River Charter
School…

The American River Charter School will also have a Charter Council
(ACRS Council), which will be responsible for making
recommendations to the Board of Trustees. The ACRS Council will be
governed by the laws established and approved annually by the council.
The council will be comprised of 50% parents, students and community

5

members, and 50% staff of the ARCS plus one member to be
designated by the Black Oak Mine Unified School District Board of
Trustees…

22.

In Element D, at page 11, the final paragraph states in pertinent part:

The Board of Trustees of the Black Oak Mine Unified
School District is the governing body of the American
River Charter School…

23.

The ARCS charter petition addresses employee rights in Element L, at pages

18-19: The section states in pertinent part:

Qualities in a Charter Teacher and Charter Administrator
will be sought after as delineated in the ARCS Charter
School Petition. Teachers, parents, and other stakeholders
will be actively involved in the selection of these
candidates. The ARCS Charter Council is responsible for
making recommendations regarding the structure of the
school including the type of administration with ultimate
authority resting in the BOMUSD Board of Trustees.
Some options for consideration may include but not be
limited to: a self governance model, contracting with the
BOMUSD for technical support or a separate
administrator. Should the ARCS Charter Council hire
their own administrator, the Charter Administrator will
solicit evaluative feedback from teachers and other key
stakeholders annually to be evaluated annually by the
BOMUSD… with input from the ARCS council. The
BOMUSD will at all times provide oversight in regards to
governance, support and technical assistance to the ARCS.
The Board of Trustees of the Black Oak Mine Unified
School District or its designee(s) will have final decision
making over staffing matters. (Italics added)

Employees of this Charter School will participate in STRS,
PERS, or Social Security depending upon each
individual’s eligibility. No District employee will be
required to work at the charter school (Ed. Code 47605
(3)(e). (Italics added)

Employee rights and terms of employment for ARCS
employees will be governed by individual employment
contracts and/or other ARCS policy statements, which may

6

be set forth in employee handbooks or other documents.
(Italics added)

24.

The ARCS charter petition in Element Q, at page 22 states:

Employer

The ARCS will be the exclusive public school employer
responsible within the meaning and for the purpose of
Education Code Section 47611.5 (Italics added)

25.

The ARCS charter petition in Element S, at page 23 states in pertinent part:

Existing Black Oak Mine Unified School District
employee agreements, contracts, or policies relating to
school district or school district personnel may not cover
American River Charter School employees. Employees
covered by existing Black Oak Mine Unified School
District employee agreements that transfer to American
River Charter School staff, are no longer covered by Black
Oak Mine Unified School District collective bargaining
agreements…

26.
in pertinent part:

The ACRS Personnel Policies and Staff Handbook states at page 2 section V,

V.

Dismissal, Discipline and Termination

…All employees will be hired on the basis of annual
contracts and their terms expire at the end of the annual
contract…. The Black Oak Mine Unified School District
will be made aware of all Dismissals, Discipline and
Terminations by the Director of the Charter School….

27.

Education Code section 47610 provides:

A charter school shall comply with this part and all of the

provisions set forth in its charter, but is otherwise exempt from the
laws governing school districts, except all of the following:

(a) As specified in Section 47611.

(b) As specified in Section 41365.

(c) All laws establishing minimum age for public school

7

attendance.

(d) The California Building Standards Code (Part 2 (commencing
with Section 101) of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations),
as adopted and enforced by the local building enforcement agency
with jurisdiction over the area in which the charter school is
located.

(e) Charter school facilities shall comply with subdivision (d) by
January 1, 2007.

The exceptions set forth in subdivisions (a) through (e) are not applicable here.

28.

Education Code section 47611.5 provides:

(a) Chapter 10.7 (commencing with Section 3540) of
Division 4 of Title 1 of the Government Code shall apply
to charter schools.

(b) A charter school charter shall contain a declaration
regarding whether or not the charter school shall be
deemed the exclusive public school employer of the
employees at the charter school for the purpose of Section
3540.1 of the Government Code. If the charter school is
not so deemed a public school employer, the school district
where the charter is located shall be deemed the public
school employer for the purposes of Chapter 10.7
(commencing with Section 3540 of Division 4 of the
Government Code.

(c) If the charter of a charter school does not specify that it
shall comply with those statutes and regulations governing public
school employers that establish and regulate tenure or a merit or
civil service system, the scope of representation for that
charter school shall also include discipline and dismissal of
charter school employees.

29.

Education Code section 47611, subdivision (a), provides in pertinent part:

If a charter school chooses to make the State Teacher's
Retirement Plan available, all employees of the charter school who
perform creditable service shall be entitled to have that service
covered under the plan’s Defined Benefit Program or Cash
Balance Benefit Program, and all provisions of Part 13
(commencing with Section 22000) and Part 14

8

(commencing with Section 26000) shall apply in the same
manner as the provisions apply to other public schools in
the school district that granted the charter. (Italics added)

(b) (1) If a charter school offers its employees coverage by the
State Teachers' Retirement System or the Public Employees' Retirement
System, or both, the charter school shall inform all applicants for
positions within that charter school of the retirement
system options for employees of the charter school.
(Italics added)

(2) The information shall specifically include whether the charter
school makes available to employees coverage under the State
Teachers' Retirement System, the Public Employees'
Retirement System, or both systems, and that accepting
employment in the charter school may exclude the
applicant from further coverage in the applicant's
current retirement system, depending on the retirement options
offered by the charter of the charter school.

30.

Education Code Section 47611.3, subdivision (a), provides in pertinent part:

At the request of a charter school, a school district
or county office of education that is the chartering authority of a
charter school shall create any reports required by the State
Teachers' Retirement System and the Public Employees' Retirement
System. The county superintendent of schools, employing agency, or
school district that reports to those systems pursuant to
Section 23004 of this code or Section 20221 of the
Government Code shall submit the required reports on
behalf of the charter school. The school district or county
office of education may charge the charter school for the
actual costs of the reporting services….

31.

In Wilson v. State Board of Education (1999) 75 Cal. App. 4th 1125, the court

addressed challenges to the constitutionality of the Charter School Act. In upholding the
Act, the court held that the legislature determined that charter schools “would be free from
most state laws pertaining uniquely to school districts.” Id at 1131. The court held that
charter schools are “under the jurisdiction of chartering authorities …within the Public
School System” and explained: “School districts, county boards of education and respondent
Board share several things in common: The formation of each entity is provided for in
article IX (§ 7 [Board and county boards of education], §§ 14 & 16 [local school districts and
their governing boards]). As such each entity is “authorized to maintain” the various schools
in our public school system. ( Id., § 6.) Finally, each entity is a defined chartering and
revoking authority under the Act (§§ 47605, subds. (b), (j), 47605.5, 47607), with

9

supervisorial oversight over their charter schools (§§ 47604.3, 47607, 47613.7). Wilson v.
State Board of Education 75 Cal. App. 4th 1125 at 1142.

32.

Respondents contend that, because the District is the governing authority over

ARCS, approves hiring and employment contracts and has certain oversight and
administrative responsibilities in respect to ARCS, ARCS employees are District employees
and respondents should be able to displace the less senior ARCS teachers. This argument is
not persuasive. As set forth in Wilson v. State Board of Education (1999) 75 Cal. App. 4th
1125, the District is mandated by the Charter Schools Act to govern ARCS. As set forth in
the ARCS charter petition, personnel handbook and the Education Code sections cited above,
the employees of a charter school are District employees only if the charter petition elects to
treat them as such. Here, the charter petition designates ARCS as the employing entity for
ARCS teachers. It is abundantly clear that ARCS teachers are not automatically afforded the
rights of other certificated employees. They may be selected in a different manner than
District employees (i.e., parent and teacher input), the charter school may or may not elect to
extend retirement benefits and tenure to employees and the charter school may set salaries
and terms of employment which differ from those of District employees.

33.

Respondents contend the District treated ARCS certificated employees as
District employees by issuing precautionary notices of layoff to ARCS employees. As a
precautionary measure, the District issued “Precautionary Notices” to ARCS teachers. The
Precautionary Notices advise that the employee is to serve on a year to year basis, pursuant
to the charter and the employee’s contract of employment. The Precautionary Notice
explains that the District layoff procedure applies only to permanent or probationary
certificated employees of the District, but the Precautionary Notice was given upon “advice
of counsel, because of the possibility you may believe that you are improperly categorized as
a charter school teacher.” The Precautionary Notice makes clear that the District does not
regard ARCS employees as District employees. The District’s exercise of caution in a layoff
procedure does not confer a particular employment status upon a charter school employee.
Respondents’ argument is not persuasive.

34.

Respondents contend the District treated ARCS certificated employees as

District employees by including in the Resolution the skip of the Charter School. Again, this
argument lacks merit. The District’s exercise of caution in a layoff procedure does not
confer a particular employment status upon charter school employees.

35.

Respondents may apply for vacant positions at ARCS; however, they cannot

be guaranteed employment at the charter school, and their layoff from the District is
completely separate and unrelated to any employment possibility at the charter school.

Welfare of the District and Its Students

36.

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services

identified in Resolution No. No. 2012-5 was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a
proper exercise of discretion.

10

37.

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the
welfare of the District and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District as
determined by the Board.

38.

No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any

services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections were satisfied.
Each respondent is presently a certificated probationary or permanent employee of the
District.

2.

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services
identified in Resolution No. 2012-5 was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper
exercise of discretion.

3.

The services identified in Resolution No. 2012-5 are particular kinds of

services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. Cause
exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or
discontinuance of particular kinds of services. Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning
of section 44949.

4.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code section
44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

5.

Education Code section 44955, provides in pertinent part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her
position for causes other than those specified in Sections 44907 and
44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, and no probationary
employee shall be deprived of his or her position for cause other
than as specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive.
(b) Whenever … a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year…
and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it

11

shall have become necessary by reason of any of these conditions to
decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, the
governing board may terminate the services of not more than a
corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the
district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the
school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of
no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this
section while any probationary employee, or any other employee with
less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render.

[¶] . . . [¶]

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine the
order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the district and
the students thereof….

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given before
the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and
services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the
order in which they were employed ...

… The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in
such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service
which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render….

6.

As set forth in the Findings, there are no certificated employees junior to any

of the respondents who are being retained to render services for which any of the respondents
is certificated and competent to render.

The Board may give Frances Ragle final notice that .40 FTE of her services

will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year.

The Board may give the remaining respondents final notice that their services

will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year.

7.

8.

//

//

12

ORDER

The Accusations served on respondents are sustained. Final Notices shall be given to
respondents that their services will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year because of
the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The Final Notices shall be
given in inverse order of seniority.

Dated: April 29, 2012

________________________________
ANN ELIZABETH SARLI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

13

