BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION
YUCAIPA-CALIMESA JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
Involving the Respondents Identified in
Appendix A.

OAH No. 2012030407

PROPOSED DECISION

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 9, 2012, in Yucaipa, California.

Mark Thompson and David Robinette, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo,

represented Yucaipa-Calimesa Joint Unified School District (District).

Kent Morizawa, Reich, Adell, & Cvitan, represented all of the respondents except for

Susan Reddick who did not appear.

During the hearing the District proposed rescinding the layoff notice issued to Gina
Aten and the preliminary layoff notices issued to Susan Reddick and Margaret Stevenson.
Based upon the findings contained herein those accusations are withdrawn and their layoff
notices rescinded.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the matter was submitted on April

9, 2012.

Jurisdiction

1.

2.

Melissa Moore, made and filed the accusation in her official capacity as the

District’s Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources.

Respondents are identified on Appendix A, attached hereto and by this

reference incorporated herein. All respondents are certificated employees of the District.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1

3.

On February 28, 2012, the Board of Education of the Yucaipa-Calimesa Joint

Unified School District (Board) adopted a resolution which reduced particular kinds of
services and directed the superintendent to give appropriate notices to certificated employees
whose positions would be affected by the action. The resolution identified 35 FTEs to be
reduced.

Bump Analysis

4.

The Board also implemented a bump analysis to determine which employees

could bump into a position being held by a junior employee. The resolution defined
“competency” pursuant to Education Code sections 44955, subdivision (b), 44956, and
44957 for the purposes of bumping as “(1) possession of a valid credential and Highly
Qualified status under NCLB in the relevant subject matter area(s); an appropriate EL
authorization if required by the position; (3) to bump a single subject credential holder in a
secondary assignment, an appropriate single subject credential; (4) to bump the holder of a
Specialist Instruction – Reading & Language Arts credential, an appropriate Specialist
Instruction – Reading & Language Arts credential; (5) any training and experience necessary
to meet the job requirements of specialized positions; and (6) for specialty positions such as
Counseling, School Psychologist, Community Day School, Advance placement, and
secondary Designated Dual Assignment, at least one (1) complete year of District experience
in the same assignment within the last five (5) years.”

At issue in this hearing were the reading certification and reading specialist
certifications. Assistant Superintendent Moore testified that a Reading Specialist credential
takes approximately twice as long to achieve as a Reading Credential and that the latter is
required to obtain the former. Although Moore’s testimony established that the District
correctly applied the Board’s bumping criteria, confusion arose because the District uses the
term “Reading Specialist” as the job title and it appeared that employees with a Reading
Credential were being retained over more senior employees with a Reading Specialist
credential when that was not the case. In order to allay any future confusion, the District is
encouraged to rename that position.

Layoff Determinations

5.

Consistent with the Board’s Resolution, the District identified certificated
employees for layoff. The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is
matter reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this
proceeding. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167.) A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not
be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.
App. 3d 627, 637.)

6.

The District considered attrition, resignations, retirements and requests for
transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its
employees. No evidence was presented that any known positively assured attrition was not

2

considered. The District must issue final layoff notices before May 15, and when it does so
it will take into account any additional attrition that has occurred. After that, further attrition
will allow the District to rehire laid off employees. A question arose during the hearing
regarding the vacancies created by the attrition which has occurred since March 15, but the
district is not required to consider those vacancies for purposes of this hearing. (San Jose
Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627.)

7.

On or before March 15, 2012, the District timely served on Respondents a

written notice that the Superintendent had recommended that their services would be
terminated at the close of the current school year. The reasons for the recommendation were
set forth in these preliminary layoff notices.

8.

The District also issued precautionary layoff notices to ensure that it could

reduce its force in sufficient numbers as ordered by the Governing Board. There was nothing
improper in the District taking this precaution.

9.

An accusation was served on each respondent. No evidence was introduced

demonstrating that all prehearing jurisdictional requirements were not met.

10.

Davina Correa possesses the seniority, competence and credential to “bump”
Gina Aten, an employee who also received a layoff notice. However, Correa did not want to
teach middle school math at this time and elected to execute a stipulation waiving her right to
bump Aten. Accordingly, Correa will be noticed for layoff and Aten will be retained.

Davina Correa Issue

Final Layoff List

11.

The District is not retaining any employee with less seniority to perform a

service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955,

and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3

3.

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is matter

reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this proceeding.
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d
167.)

4.

Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant
to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be
required for the 2012-2013 school year. The cause relates solely to the financial welfare of
the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. The
District has identified the certificated employees who are providing the particular kinds of
services that the Board directed be reduced or discontinued. It is recommended that the
Board give respondents notice before May 15, 2012, that their services will not be required
by the District for the school year 2012-13.

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the Board give notice to the respondents whose names are set
forth below that their employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year
and that their services will not be needed for the 2012-2013 school year.

DATED: April 22, 2012

____________________________
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

4

Appendix A

RESPONDENTS

The following certificated personnel will receive a layoff notice:

LAST
Anguiano

Bay
Bernier
Bickford
Burton
Caballero
Casey
Correa Davina
Correll
Cross
Davis
DeAntonio
Evans-Holmes
Farritor
Flores
Gilsen
Kumanski
Lehr
Majors
Martin
Miller
Monarrez
Mullen
Ostronic
Pennino
Ramirez
Schoonover
Spencer
Sullivan
Young
Zanone

FIRST
Keri

Brittany
Kristen
Tara
Jennifer
Barbara
Rebecca

Kimberly
Traci
Brittany
Paula
Kimberly
Crystal
Margaret
Lindsey
Melissa
Esther
Jennifer
Priscilla
Kathleen
Stacey
Krestin
Janelle
Kellie
Brianna
Tamara
Michelle
Amy
Sherry
William

5

