BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
SOUTHERN KERN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF KERN, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Layoffs of:

OAH No. 2012030748

GERRY BLUNDELL, ROBERT D.
HORNER, JAMES E. JOHNSON, and
KATHY MOSHIER,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Mark Harman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) of the
Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 24, 2012, in Rosamond,
California.

Salvador O. Holguin, Jr., Attorney at Law, represented the Southern Kern Unified

School District (District). Gerry Blundell (Respondent Blundell), James E. Johnson
(Respondent Johnson), and Kathy Moshier (Respondent Moshier) (collectively,
Respondents) were present and represented themselves during the hearing. There was no
appearance by or on behalf of Respondent Robert D. Horner (Horner).1

The District decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and gave
Respondents and other certificated District employees notice of its intent not to reemploy
them for the 2012-2013 school year. Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of
whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2012-2013 school year.

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The matter was submitted for decision

on April 24, 2012.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Kent Taylor is the Superintendent of the District. He filed the Accusation in
his official capacity. The Superintendent and his staff were responsible for implementation
of the technical aspects of the layoff.

1 On April 18, 2012, Horner notified the Superintendent that he intended to retire
from the District on June 2, 2012; Horner’s retirement notice, however, has not yet been
accepted by the Board, and the Order that follows authorizes the District to lay off Horner.

2.

Respondents are permanent certificated employees of the District who

currently are serving in administrative positions: Blundell is an Assistant Principal
(Secondary Schools); Johnson is the Principal of the alternative high school, and Moshier is
an Assistant Principal at Tropico Middle School. In late February 2012, the Superintendent
notified Respondents that they would be released from their administrative positions and
would be reassigned to teaching positions at the close of the 2011-2012 school year.

3.

On March 7, 2012, the Governing Board of the District (Board) determined

that it was necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services for the 2012-2013
school year and, for that reason, that it was necessary to decrease the number of certificated
employees of the District for the 2012-2013 school. On the same date, the Board adopted
Resolution No. 11-12-41 (the Resolution) to reduce or discontinue the following services:

PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES

Alternative Education Science/Independent Study (IS)

Alternative Education Social Science/IS

Alternative Education Physical Education/IS

Alternative Education Principal Services

Assistant Principal High School Services

K-6 Classroom Instructional Services

Physical Education Instructional Services

Elementary L.E.P. Instructional Services

Total FTE Reduction

NO. OF FULL
TIME
EQUIVALENT
(FTE)
POSITIONS

0.6

1

0.4

1

1

3

1

2
_____

10

4.

Pursuant to the Resolution, on or before March 15, 2012, the District served

preliminary layoff notices, via certified mail and first class mail, to 10 certificated
employees, including Respondents. These notices state that the District’s Superintendent had
recommended to the Board that the District give notice to these employees that their services

2

will not be required in the 2012-2013 school year. All employees who received these
notices, including Respondents, timely requested a hearing to determine if there was cause
for not reemploying them for the 2012-2013 school year. The Superintendent then served
Accusations, dated March 27, 2012, and their related documents, upon these 10 employees,
including Respondents, all of whom timely filed their Notices of Defense.2 All prehearing
jurisdictional requirements have been met.

5.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of
services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code
section 44955.3

6a.

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority

dates (first date of paid service), current assignments, and credentials. Respondent Johnson
is number 6 on the seniority list. His seniority date is August 26, 1986. He holds a single
subject credential in physical education (PE) and an administrative services credential. In
addition to his responsibilities as a Principal, Respondent Johnson has taught PE, Driver’s
Education, has been a Dean, was on the Board, and was Assistant Superintendent in charge
of District personnel in prior years. He is senior to every other certificated employee in the
District holding a credential to teach PE with the exception of Rodney Van Norman, whose
notice of retirement at the close of the current year has been accepted by the Board. No other
District PE teacher received a preliminary lay off notice this year. Respondent Johnson
asserts that the District has improperly identified him for lay off, and identified Mishell
Prothro, with a seniority date of August 7, 2008, and Stanley Lyons, with a seniority date of
August 18, 2008, as the two most junior PE teachers in the District.

6b.

Respondent Blundell has a seniority date of August 23, 1989, and holds

multiple subject and administrative services credentials. Before becoming an administrator,
Respondent Blundell taught second, fifth, and sixth grades, and was a District dean.
Respondent Moshier has a seniority date of July 3, 1997. She holds preliminary
administrative services and clear multiple subject credentials. She taught first and sixth
grades before assuming her duties as an Assistant Principal. David Dixon (Dixon) is the only
certificated employee who holds a multiple subject credential and whose seniority date is
earlier than either Respondent Blundell or Respondent Moshier. Dixon is currently teaching

2 Before March 15, 2012, the District gave notice to, and received requests for a
hearing from, 10 certificated employees including Respondents. On April 17, 2012, the
District sent a letter to six of these employees, Lon Boyett, Angela Canham, David Dixon,
Christine Dorman, Michelle Hubkey, and Cindy McNutt, which states: “circumstances have
changed since the issuance of [the preliminary layoff notices and Accusations], which
include certain known resignations and retirements, thus permitting the District to rescind the
March 13, 2012 notice and dismiss the Accusation.” (Exhibit 10.) Thus, Respondents and
Horner are the only persons still affected by the District’s lay off determinations.

3 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

3

fifth graders. The District rescinded Dixon’s preliminary notice, dismissed the Accusation as
to him, and he will be retained for the 2012-2013 school year. The District also rescinded or
withdrew the preliminary notices and Accusation served on four other certificated
employees, Angela Canham, Christine Dorman, Michelle Hubkey, and Cindy McNutt, who
currently are teaching classes pursuant to their multiple subject credentials. These four are
the most junior employees serving in K-6 Classroom Instruction Services positions. Each of
these employees is more junior than Respondent Blundell or Respondent Moshier.

The District’s Implementation of Layoff Analysis

7.

Economic layoffs are generally to be carried out on the basis of seniority. A
teacher with more seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment than a junior
teacher. A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to a position held by a
junior teacher if the senior teacher is properly credentialed and competent. That
displacement of a junior teacher is known as “bumping.” In the District’s implementation of
the Resolution with regards to Respondent Blundell and Respondent Moshier, it determined
not to reassign them but made its own “bumping” analysis; however, the District’s analysis
was flawed because the District’s junior teachers who currently are serving in the teaching
positions the Board intends to eliminate are the ones who can “bump,” and the District’s
analysis fails to recognize these Respondents have seniority within the District. Respondent
Blundell and Respondent Moshier would not be “bumping” junior teachers since their
positions are not being discontinued through the lay off; rather, they are returning to
positions that were vacated when these Respondents became administrators because they are
being released from their administrative positions. Further, the District erroneously has
asserted that Respondents are not competent, and therefore, are not able to “bump” any
junior employees. In addition, the District has failed to demonstrate with regard to
Respondents that it has a specific need for personnel to teach “a specific course or course of
study” and that the junior employees that will be retained have the special training and
experience to teach this course or course of study, which Respondents do not possess. The
District’s failure to demonstrate these elements of “skipping” prevents the District from
deviating from terminating employees in order of seniority. (§ 44955, subd . (d)(1).)

Discussion of the Resolution’s Competency Criterion

8.

The Board adopted as part of Resolution No. 11-12-41 a definition of

competency that pertains to each and every teaching position in the District. The District
maintains Respondents are not “competent” to serve in any teaching position within the
District because they do not possess English Learner (EL) authorizations. Respondents’
primary contention is that, as the more senior certificated employees, they have preferential
rights in this proceeding and the District must reassign them to teaching positions under
section 44955, subdivision (b), so long as the District continues to provide services they are
certificated and competent to render and no one with more seniority is able to “bump” them.
Respondents also argue that the District may not impose EL authorization as one of the
criteria that the more senior employees must meet before they are retained, particularly since
the District is retaining more junior employees whom they could bump and who also have

4

not obtained their EL authorizations. The District’s competency standard must be reasonable
and valid; and the District must apply its competency rule fairly before it decides it cannot
reassign Respondents into positions currently held by more junior employees, whom the
District has retained and who presumably have the work experience, skills, and qualifications
(competency) necessary for these positions, which Respondents purportedly do not possess.

9.

In support of its competency standard, the Board determined that it had a

significant population of EL students with specialized educational needs, and a compelling
need to employ and retain certificated employees who have authorizations to teach EL
students. The District did not offer any substantial evidence at the hearing in support of this
factual determination and, therefore, the actual or specific needs of the District for teachers
with EL authorizations has not been established. While it is true every district is required to
make reasonable efforts to staff classrooms containing one or more EL students with a
certificated employee possessing an appropriate EL authorization to provide instruction for
English language development (§ 44253.10), the law has provided districts with many ways
to achieve this result. For example, a district may make provisional assignments of teachers
who are pursuing the necessary training (§ 44253.10, subd. (e)) or seek an emergency permit
from the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC).4 The Board’s Resolution
correctly references that a “misassignment” can result in sanctions imposed by the County
Superintendent of Schools. The District further asserts, without establishing, that the needs
of the District and the students “should not, and cannot, be adequately served by
concentrating EL students in particular classrooms in such a manner as to lessen the need for
certificated employees with EL authorizations.” (Exhibit 1.) Assuming that the Resolution
is sufficient to establish the District’s needs in this proceeding, the Board still must
demonstrate that its “competency” definition is reasonable and valid. There are “limitation
on a board’s discretion . . . the Board must act in good faith and not resort to a reduction in
services as a subterfuge to rid itself of an unwanted teacher. ‘[The law] will not . . . permit
the dismissal of that employee for the sole purpose of employing another whose
qualifications may seem more desirable.’ [Citation omitted.]” (Ozsogomonyan, Teacher
Dismissals Under Section 13447 of the California Education Code, 30 Hastings L.J. 1401,
1414-1415, fn. 97.) The Board cannot properly determine whether a teacher’s specific skills
and qualifications are related to his or her competence for a particular position by evaluating
the needs of the District and students. “With respect to teachers having different seniority
dates, ‘needs’ are considered only in relation to the program requirements.” (Alexander v.
Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3 d 567, 573.)

4 The Resolutions states that the senior employee is competent if he or she, among

other things, has authorization to teach English Learner students, as determined by the CTC,
“and be able to perform such services without Board authorization.” (Exhibit 1.) This
limitation upon the District’s power to grant provisional assignments is more evidence
tending show that the Board and the Superintendent took explicit measures to make it more
difficult to reassign Respondents to teaching positions that require EL authorizations.

5

The Board’s Definition of Competency Is Neither Reasonable Nor Valid

10.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he services of

no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a
service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.” (Italics
added.) “Certificated” is defined by the provisions of the Education Code pertaining to
credentials, but “competent” is not specifically defined. In Forker v. Board of Trustees
(1994) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 19, the Court defined the term in a reemployment proceeding
under section 44956, in terms of the teachers’ skills and qualifications, specifically, as
“relating to special qualifications for a vacant position, rather than relating to the on-the-job
performance of the laid-off permanent employee.” In doing so, the Court noted that courts in
reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing Board (1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702,
714-15, and Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55,
had interpreted the term in a similar manner. Courts have recognized that school districts have
discretion to establish rules to define teacher competency. Thus, after reviewing earlier cases,
the Court in Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565 (Duax),
wrote: “Hence, from these authorities we conclude that a board’s definition of competency is
reasonable when it considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.”

11.

A standard that is “clearly related to skills and qualifications to teach,” and which

does not define “competency” too narrowly, is a reasonable one. (Duax, at p. 567.) However,
the District’s competency rule does not relate to the skills and qualifications of a certificated
employee in the same manner as the rule in Duax. Rather than defining skills and qualifications
in terms of past experience, the District’s rule relies exclusively on teacher certification or other
credential authorizations. And while such certificate-based qualifications may indeed bear on
competency, section 44955 precludes its use to define competency. The District’s competency
rule blurs the distinction between the two requirements and makes possession of certain
credentials the basis to also establish competency. There are two problems with such a
competency rule. First, the District modifies “certificated” in a manner not authorized by
44955 or any other statute, in effect imposing a “super certificated” criteria for more senior
employees to meet before they are retained. Second, it renders the “competent” requirement
partially superfluous, as credentials become determinative. Such additions to, and subtractions
from, the statutory language are inconsistent with established rules of statutory construction and
are contrary to expressed legislative intent.

The District’s Application of the Competency Criterion was Arbitrary

12.

The Resolution’s competency rule, in trying to address a larger District issue

along with the District’s other policies that deal with the underlying problem – too few teachers
with EL authorizations – has been applied inconsistently and in a way that has adversely
affected Respondents’ rights in this layoff proceeding. Since the Superintendent was hired by
the Board in July 2011, more than 10 percent of the District’s certificated employees have
been providing services to the District either without EL authorizations or with emergency
permits that are good for only one year and must be obtained from the CTC by the District.

6

The District will not only be retaining junior certificated teachers in the coming school year,
but for many of these teachers, the District again will apply for the emergency permits they
need by certifying to the CTC that it has a need for fully qualified educators. If the District
can certify that it needs junior teachers who are serving in their positions without EL
authorization, there is no rational basis upon which the District can argue that it does not
need senior teachers to render these services. As administrators, Respondents are not legally
required to have EL authorizations in their positions. After they received notice they would
be released and reassigned to teacher positions at the close of this school year, Respondent
Blundell and Respondent Mosher earnestly began working to obtain EL authorizations.

13.

In July 2011, the District and the Rosamond Teacher’s Association
(Association) entered into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) authorizing the District’s
teachers who had not yet obtained EL authorizations one last chance, until June 30, 2013,
either to possess a Cross-cultural Language and Academic Development (CLAD) certificate
or some other form of EL authorization, or to resign. The MOU required each affected
teacher to submit a description of his or her plan to obtain the required certification for the
District’s review and approval by September 30, 2011, e.g., the teacher had to state how her
or she intended to satisfy the requirement, by taking coursework or by taking the CTEL
(California Teachers of English Learners) examination. The MOU further required teachers
to demonstrate satisfactory progress toward passage of CTEL coursework or passage of at
least one-third of the CTEL examination on or before June 30, 2012. The MOU offered a
third option, i.e., a teacher could indicate that he or she intended to retire by June 30, 2013.
(Exhibit D.)

14.

The MOU provides that the “District’s denial of a unit member’s plan may not

be arbitrary or capricious and the reason for the District’s denial of a unit member’s plan
shall be provided to the unit member in writing, upon request.” The agreement further
stipulates that, if statutes and regulations change the requirements pertaining to EL
authorizations, the parties would meet and negotiate the implications of those changes. The
district, however, has refused to allow Respondents to benefit from this agreement. Since
Respondents currently are administrators and are not unit members, they cannot assert the
rights and protections bargained for and afforded to the other teachers under the MOU. The
MOU does not govern the order of layoff, but the District’s unequal treatment of
Respondents relative to MOU tends to show that a different standard has been applied to
Respondents in comparison with the teachers the District wants to retain. After the Board
had determined in February 2012 to release Respondents from their administrative positions
and reassign them to teaching positions at the close of the school year, the only fair thing to
do under the circumstances would be to extend the MOU’s provisions to Respondents.

15a.

In August 2011, the Superintendent had indicated that he wanted all

certificated District administrators to have EL authorizations and offered to allow these
administrators the same period of time to obtain their CLAD certificates or other types of EL
authorizations as had been provided to the certificated teachers under the MOU. He sent out
a memorandum on December 9, 2011, which advanced the date by which administrators
would need to have obtained their EL authorizations to June 30, 2012, and also required

7

administrators to submit to him no later than February 10, 2012, a plan for the completion of
the necessary coursework or examinations. Respondent Blundell and Respondent Moshier
both enrolled in the coursework needed to obtain the EL authorization. Respondent Blundell
anticipated that he will complete the coursework by the middle of May. Respondent Moshier
did not pass one of her examinations, but will be retaking it and others and anticipates that
she will complete her coursework in June 2012. Johnson intends to retire by June 30, 2013.

15b. Respondent Blundell and Respondent Moshier believe that they did what the
Superintendent asked them to do. In February 2012, Respondent Blundell and Respondent
Moshier submitted their applications for Emergency CLAD permits to the Superintendent for
submission to the CTC. Shortly before the Board adopted the Resolution, the Superintendent
rejected Respondent Blundell’s and Respondent Moshier’s Emergency CLAD Permit
applications. The Superintendent refused to execute this ministerial act, thereby making
reassignment of Respondents that much more problematic. The Superintendent offered no
valid reason for his refusal to apply for the emergency permits or for his refusal to offer
Respondents any additional time to get their EL authorizations.

15c. With regard to the refusal to apply for emergency permits with the CTC, the

Superintendent testified that, because Respondents currently were not serving in teaching
positions, he was unable to certify to the CTC where they might be employed or what
position they might hold or where the position would be located on their emergency permit
applications. His testimony in this regard was not credible. The District’s refusal to offer
this accommodation to Respondents, but make it available to every other certificated
employee in a teaching position, is striking not only because it goes against the District’s
own policy of retaining certificated employees who demonstrate a good faith effort in
obtaining their EL authorizations, but for its refusal to offer any justification for treating
Respondents differently.

16.

The Superintendent revealed his hand in part during his testimony at the

administrative hearing. He indicated that Respondents’ poor performance as administrators
had been a reason for their releases, and by implication, that they were subject to lay off for
these reasons as well. The Superintendent appeared to blame Respondents for having failed
to implement the District’s policy by requiring teachers to obtain EL authorizations. The
Superintendent’s testimony suggested that he had recommended termination of Respondents
for causes that were not related to economic reasons. When Respondents cross-examined
him, he showed animus toward them; he became condescending and refused to answer
Respondent Johnson’s questions when Johnson was unable to state them with ease. He
offered no rational explanation for refusing to facilitate Respondents’ obtaining emergency
permits. His testimony on this point was not credible. He never explained why the District
was permitting all other certificated employees who still lacked EL authorizations not only
the opportunity to retain their positions but also the opportunity to obtain their EL
authorizations on or before June 30, 2013.

8

17.

Except as otherwise provided herein, the District did not retain any certificated
employee junior to Respondents to render a service which these Respondents are certificated
and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

3.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and

44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 5.

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services

that could be reduced or discontinued under section 44955.

The District has failed to establish that the reduction or elimination of three

FTE’s of K-6 instructional services, as listed in factual finding number 3, relates solely to the
welfare of the District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949. As set forth in
the factual findings and discussion, the District has acted arbitrarily and capriciously to
terminate Respondents through this lay off proceeding. Respondents are competent to render
services as teachers in the District. The District’s decision to terminate Respondents regardless
of their seniority, and without properly examining their qualifications to render services to the
District, is arbitrary and capricious. The District’s actions with regard to Respondents are not
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils and cannot be sustained under section
44949, subdivision (c)(3), which requires the ALJ to determine whether “the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.”

4.

The bleak outlook for the State’s finances resulted in the District’s determine

to reduce school services. The District’s decision has not been challenged and appears
reasonable. As long as a decision to reduce or discontinue services is reasonable, the
motivation is not open to challenge. (Campbell Elementary Teachers Association v. Abbott
(1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796.) The District, however, has failed to establish facts that
reasonably support its actions to terminate Respondents. In general, the District has an
affirmative obligation to reassign a senior teacher who is losing his or her position into a
position held by a junior teacher if the senior teacher has both the credentials and is
competent to serve in that position. “Competency becomes an issue only when the least
senior employee performing a service that is being reduced or discontinued is credentialed to
perform a service being rendered by a more junior employee whose position is being
retained.” (Ozsogomonyan, Teacher Layoffs in California: An Update, 30 Hastings L.J.
1727, 1750, fn. 143.) Respondent Johnson, whose Principal position was eliminated through
layoff, was entitled to “bump” the most junior employee teaching PE classes. The District’s
determination that Respondent Johnson was not competent to “bump” is erroneous. The
District failed to demonstrate that its bumping analysis should even have applied to
Respondent Blundell or Respondent Moshier in this matter, particularly since the District’s
analysis resulted in the retention of junior teachers whose competencies to meet the District’s
program needs were materially no different than Respondents.

9

5a.

The District has failed to properly identify the correct employees it needed to

lay off, either because these employees served in one of the positions being eliminated or
because they were being bumped by a more senior employee who served in one of these
positions. Respondents did not fit either of these categories. The District has denied
Respondents reassignment rights that entitle them to teach in the 2012-2013 school year.
The District arbitrarily applied its competency rule to circumvent these rights and retain its
junior employees. The District failed to demonstrate any rational relationship between its
actions and a proper objective of reducing the number of employees through a seniority-
based economic layoff. “When a service is reduced, the most junior person performing the
serve is generally either laid off or reassigned. If a more senior employee performing the
service is incompetent, the only means of dismissing that employee is termination for cause.”
(Ozsogomonyan, Teacher Layoffs in California: An Update, 30 Hastings L.J. 1727, 1750, fn.
143.) The District attempted to dismiss Respondents for cause, which is not appropriate in a
layoff proceeding. (See Governing Bd. Of Ripon Unified School Dist. v. Commission on
Professional Conduct (2009) 177 Cal.App.4th 1379, where it was found proper for a district
to commence proceedings to terminate a tenured music teacher who refused to earn a CLAD
certificate or other EL authorization. The teacher’s life credential did not preempt the district
from conditioning her employment on obtaining new certifications. The teacher’s actions
constituted “persistent refusal to obey reasonable regulations prescribed by the district,”
under the statute defining grounds for termination of a tenured teacher.)

5b.

Furthermore, the District failed to establish all facts necessary to establish a

basis for “skipping” Respondents. For these reasons, the preliminary lay off notices sent to
Respondents must be rescinded, and the Accusation as to them must be dismissed.

6.

Cause does not exist to terminate the services of Respondents Gerry Blundell,
James E. Johnson, or Kathy Moshier for the 2012-2013 school year due to the reduction of
particular kinds of services, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 17 and legal
conclusion numbers 1 through 5.

ORDER

1.

The Accusation is dismissed as to Respondents. The District shall not give

notice to Respondents Gerry Blundell, James E. Johnson, or Kathy Moshier that their services
will not be needed during the 2012-2013 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of
services.

2.

The Accusation is sustained as to Respondent Horner, and the District may give
notice to Respondent Horner that his services will not be needed during the 2012-2013 school
year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

Dated: May ____, 2012

_______________________________
MARK HARMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

