BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
SAN JUAN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
(Accusation) of:

OAH No. 2012080786

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE
SAN JUAN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
IDENTIFIED IN ATTACHMENTS A AND
B,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Ann Elizabeth Sari, Office of Administrative
Hearings (OAH), State of California heard this matter in Carmichael, California, on April 9
and 10, 2013.

Linda Simlick, Attorney at Law, represented the San Juan Unified School District

(District).

Michael McCallum, assisted by Paralegal Robin Thompson, represented all

respondents except Martha Melendez-Quedras.

Martha Melendez-Quedras did not appear and was not represented at hearing.

Evidence was received, and the record was left open until April 30, 2013, for the

receipt of written closing arguments and a declaration. On April 30, 2013, both briefs were
filed. The District’s Post-Hearing Brief and declaration were marked as Exhibit 32.
Respondents’ Closing Brief was marked as Exhibit Q. The record was closed and the matter
was submitted on April 30, 2013.

1

Jurisdiction for Lay Offs

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The District has over 2,000 certificated employees and approximately 64

schools, including Adult Education Programs at Orange Grove and Sunrise Tech.
Enrollment has been declining and projections available for 2013-2014 confirm that there
will be reduced enrollment. The State and Federal budgets for educational funding are not
yet established, but the Governor has proposed that all funding for adult education be
transferred from school districts to community college programs. Uncertainties in State and
Federal funding and the effect of the Sequestration Act caused the District to expect
decreased funding in the 2013-2014 school year. In addition, the District’s deficit spending
this school year has been approximately $3 million. The projected deficit spending in the
2013-2014 school year would be approximately $10 million.

2.

These fiscal concerns caused Paul Oropallo, District Director of Certificated

Personnel, Human Resources, with the approval of Glynn Thomson, Superintendent of
Schools, to make a written recommendation to the Governing Board of the District
(Governing Board) for the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services (PKS),
in order to reduce expenses for the 2013-14 school year. Mr. Oropallo recommended that the
District eliminate 63.50 full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated positions in the K-.12
program and 20.42 FTE certificated positions in the Adult Education Programs.

3.

On February 26, 2013, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2636,
authorizing the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services in the K-12 schools
and adopting “competency criteria.” The Resolution directed the Superintendent, or his or
her designee, to send notices that their services would not be required for the 2013-2014
school year to the appropriate number of certificated employees necessary to effectuate the
reduction of the certificated staff in an amount equal to 63.50 FTE positions.

4.

On February 26, 2013, the Governing Board also adopted Resolution No.

2637, specifying criteria to be used in determining the order of termination of certificated
employees with the same District seniority (tiebreaker criteria).

5.

On February 26, 2013, the Governing Board also adopted Resolution No.

2639, authorizing the reduction or elimination of PKS in the Adult Education Program and
adopting “competency criteria.” The Resolution directed the Superintendent, or his or her
designee, to send notices that their services would not be required for the 2013-2014 school
year to the appropriate number of certificated employees necessary to effectuate the
reduction of the certificated staff in an amount equal to 20.42 FTE positions.

6.

On March 7, 2013, Annette Buckmaster, Assistant Superintendent, Human

Resources caused to be served on all affected employees, including all respondents, written
Preliminary Notice of Recommendation That Service Will Not Be Required (Preliminary
Notice). Each Preliminary Notice recited that it had been recommended to the Governing

2

Board that respondent’s services would not be required for the ensuing school year due to a
reduction or discontinuation of PKS. The notices set forth the reasons for the
recommendation, as required by Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. The notices
provided respondents with information and deadlines for requesting a hearing and included
blank Request for Hearing forms. All of the respondents in this action filed timely Requests
for Hearing.

7.

On March 20, 2013, Paul Oropallo, filed an Accusation against the 40

certificated employees who had requested a hearing. The Accusation was served on March
20, 2013. Pursuant to a Stipulation between the District and counsel for the represented
respondents, respondents’ counsel filed one Notice of Defense on behalf of all respondents,
except Martha Melendes-Quedras. Thereafter, the matter was set for hearing. Jurisdiction
for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.

Implementation of Lay Off Process

8.

In anticipation of the layoff, and in order to determine which employees would

be affected by the reductions in FTEs, the District updated its seniority list. On November
15, 2012, the District sent to each certificated employee a letter requesting the employee
review the credential information, status and seniority date included in the letter and
directing the employee to return the letter with any corrections by December 7, 2012, or
Human Resources would assume that the information provided therein was correct.

9.

The Human Resources Department verified and incorporated any new or

changed information received on the returned letters into its computer records and generated
seniority lists organized by seniority date and alphabetically by last name of the teacher. A
separate list was created for Adult Education certificated employees.

10.

The District made the seniority lists, contained in large binders, available for
viewing in the lobby of Human Resources at the District Office. A copy was also provided
to the San Juan Teachers Association so that certificated employees could view the lists at its
office. The lists, arranged both by seniority and by alphabetical order, were available for
employees to inspect as of February 28, 2013. All certificated employees were advised in an
email that the information contained in the binders would be “used to determine who
receives potential layoff notices.”

11.

Deann Carlson, Analyst, Human Resources, and Human Resources staff

determined which employees should receive Preliminary Notices by first identifying those
individuals who rendered any service in which the Board had authorized reduction. Ms.
Carlson took into account all known attrition in determining the number of FTEs remaining
for reduction and the affected individuals. After these individuals were identified, the least
senior individuals providing each reduced service were identified, up to the number required
to meet the FTE reduced. The credentials of these least senior individuals were reviewed to
determine whether the individual had rights to displace (bump) a junior employee. Ms.
Carlson then applied the Board’s “competency criteria” in determining whether a senior

3

employee was “competent” to bump into a position held by a junior employee. As a result of
these exercises, bumping charts were created identifying those persons initially affected by
the FTE reductions, and those persons affected by being bumped by a senior employee.
Preliminary Notices were given to these individuals pursuant to the Board’s directives.

FTE Reductions- K-12

12.

Exhibit A to Resolution No. 2636 and 2637, provides for the reduction or

elimination of the following PKS in the K-12 program:

Administrators, Central Office Support
Coordinator, Parent Involvement

Subtotal

K-12 Certificated, Non-Administrative Positions
Agriculture
Art
Auto 1/Auto Tech II
AVID
Careers with Children
Child Development/Early Childhood Development
Computers/Computer Technology
Drama
Driver’s Ed
Engineering Technology
English
English Learner Instructional Specialist
Foods/Nutrition
French
Freshman Academy-Engineering
German
Health
Japanese
Math
Metal Technology I
Multiple Subject/Self Contained
Music
Nurse
Physical Education
Science: Biology/Life
Science: Chemistry
Science: Integrated
Site Resource Elem/Title 1 Coach
Site Resource Elem/Title 1 Intervention Teacher

4

FTEs
1.00
1.00

FTEs
0.34
2.56
0.00
0.67
1.00
0.67
1.27
0.40
0.20
0.17
7.96
0.30
1.33
1.40
0.16
0.33
1.00
0.40
5.03
0.00
16.34
3.68
0.10
2.41
3.68
0.20
1.00
0.66
2.10

Social Science
Spanish
Wood Technology I/Wood Technology II

Subtotal
TOTAL:

Subtotal

Subtotal
TOTAL:

FTE Reductions-Adult Education Program

Exhibit A to Resolutions No. 2638 and 2639 provides for the reduction or elimination

13.
of the following PKS in the Adult Education Program:

Administrators, Schools
Principal - Adult Education

Adult Education Certificated, Non-Administrative Positions
Counselor
Teacher – Orange Grove
Teacher - Sunrise

Competency Criteria for K-12

14.

Board Resolution number 2636 provides in paragraphs 4 and 5:

4.78
1.95
0.40

62.50
63.50

FTEs
2.00

2.00

FTEs
1.00
7.50
9.92
18.42
20.42

4.

5.

a.

b.

Teachers are deemed to be “certificated and competent” to teach any
Regional Occupational Program (ROP)/Career Technical Education
(CTE) class if the teacher meets BOTH criteria listed below.

Holds a valid credential issued by the State of California which
is associated with the course (s) been taught, and

Has taught the course (s) for at least one semester in the current
school year or any of the five preceding school years.

Teachers are deemed to be “certificated and competent” to teach any
class that is not a Regional Occupational Program (ROP)/Career
Technical Education (CTE) class if the teacher meets EITHER criteria
listed below.

a

Holds a valid credential issued by the State of California which
is associated with the course (s) been taught, AND, for course(s)

5

b.

a.

b.

identified by NCLB (ESEA) as core curriculum, is NCLB
(ESEA) qualified to teach the course(s), or

If there is no credential issued by the State of California
associated with the course (s) being taught, has taught the
specific course (s) for least one semester in the current school
year or any of the five preceding school years.

Competency Criteria for Adult Education Program

15.

Board Resolution number 2638 provides in paragraph 4:

4.

Teachers are deemed to be “certificated and competence” to teach any
class in the Adult Education program if the teacher meets EITHER
criteria listed below.

Holds a valid credential issued by the State of California which
is associated with the course (s) been taught, or

If there is no credential issued by the State of California
associated with the course (s) been taught, has taught the
specific course (s) for at least one semester in the current school
year or any of the five preceding school years.

Prior to the layoff hearing, the District rescinded layoff notices for, and agreed

Respondents Remaining in Action

16.
to restore:

Kari Uno for 1.00 FTE
Alice Fellos for 1.00 FTE

During the layoff hearing, the District agreed to restore:

Garrett Lane for 0.60 FTE out of .80 FTE
Matt Sumpter for 0.20 FTE out of .80 FTE

17.

At hearing, the District waived its objection to Lindsey Wing’s untimely

Request for Hearing. Consequently, Ms. Wing is a respondent in this action.

18.

Diana Moorman failed to file a timely Request for Hearing. Accordingly, she

waived her right to a hearing and is therefore not a respondent in this action.

6

19.

Attachment A to this Proposed Decision lists the respondents remaining in this

action who are assigned to K-12 schools. Attachment B lists the respondents remaining in
this action who are assigned to Adult Education schools.

Respondents’ Challenges

Bumping from Adult Education to K-12 Program

20.

All of the certificated employees in the Adult Education Program received

Preliminary Notices. The entire program was eliminated in the FTE reductions, due to the
Governor’s proposal that school districts no longer be funded for Adult Education Programs
and that those programs be transferred to the auspices of Community College Districts.

21.

Three Adult Education teachers argue that they have the credentials and
seniority to bump into the K-12 program: Marta Kinney (seniority date 03/22/1978);
Elizabeth Friend (seniority date 06/18/1990) and L. Lynn Starks (seniority date 08/26/1990).
Ms. Friend holds a Multiple Subjects credential and a Single Subject credential in Art. Ms.
Starks holds Single Subject credentials in Art and in English. Ms. Stark and Ms. Friend are
Highly Qualified in their Multiple Subject credentials. Ms. Kinney holds a Multiple Subject
credential and a Specialist Learning Handicap credential, a Special Education credential.
She is not Highly Qualified in her Multiple Subject credential, but, if she taught in the K-12
program, she would probably be able to teach under her Specialist Learning Handicap
credential. All three, if they taught in the K-12 program, would be able to teach K-12
courses that do not require a specific credential (e.g., Independent Study) depending on
whether the Board’s competency criteria for these courses is upheld.

22.

The District maintains that the Adult Education respondents have no legal

right to bump into the District’s K-12 program. Education Code1 section 44929.25 states in
pertinent part:

When a teacher of classes for adults serves sufficient probationary time as
provided in Sections 44929.20 to 44929.23, inclusive, and Section 44908 to be
eligible for election to permanent classification in that district, his or her
tenure shall be for the service equivalent to the average number of hours per
week that he or she has served during his or her probationary years. In no case
shall the employee be classified as permanent for more than one full-time
assignment...

[¶]…[¶]

1 All statutory references are to the California Education Code, unless otherwise

indicated.

7

Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, any person who is
employed to teach adults for not more than 60 percent of the hours per week
considered a full-time assignment for permanent employees having
comparable duties shall be classified as a temporary employee, and shall not
become a probationary employee under the provisions of Section 44954.

23.

Section 44929.26, provides in part that:

Nothing in Sections 44929.20 to 4492 9.23, inclusive, shall be construed to
give permanent classification to a person in the adult school who is already
classified as a permanent employee in the day school.
obtains permanent classification in the evening school and later is eligible for
the same classification in the day school by reason of having served the
probationary period therein, he or she shall be given his or her choice as to
which he or she shall take.

In case a teacher

Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, service in the evening
school shall not be included in computing the service required as a prerequisite
to attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a permanent employee in the
day school, except service in the evening school rendered by a person
rendering services in the day school who is directed or specifically requested
by the school district to render services in the evening school either in addition
to, or instead of, rendering service in the day school. Service in the day school
shall not be included in computing the service required as a prerequisite to
attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a permanent employee in the
evening school

24.

Sections 44929.25 and 419 9.26 create very different rules for acquiring tenure

and determining seniority in Adult Education schools than regular district schools. Further,
section 44929.26 does not permit service in the evening school (Adult Education) to be
included in determining tenure and seniority in the day school (regular programs). Section
44929.26 prohibits teachers from holding permanent status in both Adult Education and
regular district programs simultaneously. There was no evidence that any of the Adult
Education teachers were eligible to choose between permanent status in the Adult Education
program and the regular District school program, as provided by section 44929.26. There
was no evidence that any Adult Education teacher had “obtained permanent classification in
the evening school and was later eligible for the same classification in the day school by
reason of having served the probationary period in the day school.”

25.

Accordingly, the Education Code does not permit Adult Education teachers to

displace teachers in regular District schools.

8

Competency Criteria For Bumping into Positions Where There Is Not a Specific
Credential Required

26.

Competency Criteria 5 b provides:

Teachers are deemed to be “certificated and competent” to teach any class that
is not a Regional Occupational Program (ROP)/Career Technical Education
(CTE) class if the teacher meets EITHER criteria listed below.

b.

If there is no credential issued by the State of California
associated with the course (s) being taught, has taught the
specific course (s) for at least one semester in the current school
year or any of the five preceding school years.

27.

There are several respondents who have the seniority to bump into classes

which do not require a specific credential and are being taught by junior employees.
These courses are:

Site Resource-Elementary IB Coordinator

.20 FTE

Course

Athletic Director

Student Government

Advancepath

On Site

Student Activity Director

Student Government

AVID II

Student Government

Study Hall

Student Government

Student Leadership

Student Activity Director

.20 FTE

.40 FTE

1.00 FTE

.60 FTE

.40 FTE

.20 FTE

.40 FTE

.40 FTE

.20 FTE

.40 FTE

.20 FTE

20 FTE

9

AVID Sr. Sem.

AVID I

.20 FTE

.20 FTE

TOTAL FTE

5.20 FTE

28.

Respondents argue that the competency criteria the District established to

bump into positions where no specific credential is required are not reasonable and are
invalid. The District argues that the competency criteria are appropriate and are neither
arbitrary nor capricious and have a rational and reasonable relationship to the skills and
qualification to teach those particular subjects at issue.

29.

At hearing, the District presented no evidence that it was necessary for any

properly credentialed teacher to have particular experience to teach in any of the courses that
did not require a specific credential. Evidence was that some training may be required to
teach AVID, but that training was brief and could be acquired prior to the school year. It is
not probable that a teacher would not be competent to teach many of these courses, (e.g.
Study Hall, Student Government, Student Leadership and Student Activity Director) without
having taught it before. Moreover, the competency criteria for these courses was established,
not because it was necessary to have prior experience in the course in order to teach it
competently, but because these courses are mostly partial FTE courses and it is logistically
difficult for the District to bump full time teachers into these partial FTEs. Ms. Carlson
testified: “In the past years, before we established competency criteria, teachers were
bumping into AVID, Study Hall, Activities Director etc. … what we found was there is not a
full-time assignment for all of those classes and we ended up retaining a teacher that has no
assignment…” Ms. Carlson’s testimony was supported by the fact that the competency
criteria at issue applied only to non-specific credential courses. It did not apply to bumping
into courses that required a specific credential.

30.

In Duax v. Kern Community College Dist. (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, the

court interpreted Education Code section 87743, the community college analog to Education
Code section 44955. The court explained:

As is easily surmisable from a brief reading of the section, a
district is statutorily authorized to reduce teaching staff and is
required to proceed according to seniority principles. “The
statute specifically protects tenure rights and seniority. Layoffs
must begin with the most recently hired. Furthermore, tenured
employees who are competent and properly credentialed must
be reassigned to replace junior employees. Thus, section 87743
gives ‘bumping privileges’ to qualified, senior employees, even
if their specific post has been eliminated.”(citing case) These
bumping privileges allow a senior teacher whose teaching
services are being terminated to move into the teaching position
of a junior teacher whose services the senior teacher is

10

certificated and competent to perform, thus necessitating the
layoff of the junior teacher and protecting seniority rights. Yet
these bumping rights are not absolute even for a teacher with
substantial seniority who is facing layoff. The section
specifically requires the senior, regular employee to be
“certificated and competent” to render the service otherwise
being rendered by a junior member of the teaching staff.” (Id. at
pp. 563-564.)

31.

In Duax, a teacher noticed for layoff, Wesley Sanderson, had been employed

at Bakersfield College as a clinical psychologist for the preceding 25 years. The district was
discontinuing psychologist services for the 1981-1982 school year. The district planned to
retain a junior teacher to teach psychology as an academic subject the ensuing school year.
The board had adopted competency standards that required one year’s full-time teaching in
the subject area within the last ten years. Sanderson had not taught since 1960, and the
district considered him not competent to teach psychology. Thus, he was deemed not
competent to bump a junior teacher being retained to teach psychology. (Id. at p. 564.)

32.

The Duax court stated that the meaning of “certificated and competent” was a

“watershed inquiry.” The court turned to the board of trustee’s resolution defining the
meaning of competence. That resolution stated: “In determining that no employee shall be
terminated while a less senior employee is retained to render a service which the more senior
employee is both certificated and competent to render, this Board directs the Chancellor to
apply as a standard of competence that an employee have had experience rendering a service
or teaching in a specific subject area equal to a total of one year’s full-time assignment in
that service or subject area since January of 1971.” The court framed the “crucial inquiry”
as: “…was the standard of competence adopted by the board reasonable and valid?” (Id. at
pp. 564-565.)

33.

The court found: “… [t]he statute envisions and the cases mandate that in the

event of a layoff under section 87743 based on discontinuance of the services being provided
by a senior member of the staff, the governing board must determine whether the senior
employee is competent to perform services being performed by a junior employee. In this
case, the governing board established a standard of competency that required one year’s full-
time teaching in the subject area within the last ten years, a standard clearly relating to skills
and qualifications to teach…” The court found the standard set forth in the resolution was
“reasonable and valid” “[S]ince teaching is the primary and premier function of the
community college and since the job description for instructors in the board policy manual
emphasizes teaching skills, development of course material, interaction with students,
knowledge of student abilities, and evaluation of student work… The mandate is that the
governing board establish a standard of competency that relates to the skills and
qualifications of the teacher. That standard was established by resolution of the governing
board, and since it requires only one year of teaching in the last ten, not one in the last two or
three, we are not persuaded that it too narrowly defines competency.” (Italics added.) (Id. at
pp. 566-567.)

11

34.

The Duax court also reviewed case law and concluded: “Hence, from these

authorities we conclude that a board's definition of competency is reasonable when it
considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.” (Italics added.)
(Id. at p. 56)

35. What we take away from Duax is that in making bumping decisions:

(1) It is the board’s duty to consider the skills and qualifications of
the senior teachers subject to layoff in order to make assignments
and reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be
retained to render any service which their seniority and
qualifications entitle them to render.

(2) The governing board may set standards of competency.

(3) Standards of competency must be reasonable and valid.

(4) Standards of competency are reasonable and valid if they relate to the skills and
qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.

36.

Under the facts of Duax, a district could reasonably establish competency

criteria that prevented a teacher who had not taught at all in ten years from bumping a junior
teacher. The Duax court found that the competency criteria of teaching in ten years related
to the skills and qualifications to teach. But, the Duax court did not give districts the
authority to impose any competency criteria they deemed appropriate. Clearly, allowing
districts to establish any competency criteria they see fit would defeat the statutory scheme of
section 44955 and allow district’s to ignore seniority in making assignments and
reassignments.2

37.

In contrast to the reasonable competency criteria in Duax, here the Board

established “competency” criteria which do not relate to the skills and qualifications to teach,
but which are designed to make the layoff process easier to implement. These criteria may
be convenient in administering a lay off, but they arbitrarily prevent senior teachers from
bumping junior teachers in violation of section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c).

2 Bledsoe vs. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 CA 4th 127 is not applicable
here. It does not hold that districts may adopt certain competency criteria to prevent senior
teachers from bumping into junior positions. In Bledsoe, there was no challenge to the
competency criteria at issue: teaching within an alternative education environment. The
issues were whether a respondent met the competency criteria, which he did, and whether the
district could employ section 44955 subdivision (d), to skip the junior teacher. The decision
concluded the District had met its burden to establish the exception provided by section
44955 subdivision (d), to “skip” junior employees.

12

Accordingly, the competency criteria in Board Resolution number 2636 section 5 b is
invalid and must be disregarded in considering whether individual respondents should be
permitted to bump junior teachers.

38.
In the event the competency criteria at issue were found invalid, the District prepared
a bumping list for senior respondents into the courses identified in Finding 27. The bumping
list is set forth on Exhibit 31page 23, implementation of which results in the following:

Masako Thomas- restored .40 FTE

Kristen Price-restored .30 FTE

Elisha Webb restored .31 FTE

Bert Cooper restored 1.00 FTE

Sarah Locke restored 1.00 FTE

Classification of Jonathan Perry

39.

Jonathan Perry maintains that the District incorrectly classified him as a

probationary employee, rather than a permanent employee. As a permanent employee, Mr.
Perry would be senior to any teacher who received a preliminary notice due to the reduction
in English services. Mr. Perry argued that the District should have considered the time he
spent as a student teacher as part of his probationary period, thereby giving him two years of
probationary service, and making him a permanent employee at the commencement of the
2012-2013 school year. However, the evidence is clear that Mr. Perry was not an employee
with the District from July 1, 2010, through February 15, 2011, except for a short period of
time spent as a day to day substitute. Mr. Perry acknowledged that during this period he did
not receive pay from the District other than some pay for substitute service and that he was
student teaching to fulfill requirements for his credential program. There is no contract of
employment during that period. The District’s payroll records for Mr. Perry during the time
in question confirm that he did not receive any payment for services. Mr. Perry did not
accrue two years of paid employment with the District prior to the 2012-2013 school year
and thus his classification as a probationary employee is correct and he was properly
identified for layoff.

FTE of Jeffrey Macklem

40.

The District classified Jeffrey Macklem as a .80 FTE and laid him off for .80

FTE. He maintains that he is in reality a 1.00 FTE employee, and should therefore be

3 Garrett Lane was restored .60 FTE of the .80 FTE On-Site course pursuant to

stipulation at hearing. However, the fact that he was restored by stipulation does not affect
the rights of employees senior to him to bump into this .60 FTE.

13

retained .20 FTE. The evidence established that Mr. Macklem signed a probationary
employment written contract for the 2012 -2013 school year at “100%.” The services were
to begin on August 15, 2012 and he was assigned to a .80 position at Barrett Middle School,
from 08/15/12 through 12/01/12. He was then assigned to a 1.0 FTE position at Bella Vista
High School, starting on 12/02/12 through 01/06/13. He was not given a temporary contract
for this .20 FTE increase. Starting on 01/07/13, Mr. Macklem had his position again reduced
to .80 FTE. The District seniority book listing for Mr. Macklem, indicates that this reduction
to .80 FTE only lasted until 01/15/13, when Mr. Macklem was again returned to a full-time
(1.0 FTE) position. However, Ms. Carlson testified that this increase to a 1.0 FTE position
on 01/15/13 was in error, and that the District subsequently notified him on February 28,
2013 of its mistake. Thus, at the time the bumping analysis was conducted, the District
records indicated that Mr. Macklem was only a .80 FTE employee, and he was only assigned
to teach classes which totaled .80 FTE.

41. Mr. Macklem taught in a 1.0 FTE position for only a month in the 2012 -2013
school year. The evidence established that at all other times he was aware that he was hired
for a .80 FTE position and he taught in a .80 FTE position. For the one month in which he
covered a 1.0 FTE position of another teacher, he received a bump in pay, acknowledging in
an email dated February 28 2013 letter that “I expected a little increase since I was 1.0 for a
while.” The evidence is conclusive that the District erred in initially issuing the contract for
100% and when entering data on a staffing listing, where district employees indicated that
Mr. Macklem was a 1.0 FTE, when he was teaching .80 FTE. This error did not prejudice
Mr. Macklem in any way and he cannot seek here to benefit from a clerical error.

Bump of Joseph Pallen

42.

Joseph Pallen holds a Single Subject credential in Chemistry and is currently

teaching a class in ninth grade Integrated Science totaling .33 FTE. He is junior to Vicki
Orton who bumped into this assignment. Vicki Orton holds a Single Subject credential in
Life Science and is Highly Qualified in Biological Science. Mr. Pallen maintains that Ms.
Orton cannot bump into his assignment because she does not have the appropriate credentials
to teach ninth grade Integrated Science. He also maintains that the ninth grade Integrated
Science course is divided into two distinct semester classes: a physical science class (taught
by Mr. Pallen) and a biological class (taught by another teacher who is credentialed in
Biological Science). Because there is no biological science component in the Integrated
Science class taught by Mr. Pallen, he maintains he should not be bumped out of this class by
a teacher who is only highly qualified in Biological Science. The issues are whether the
holder of a Single Subject credential in Life Science is certificated to teach ninth grade
Integrated Science and whether the holder of a Single Subject credential in Life Science who
is highly qualified in Biological Science can teach the physical science portion of this
divided Integrated Science class.

43.

Is clear from the Administrators Assignment Manual (published by the

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing) that Integrated Science may be taught by

14

teachers who hold Single Subject credentials in Life Science. Accordingly, Ms. Orton is
certificated to teach Integrated Science.

44.

There is no authority for Mr. Pallen’s position that one may not teach the

physical science component of Integrated Science unless one is Highly Qualified in a subject
other than Biological Science.

Carrie Probasco’s Bump by Julie Finney

45.

Julie Finney was identified as a teacher subject to layoff under the PKS

reduction in English. Ms. Finney teaches three periods of ELD 1 Support (English Language
Development) at the middle school level. She bumped Carrie Probasco. Ms. Probasco
maintains that Ms. Finney should not have been identified as a teacher subject to layoff in
English, because Ms. Finney taught ELD in the ELIS (English Language Instructional
Services) program. Because ELD is involved with instructing students so that they become
competent in the English Language, it is much more akin to ELIS than it is to the PKS of
English, even though someone with an English credential is authorized to perform ELD
services. If Ms. Finney had not been improperly identified as subject to layoff under the
English reduction, Ms. Probosco claims she would not have been bumped for .60 of her 1.00
FTE as a Multiple Subject teacher.

46.

The District acknowledged that all of the teachers affected for the English PKS

reduction were teaching English except Ms. Finney, who was teaching ELD 1 Support for
three periods. Ms. Finney was included in the English reductions because ELD support is
primarily English intervention. ELD was not listed separately under the PKS reductions,
because it is essentially English instruction in reading intervention which happens in a class
and can be taught with an English or Multiple Subject credential. Ms. Finney is teaching
primarily reading intervention under her Multiple Subject credential. The District
maintained that ELD should not be classified as akin to ELIS, because ELIS is a service, not
a class or a course, so ELD cannot be included under that service category.

47.

The issue is whether the PKS reductions should properly have identified ELD
for reduction, rather than subsuming ELD under the English service reduction. The evidence
is persuasive that the District considered ELD instruction to be English instruction at the time
of the Board’s Resolution to reduce PKS. Accordingly, it was not necessary to create a
separate ELD service for reduction. Moreover, the evidence was persuasive that if Ms.
Finney had not been subject to layoff under the English reductions, a senior English teacher
would have bumped into her position and Ms. Finney would have bumped Ms. Probasco.

Carrie Probosco’s Ability To Bump Rachel Schottky

48.

The Board Resolution reduces Computers/Computer Technology by 1.27 FTE.

When identifying those who taught computers/computer technology, the District did not
select Lawrence Williams, believing from the title of his position “Travel Prop Teacher” that
he taught core subjects. He testified persuasively that he teaches elementary school students

15

the rudiments of using a computer and computer software. He also provides technological
support to teachers. Mr. Williams is junior to Christine Sinclair who was selected by the
District for the Computers/Computer Technology reduction in the amount of .40 FTE.
Christine Sinclair bumped .40 FTE into the position held by Rachel Schottky, a first grade
teacher whose seniority date is 08/15/12, making her junior to Ms. Probasco.

49. Ms. Probasco maintains that this bumping chain would not have occurred if

Mr. Williams was properly identified for layoff. Ms. Sinclair would not have been
identified and would not have bumped into Ms. Schottky’s position. But, Ms. Schottky is
not a party to this proceeding, and it appears that Ms. Probasco was not directly affected by
this error.

50. Ms. Probasco seems to be arguing that the .40 FTE that Ms. Sinclair bumped

from Ms. Schottky should be given to Ms. Probasco, because Ms. Schottky’s position would
have been available for Ms. Probasco to bump into, had it not been improperly bumped into
by Ms. Sinclair. Ms. Probasco points out that she is the most senior Multiple Subject teacher
subject to lay-off and that .40 FTE should have been available for her.

51.

However, had Mr. Williams (seniority date 3/7/08) been identified for layoff
rather than Ms. Sinclair, he would have bumped the junior Ms. Schottky. Ms. Probasco’s,
seniority date is 8/18/10. Sheis junior to Mr. Williams and she would not have been able to
bump into the .40FTE taught by Ms. Schottky.

52. Ms. Probasco maintains that even if the result would have been the same had

the District conducted the bumping analysis as they should have, the District “should not
now be allowed to belatedly redo that bumping analysis at the hearing to come up with the
result it desires.” The real issue however is whether Ms. Probasco is now entitled to a
percentage of an FTE that she had no entitlement to when the bumping process was
conducted. She seeks to take advantage of an error in the bumping process which did not
affect her and would not have affected her if correctly done. She has no standing to do this.
Additionally, there is no phantom .40FTE up for grabs here that the most senior Multiple
Subject holder would be entitled to and, most importantly, there is no one junior to Ms.
Probasco being retained to perform a service for which she is competent and credentialed to
perform.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code

sections 44949 and 44955. All notices and other jurisdictional requirements of those sections
have been met.

2.

Cause exists for the reduction or discontinuation of the particular kinds of

services identified in Board Resolutions 2636, 2637, 2638 and 2639 at the end of the 2012-
2013 school year, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.

16

3.

The services identified in the Governing Board Resolution are particular kinds

of services that can be reduced under Education Code section 44955. The Governing
Board’s decision to reduce the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and
was a proper exercise of its discretion.

4.

The reduction of the particular kinds of services and the resultant reduction in
certificated positions were done for the welfare of the District and the pupils. The decision
was made because of factors affecting the District’s budget for the ensuing school year.

5.

By reason of the facts set forth in Findings 20 through 38, the Preliminary

Layoff notices sent to the respondents identified below and in Finding 38, must be rescinded
to the extent necessary to restore the FTE identified:

Masako Thomas- restored .40 FTE

Kristen Price-restored .30 FTE

Elisha Webb restored .31 FTE

Bert Cooper restored 1.00 FTE

Sarah Locke restored 1.00 FTE

Kari Uno restored 1.00 FTE

Alice Fellos restored 1.00 FTE

Garrett Lane restored 0.60 FTE out of .80 FTE.

Matt Sumpter restored 0.20 FTE out of .80 FTE.

6.

By reason of the facts set forth in Finding 16, the Preliminary Layoff notices
sent to the respondents identified below and in Finding 16, must be rescinded to the extent
necessary to restore the FTE identified:

7.

As set forth in the Factual Findings no employees junior to the remaining

respondents are being retained to perform services that these respondents are certificated and
competent to render.

17

RECOMMENDATIONS

The Preliminary Layoff notices sent to respondents identified in Legal Conclusions 5

and 6 shall be rescinded to the extent necessary to restore the FTE identified in Legal
Conclusions 5 and 6.

Final Notice shall be given to the remaining respondents that their services shall not

be required for the 2013-2014 school year.

Dated: May 3, 2013

____________________________
ANN ELIZABETH SARLI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

18

ATTACHMENT A TO PROPOSED DECSISION

RESPONDENTS - K-12

Aston, Lillian
Barnes, Ashley
Buschmann, Carissa
Carlson, Kathryn
Cooper, Bert
Faltermier, Shannon
Gutierrez, Alexander
Hadzi-Antich, Diana
Hansen, Bruce
Hilton, Victoria
Lane, Garrett
Locke, Sarah
Lyndaker, Kelly
Macklem, Jeffrey
Melendez-Quadros, Martha
Nixon, Stephen
Orton, Vicki
Pallen, Joseph
Pefley, Nicole
Perry, Jonathan
Price, Kirsten
Pritchett, Meadow
Probasco, Carrie
Seley, Jennifer
Steppig, Heather
Sumpter, Matthew
Thomas, Masako
Vazquez Verduzco, David
Vojnovic, Ellen
Webb, Elisha
Wells, Brandon
Wing,Lindsey

19

ATTACHMENT B TO PROPOSED DECSISION

RESPONDENTS-ADULT EDUCATION

Brewer, Thomas
Caldwell, John
Friend, Elizabeth
Kinney, Marta
Mc Elhinney, Carol
Michell, Dominika
Moorman, Diana
Starks, L. Lynn

20

