BEFORE THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SISKIYOU JOINT COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SISKIYOU
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

MICHAEL PADDACK,

OAH No. 2012040504

Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Jonathan Lew, State of

California, Office of Administrative Hearings, on May 25, 2012, in Weed, California.

Margaret M. Merchat, Attorney at Law, represented the Siskiyou Joint Community

College District (District).

Alan J. Frey, Regional UniServ Staff, Community College Association, appeared on

behalf of Michael Paddack (respondent), who was also present.

Evidence and testimony were received, and the matter was submitted for decision on

May 25, 2011.1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Randall Lawrence is the President and Superintendent of the District. On

March 9, 2012, President Lawrence gave notice to the District’s Board of Trustees
(Governing Board) of his recommendation that notice be given to respondent that his
services will not be required for the 2012-2013 academic year.

1 Under Education Code sections 87740 and 87743, copies of the proposed decision

are to be submitted to the governing board on or before May 7, and notices of termination of
services to employees shall be given before May 15. The parties stipulated that the deadline
for the proposed decision in this matter will be extended to June 14, 2012, and the deadline
for the May 15 notices to respondents will be extended to June 22, 2012.

1

2.

On March 6, 2012, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2011-12-02,

entitled “In the Matter of the Reduction or Discontinuance of Certain Particular Kinds of
Services for the 2012-2013 School Year” (PKS Resolution). Pursuant to the PKS
Resolution, the Governing Board determined that it was necessary and in the best interests of
the District to eliminate the equivalent of a 1.0 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) 195-day Athletic
Trainer, and to decrease a corresponding number of District academic employees no later
than the beginning of the 2012-2013 academic year. The PKS Resolution directed the
District President/Superintendent or his designee to initiate and pursue procedures necessary
to not reemploy the equivalent of 1.0 FTE academic employee (195-Day Athletic Trainer) of
the District in accordance with Education Code sections 87740 and 87743.2 The PKS
reduction and elimination is based solely upon financial reasons, and is not related to the
skills, abilities or work performance of the affected faculty member.

3.

On March 9, 2012, the District President/Superintendent notified respondent
of the recommendation regarding reduction/discontinuance of services and that his services
would no longer be required. The preliminary layoff notices informed respondent of his
right to request a hearing, and enclosed a copy of the PKS Resolution, sections 87740 and
87743, and a blank request for hearing form. In response to the preliminary layoff notice,
respondent filed a Request for Hearing on March 14, 2012. On April 12, 2012, the District
served the Accusation, copies of relevant sections of the Education and Government Codes,
and form Notice of Defense on respondent.

Respondent had earlier filed a Notice of Defense on March 14, 2012.

4.

Nancy Miller is the District’s Director of Human Resources. She noted that

respondent is the District’s only athletic trainer. Respondent’s District seniority date is
August 14, 2002. He holds a Master’s Degree in Kinesiology, and a Bachelor’s Degree in
Education. He is qualified to provide instruction in the community college teaching
disciplines of physical education and health. Respondent is currently assigned to provide
services for the District as an athletic trainer. His seniority and his academic qualifications
do not allow him to bump into any position held by a probationary employee or other
employee with less seniority and in which he is qualified and competent to provide
instruction.

Ms. Miller indicated that the District is offering respondent a full-time 175-day

athletic position next year. The new position will have both athletic training and
instructional components. Respondent currently works solely as an athletic trainer with no
instructional component.

5.

Respondent suggests that the District is required to provide students with an

athletic trainer certified by the Board of Certification per the California Community College
Athletic Association Constitution and Bylaws. Respondent also believes that the District is

2 All statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise indicated.

2

not really eliminating or reducing the services currently being provided by respondent and
that there is therefore no PKS reduction.

6.

Robert Aaron Frost, Ph.D., is the District’s Vice President of Student

Learning. Dr. Frost explained that the District’s budget will be reduced by $3 million and
that this was the reason services are being reduced or eliminated. He noted that there is
absolutely no requirement that community college districts have an athletic trainer on
faculty. The majority of community college districts do not use faculty to staff this position.
It may be provided through other means and the District intends to provide athletic trainer
services differently next year. Dr. Frost characterized the District’s current athletic trainer
services as a “Cadillac” plan, and one that offers considerably more than that provided at
other community colleges, particularly given the relatively small number of sports programs
offered by the District. Dr. Frost offered as one example of a change contemplated for next
year, that the athletic trainer will no longer accompany the football team during away games.
Dr. Frost confirmed that the District will continue to use only certified trainers and otherwise
satisfy minimum standards for this service.

7.

The District is not required to provide athletic trainer services in the same
fashion as it is doing this academic year. The District noted that minimum standards set
forth in the California Community College Athletic Association (CCCAA) Constitution and
Bylaws recognize that community college districts should exercise discretion in meeting
these standards and that “each college must use its experience and common sense to tailor
these policies to its specific needs.” (CCCAA Bylaw 9, section 9.1.2. Underlining in
original.)

Respondent relied upon these same Bylaws, and has not identified any other

requirement that the District continue to provide athletic trainer services solely through
faculty.

8.

9.

There was no evidence that the District proposes to eliminate any services that

are mandated by state or federal laws or regulations.

No junior employee is being retained to render services that respondent is

qualified and competent to perform.

10.

The District’s PKS reduction and discontinuance relates solely to the welfare

of the District’s colleges and students.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth

in sections 87740 and 87743.

3

2.

The Athletic Trainer services identified in the PKS Resolution is a particular
kind of service that may be reduced or discontinued under section 87743. The Governing
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue this service was neither arbitrary nor capricious,
and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of these
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s colleges and its students within the
meaning of section 87740.

3.

Cause exists to reduce academic faculty of the District due to the reduction or
discontinuance of particular kinds of services. The District properly identified the academic
faculty to be laid off as directed by the Governing Board.

4.

No junior academic faculty is being retained to perform services that

respondent is qualified and competent to render. Cause exists to give notice to respondent
that his services as a faculty athletic trainer will not be required for the 2012-2013 academic
year because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.

RECOMMENDATION

Notice may be given to respondent Michael Paddack that his services as an Athletic

Trainer will not be required for the 2012-2013 academic year.

DATED: May 29, 2012

_____________________________
JONATHAN LEW
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

4

