BEFORE THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
OF THE TEMPLE CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

OAH NO. 2012030551

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

)
)
CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE
)
TEMPLE CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, )
)
)
)

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Glynda B. Gomez, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings,

State of California, heard this matter on April 11, 2012, in Temple City, California.

Sharon J. Ormond, Attorney at Law, represented the Temple City Unified School

District (District).

Richard J. Schwab, Attorney at Law, represented Respondents Nicole Archuleta

Medina, Stephanie Baker, Sherry Boyd, Scot Drew, Shelby Elliott, Iris Chiu Hannon, Diana
Lan, Jennifer Lau, Andrea Saldana and Erin Wahbe (collectively, respondents). Music
teacher Phillip Bailey failed to file a request for hearing and the matter proceeded on a
default basis as to him.

Evidence was received, and the matter was submitted for decision.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

3.

Dr. Chelsea Kang-Smith, Superintendent of the District, filed the Accusation

in her official capacity on March 5, 2012.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

On February 22, 2012, the District’s Board of Education (Board) adopted

Resolution No. 1112-19 (the Resolution), which proposed a layoff of 10.80 full-time
equivalent (FTE) certificated employees. Specifically, the Resolution provided for the
reduction or discontinuance of the following particular kinds of services:

Reduce K-6 Classroom Teaching Services

Reduce Elementary Physical Education Services

8.8 FTE

1.0 FTE

Reduce Music Teaching Services

Total

1.00 FTE

10.80 FTE

4.

On February 22, 2012, the Superintendent of the District recommended to the

Board that notice be given to 11 certificated employees that their services would not be
required for the 2012-2013 school year, based on the Resolution.

5.

On or before March 9, 2012, the Superintendent provided written notification
to 11 certificated employees, including respondents, that it had been recommended that their
services would not be required for the next school year. The notices included the reasons for
the notifications and were accompanied by the Resolution. In addition to the notices, the
Superintendent filed and served the Accusation and other required documents on all 11
certificated employees, including respondents identified by the Superintendent as slated for
layoff.

6.

Respondents timely filed Requests for Hearing/Notices of Defense.

7.

The procedure followed by the District differed somewhat from that specified
in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, in that the District followed a one-step process
whereby the District served respondents with all jurisdictional documents, including the
Accusation, on or before March 9, 2012. Respondents perfected their rights to a hearing by
submitting a combined Request for Hearing/Notice of Defense on or before March 26, 2012.
Although this process deviated from the Education Code, it did not prejudice any of the
employees, including respondents, who were subject to layoff. 1 All prehearing jurisdictional
requirements have been met.

8.

In order to determine the number of employees to lay off, the District

considered an expected shortfall in the budget for the 2012-2013 school year and positively
assured attrition, including retirements, resignations, and other expected vacancies for the
2012-2013 school year. Dr. Julio Fonseca (Fonseca), Assistant Superintendent, Personnel
Services, testified that, because of the potential loss of State funding, the District expected a

1 The Education Code sets forth a two-step process whereby certificated employees

subject to layoff are served, prior to March 15, with a Notice of Recommendation That
Services Will Not be Required, a Request for Hearing form, and copies of Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955. If an employee files a Request for Hearing with the District
within seven days after receiving the above documents, the District is required to serve on
each employee a Notice of Accusation, a copy of the Accusation, a blank Notice of Defense,
and copies of relevant Government Code sections that set forth hearing procedures. The
employee must then file a Notice of Defense within five days to perfect his/her right to a
hearing.

2

serious budget shortfall in the 2012-2013 school year. The District estimated that it will
incur an eight million dollar deficit over the next three years unless it reduces its staff.

9.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of
services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code2
section 44955. The decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services in light
of the potential loss of revenue is neither arbitrary nor capricious, but is rather a proper
exercise of the District’s discretion. The reduction of services set forth in factual finding
number 3, given the possible reduction in State funding and the District’s need to remain
solvent to serve its students, is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has
become necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the
Board.

10.

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority

dates (the first date of paid service in a probationary position), current assignments and
locations, advanced degrees, credentials, and authorizations.

11.

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and bumping

list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced.
The District then determined whether any of these employees, beginning with the most
senior, could be reassigned to a vacant position resulting from attrition, or displace (bump) a
more junior employee from his or her position. If there was no vacancy or no such junior
employee, then the identified employee performing the particular kind of service being
reduced would be subject to layoff.

12.

In determining whether a senior employee could be reassigned or bump a more

junior employee, the District used the following competency criteria established by the
Resolution:

“ ‘Competency’ as described in Education Code section 44955(b) for purposes of
bumping and rehire shall include (1) possession of a valid clear or preliminary credential
authorizing service in the subject(s) or grade level to which the employee will be assigned at
the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year; (2) highly qualified status under the No Child
Left Behind Act; (3) an appropriate EL authorization (if required by the position); and (4) to
bump into an alternative education assignment, at least one complete year of experience
teaching in an alternative education assignment setting in the District within the past five (5)
school years.”

13.
Teaching Services.

The Resolution calls for a reduction of 8.8 FTE positions in K-6 Classroom

14.

For at least the past five years, the District has operated an alternative school

for students with emotionally challenging and problematic behaviors who are at great risk for

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

3

failure in their educational programs. It intends to retain three certificated employees,
Andrew Jahan (seniority date August 28, 2006), Yvonne Rivera-Rosales (seniority date
August 28, 2006) and Sean Patterson (seniority date September 2, 2008), all of whom have
held teaching positions in this setting at least since September 2008. The District contends
that there are no certificated employees subject to this layoff process who have more
seniority than these three teachers, and who are competent to bump into their positions under
the Resolution’s competency criteria. Respondents argued that the Resolution’s competency
criteria are arbitrary and unreasonable as applied, and that there are certificated employees
with greater seniority who are subject to layoff but who are competent to teach in the
alternative school setting. The District argued that the Board properly exercised its
discretion when it established these criteria in order to retain teachers with teaching
experience at the alternative school setting. In the District’s view, only teachers with
experience and training in this setting have the necessary skills to motivate these students and
to meet their particular needs, as well as contend with the difficult emotional situations that
arise. The District has made efforts to develop the alternative school program and its
teachers by providing special educational opportunities to those teachers performing these
services and maintaining a consistent teaching staff for the at risk, troubled, pregnant and
parenting students it services. The teachers provide instruction in a departmentalized setting
but use a multidisciplinary team approach to educating the students. The teachers have
training on computerized curriculum, trust and relationship building and issues specific to
pregnant and parenting students, violence, abuse, neglect and special learning needs.

15.

Respondent Erin Wahbe (Wahbe) contends that she should be allowed to

bump into a position at the alternative school currently being taught by a teacher Sean
Patterson who has a seniority date of September 2, 2008 and is scheduled to be retained.
Wahbe has a seniority date of September 1, 2005 and teaches fifth grade students at Longden
Elementary School. Wahbe possesses a clear multiple subject credential, has both bachelor’s
and master’s degrees and is NCLB compliant. Wahbe has taught kindergarten and fifth
grade and is certified to teach students in the gifted and talented education (GATE) program.
She has experience using computerized curriculum in the classroom. She believes her
experience as a teacher, and her credential, GATE certification and experience using a
computerized curriculum makes her competent to teach in an alternative school setting.
Wahbe’s elementary school students are academically, developmentally and emotionally
different than the teenage population of at risk and pregnant students at the alternative school
and she has no experience teaching in the alternative setting. Wahbe does not meet the
competency criterion (item 4) prescribed by the Board as set forth in Factual Finding 12
above and is therefore not entitled to bump into a teaching position at the alternative school
setting.

16.

Respondent Andrea Saldana (Saldana) contends that she should be allowed to
bump into a position at the alternative school currently being taught by Sean Patterson who
has a seniority date of September 2, 2008 and is scheduled to be retained. Saldana has a
seniority date of October 5, 2005 and teaches first grade students at La Russa Elementary
School. Sean Patterson has a seniority date of September 2, 2008 and teaches at the
alternative school. Saldana possesses a clear multiple subject credential, has both bachelors’

4

and master’s degrees and is NCLB compliant. Saldana has taught kindergarten, first, third
and fourth grades. She has also substituted as a teacher in fifth grade and special education.
She believes her experience as a teacher, her credential, certification as a home school
teacher and experience home school teaching her seventh grade child using a computerized
curriculum makes her competent to teach in an alternative school setting. Saldana’s
elementary school students are academically, developmentally and emotionally different than
the teen age population of at risk and pregnant students at the alternative school. Her
experience home schooling her own seventh grader does not demonstrate the competency
required by the Board as set forth in Factual Finding 12 above. Therefore, Saldana is not
entitled to bump into a teaching position at the alternative school setting.

17.

Respondent Stephanie Baker (Baker) contends that she should be allowed to
bump into a position at the alternative school currently being taught by Sean Patterson who
has a seniority date of September 2, 2008 and is scheduled to be retained. Baker has a
seniority date of November 5, 2007 and teaches third grade students at Emperor Elementary
School as part of a job share where she teaches eighty percent (.8 FTE) of the position.
Baker possesses a clear multiple subject credential, a clear reading certificate, a bachelors’
degree and is NCLB compliant. Baker taught in the District’s alternative school setting for
one year during the 2009-2010 school year as part of a half time (.5 FTE) job share with
another teacher. She accepted an elementary school teaching position and left the alternative
school for the 2010-2011 school year. Baker’s half time service for one school year does not
meet the District’s competency criterion to bump into a teaching position in the alternative
education setting.

18.

The Resolution also calls for a reduction of 1.0 FTE positions in Physical

Education (PE) Classroom Teaching Services.

19.

School Districts are mandated to provide 200 minutes of PE in each ten school

day period. The parties agree that PE is a mandated service that cannot be reduced below
this mandated level.

20.

Scot Drew (Drew) has a seniority date of September 2, 2008. Drew holds a

clear single subject PE credential and a bachelor’s degree. He is the only elementary school
PE teacher in the District. District insists that PE instruction will not fall below the
mandated level of instruction, but does not yet have a plan as to how it will provide PE.
District is considering requiring the regular elementary classroom teachers to provide PE
instruction.

21.

No junior certificated employee is being retained to perform services which a

more senior employee subject to layoff is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

5

1.

All notices and other requirements of Code sections 44949 and 44955 were

met. Therefore, jurisdiction was established for this proceeding as to all respondents.

2.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of Code section 44955,
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3.

Cause was established as required by Code sections 44949 and 44955 to

reduce the number of certificated employees by 10.8 FTE due to the reduction or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services for the reasons set forth in factual funding
numbers 1 through 9. The Board’s decisions to reduce or eliminate the identified services
were neither arbitrary nor capricious. The decisions relate solely to the welfare of the
District’s schools and the pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

4.

Respondents Wahbe, Saldana and Baker have argued that they are competent

to teach at the alternative school, and thus, are entitled to bump into the positions held by
Sean Patterson, or any other employee with less seniority, who currently renders these
services. The Resolution specifically requires that, for employees to be competent to teach at
the alternative school, they must have the appropriate credential and at least one complete
year of experience teaching in an alternative education setting in the District within the past
five school years. There is no dispute that Wahbe, Saldana and Baker possess the necessary
credential; however, the District is not required to displace junior employees with more
senior employees who are credentialed but lack the competency, one year of experience in a
District alternative education setting in the last five years, as determined by the Board, to
teach at the alternative school site. Wahbe, Saldana and Baker do not have the experience
the Board has determined is necessary to teach competently in the alternative school and
thus, are not competent to bump into the alternative education assignments of junior teachers.

5.

The term “competent” as used in section 44955 has been defined by the courts.

In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 19, the court defined the term in a
reemployment proceeding under section 44956, in terms of the teachers’ skills and
qualifications, specifically, as “relating to special qualifications for a vacant position, rather than
relating to the on-the-job performance of the laid-off permanent employee.” In doing so, the
court noted that courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing Board (1981)
118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109
Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, had interpreted the term in a similar manner.

6.

Courts in analogous layoff and reemployment contexts, construing provisions

similar to section 44955, have recognized that school districts have discretion to establish rules
to define teacher competency.
Cal.App.3d 555, 565, See also Martin v. Kentfield School District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299-

(Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196

6

300; Forker v. Board of Trustees, supra.) In Duax, the governing board had established a
standard of competency that required one year of full-time teaching in the subject area within
the last ten years. The court found such standard “clearly related to skills and qualifications to
teach” and that standard was reasonable. (Duax, supra, 196 Cal. App.3d 555, at p. 567.) The
court also concluded that the standard did not define competency too narrowly. Similarly, in
Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal. App. 4th 127, the Court upheld layoffs
of employees made using criterion requiring one semester of experience in a continuation high
school within the preceding ten years as a competency criterion to bump junior teachers.

7.

The Resolution’s criteria, in pertinent part, require certificated employees to have

one complete year of experience teaching in a District alternative school within the past five
years in order to bump a more junior certificated employee who satisfies this criterion and who
is currently in the assignment. The criteria relate to the skills, qualifications and training of
certificated employees, and may be used by the District in implementing the layoffs, as they are
a reasonable means for assuring that teachers assigned to the alternative school have the
experience and skills needed to work with at-risk students.

8.

Code section 51210.2, subdivision (a), provides that District is required to

provide PE instruction to elementary school children in grades one through 6 for a minimum
of 200 minutes in each 10 school day period. Code section 51210.2, subdivision (b),
provides a school district can meet the PE instruction requirement with either (1) a
credentialed physical education teacher or (2) a teacher who either completes one college
course in physical education or a yearly PE theoretical practical developmental training.
Accordingly, District has flexibility in its delivery of PE services and is not required to use
the services of a credentialed PE teacher. Although District may, for various reasons, have a
challenge in meeting the state mandate for PE, it was not established that District’s level of
PE service would fall below the mandated level in the event its sole PE teach is laid off. (see
Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal. App. 3d 689, 698.)

9.

Cause exists for the District to terminate the services of respondents Nicole
Archuleta (1.0 FTE), Stephanie Baker (.8 FTE), Sherry Boyd (1.0 FTE), Scot Drew (1.0
FTE), Shelby Elliott (1.0 FTE), Iris Chiu Hannon (1.0 FTE), Diana Lam (1.0 FTE), Jennifer
Lau (1.0 FTE), Andrea Saldana (1.0 FTE) and Erin Wahbe (1.0 FTE) for the 2012-2013
school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services, by reason of factual finding
numbers 1 through 21 and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 8.

1.

The Accusation is sustained with respect to respondents Nicole Archuleta (1.0

FTE), Stephanie Baker (.8 FTE), Sherry Boyd (1.0 FTE), Scot Drew (1.0 FTE), Shelby
Elliott (1.0 FTE), Iris Chiu Hannon (1.0 FTE), Diana Lam (1.0 FTE), Jennifer Lau (1.0
FTE), Andrea Saldana (1.0 FTE), Phillip Bailey (1.0 FTE) and Erin Wahbe (1.0 FTE).

ORDER

7

2.

The District may notify the above respondents that their services will not be

needed during the 2012-2013 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

Dated: April 30, 2012

_________________________________
GLYNDA B. GOMEZ
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

8

