BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF
THE LYNWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH No. 2012040137

Certificated Employees of the Lynwood
Unified School District,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Chris Ruiz, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative

Hearings (OAH), heard this matter on May 1, 2012, in Lynwood, California.

Terence J. Gallagher, Esq., represented the Lynwood Unified School District

(District).

Richard J. Schwab, Esq., represented the remaining six Respondents (as listed in

exhibit 23). Exhibit 23 was marked after the conclusion of the hearing and contains a list of
the original 34 Respondents, with the remaining 6 Respondents still at issue having their
corresponding number circled. Exhibit 23 is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set
forth herein. Except as to those six Respondents, the District withdrew the Accusation
against all other Respondents.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Edward Velasquez, Superintendent of the District, acting in his official

capacity, caused all pleadings, notices and other papers to be filed and served upon each
Respondent pursuant to the provisions of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. All
pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

2.

Respondents are employed by the District as permanent, probationary, intern,

pre-intern, emergency permitted, waiver, and/or temporary certificated employees of the
District.

3.

On February 28, 2012, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955,

the Governing Board of the District (Board) issued a Resolution which approved the
recommendation by the Superintendent that notice be given to Respondents that their

services will not be required for the ensuing school year and stating the reasons for that
recommendation

4. On March 6, 2012, Respondents were given written notice of the recommendation

that notice be given to them, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that
their services will not be required for the ensuing school year and stating the reasons for that
recommendation.

5.

It was established that cause exists, within the meaning of Education Code

sections 44949 and 44955, for not reemploying Respondents for the ensuing school year for
all of the reasons set forth below. The District has decided that particular kinds of services of
the District will be reduced or eliminated no later than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school
year

6. The reduction or discontinuation of these particular kinds of services is related to the
welfare of the District and its pupils. Due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds
of services, it is necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District as
determined by the Board. This reduction is necessary because of budgetary issues.

7. The Board decided that it is necessary to decrease the number of certificated

employees as a result of the reduction in services. These services are “particular kinds of
services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section
44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was
not arbitrary or capricious, but rather, constituted a proper exercise of discretion. The Board
is faced with a budget shortfall. A detailed list of the particular kinds of services to be
eliminated is stated in Exhibit 1, Resolution number 11-12/18, which is hereby incorporated
by reference as if fully set forth herein.

8.

The reduction or discontinuation of these particular kinds of services is related

to the welfare of the District and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuation of particular
kinds of services is necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District
as determined by the Board. This reduction is necessary because of budget reductions.

9.

The Board properly considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements
and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be
delivered to its employees prior to March 15, 2012. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627 at 636).

10.

The District properly created and utilized its seniority list by determining the
first date of paid service of each certificated employee and properly utilized reasonable “tie-
breaker” criteria when necessary. No junior teacher has been improperly retained in place of
more senior teacher.

11.

None of the six remaining Respondents presented any legal basis to challenge

their layoff.

2

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.
44949 and 44955.

Jurisdiction for these proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code sections

2.

Each of the services set forth in Findings 5 and 6 is a particular kind of

service which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and
case law.

3.

The District’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither

arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.

4.

Cause exists to reduce the District's teaching positions as described above and
to give notice to the affected teachers pursuant to Education Code section 44955. Based on
the above Findings, including the preamble to this Proposed Decision, the names of the
affected teachers, those as to whom final notices of layoff may be given, are as follows:

All Respondent teachers listed in exhibit 23 whose have the number next to their

name circled. Their last names are: Acosta, Louis-Herrera, Ochoa, Oronoz, Sung, and
Walker.

ORDER

Because of the reductions of services, the District may give notice to the teachers
identified in Legal Conclusion No. 4 that their services will not be required for the 2012-
2013 school year.

Dated: May ___, 2012.

___________________________
CHRIS RUIZ
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

3

