BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF
OROVILLE UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF BUTTE, CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusations Against:

OAH No. 2012020578

RYAN ALDRICH
CHRISTEN CARR
COURTNY CONNELLY
SCOTT GIANNINI
LESLIE GRANKA
STEPHANIE GRECO
LINDSAY HIMMELSPACH
EVA HORVATH
SHANE JOHNSTON
LIBRADO LASCANO
WONG LEE
BRAD LUND
SHANNON SHARP
RYAN SPEAS
ALISHA WELIVER
ROBIN ZANON

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Rebecca M. Westmore, Administrative Law

Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 12, 2012, in
Oroville, California.

Diana D. Halpenny, Attorney at Law, Kronick, Moskovitz, Tiedemann &

Girard, represented the Oroville Union High School District.

Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp, Curtis & Price, represented all

respondents, except for Scott Giannini.

Scott Giannini (respondent) appeared and represented himself.

1

Evidence was received and the parties offered oral closing arguments. The

record was then closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on April 12, 2012.

PRELIMINARY MATTERS

District’s Motion Seeking a Ruling That Certain Respondents Waived Their Right to a
Hearing

1.

At hearing, the district filed a Motion Seeking a Ruling That Certain

Respondents Waived Their Right to a Hearing. The following respondents were
identified for failing to timely submit a Notice of Defense pursuant to Government
Code section 11506, subdivision (c): Ryan Aldrich, Christen Carr, Scott Giannini,
Lindsay Himmelspach, and Librado Lascano.

2.

Pursuant to stipulation, respondents Ryan Aldrich and Christen Carr

agreed to withdraw their Requests for Hearing; the district agreed to rescind
respondent Scott Giannini’s layoff notice; and the district agreed to accept the late
filing of the Notice of Defense from respondents Lindsay Himmelspach and Librado
Lascano, in order to allow them to participate in the layoff proceedings.

Withdrawals and Rescissions

3.

Pursuant to stipulation, several other respondents were dismissed from
the proceeding due to: (1) withdrawal of their Notice of Defense; and (2) the district’s
rescission of their Notice of Non-Reemployment. The following respondents
withdrew their Notices of Defense: Eva Horvath, Shane Johnston, and Alisha
Weliver. The district rescinded the Notice of Non-Reemployment issued to
respondent Courtny Connelly.

4.

The hearing proceeded against the remaining respondents: Leslie

Granka, Stephanie Greco, Lindsay Himmelspach, Librado Lascano, Wong Lee, Brad
Lund, Shannon Sharp, Ryan Speas, and Robin Zanon.

Compliance with No Child Left Behind (NCLB)

5.

Pursuant to stipulation, the parties agreed that NCLB compliance

requires compliance only in the following core subject areas: Mathematics; Biological
Sciences; Chemistry, Geosciences, and Physics; Social Science, including History,
Government, Economics and Geography; Foreign Languages; Drama; Theatre; Visual
Arts, including Dance and Music; English; Language Arts; Reading, including
Reading Intervention; and the California High School Exit Exam (CAHSEE).

2

Oroville Union High School District Reduction in Force (RIF) List of Names

6.

Pursuant to stipulation, the parties agreed to amend the district’s RIF

List of Names1 as follows:

a.

b.

Patricia Bauer’s first name (seniority number 103 and
date of hire 2/1/07), will be amended to read “Debbie”
Bauer.

Shannon Sharp’s date of hire (seniority number 88) will
be amended to read 8/15/2005, instead of 8/15/2004.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Corey Willenberg, Ed.D is the Superintendent of Oroville Union High
School District (district). The district serves two comprehensive high schools2 with
approximately 1,100 students in each school in grades 9 through 12; one continuation
high school3 with approximately 157 students; and a community day school4 with
approximately 47 students. Superintendent Willenberg described Prospect High
School as a targeted-assisted Title I school,5 which serves students in grades 10
through 12 who are behind in credits, did not perform well in a comprehensive high
school, or are pregnant teens or teen parents. Oroville Union High Community Day
School is also a targeted-assisted Title I school, and serves students who have been
expelled into the program, or placed there by juvenile court probation, or the School
Attendance Review Board (SARB). According to Superintendent Willenberg,
students attending the community day school are challenging because of their
discipline issues and credit deficiencies. They have “behavior problems on a daily
basis and it’s not just mere defiance. It could be in-your-face defiant. They could be
threatening.”

1 The district’s RIF List of Names was identified and admitted into evidence as

Exhibit 4.

Oroville High School.

2 The district’s comprehensive high schools are Las Plumas High School and

3 The district’s continuation high school is Prospect High School.

4 The district’s community day school is Oroville Union High Community Day

School.

5 Superintendent Willenberg explained that a targeted-assisted Title I school

“means that the Title I dollars can only be used for at-risk groups like special
education or English language learners or students that are low socioeconomic.”

3

2.

The actions of Superintendent Willenberg, and those of the district’s
staff and governing body, the Governing Board (board), were taken solely in their
official capacities.

3.

The district is facing a budget shortfall for the 2012-2013 school year
of approximately $2 million, and a projected declining enrollment of approximately
33 students.

4.

On March 7, 2012, the board adopted Resolution No. 12-11/12,

reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services (PKS) of the district, affecting
15.1 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) certificated positions.

5.

The Resolution states that it will be necessary to reduce the following

PKS of the district, and to decrease a corresponding number of certificated employees
in the district not later than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year:

SERVICE

F.T.E.

English Teachers (5 sections)

Social Science Teachers (5 sections)

Math Teachers (5 sections)

Earth Science Teachers (5 sections)

Biology Teachers (5 sections)

Physical Education Teachers (3 sections)

Spanish Teacher (1 section)

Business/Computers Teachers (3 sections)

EIA Credit Recovery Teacher (1 section)

EIA Study Skills Teachers (2 sections)

EIA LEP Teachers (3 sections)

EIA Math Teachers (2 sections)

EIA English/Reading Teachers (6
sections)

4

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.4

1.2

Title 1 Study Skills Teacher (1 section)

Title 1 Math Teachers (4 sections)

Title 1 Credit Recovery Teachers (2
sections)

Title 1 English/Reading Teachers (13
sections)

Alternative Education Assistant Principal

Special Education Coordinator/School
Psychologist

Total

0.2

0.8

0.4

2.6

1.0

.90

15.1

6.

As a result of the above PKS reductions and/or eliminations, the board

determined that it was necessary to decrease 15.1 FTE positions for certificated
employees in the district at the close of the 2011-2012 school year, in accordance
with Education Code section 44955.6

7.

On March 7, 2012, Superintendent Willenberg gave the board written
notice of his recommendation that notice be given to respondents that their services
would not be required for the ensuing school year, and the reasons therefor.

8.

On March 12, 2012, Superintendent Willenberg timely served a letter

entitled “Preliminary Notice of Layoff” (Preliminary Notice) on each of the
permanent and probationary certificated employees affected by the PKS reductions
and/or eliminations set forth in the Resolution. The Preliminary Notice advised that it
had been recommended to the board that the recipient be given preliminary written
notice that his/her services might not be required for the 2012-2013 school year, due
to reductions in PKS.

9.

All the respondents in this action timely filed a Request for Hearing to

determine whether there was cause for not reemploying them for the 2012-2013
school year.

6 All further statutory references are to the California Education Code unless

otherwise indicated.

5

10.

On March 28, 2012, Superintendent Willenberg made and filed the

Accusation, and caused it to be served on respondents. With the exception of
respondents Ryan Aldrich, Christen Carr, Scott Giannini, Lindsay Himmelspach, and
Librado Lascano (Preliminary Matters 1), all respondents timely filed a Notice of
Defense requesting a hearing in this matter.

Implementation of Layoff Procedure

11.

In anticipation of the PKS reduction, Superintendent Willenberg and
his staff began updating the district’s seniority list. On December 14, 2011, Deana
Fallen, Senior Personnel Technician, sent the seniority list to the teachers to allow
them to report inaccurate information and request corrections to their first date of paid
service and credentials on or before January 3, 2012.

12. Ms. Fallen identified the individuals serving in the positions affected

by the PKS reductions. District staff used the updated seniority list to identify vacant
positions and to identify the least senior persons occupying the positions affected by
the PKS reductions. District staff took into account known attrition and existing
vacancies.

13. When the least senior persons occupying the positions affected by the
PKS reductions were identified, Ms. Fallen looked at each individual’s credentials to
determine whether he or she could displace any less senior certificated employees.
On March 12, 2012, district staff served the Preliminary Notices identified in Factual
Finding 8, on the most junior employees affected by the PKS reduction.

Date of Hire – Brad Lund

14.

Leslie Granka has a seniority date of 8/14/06. She maintains that the

district’s seniority list does not reflect Brad Lund’s correct seniority date. The
district’s seniority list indicates that Brad Lund’s seniority date is 8/1/06. Ms. Granka
asserted that while Mr. Lund was paid an hourly wage to prepare to teach the Ready
to Succeed (RTS) class prior to the start of the first day of school, his seniority date
should be reflected as 8/14/06, the first date of paid service under their employments
contract with the district. Ms. Granka contends that if the district takes this position,
then it could set a precedent that teachers who are paid on an hourly basis prior to
their actual start date are given a favorable seniority date, and that may include
teachers who teach in summer and adult schools.

15. Mr. Lund contends that he was hired by the district on August 1, 2006

to work with a drug and alcohol counselor to develop the curriculum for the RTS
class.

6

16.

As part of her duties as a Senior Personnel Technician, Ms. Fallen
maintains the personnel records of all the teachers in the district. At hearing, she
confirmed that Mr. Lund was contracted with and paid by the district as of August 1,
2006.

17.

Education Code section 44845 provides, in pertinent part, that a

permanent employee is “deemed to have been employed on the date upon which he
first rendered paid service ….” The evidence established that Mr. Lund was paid to
begin his service with the district on August 1, 2006, and worked continuously before
the start of the school year. Therefore, Mr. Lund’s seniority date is correctly reflected
in the district’s seniority list as August 1, 2006.

Competency Criteria

18.

In Resolution No. 12-11/12, the board defined “competency” for

the purposes of Education Code sections 44955, 44956 and 44957 as:

The more senior employee must possess the appropriate subject
area credential or authorization to render the service provided by
the junior employee and …

1. The employee must be “highly qualified” where required by
No Child Left Behind; and

2. If the employee is bumping within or into the continuation
high school or community day school program, the employee
must possess the subject authorization for the particular
assignment, be NCLB qualified and consent to be assigned to
the program.

Alternative Assignments

19.

Pursuant to section 44865, the district requested that on or before
February 1, 2012, each respondent express their consent or refusal to teach in an
alternative assignment at either Prospect High School or Oroville Union High
Community Day School, or in Independent Study, commencing in the 2012-2013
school year. The following respondents consented to teach in an alternative
assignment commencing in the 2012-2013 school year: Ryan Aldrich, Courtny
Connelly, Leslie Granka, Lindsay Himmelspach, Eva Horvath, Librado Lascano,
Wong Lee, Brad Lund, Ryan Speas, Alisha Weliver, and Robin Zanon. The
following respondents failed to submit their consent/declination forms to the district:
Christen Carr, Scott Giannini, Stephanie Greco, Shane Johnston and Shannon Sharp.

7

Individual Challenges to the Application of the Competency Criteria

20.

The respondents adversely affected by the competency criteria have

been teaching a subject identified for reduction, and, because of the resolution
reducing their services, wish to exercise their rights to displace junior employees.
The junior employees are either teaching the same subject, or teaching a different
subject that the senior teachers believe they are certificated and competent to teach.
When the competency criteria were applied to the senior teachers, Leslie Granka and
Ryan Speas were deemed not credentialed or competent to bump junior teachers
Keeley Frazier-White7 and Kurt Osterlund. However, senior teacher Brad Lund was
deemed credentialed and competent to bump Lindsay Himmelspach.

Leslie Granka

21.

Leslie Granka has a seniority date of 8/14/06. She holds a Professional

Clear Single Subject Credential in English, and English Learner (EL) Authorization.
She teaches .60 FTE English and .40 FTE Art at Prospect High School. She was laid
off .60 FTE in English pursuant to the bumping analysis applied by the district. She
is being retained to teach .40 FTE Art in the 2012-2013 school year. Ms. Granka
maintains that she can bump Keeley Frazier and Kurt Osterlund “and anyone else that
is less senior,” who are being retained to teach social science. Keeley Frazier has a
seniority date of 8/14/06, holds a Professional Clear Single Subject Credential in
Social Science, and teaches 1.0 FTE in Social Science/EIA Study Skills at Oroville
High School. Kurt Osterlund has a seniority date of 8/14/06, holds a Clear Single
Subject Credential in Social Science, and teaches 1.0 FTE in Social Science at Las
Plumas High School. Ms. Granka also maintains that because she holds an Associate
of Arts (AA) degree in Social Science, and has taught History at Prospect High
School, she is highly qualified pursuant to NCLB, to teach social science. In addition,
the district’s Tie-Breaking Criteria Application lists Ms. Granka as being NCLB
compliant in Social Science.8 The district did not permit Ms. Granka to bump into
any of these positions because she is not credentialed, authorized or highly qualified
pursuant to NCLB to teach social science.

7 According to Ms. Fallen, Keeley Frazier-White has since changed her name
to Keeley Frazier. It should be noted, however, that throughout the district’s exhibits,
Ms. Frazier’s first name is identified intermittently as “Keeley” and “Keely.”

8 The district’s Tie-Breaking Criteria Application (Exhibit 14) indicates that

Leslie Granka, Stephanie Greco and Courtny Connelly are NCLB compliant in Social
Science. At hearing, Ms. Fallen clarified that this was a typographical error carried
over when the page was merged from the Tie-Breaking Criteria applied to Keeley
Frazier and Kurt Osterlund who are NCLB compliant in Social Science. According to
Ms. Fallen, Ms. Granka, Ms. Greco and Ms. Connelly are NCLB compliant in
English, and not Social Science.

8

22. Ms. Granka holds a Professional Clear Single Subject Credential in

English. She is seeking to bump junior teachers who hold Clear Single Subject
Credentials in Social Science and are authorized to teach social science in high
school. Although she possesses an AA degree in social science, and has experience
teaching History at Prospect High School, her degree and experience do not authorize
her to teach social science, and do not establish that she is highly qualified pursuant to
NCLB. The district may reasonably require that one seeking to bump a junior social
science teacher hold a credential for the subject matter, and be NCLB compliant. Ms.
Granka does not possess the appropriate subject area credential to teach social
science, and is not NCLB compliant; therefore, she cannot bump Keeley Frazier or
Kurt Osterlund.

Ryan Speas

23.

Ryan Speas has a seniority date of 9/12/05. He holds a Clear Single
Subject Credential in Biological Science-Geosciences, and EL Authorization. He
teaches .60 FTE in Earth Science, .40 FTE in Biology Science, and .20 FTE in EIA
Credit Recovery at Prospect High School. He was laid off .40 FTE in Earth Science,
.40 FTE in Biology Science, and .20 FTE in EIA Credit Recovery pursuant to the
board’s Resolution and the bumping analysis applied by the district. He is being
retained to teach .20 FTE in Earth Science in the 2012-2013 school year. Mr. Speas
maintains that he can bump Kurt Osterlund if he is retained to teach government.
Kurt Osterlund has a seniority date of 8/14/06, holds a Clear Single Subject
Credential in Social Science, and teaches 1.0 FTE in Social Science at Las Plumas
High School. Mr. Speas also maintains that he was previously granted a waiver by
the board to teach government, and taught government at Prospect High School for
five years. The district did not permit Mr. Speas to bump into this position because
he is not credentialed, authorized or highly qualified pursuant to NCLB to teach social
science.

24. Ms. Fallen confirmed that Mr. Speas received a waiver from the board

to teach government when the district had no teachers that were credentialed and
authorized to teach social science. However, as Mr. Osterlund is credentialed and
authorized to teach social science, the board has not granted a waiver to Mr. Speas to
teach government in the 2012-2013 school year.

25. Mr. Speas holds a Clear Single Subject Credential in Biological

Science-Geosciences. He is seeking to bump a junior teacher who holds a Clear
Single Subject Credential in Social Science and is authorized to teach social science
in high school. While Mr. Speas previously received a waiver from the district to
teach government, he does not have a waiver to teach government in the 2012-2013
school year. The district may reasonably require that one seeking to bump a junior
social science teacher hold a credential for the subject matter, and be NCLB
compliant. Mr. Speas does not possess the appropriate subject area credential to teach

9

social science, and is not NCLB compliant; therefore, he cannot bump Kurt
Osterlund.

Brad Lund

26.

Brad Lund has a seniority date of 8/1/06. He holds a Professional Clear

Single Subject Credential in Physical Education (PE)/Introductory Health and EL
Authorization. He teaches .20 FTE in PE, .20 FTE in Health, .40 FTE in Careers, .20
FTE in Recycled Cycles, and .20 FTE in Title I Credit Recovery at Prospect High
School. He was laid off .20 FTE in Title I Credit Recovery as a result of the board’s
Resolution, and is being retained to teach all of his remaining classes in the 2012-
2013 school year. Mr. Lund contends that if he is bumped out of his Careers and
Recycled Cycles by any senior teachers, he can bump into Lindsay Himmelspach’s
.20 FTE in PE. Lindsay Himmelspach has a seniority date of 10/19/06, holds a Clear
Single Subject Credential in PE, and teaches 1.0 FTE in PE at Las Plumas High
School. She was laid off .80 FTE in PE as a result of the board’s Resolution and the
bumping analysis applied by the district. She is being retained to teach .20 FTE in PE
in the 2012-2013 school year. The district may reasonably require that one seeking to
bump a junior PE teacher hold a credential for the subject matter, and be NCLB
compliant. Mr. Lund possesses the appropriate subject area credential to teach PE, is
NCLB compliant, and is senior to Lindsay Himmelspach. Therefore, Mr. Lund can
bump into Ms. Himmelspach’s .20 FTE in PE in the 2012-2013 school year.

Skipping Certain Certificated Teachers

27.

The district seeks to skip certain certificated employees pursuant to
section 44955, subdivisions (b), (c) and (d)(1). These sections provide in pertinent
part:

(b) … except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of
no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions
of this section while any probationary employee, or any other
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render….

(c) …services of such employees shall be terminated in the
inverse of the order in which they were employed…

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of
seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The District demonstrates a specific need for personnel to
teach a specific course or course of study … and that the

10

certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study… which others
with more seniority do not possess.

[ ¶ ] …[ ¶ ]

28.

At hearing, Ms. Fallen admitted that the district does not maintain a list

of qualifications necessary to teach the Careers, Recycled Cycles, RTS and Foods,
non-core/elective classes currently being taught in the district’s alternative education
schools. Ms. Fallen also admitted that these classes are not core subjects under
NCLB, that a teacher is not required to be highly qualified pursuant to NCLB to teach
these classes, and with the exception of the Foods class, a specific credential is not
required to teach these classes. According to Ms. Fallen, a Home Economics
credential is required to teach the Foods class; however, Librado Lascano is currently
teaching the Foods class and does not possess a Home Economics credential. Ms.
Fallen contends that the district is moving towards 100 percent compliance with
NCLB requirements, and currently has only two sections in the district’s alternative
education schools – Art and Guitar - that are non-compliant with NCLB requirements.

Skipping Brad Lund – Careers and Recycled Cycles

29.

Brad Lund has a seniority date of 8/1/06. He holds a Professional Clear

Single Subject Credential in Physical Education (PE)/Introductory Health and EL
Authorization. He teaches .20 FTE in PE, .20 FTE in Health, .40 FTE in Careers, .20
FTE in Recycled Cycles, and .20 FTE in Credit Recovery at Prospect High School.
He was laid off .20 FTE in Credit Recovery as a result of the board’s Resolution, and
is being retained to teach all of his remaining classes in the 2012-2013 school year.
The district proposes to skip Mr. Lund’s .40 FTE in Careers and .20 FTE in Recycled
Cycles, pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

30.

Jeff Ochs is the Director of Alternative Education and Principal of the

Continuation and Community Day Schools. He has developed the schedule and
course assignments for the continuation and community day schools for ten years.
Mr. Ochs maintains that the district has a special need for Mr. Lund to teach the
Careers and Recycled Cycles classes, and that he has special training and experience
necessary to teach those classes. Principal Ochs asserted that in 2011, the district
asked Mr. Lund to work with the retiring teacher on the Careers curriculum, using his
experience from the Jump Start program he designed for the district. Principal Ochs
described the Careers class as “preparation for the work force.” It is a graduation
requirement for Prospect High School. Mr. Lund is now teaching the course, and
“has adjusted the curriculum to include some additional features that the prior teacher
did not use or were necessarily outdated.” According to Principal Ochs, Mr. Lund
interacts with the students by discussing their futures and what careers they could
have, and brings examples of real life situations to the students. For example, Mr.
Lund has shared his summer work and outdoor adventures with the students to

11

demonstrate other things they can do in life. Principal Ochs believes Mr. Lund “does
a great job with kids.”

31.

Principal Ochs also asserted that the district created the bicycle

mechanics program in response to the district’s need for an additional vocational
education class for their students. The district paid for Mr. Lund to attend a week-
long, 50-hour, training program in September 2007 at the United Bicycle Institute in
Ashland, Oregon, to learn about bicycle mechanics and equipment. Mr. Lund has
taught the Recycled Cycles class “on and off” since 2007. In addition, Mr. Lund
brings his personal experience in cycling and mountain biking to the class. According
to Principal Ochs, the Recycled Cycles class is “very popular” among the students,
and the students earn a bicycle for taking the class.

32. Ms. Granka maintains that she can bump into an alternative assignment

because her single subject teaching credential allows her to “teach anything, pretty
much within reason,” and because the district made it clear to her that seniority was
“paramount” to the hiring and rehiring process. In addition, Ms. Granka believes that
because “experience is very, very important when you’re placing teachers to … best
serve students’ needs,” she can bump into the Careers class being taught by Mr. Lund
in the 2012-2013 school year. Ms. Granka also contends that while it is honorable for
the district to strive for 100 percent compliance with NCLB, the district is not
required to follow the NCLB guidelines because not all the schools in the district are
Title I schools, and therefore she does not have to be NCLB compliant to bump into
an alternative assignment. With regard to the Careers class, Ms. Granka contends that
she has 10 years experience as an office manager with her husband’s business, and
four years experience running her own coffee house business, as well as contacts
within the Oroville community, and therefore “could offer a lot to students in a
Careers class.”

33.

Ryan Speas maintains that he can bump into the Careers and Recycled
Cycles classes being taught by Mr. Lund in the 2012-2013 school year. With regard
to the Careers class, Mr. Speas testified that prior to his teaching career he was an
assistant manager and brand representative for Abercrombie & Fitch and American
Eagle. His responsibilities included hiring employees, during which time he became
familiar with “resumes, careers paths and how business are run.” He has “a plethora
of resources” available to bring in guest speakers. While teaching at Prospect High
School, he taught a Student Advisory Period (SAP), which involved career
coursework. With regard to the Recycled Cycles class, he gained experience with
bicycles when he and his father ran a bicycle shop in Davis, California, and
participated in Earth Days in Davis where they repaired and sold bicycles.

34.

The district has identified the Careers class as a specific course or

course of study that will be taught at Prospect High School in the 2012-2013 school
year. However, the district has not demonstrated that Mr. Lund has special training
and experience to teach that class which others with more seniority do not possess.

12

Ms. Fallen admitted that a credential is not necessary to teach the course (Factual
Finding 28), and pursuant to stipulation by the parties, NCLB compliance is not
required for non-core courses (Preliminary Matters 5). In addition, Ms. Granka and
Mr. Speas consented to teach in an alternative assignment (Factual Finding 19).
Therefore, the evidence established that the class can be taught by either Ms. Granka
or Mr. Speas, or any other senior teachers who consented to teach in an alternative
assignment. Although the district believes Ms. Lund may be the “best candidate” to
teach the Careers class, the Education Code does not permit districts in a layoff
proceeding to weigh the qualifications of its teaching staff and retain junior
employees it believes have superior qualifications. The district must show that the
skipped teacher has special training and experience necessary to teach the specific
course or course of study. The district has not met that burden. Mr. Lund has a
seniority date of 8/1/06. Mr. Speas has a seniority date of 9/12/05. Ms. Granka has a
seniority date of 8/14/06. Although Ms. Granka and Mr. Speas are competent to
teach the Careers class, only Mr. Speas is senior to Mr. Lund, and therefore Mr. Speas
is eligible to teach .40 FTE in Careers in the 2012-2013 school year.

35.

The district has identified the Recycled Cycles class as a specific

course or course of study that will be taught at Prospect High School in the 2012-
2013 school year. The district established that Mr. Lund has special training and
experience to teach that class which Mr. Speas does not possess. Specifically, Mr.
Lund has received 50 hours of formal training, has taught the class “on and off” for
six years, and has personal experience in cycling and mountain biking. Therefore, the
district may retain Mr. Lund to teach .20 FTE in Recycled Cycles in the 2012-2013
school year.

Skipping Librado Lascano – RTS and Foods

36.

Librado Lascano has a seniority date of 8/13/07. He holds a

Professional Clear Single Subject Credential in Social Science and EL Authorization.
He teaches .20 FTE in Social Science, .20 FTE in Mathematics, .20 FTE in Spanish,
.20 FTE in Foods, and .20 in RTS at Oroville Union High Community Day School.
He was laid off .20 FTE in Social Science, .20 FTE Mathematics, and .20 FTE in
Spanish, pursuant to the board’s Resolution and the bumping analysis applied by the
district. He has been retained to teach .20 FTE in Foods and .20 FTE in RTS in the
2012-2013 school year. The district proposes to skip Ms. Lascano’s .20 FTE in RTS
and .20 FTE in Foods, pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

37. Mr. Ochs maintains that they have a special need for Mr. Lascano to

teach the RTS and Foods classes, and that he has special training and experience
necessary to teach those classes. Principal Ochs asserted that prior to teaching RTS
for the district, Mr. Lascano taught “for a few years” at the Academy for Change at
the Chico Unified Community Day School. He has a Drug and Alcohol Counseling
Certificate, which makes him “a very good instructor for our Ready to Succeed Drug
and Alcohol Education Program.” In addition, prior to his teaching career, Mr.

13

Lascano worked in restaurants as an owner and a cook. According to Principal Ochs,
Mr. Lascano “brought in a new restaurant-based approach to the Foods class which
gave the kids a little bit more opportunity to learn some more career skills,” and “[i]t
also opened up a menu or [introduced students] to foods they probably have never
tried eating or cooking before.” Principal Ochs described the Foods program as “very
successful.”

38. Mr. Lascano asserted that he was hired primarily because he is
bilingual and is a drug and alcohol counselor. He has served as a counselor for 17
years, and has taught Spanish and Art. He recently celebrated his twenty-third year of
recovery. Mr. Lascano contends that he brings unique qualifications to the Foods
class that no other teachers have. He was in the restaurant business for 10 years as a
manager, bartender, owner, and cook. He “did it all.” Throughout his teaching career
in alternative education, he has also learned that you need “to wear many different
hats,” and “to do your job to the best of your ability.”

39. Ms. Granka maintains that she can bump into the RTS and Foods
classes being taught by Mr. Lascano in the 2012-2013 school year. With regard to the
RTS class, Ms. Granka asserted that she has worked with “lower level learners and
struggling students [and] at-risk students … who were addicted to drugs and alcohol”
since she began her teaching career, and has “been very successful at it.” With regard
to the Foods class, Ms. Granka asserted that she worked with the Foods teacher,
Marcia Miller, for five years at Prospect High School, and assisted Ms. Miller
annually with the Thanksgiving meal. In addition, Ms. Miller gave her “an entire
packet and binder of the procedures that she would follow to prepare that
Thanksgiving meal,” which leads Ms. Granka to believe that she was going to take
over the Foods class. Ms. Granka also enjoys cooking and baking, and believes that
she “could really do a good job with teaching that class.”

40. Mr. Speas maintains that he can bump into the RTS and Foods classes
being taught by Librado Lascano in the 2012-2013 school year. Mr. Speas testified
that “RTS is very much a health class,” and serves students who have drug and
alcohol problems. He has been teaching Health at the community day school for
seven years. With regard to the Foods class, Mr. Speas asserted that “[i]f you look at
me, you can tell I like food and like to eat, and I like to cook that food, and I like to
eat it.” He believes he can bring a different perspective to the Foods class.

41.

Robin Zanon has a seniority date of 8/14/06. She holds a Clear Single
Subject Credential in Math and EL Authorization. She teaches 1.0 FTE Mathematics
at Prospect High School. Ms. Zanon was laid off 1.0 FTE in Mathematics pursuant to
the board’s Resolution and the bumping analysis applied by the district. Ms. Zanon
maintains that she can bump into the RTS and Foods classes being taught by Librado
Lascano in the 2012-2013 school year. With regard to the RTS class, Ms. Zanon
asserted that because the class will be taught by a team, and the teacher currently
teaching the class had no prior training or experience, that she too can learn the

14

position on the job. In addition, she has five years experience and training teaching at
Prospect High School and Oroville Union High Community Day School. With regard
to the Foods class, Ms. Zanon likes to “eat and cook,” and learned how to cook
cheaply as a college student.

42. Mr. Lund maintains that he can bump into the RTS and Foods classes
being taught by Librado Lascano in the 2012-2013 school year. Mr. Lund testified
that because he developed the RTS curriculum (Factual Finding 15), and has five
years experience and 300 hours of training at Youth for Change School where he
taught special education and ran a therapeutic recreation program, he has the “skill set
that best meets the needs of that program and the course that’s being offered.” With
regard to the Foods class, Mr. Lund contends that he “used to cook for about 150 to
250 paying guests as a whitewater raft guide.”

43.

The district has identified the RTS class as a specific course or course

of study that will be taught at Oroville Union High Community Day School in the
2012-2013 school year. However, the district has not demonstrated that Mr. Lascano
has special training and experience to teach that class which others with more
seniority do not possess. While Mr. Lascano has unique qualifications as a bilingual
teacher and a drug and alcohol counselor, the class being taught is RTS, not language
and counseling. In addition, Ms. Granka, Mr. Speas, Ms. Zanon and Mr. Lund teach
in a continuation high school or community day school program, and therefore have
exposure to the at-risk student population. Ms. Fallen admitted that a credential is not
necessary to teach the course (Factual Finding 28), the parties stipulated that NCLB
compliance is not required for non-core courses (Preliminary Matters 5), and Ms.
Granka, Mr. Speas, Ms. Zanon and Mr. Lund all consented to teach in an alternative
assignment (Factual Finding 19). The evidence established that the RTS class can be
taught by either Ms. Granka, Mr. Speas, Ms. Zanon, or Mr. Lund, or any other senior
teachers who consented to teach in an alternative assignment. Although the district
believes Ms. Lascano may be the “best candidate” to teach the RTS class, the
Education Code does not permit districts in a layoff proceeding to weigh the
qualifications of its teaching staff and retain junior employees it believes have
superior qualifications. The district must show that the skipped teacher has special
training and experience necessary to teach the specific course or course of study. The
district has not met that burden. Mr. Lascano has a seniority date of 8/13/07. Ms.
Granka has a seniority date of 8/14/06. Mr. Speas has a seniority date of 9/12/05.
Ms. Zanon has a seniority date of 8/14/06. Mr. Lund has a seniority date of 8/1/06.
Ms. Granka, Mr. Speas, Ms. Zanon and Mr. Lund are all competent to teach the RTS
class, and are all senior to Mr. Lascano. As the most senior teacher, however, Mr.
Speas is eligible to teach .20 FTE in RTS in the 2012-2013 school year.

44.

The district has identified the Foods class as a specific course or course

of study that will be taught at Oroville Union High Community Day School in the
2012-2013 school year. However, the district has not demonstrated that Mr. Lascano
has special training and experience to teach that class which others with more

15

seniority do not possess. While Mr. Lascano has unique qualifications as a bilingual
teacher and a drug and alcohol counselor, the class being taught is Foods, not
language and counseling. In addition, Ms. Granka, Mr. Speas, Ms. Zanon and Mr.
Lund teach in a continuation high school or community day school program, and
therefore have exposure to the student population. While Ms. Fallen admitted that a
Home Economics credential is necessary to teach the course (Factual Finding 28), the
evidence established that the class has been taught by Mr. Lascano who does not hold
a Home Economics credential. The parties stipulated that NCLB compliance is not
required for non-core courses (Preliminary Matters 5), and Ms. Granka, Mr. Speas,
Ms. Zanon and Mr. Lund all consented to teach in an alternative assignment (Factual
Finding 19). The evidence also established that that the class can be taught by either
Ms. Granka, Mr. Speas, Ms. Zanon, or Mr. Lund, or any other senior teachers who
have consented to teach in an alternative assignment. Although the district believes
Ms. Lascano may be the “best candidate” to teach the Foods class, the Education
Code does not permit districts in a layoff proceeding to weigh the qualifications of its
teaching staff and retain junior employees it believes have superior qualifications.
The district must show that the skipped teacher has special training and experience
necessary to teach the specific course or course of study. The district has not met that
burden. Mr. Lascano has a seniority date of 8/13/07. Ms. Granka has a seniority date
of 8/14/06. Mr. Speas has a seniority date of 9/12/05. Ms. Zanon has a seniority date
of 8/14/06. Mr. Lund has a seniority date of 8/1/06. Ms. Granka, Mr. Speas, Ms.
Zanon and Mr. Lund are all competent to teach the Foods class, and are all senior to
Mr. Lascano. As the most senior teacher, however, Mr. Speas is eligible to teach .20
FTE in Foods in the 2012-2013 school year.

Additional Challenge - NCLB Compliance

45. Ms. Granka and Mr. Speas contend that because the district has a

history of arbitrarily placing teachers in classroom positions for which they are not
credentialed,9 they have set a precedent for allowing teachers to teach out of their
credentialed areas and should not prohibit them from teaching a course for which they
are not credentialed. This argument is not persuasive. While the district has and
continues to place teachers in classroom positions for which they are not credentialed,
the district has resolved to become 100 percent compliant with NCLB requirements
(Factual Finding 27) and continues to work towards that goal. The decision to
become 100 percent compliant with NCLB is a reasonable decision, and well within
the board’s authority and discretion.

9 For example, Ms. Granka has taught Art at Prospect High School for three

years, and is being retained to teach .40 FTE in Art in the 2012-2013 school year.
However, Ms. Granka is not credentialed or authorized to teach Art.

16

Additional Challenge – Tie Breaking Criteria

46. Ms. Granka maintains that the board failed to include personal
experience in their tie-breaking criteria. Ms. Granka believes that if two teachers are
in a tie-breaking situation, then seniority should not be considered, and personal
experience should. Ms. Granka explained that if she has the same date of hire as
another English teacher, and a drama class is open for which she has no experience
but the other teacher does, she would defer to the other teacher based on her personal
experience. This argument is not persuasive. The board’s decision to exclude
personal experience as a tie-breaking criteria was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and
was a proper exercise of the board’s authority and discretion.

Other Defenses to Layoff

47.

Any other assertions raised by the parties at hearing which are not

addressed above are found to be without merit.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

As set forth in the Factual Findings, all notice and jurisdictional

requirements set forth in sections 44944 and 44945 were met. The notices sent to
respondents indicated the statutory basis for the reduction of services and, therefore,
were sufficiently detailed to provide them due process. (San Jose Teachers
Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation of Teachers
v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The description of services to be
reduced, both in the board’s Resolution and in the notices, adequately describe
particular kinds of services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838. See,
also, Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)

2.

The board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular kind of

service and then provide the needed services to the students in another manner.
(Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California Teachers
Association v. Board of Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d
32.) A school board may reduce services within the meaning of the statute either by
determining that a certain type of service shall not be performed at all or by reducing
the number of district employees who perform such services. (Rutherford v. Board of
Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)

3.

The services identified in PKS Resolution No. 12-11/12 are particular
kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued pursuant to sections 44949 and
44955. The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for
the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the
district’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

17

4.

The preliminary layoff notice issued to respondent Ryan Speas must be
rescinded because the district is retaining junior employees to provide services which
Mr. Speas is competent to render. Mr. Speas was laid off .40 FTE in Earth Science,
.40 FTE in Biology Science, and .20 FTE in EIA Credit Recovery pursuant to the
board’s Resolution and the bumping analysis applied by the district. Mr. Speas is
competent to bump into Mr. Lund’s .40 FTE in Careers, and Mr. Lascano’s .20 FTE
in RTS and .20 FTE in Foods. Therefore, Mr. Speas is retained to teach .20 FTE in
Earth Science, .40 FTE in Careers, .20 FTE in RTS and .20 FTE in Foods.

5.

The preliminary layoff notice issued to respondent Brad Lund must be
rescinded because the district is retaining junior employees to provide services which
Mr. Lund is certificated and competent to render. Mr. Lund was laid off .20 FTE in
Credit Recovery as a result of the board’s Resolution. Mr. Lund was bumped by Mr.
Speas .40 FTE in Careers, but is certificated and competent to bump into Ms.
Himmelspach’s .20 FTE in PE. Therefore, Mr. Lund is retained to teach .40 FTE in
PE, .20 FTE in Health, and .20 FTE in Recycled Cycles.

6.

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 4 and 5 and the Factual

Findings, no employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to
render a service which any respondent is competent to render.

7.

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 4 and 5, the board may give

respondents final notice that their services will not be required for the 2012-2013
school year.

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.

2.

3.

4.

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 4 and 5, the Accusations

served on respondents are sustained.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 4 and the Factual Findings, the

Preliminary Notice issued to certificated employee, Ryan Speas, shall be rescinded.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 5 and the Factual Findings, the

Preliminary Notice issued to certificated employee, Brad Lund, shall be rescinded.

Final Notices shall be given to the remaining respondents that their

services will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year because of the reduction
or discontinuation of particular kinds of services.

18

5.
seniority.

Final Notices shall be given to respondents in inverse order of

Dated: May 2, 2012

____________________________
REBECCA M. WESTMORE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

19

