BEFORE THE
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
COUNTY OF NEVADA
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH No. 2012031238

ROJEAN COSSAIRT,

Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Danette C. Brown, Office of Administrative Hearings

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter in Nevada City, California, on April 13, 2012.

Heather M. Edwards, Attorney at Law, represented the Nevada County

Superintendent of Schools.

Ted Lindstrom, Attorney at Law, represented Rojean Cossairt (respondent).

Oral and documentary evidence was presented and the parties offered oral closing
arguments. The record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 13,
2011.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Holly Hermansen is the Nevada County Superintendent of Schools

(Superintendent). Her actions were taken solely in her official capacity.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of Nevada County

Superintendent of Schools Office (County Office).

3.

The County Office provides special education services for children with
disabilities and itinerant services for students in the various school districts in Nevada
County. It operates its special education program at the following school sites: TKM
Resource Center (TKM), infants; TKM, preschool; Hennessy School, grades kindergarten
through third; Seven Hills School, grades five through eight; Union Hill School (severely
handicapped and emotionally disturbed students), grades kindergarten through eight; and
Gilmore School (emotionally disturbed students), grades six through eight.

4.

The Superintendent is responsible for identifying and implementing reductions

in particular kinds of services (PKS) for the County Office. In making PKS reductions, the
County Office projected the number of students for the incoming year, took budget matters
into consideration, and “weigh[ed] all of those in making a decision.” For the 2012-2013
school year, the decision was finalized in the first week of March 2012. The County Office
projected the following number of special education students to be enrolled for the 2012-
2013 school year:

TKM: 11 or possible 12 students;
Hennessy School: nine or possible 10 students;
Seven Hills School: 10 students;
Union Hill School (severely handicapped): 10 students;
Union Hill School (emotionally disturbed): seven students;
Gilmore School (emotionally disturbed): five, or possible seven students.

5.

The total number of special education students projected to be enrolled for the
2012-2013 school year is approximately 52 to 58. Based on the projected enrollment and the
budget, the County Office reduced 1.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated positions in
special education, and 1.0 FTE in community day school for expelled youth. The County
Office anticipates that 12 special education eighth graders will be going on to high school,
and only one or two students will be coming in to preschool. The projected decrease in
enrollment will result in low class sizes. According to the Superintendent, “our budget does
not allow us to run classes at low class sizes.”

6.

On March 12, 2012, the Superintendent issued Order No. 2012-001 (Order),

“In the Matter of the Reduction or Discontinuance of Certain Particular Kinds of Services for
the 2012-13 School Year.” The Order reduced or discontinued PKS affecting 2.0 FTE.

7.

The Order was based on the Superintendent’s decision that it was necessary to

reduce or discontinue PKS no later than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year. In
making her decision, the Superintendent took into account all positively assured attrition
(i.e., resignations or retirements, and other permanent vacancies for 2012-13) which were
known to the County Office as of the date of the Order.

8.

The Order states that the Superintendent found that it was necessary to reduce
or discontinue the following PKS of the County Office not later than the close of the current
school year:

Services

Number of FTE Positions

Special Education Teacher

Community Day School Teacher

TOTAL

1.0 FTE

1.0 FTE
_________
2.0 FTE

2

9.

As a result of the above PKS reductions and/or eliminations, the County

Office determined that it was necessary to decrease 2.0 FTE positions for certificated
employees no later than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year, in accordance with
Education Code section 44955.1

10.

The Order directed the Superintendent or her designee to send appropriate

notices to all employees whose services would be terminated by virtue of the County
Office’s action.

11.

Before March 15, 2012, the Superintendent caused a letter entitled “Notice of

Layoff” to be served in person on the employees affected by the PKS reductions and/or
eliminations set forth in the Order. The Notice of Layoff provided notice to the respondent
that her services would be reduced for the ensuing 2012-2013 school year. The Notice of
Layoff set forth the reasons for the reduction in services and attached a copy of the Order.

12.

Respondent timely filed a Request for Hearing to determine whether there was

cause for not reemploying her for the 2012-2013 school year.

13.

On April 5, 2012, Donna Fitting, Associate Superintendent (designee), signed

the Accusation, and caused it to be served on respondent. Respondent, through her legal
counsel, timely filed a Notice of Defense.

Development of the District’s Seniority List for Special Education

14.

Seniority is the relationship between the teachers within a school district.

Among the teachers credentialed to provide a given service, greater seniority in the district
gives a greater legal entitlement to a position. Seniority is defined as the date upon which an
employee first rendered paid services in a probationary position. (§ 44845.)

15.

The County Office maintains a seniority list of certificated employees. The

Superintendent reviewed the list with Monty Martin, an Assistant Superintendent responsible
for Special Education Services. The County Office verified the accuracy of the seniority list,
which is thoroughly reviewed several times a year. The County Office reviewed personnel
files to ensure that the list is accurate. The Superintendent reviewed respondent’s seniority
date, which is March 10, 2008. At hearing, respondent confirmed that March 10, 2008 is her
seniority date. There are four special education teachers with less seniority than respondent:
Rolf Keltner (Keltner), with a seniority date of September 2, 2008; Brendan Cariaga
(Cariaga), with a seniority date of September 17, 2010; Angela Mihm (Mihm), with a
seniority date of September 14, 2011; and Debra Benton (Benton), with a seniority date of
February 28, 2012. Keltner, Cariaga, Mihm and Benton were not identified for layoff.

1 All statutory references are to the California Education Code unless otherwise

indicated.

3

Implementation of Layoff

16.

In addition to the class projections set forth in Findings 4 and 5, The County

Office used the seniority list in identifying employees affected by the PKS reductions. With
the exception of the 1.0 FTE reduction for a community day school teacher, the Order called
for a 1.0 FTE reduction involving a position in which a certificated employee is a special
education teacher. The Order did not indicate the specific special education teacher position
to be retained or eliminated. The superintendent and her staff identified respondent as the
least senior person occupying 1.0 FTE position as a special education teacher.

17. When the least senior person occupying the position affected by the PKS

reduction was identified, County Office staff looked at the individual’s credentials to
determine whether she could displace any less senior certificated employees.

18.

Before March 15, 2011, Monty Martin served the Notice of Layoff identified

in Finding 10, on the most junior employee affected by the PKS reduction, as set forth in
further detail below.

Reduction of 1.0 FTE Special Education Teaching Position

19.

Respondent (03/10/08) teaches 1.0 FTE Special Education. She holds a Clear
Education Specialist Instruction credential with a moderate/severe disabilities authorization,
a Level I Education Specialist Instruction credential with a moderate/severe disabilities
authorization, and a Clear Multiple Subject credential with an English supplemental
authorization. Respondent is a special education classroom teacher at Seven Hills School.

20.

The four least senior certificated employees that are special education teachers

holding various credentials/authorizations are as follows:

A.

Keltner (09/02/08) teaches 1.0 FTE Speech-Special Education. He holds a
Clear Clinical or Rehabilitation Services credential and a Language, Speech and Hearing
authorization. Keltner is a special education speech teacher who is based at TKM.

B.

Cariaga (09/17/10) teaches 1.0 FTE Adaptive Physical Education. He holds

Preliminary Single Subject and Clear Adapted Physical Education Specialist credentials and
a Physical Education authorization. Cariaga is a special education teacher who teaches
adaptive physical education which is based at TKM.

C.

Mihm (09/14/11) teaches 1.0 FTE Special Education. She holds a Level I
Educational Specialist Instruction credential and an Early Childhood Special Education
authorization. Mihm is a special education teacher who teaches in the infant program which
is based at TKM.

D.

Benton (02/28/12) teaches 1.0 FTE Special Education. She holds a Clear

Multiple Subject credential, a Cross Cultural, Language and Academic Development

4

(CLAD) certificate, and a temporary county certificate (TCC) with a short term staff permit.2
Benton is a special education teacher who teaches in the visual impairment (vision) program
which is based at TKM.

21.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides in part, that whenever a particular

kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following
school year, the governing board may terminate the services of not more than a
corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as
probationary, at the close of the school year. Subdivision (b) further states: “Except as
otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee may be terminated
under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or any other employee
with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent employee is
certificated and competent to render.”

22.

The County Office has reduced a “1.0 FTE Special Education Teacher” not

later than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year. Without more explanation, this means
that the least senior special education teacher must be laid off, “except as otherwise provided
by statute.”

23.

Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1) permits a school district to deviate from
terminating certificated employees in order of seniority (i.e., “skip” a junior certificated
employee) when the school district “demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a
specific course or course of study … [and] the certificated employee has special training and
experience necessary to teach that course or course of study … which others with more
seniority do not possess.” In order to retain a certificated employee under Section 44955,
subdivision (d)(1), a district must not only establish a specific need for personnel to teach a
specific course of study, but establish the certificated employee it proposes to retain “has
special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide
those services. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District, 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 88
Cal.Rptr.3d 13.)

Specific Need to Teach Specific Course or Course of Study

24.

The Superintendent testified that Keltner, Cariaga, Mihm, and Benton were

not identified for layoff because the County Office did not need to reduce services in the
areas in which they teach. In other words, the County Office needed the particular services
they provided in specialized programs offered by the County Office, namely, speech,
adaptive physical education, infant program, and vision program. Respondent was identified
for layoff because she was the least senior special education classroom teacher; the County
Office contends that she is not certificated and competent to render services that junior
certificate employees Keltner, Cariaga, Mihm, and Benton were retained to provide.

2 Benton has a “Short Term Staff Permit (VI).” She is finishing a program in June

2012 for an Education Specialist Instruction Permit (VI).

5

25.

The Superintendent further testified that she and Monty Martin used the
County Office’s Class Projections and Staffing document to balance special education
classes. The document is a spreadsheet that lists the names and grades of those students
assigned to schools providing special education programs and services. The document is in
draft form, because “students come and go.” The County Office developed this document
because it needed time to plan, and time to work with the Individual Education Program
(IEP) teams to determine placement for the students. Based on its class projections and
staffing document, and student needs, the Superintendent determined that the services
provided by Keltner, Cariaga, Mihm and Benton were to be retained, and respondent’s
services were to be eliminated. The Superintendent’s testimony demonstrated a specific
need for the specific courses of study to which Keltner, Cariaga, Mihm and Benton are
currently assigned. It must next be determined whether the County Office has established
the certificated employees it proposes to retain “ha[ve] special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services.”

Special Training and Experience Necessary to Teach Course or Course of Study

26.

As set forth in Finding 20.D., Benton is the least senior special education
teacher. Respondent and Benton have similar credentials, in that they both hold special
education teaching credentials and multiple subject credentials. Benton has taught in the
vision program for only two months. The County Office did not provide evidence that
Benton had special training and experience necessary to provide vision services, which
respondent, with more seniority, does not possess. While the County Office has
demonstrated a specific need for a special education teacher to provide vision services, it did
not establish that Benton has special training and experience to do so. Respondent is clearly
certificated to teach in the vision program, and the County Office did not establish what
special training or experience, if any, would be necessary to teach in the vision program.
Inasmuch as a less senior teacher has been retained to provide a service that respondent is
certificated and competent to render, the layoff notice issued to respondent was improper,
and the Accusation must be dismissed.

Respondent’s Arguments

Order is Impermissbly Vague

27.

Respondent contends that the Order is impermissibly vague because it did not

indicate what kinds of special education positions would be retained or eliminated. For
example, the Order does not state that a special education teacher with a moderate/severe
disabilities authorization will be eliminated. Respondent contends that the Order, in essence,
allows the Superintendent to “pick whomever she wants to lay off.” Respondent’s
contention is unpersuasive, in that the courts have consistently held that school districts need
not specify the specific positions to be eliminated. As set forth in San Jose Teachers Assn. v.
Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638 (San Jose), [preliminary notice recommending that
school district terminate certain certified employees because of a reduction in particular
kinds of services was sufficiently specific where it designated the categories of the services

6

to be reduced or discontinued, even though it did not specify the specific positions to be
eliminated] courts have allowed school districts significant leeway in describing the
particular kinds of services identified for reduction.

28.

In the present case, “special education teacher” is a category of teaching which

is sufficiently specific under San Jose. The services identified in the Order are particular
kinds of services that the Superintendent and County Office can reduce or discontinue under
Education Code section 44955. The Superintendent and County Office’s decision to reduce
or discontinue the identified services was not arbitrary or capricious, but was a proper
exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely
to the welfare of Nevada County’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Section 44949.

County Office is Allowing Teacher to Teach Moderate/Severe Students without
Appropriate Credential

29.

Respondent also contends that the County Office will be allowing a special

education teacher, Patricia Lang (Lang) (06/10/02 seniority date), to teach special education
students with moderate to severe disabilities.3 Lang holds an Education Specialist
Instruction Credential, but does not hold an authorization to teach moderate/severely disabled
students. The County Office is allowing Lang to obtain a moderate/severe authorization by
the 2012-2013 school year. Respondent asserts that she can easily teach those students. The
Superintendent conceded that “the law is that a student with moderate to severe disabilities
should be taught by a moderate to severe credentialed teacher.” The Superintendent
confirmed that Lang does not have a moderate/severe authorization, but is in the process of
obtaining it. Respondent asserts that she, too, should be given the opportunity to obtain a
“higher credential” in the interest of fairness.

30.

Section 44955, subdivision (c), in relevant part, provides that a school district

“shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be
retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.
However, prior to assigning or reassigning any certificated employee to teach a subject
which he or she has not previously taught, and for which she does not have a teaching
credential… the governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter
competency test in the appropriate subject.”

31.

It is clear that the County Office may reassign teachers as needed provided

that they are competent and credentialed to render the applicable services.4 Here, Lang is in

3 Holders of an Education Specialist Instruction Credential, Moderate/Severe
Disabilities are authorized to teach children with moderate or severe disabilities in which the
primary disability is “mental retardation” as defined in subsection 300.7(b)(5) of Title 24,
Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A. (The Administrator’s Assignment Manual (2007),
Section F, Special Education.)

4 The County Office’s job description for a Severely Handicapped/Moderate to Severe

Special Education Teacher includes the following education/experience requirements: 1) a

7

the process of obtaining her “moderate to severe” authorization, which she may receive prior
to the 2012-2013 school year. If she does not, then the County Office should make another
assignment/reassignment of Lang. The actions of the County Office do not constitute an
abuse of discretion.

32.

All other arguments of the parties not specifically addressed herein were

considered and are rejected.

Welfare of the District and Its Students

33.

The Superintendent correctly identified the certificated employee providing
the particular kinds of services that the County Office directed be reduced or discontinued.
Except as otherwise noted, no junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to
perform services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. The
reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the County Office’s
schools and pupils, within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

As set forth in the Findings, all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth
in sections 44944 and 44945 were met. The notice sent to respondent indicated the statutory
basis for the reduction of services and, therefore, was sufficiently detailed to provide her due
process. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara
Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The description of
services to be reduced, both in the Board Resolution and in the notices, adequately describes
particular kinds of services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838. See, also,
Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)

2.

The Governing Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular kind

of service and then provide the needed services to the students in another manner. (Gallup v.
Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California Teachers Association v. Board of
Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.) A school board may
reduce services within the meaning of the statute either by determining that a certain type of
service shall not be performed at all or by reducing the number of district employees who
perform such services. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School
District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)

3.

The services identified in Order No. 2012-001 are particular kinds of services
that may be reduced or discontinued under sections 44949 and 44955. The County Office’s

current valid California teaching credential; 2) a valid credential in Severely Handicapped; 3)
experience with Specialized Health Care desired; and 4) a current valid California Driver’s
License. It should be noted that the job description does not include requiring a valid
credential/authorization in Moderate to Severe Disabilities, which respondent holds.

8

decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious,
and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of
services relates solely to the welfare of the County Office’s schools and pupils within the
meaning of section 44949.

4.

As set forth in Finding 26, the County Office did not establish cause to issue a

Notice of Layoff to respondent pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, in that a less senior
certificated employee was retained to provide a service that respondent is certificated and
competent to render. Therefore, the County Office shall rescind the Notice of Layoff and
dismiss the Accusation against respondent.

RECOMMENDATION

Pursuant to Legal Conclusion 4, the Accusation is dismissed. The County Office
shall rescind the Notice of Layoff issued to respondent Rojean Cossairt, and Ms. Cossairt
shall be retained for her full 1.0 FTE position for the 2012-2013 school year.

Dated: May 1, 2012

____________________________
DANETTE C. BROWN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

9

