BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION
TRACY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SAN JOAQUIN
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction or Elimination
of Particular Kinds of Services and the
Employment Status of:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
OF THE TRACY UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT,

Respondents.

OAH No. 2012030076

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Stephen J. Smith, Office of Administrative Hearings, State

of California, heard this matter via a stipulation between the parties on April 3, 2012.

Marie A. Nakamura, Attorney at Law, Kronick, Moskovitz, Tiedemann and Girard,

Attorneys represented the Tracy Unified School District (District).

Thomas J. Driscoll, Jr., Attorney at Law, Driscoll Law Firm, represented all

respondent members of the Tracy Education Association (TEA).

The matter was submitted through a stipulation of the parties (below) received on

April 4, 2012, and through submission of the written record, received April 9, 2012.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

James C. Franco, Ed.D., ( Superintendent) made and filed the Accusation in

his official capacity as Superintendent, Tracy Unified School District (District).

All respondents are and at all times relevant to this Decision were certificated

permanent or probationary employees of the District.

1

3.

On or just before March 13, 2012, in accordance with Education Code section
44949 and 44955, the Superintendent notified the Board of Education of the District (Board)
in writing of the Superintendent’s recommendation that certain particular kinds of services
would have to be reduced or eliminated for the upcoming school year. The Superintendent’s
recommendation specified the particular kinds of services to be reduced or eliminated, as set
forth below.

4.

Just before February 28, 2012, the Superintendent notified the Board that a

certain number of certificated employees of the District, in this instance, 12.00 full time
equivalents (FTE), would have to be laid off to effectuate the reduction or elimination of the
particular kinds of services necessitated by reductions required to balance the District’s
budget. By attachment to the pre-February 28, 2012, notification to the Board, the
Superintendent identified and notified the Board that respondents listed on the attachment to
that notice to the Board had been identified as persons to whom notice should be given that
their services would not be required for the ensuing school year. The recommendation that
respondents’ services for the District would not be required for the upcoming school year
was not related to any respondent’s skills, abilities, capabilities or competencies as teachers.

REDUCTIONS/ELIMINATIONS OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES

5.

The Board adopted Resolution 11-13 on February 28, 2012. The Board

resolved to follow the Superintendent’s recommendation to reduce 12.00 FTE of particular
kinds of services. The Resolution authorized and directed the Superintendent to give notice
to an equivalent number of certificated employees of the District that their services would not
be required for the upcoming school year in order to effectuate the reduction. The
Resolution authorized the elimination of the following services now offered in the District:

Building Literacy Together (First Five) Preschool Program
Elementary Classroom Teaching Program
Middle School Business (Business Applications) Teaching Program

1.00 FTE
10.00 FTE
1.00 FTE

TOTAL REDUCTIONS/ELIMINATIONS

12.00 FTE

6.

The Governing Board also adopted Resolution 11-14, Competency Criteria in

the Case of Certificated Reduction in Force (Competency Criteria Resolution) on February
28, 2012, regarding the adoption of criteria and standards for assessing potentially tied
employees against District educational priorities. The Tie Breaker Resolution was adopted
for use for breaking ties in the event two or more certificated employees have the same first
date of paid service in the event of a reduction in force layoff such as this one.

7.

The Governing Board also adopted Resolution 11-15, Tie Breaking Criteria in
the Case of Certificated Reduction in Force (Tie Breaker Resolution) on February 28, 2012,
regarding the adoption of criteria and standards for assessing potentially tied employees,
creating a scoring system for potentially tied employees against Board-agreed upon standards
and District educational priorities. The Tie Breaker Resolution was adopted for use for

2

breaking ties in the event two or more certificated employees have the same first date of paid
service in the event of a reduction in force layoff such as this one, in conjunction with the
Competency Criteria resolution.

8.

The Superintendent caused each of the respondents to be served with a written

Notice of Intention to Dismiss (Preliminary Notice) on March 13, 2012. The written
Preliminary Notices advised respondents that their services would not be required for the
upcoming school year. The Preliminary Notices set forth the reasons for the
recommendation. Fourteen Preliminary Notices were timely served by the District on
respondents, including the two Precautionary Notices set forth below. Ten of the recipients
of Preliminary Notices are permanent employees of the District, and two are probationary
certificated employees.

9.

Those certificated employees of the District receiving either a Preliminary

Notice or a Precautionary Notice, who also filed Requests for Hearing with the District and
Notices of Defense in response to Accusations filed and served upon each of the respondents,
are as follows:

PERMANENT CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES RECEIVING NOTICE
AND CURRENT ASSIGNMENT

1.
Case, Leilani
2.
Coredisco, Monica
3.
Garcia, Rocio
4.
Huddleston, Amber
5.
Hula, Amanda
6.
Johnson, Jennifer
7.
Lee, Maysue
8.
Nunes, Laura
9.
Ryan, Myesha
Shah, Fiaz
10.
11. Walker, Wesley
12. Web, Justine

NORTH (K-8)
WILLIAMS (6-8)
SOUTH/WEST PARK
HIRSCH (K-5)
VILLALOVOZ (K-5)
CENTRAL (K-5)
MCKINLEY (K-5)
JACOBSON (K-5)
KELLY (K-8)
WILLIAMS (6-8)
CENTRAL (K-5)
MCKINLEY (K-5)

PROBATIONARY CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES RECEIVING NOTICE
AND CURRENT ASSIGNMENT

1.
2.

Gardner, Shazana
Mullen, Tyler

WILLIAMS (6-8)
KIMBALL HIGH

10.

At least two permanent certificated employees receiving notice were given a
“precautionary” Preliminary Notice of layoff (Precautionary Notice). These two employees
were Fiaz Shah (06/26/20061) and Westley Walker (06/20/2006). As nearly as could be

1 First day of paid service to the District, also known as seniority date.

3

ascertained from the record, these two employees were given Precautionary Notices to
provide the District the ability to still lay them off, in the event that these employees were
determined in the proceedings to have status or “bumping rights” that might place either into
him and him a position to displace another teacher not given notice.

11.

Respondents timely filed Requests for Hearing with the district following

receipt of Preliminary Notices and/or Precautionary Notices.

12.

The District timely served Accusations on each respondent following receipt

of their Requests for a Hearing. Respondents timely filed Notices of Defense to the
Accusations. The matter was set for an evidentiary hearing before an Administrative Law
Judge of the Office of Administrative Hearings, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949
and 44950, as those sections incorporate Government Code section 11500, et. seq. All
prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

STIPULATION

13.

Just prior to the evidentiary hearing, the District and respondents, by and

through their respective counsel, entered into a written stipulation, referred to above, that
resolves all of the issues pending between the parties. The parties stipulated and agreed to
submit the matter to the ALJ for preparation of a written Decision to be submitted to the
Board of Education for review and adoption, based on the written stipulation. The written
stipulation was executed by the parties April 3, 2012, and filed with the ALJ on April 4,
2012. The parties stipulated and agreed that the ALJ should prepare the Decision based upon
the agreements made in the written stipulation, and that, based upon the execution of the
stipulation and submission of the matter for Decision, all parties thereupon waived any
further right to evidentiary hearing on the matters raised in the Accusations.

STIPULATED WITHDRAWALS OF PRELIMINARY NOTICES

14.

The written stipulation referred to just above resolved all outstanding issues
pending between the parties. In the written stipulation, the parties agreed to the following:

The Precautionary Notices of layoff issued to Fiaz Shah and Westley

a.
Walker are rescinded;

The Preliminary Notices of layoff issued to Amanda Hula and Jennifer

b.
Johnson are withdrawn and rescinded.

15.

As a result of the written stipulation, each of the employees specifically named

in the written stipulation (Shah, Westley, Hula, and Johnson), are deemed rehired for the
upcoming school year.

4

16.

All other Preliminary Notices of layoff and Precautionary Notices issued to

respondents are affirmed, and the District may issue and serve Final Notices of layoff to the
remaining respondents not covered by the stipulation.

17.

The reductions and eliminations of particular kinds of services as set forth in

the District’s Resolution are in the best interests of the District and its students.

18.

The Superintendent, on behalf of the District, considered all known attrition,

resignations, retirements and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of
necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.

19.

There was no evidence that the District proposes to eliminate any services that

are State or federally mandated.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.
The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the proposed
reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and the preliminary notice of layoff
served on respondents is factually and legally appropriate.2 The parties stipulated and agreed
in the written stipulation that the District met its burden.

2.

The services the District seeks to eliminate in this matter are “particular kinds

of services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code
section 44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of
services was not demonstrated to be arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise
of discretion.

3.

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the

welfare of the District and its pupils. The District is facing a projected deficit related to
funding. The reduction in particular kinds of services proposed is necessary to avert the
District operating in a deficit in the upcoming school year.

4.

The parties stipulated and agreed that, with the exception of those persons

named in the stipulation, no person receiving a preliminary notice of layoff is being laid off
in favor of a junior employee being skipped, or that any employee being laid off is entitled to
bump into a position held by a more junior employee where the employee being laid off has
the credentials and competence to take the position of the more junior employee being
retained. No certificated employee of the District is being retained to provide a service any
of the respondents who received preliminary notices are certificated and competent to render.

2 Education Code section 44949.

5

5.

The parties agreed that legal cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections
44949 and 44955 for the Tracy Unified School District to reduce or discontinue 12.0 FTE of
particular kinds of services, as set forth in the District’s Resolution 11-13. The cause for the
reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services relates solely to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. Legal cause therefore exists to sustain the Accusations. The
Board may give respondents final notices that their services will not be required by the
District in the upcoming school year, in inverse order of seniority.

ORDER

The Precautionary Notices of Layoff issued to Fiaz Shah and Westley Walker

are RESCINDED. The Accusations against Fiaz Shah and Westley Walker are
WITHDRAWN and DISMISSED;

The Preliminary Notices of Layoff issued to Amanda Hula and Jennifer

Johnson are WITHDRAWN and RESCINDED. The accusations against Amanda
Hula and Jennifer Johnson are WITHDRAWN and DISMISSED.

The Accusations against all other named respondents are SUSTAINED.

The Tracy Unified School District action to reduce or eliminate 12.0 FTE of

particular kinds of services for the 2012-2013 school year is AFFIRMED.

With the exception of those respondents named above, Final Notice may be given to
respondents by the District that their services will not be required for the upcoming school
year. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: April 23, 2012

_____________________________
STEPHEN J. SMITH
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

