BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
ACTING ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
BANNING UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
Proceeding Involving:

OAH No. 2012030949

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
OF THE BANNING UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT WHO RECEIVED
PRELIMINARY LAYOFF NOTICES FOR
THE 2012-2013 SCHOOL YEAR,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of

California, heard this matter in Banning, California, on April 23, 2012.

William A. Diedrich and John W. Dietrich, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud &

Romo, represented the Banning Unified School District.

Carlos R. Perez, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented the respondents appearing at the

reduction in force proceeding.

The matter was submitted on April 23, 2012.

The Banning Unified School District

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Banning Unified School District serves approximately 4,500 kindergarten

through 12th grade students who reside in a 300-square mile area along the I-10 corridor
between Beaumont and Palm Springs. It encompasses the City of Banning, Cabazon,
Whitewater, Poppet Flats, and the Morongo Indian Reservation. The District maintains four
elementary schools, one intermediate school, one middle school, one comprehensive high
school, and one continuation high school. It employs approximately 500 persons, about 250
of whom are certificated employees.

1

Approximately 24 percent of the students within the District are English Language

Learners. About 87 percent of the student body is eligible to participate in the hot lunch
program.

The District has a projected budget of approximately $35 million for the 2012-2013

school year, for which a $5.8 million deficit is projected. More than 85 percent of the
District’s budget pays employee salaries and benefits.

2.

The District is governed by an elected five-member Board of Education.

Lynne B. Kennedy, Ph.D., is the District Superintendent and the Board’s Chief Executive
Officer. Gordon Fisher is an Assistant Superintendent of Schools and is the Acting Assistant
Superintendent of Human Resources. Febe Lorio is a school secretary who is assigned to the
Human Resources.

The Fiscal Crisis

3.

Public schools rely on financing from the State of California. A school district

cannot determine the level of state funding it will receive until the state budget is chaptered,
an event that is supposed to occur each year in late June. Before then, a school district’s
governing board, which has the duty to produce a balanced budget and to file that budget
with the County Department of Education, must take steps to ensure that financial ends will
meet if the worst-case financial scenario develops.

California’s recent economic problems have had a crippling impact on the Banning

Unified School District and other public school districts. If the District fails to meet its
financial obligations, the County Office of Education has the right to intervene and take over
the District’s operations.

The District’s total shortfall for 2012-2013 school year is projected to be $5.8 million.

The District must maintain reserves of at least three percent of general fund expenditures,
which is the bare legal minimum; in fact, maintaining a three percent reserve is inadequate
because a reserve in that amount would not cover the district’s payroll for one month.

The District’s Response

4.

In response to the anticipated budgetary shortfall for the 2012-2013 school

year, District administrators reviewed services and staffing. Two and a half administrative
positions were eliminated, and the pay scale of assistant superintendents was reduced.
Furlough days were instituted. “Flexible dollars” from special funding were reassigned. In
addition, it was recommended that particular kinds of services be reduced or eliminated.

5.

On March 13, 2012, following Superintendent Kennedy’s staffing

recommendations, the Governing Board adopted Amended Resolution No. 11-12-36. It
provides:

2

WHEREAS, the Board of Education of the Banning Unified
School District has determined that it is in the best interests of
the District and the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof
that the particular kinds of services set forth herein must be
reduced or discontinued due to financial conditions; and

WHEREAS, it is the opinion of the Board that because of the
aforementioned reason, the number of certificated employees of
the District must be reduced; and

WHEREAS, this reduction is not based upon a reduction of
average daily attendance during the past two years; and

WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a significant
population of English language learners with specialized
educational needs, a specific and compelling need exists to
retain certificated employees who teach in the District's
bilingual dual immersion program and also possess the special
training and experience that is necessary for that assignment;
and

WHEREAS, the needs of the District and the students thereof
cannot be adequately served by laying off teachers who possess
special training and/or experience to teach bilingual dual
immersion program classes; and

WHEREAS, Education Code section 44955(d) authorizes this
Board to deviate from terminating a certificated employee in
order of seniority for the above reasons, if necessary.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of
Education of the Banning Unified School District as follows:

A. That the particular kinds of services set forth below be
reduced or eliminated commencing in the 2012-2013 school
year:

Gate/Literacy Specialist Services
High School English/Language Arts Teaching Services
Middle School Science Teaching Services 1.0 F.T.E.
Middle School Math Teaching Services
Middle School Social Science Teaching Services
Middle School English/Language Arts Teaching
Services

1.0
2.2
1.0
2.0
3.6

2.8

F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.

F.T.E.

3

High School Spanish Teaching Services
Intermediate School Dean
Independent Study Teaching Services
Coordinator of Student Support Services
Subtotal

Temporary services as follows:
Elementary (K-6) Classroom Teaching Services
Middle School Yearbook Teaching Services
Middle School Core Teaching Services
Middle School Science Teaching Services
Middle School Math Teaching Services
High School Spanish Teaching Services
High School Math Teaching Services
High School French Teaching Services
High School Social Science Teaching Services
Subtotal
Total

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
48.8

4.0
0.2
1.8
1.0
1.0
1.0
2.0
0.6
0.2
11.8
60.6

F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.

F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.

Inclusion of temporary services within this Resolution is

*
not intended to grant those individuals who are impacted any
rights greater than provided by law, nor to nullify any provisions
within each impacted individual's employment contract, nor to
supersede any other Resolution by this Governing Board to
release or otherwise terminate the services of any impacted
individual.

B. That due to the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of
services, the corresponding number of certificated employees of
the District shall be terminated pursuant to Education Code
section 44955.

C. That, except as indicated hereinabove, the reduction of
certificated staff be achieved by the termination of regular
employees and not by terminating temporary and substitute
employees.

D. That “competency” as described in Education Code sections
44955(b), 44956, and 44957 for the purposes of bumping and
reemployment shall necessarily include: (1) possession of a
valid credential in the relevant subject matter area; (2) “highly
qualified” status under the No Child Left Behind act in the

4

position into which the employee is bumping/being reemployed;
(3) an appropriate EL authorization (if required by the position);
and (4) in order to bump or be reemployed as a Dual Immersion
teacher, a Dual Enrollment teacher or a Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) teacher, possession of the requisite
qualifications, education, special training, and experience
necessary to meet the job requirements of those positions.

E. That, as between certificated employees with the same
seniority date, the order of termination shall be determined
solely by Board-adopted criteria.

F. That the District Superintendent or designee is directed to
initiate layoff procedures and give appropriate notice pursuant
to Education Code sections 44955 and 44949.

PASSED AND ADOPTED this 13th day of March, 2012, in the
County of Riverside, California.

The Particular Kinds of Services

6.

The kinds of services identified in Resolution No. 11-12-36 (Amended) were

the kinds of services that could be reduced lawfully under the Education Code. The
Governing Board’s adoption of Resolution No. 11-12-36 (Amended) was neither arbitrary
nor capricious; its adoption was well within the Governing Board’s discretion; no particular
kind of service was lowered to a level below that mandated by state or federal law. The
enactment of Resolution No. 11-12-36 (Amended) related solely to the economic crisis and
the Governing Board’s duty to balance the budget.

The District’s Seniority List

7.

The District maintains a seniority list, a constantly evolving document that is

updated as new certificated employees are hired and as other employees retire, resign, or
otherwise become separated from service. The seniority list is a spreadsheet that is
organized from the District’s most senior certificated employee to the most recently hired
certificated employee. The list contains each employee’s seniority number, name, site where
services are provided, current assignment, specific assignment information, seniority date
(the employee’s first paid date of probationary service), status (tenured or probationary),
credentialing information, credential notes, the kind of English Learner (EL) authorization
the employee holds, and bumping notes.

Tie-Breaking

8.

Many employees hold the same first paid date of probationary service. In

some instances, the ranking of employees with the first paid date of probationary service is

5

required to determine the employee to whom a layoff notice must be given. Ranking these
employees requires the application of various “tie-breaking” criteria.

On March 1, 2012, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 11-12-32, which
provided criteria to be used to resolve ties in seniority related to certificated layoffs. The
enactment of the resolution was in accordance with Education Code section 44966,
subdivision (b), and Education Code section 44846. Resolution No. 11-12-32 was based
upon the needs of the District and its students. The criteria set forth in the resolution were to
be applied in order, one step at a time, until the tie was broken. The criteria were:

1. Highly Qualified Status under NCLB in area of assignment.
2. Possession of a non-emergency authorization to teach English Language

Learners in order of priority:

(BCLAD)

a. Bilingual Cross Cultural Language and Academic Development

b. Cross Cultural Language and Academic Development (CLAD), SB
1969 or SB 395 Certificate, Language Development Specialist
Certificate, Supplemental Authorization for English as a Second
Language, Specially Designated Academic Instruction in English
(SDAIE), other.

3. Credential status in area of assignment, in order of priority:

a. Clear, Life, Standard Secondary, etc.
b. Preliminary
Intern
c.
d. Provisional, STC, other

4. Possession of a Clear or Preliminary Single Subject credential in the

following areas in order of priority:

a. Special Education
b. Math
c. Science
d. Social Studies
e. English

in order of priority:

a. Math
b. Science
c. Social Science
d. English

5. Possession of a supplemental authorization to teach in the following areas,

6. Total number of Clear or Preliminary credentials in different subject areas.
7. Total number of supplementary authorizations in different subject areas.
8. Number of years of credentialed teaching experience prior to employment

with the District, as indicated by initial salary schedule placement

9. Possession of a Doctorate Degree, earliest date prevails
10. Possession of a Masters Degree, earliest date prevails
11. Total number of post-secondary credits on file with the District.

6

12. If ties cannot be broken by using the above criteria then order of seniority

shall be determined by a random drawing among employees in the
individual tie.

The Issuance of Preliminary Layoff Notices

9.

Using the updated seniority list, Resolution No. 11-12-36 (Amended), and the
tie-breaking criteria, Ms. Lorio and others identified those certificated employees who should
receive preliminary layoff notices and those who should not.

Whenever an employee providing a particular kind of service that was being
eliminated under Resolution No. 11-12-36 (Amended) was tentatively identified as being in
line to receive a preliminary layoff notice, that employee’s seniority, credentials, and
“competence” (as defined by Resolution No. 11-12-36 (Amended)) were carefully examined
to determine if that employee had the seniority, credentials, and competence to “bump” a
junior employee and assume the more junior employee’s position.

Precautionary notices were issued to teachers involved in the dual immersion
program1 in the event that the Board’s attempt to “skip” those employees was not granted.
The skipping of these employees was set forth Resolution No. 11-12-36 (Amended) because
“the needs of the District and the students thereof cannot be adequately met by laying off
teachers who possess special training and/or experience to teach bilingual dual immersion
program classes.

Preliminary layoff notices were issued to the certificated employees whose
employment the District staff identified as being subject to reduction or elimination as a
result of Resolution No. 11-12-36 (Amended). Positive attrition, resulting from the
retirement, resignation, or other causes, of a current teacher who was not subject to the layoff
proceeding was taken into account.

10.

Temporary teachers, none of whom were employed in a categorically funded
program but who were instead, provided temporary or “backfill” services for permanent or

1

The District’s 90:10 dual immersion program integrates language minority students

(English learners) and language majority students (English speakers) in a classroom to
develop bilingualism and biliteracy in English and another language. Under state law,
parents of English learners must sign yearly waivers of consent prior to placement of their
child in a two-way immersion program. Additionally, before enrollment in the program,
California requires English learners (under ten years of age) to be placed in an English
language classroom for 30 calendar days before placement. The first number in the 90:10
model refers to the amount of instructional time initially spent for instruction in the target or
non-English language in kindergarten. The second number refers to English. In a 90:10
model, the amount of the target language decreases yearly as English increases until there is
a 50:50 balance of the languages generally in grades four through six. Teachers providing
educational services in the dual immersion program must hold a BCLAD certification.

7

probationary employees who were on leave, were given notices to enable them to protest the
District’s assignment of a “temporary” status. No temporary teacher protested his or her
classification as a temporary employee.

The Administrative Hearing

11.

On April 23, 2012, the record in the reduction in force proceeding was opened.
Jurisdictional documents were introduced. Luis Estrella, who was represented by Mr. Perez,
was permitted to participate in the reduction in force proceeding. The caption was amended.
An opening statement was presented on the District’s behalf. Opening statements were not
provided on behalf of respondents. Sworn testimony was taken; documentary evidence was
received; Assistant Superintendant Fisher testified about the budgetary crisis and the layoff
process, including skipping; Ms. Lorio testified about the seniority list, bumping, and the
District’s efforts to ensure that the most senior employees were retained to provide services
for which they were credentialed and competent; a written stipulation to jurisdictional facts
was filed; closing comments were given by counsel for respondents; the record was closed;
and the matter was submitted.

12.

Kathryn Kaiser’s correct seniority date should be September 12, 2007, and the

District should amend the seniority list to reflect that date. The correction of Ms. Kaiser’s
seniority date does not have any impact in this reduction in force proceeding.

13.
withdrawn.

The notices issued to employees Daniel Cobb and Lisa Kellars were

14.

Lisa Kellars is a permanent employee, and the District should amend the

seniority list to reflect her tenured status.

The Reduction in Force Proceeding

15.

The enactment of Resolution No. 11-12-36 (Amended) was the result of a

budgetary crisis; it was enacted in good faith and was in the best interest of the District and
its students. The District complied with all jurisdictional requirements. The District used
seniority, credentials, and competence as the basis for “bumping” junior employees; the
District had the right to skip dual immersion teachers who possessed BCLAD certifications
over more senior employees who lacked the specialized training, skill and education to
provide service in the dual immersion program; the District retained the services of senior,
competent, and appropriately credentialed employees to provide services currently being
provided by more junior employees; the District’s tie-breaking criteria were applied in an
appropriate and evenhanded manner; the application of those criteria was in the best interest
of the District and its students.

8

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Statutory Authority - Reduction in Force Proceedings

1.

Education Code section 44949 provides in part:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee . . . that it has been recommended that the notice be
given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . .

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency
therein, except that all of the following shall apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any,
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation
and he or she shall be notified of this five-day period for filing
in the accusation.

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the
Government Code shall be available only if request is made
therefor within 15 days after service of the accusation, and the
notice required by Section 11505 of the Government Code shall
so indicate.

9

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be
prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds . . .

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the
employee. . . .

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) any
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the
Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) which
occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which
occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be
extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides in part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her
position for causes other than those specified . . . and no
probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position
for cause other than as specified . . .

(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school

10

year . . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the
district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in
the district, the governing board may terminate the services of
not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at
the close of the school year. Except as otherwise provided by
statute, the services of no permanent employee may be
terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less
seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render . . .

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would
not exist without such a requirement.

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given before
the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and
services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of
the order in which they were employed, as determined by the
board in accordance with the provisions of Sections 44844 and
44845. In the event that a permanent or probationary employee
is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the
ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments
in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any
service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to
render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not
previously taught, and for which he or she does not have a

11

teaching credential or which is not within the employee’s major
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject
matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of
seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to
teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide services
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that
the certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide
those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the
laws.

Jurisdiction

3.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied
as to all respondents.

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

4.

A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service should be
reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the governing board acted unfairly
or improperly simply because it made a decision it was empowered to make. (Rutherford v.
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.) A school board’s decision to reduce or
discontinue a particular kind of service need not be tied in with any statistical computation.
It is within the discretion of a school board to determine the amount by which it will reduce
or discontinue a particular kind of service as long as the school district does not reduce a
service below the level required by law. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144
Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)
Competence

5.

The Education Code leaves to a school board’s discretion the determination of
whether an employee must also be competent to be employed in a vacant position in addition
to possessing seniority. The term “competent” relates to an individual’s specific skills or
qualifications, including academic background, training, credentials, and experience, but it

12

does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance. (Forker v. Board of Trustees
(1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)

6.

In this matter, the Board determined that competence included possession of a
valid credential in the relevant subject matter; highly qualified NCLB status; an appropriate
EL authorization; possession of requisite qualifications, education, special training, and
experience to bump or be reemployed as a dual immersion teacher, a dual enrollment teacher,
or a geographic information systems (GIS) teacher. These are valid criteria to determine
“competence.”

Seniority, Bumping, Skipping

7.

Seniority: Under Education Code section 44845, seniority is determined by

the date a certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”

8.

Education Code section 44846 provides in part: “The governing board shall
have power and it shall be its duty to correct any errors discovered from time to time in its
records showing the order of employment.”

9.

The Statutory Scheme: Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff

statute, provides in subdivision (b), in part:

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while . . . . any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is
certificated and competent to render.

Essentially this statutory language provides “bumping” rights for senior certificated

and competent employees, and “skipping” authority to retain junior employees who are
certificated and competent to render services which more senior employees are not.

10.

Bumping: The district has an obligation under Section 44955, subdivision (b),

to determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be
assigned to another position. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th
127, 136-137.)

11.

Skipping: Subdivision (d)(1) of Section 44955 provides an exception to

subdivision (b) where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific
course of study and that a junior certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated employee does not possess.
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at pp. 134-135.) There is nothing in the statute
that requires such special needs be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job
descriptions, or program requirements. (Id., at p. 138.)

13

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district and
establishing requirements for employment. This discretion encompasses determining the
training and experience necessary for particular positions. Similarly, school districts have
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)

Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees

12.

As a result of the Governing Board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of
service, cause exists under the Education Code for the District to give final notice to those
respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment with the District will be
terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed by
the district for the 2012-2013 school year.

Determination

13.

The charges set forth in the Accusation were sustained by the preponderance
of the evidence except as otherwise stated herein. The enactment of Resolution No. 11-12-
36 (Amended) was related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, as was the enactment
of Resolution No. 11-12-32. The District made necessary assignments and reassignments in
such a manner that the most senior credentialed employees were retained to render services
that their seniority and qualifications entitled them to provide.

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the Banning Unified School District

direct that the District’s seniority list be amended to show that Kathryn Kaiser’s seniority
date is September 12, 2007.

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the Banning Unified School District

direct that District’s seniority list be amended to show that Lisa Kellars is a permanent
employee.

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the Banning Unified School District

direct that District withdraw the notices issued to Daniel Cobb and Lisa Kellars.

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the Banning Unified School District

direct that the following temporary employees be released from their employment: Julie
Baker; Jenifer Carbajal; Beatriz Diaz; Allison D’Spain; Cecilia A. Lopez; Robin Moore;
Deborah Nelson; and Karl Sterbinsky, Jr.

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the Banning Unified School District

issue final layoff notices to the following certificated employees: Stephen Adesina;
Raymundo Alcala; Maria Almejo Vilte; Shara Andrade; Lisa Beasley; Amy Brandon;

14

Jacquelyn Bridges; Colette Burgess; Lauren Cochran; Marcia Cole Anderson; Natalie Crine;
Kelly Daly; Stephanie Dodd; Susanna Duncan; Luis Estrella; Evelyn Galligani; Anthony
Garcia; Sara Gilbert; Brittney Goodwin; Noel Inzunza; Richard Johnson; Kathryn Kaiser;
Jeannine Kersavage; Kyle Kloncz; Natalee Manley; Jeffrey Martinez; Elizabeth Mayagoitia;
Scott McRitchie; Danielle Miller; Melissa Ortega; Tabitha Ramsey; Sharon Rideau;
Elizabeth Rodriguez-Ashton; Henry Romero; April Salas; Annabel Solis; Ronnie Stevens;
Pakanueng Utrapiromsuk; Heather Warner; Melissa Wheeler

Dated: April 30, 2012

________________________________
JAMES AHLER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

15

