BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE
SADDLEBACK VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
Involving Certificated Employees of the
Saddleback Valley Unified School District
listed on Attachment “A,”

Respondents.

OAH No. 2012020428

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Jankhana Desai, Office of Administrative Hearings, State

of California, heard this matter on April 16, 2012, in Mission Viejo, California

Rutan & Tucker, LLP, by David C. Larsen, Attorney at Law, represented the

Saddleback Valley Unified School District (District).

Reich, Adell & Cvitan, by Marianne Reinhold, Attorney at Law, represented the

Respondents named in Attachment “A” attached hereto.

Evidence was received by stipulation, documents, and testimony. The matter was

submitted on April 16, 2012.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Margarett Lewis (Lewis), Assistant Superintendent of the District, filed the

Accusations in her official capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

1.

2.

3.

On March 13, 2012, the Governing Board of the District (Board) adopted
Resolution No. 33:11-12, which proposed to eliminate or reduce particular kinds of services
encompassing 15.2 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions for the 2012-2013 school year.

4.

By no later than March 15, 2012, certain certificated employees of the District,
including Respondents, were given preliminary notice that their services would not be

1

required for the following school year, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and
44955.1

5.

Respondents timely requested a hearing to determine if there is cause for
terminating their services. Each was thereafter served with an Accusation. Respondents
timely filed Notices of Defense, which requested the instant hearing. Respondents in this
proceeding are: Lynn Alexander, Bridget Down, Lauren Godfrey (Godfrey), Navaz
Kerawalla, Michele Mock, Andrew Moriates (Moriates), Maria Nadal, Christina Schramm,
and Lorinda Shew (Shew).2 Shew was notified by the District that she would be released
from employment separately and independently from the lay-off process. She was also sent
a letter dated March 14, 2012, informing her that, although District records indicate that she
is a temporary employee, she is permitted to participate and exercise any claimed rights to
the lay-off hearing process.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

6.

7.

Resolution No. 33:11-12 (Resolution) specifically provides for the reduction

or elimination of the following particular kinds of services:

SERVICES OR PROGRAMS TO BE
ELIMINATED OR REDUCED

Course Offerings/Instructional Program

POSITIONS
(FTE)

Secondary
English
Math
Social Science
Science:

Spanish
French
German
PE
Art

Earth Science
Biology
Intermediate School Science

4.00
2.40
2.80

0.20
0.20
0.80
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.20
0.40

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

2 Teacher Diane Garner appeared at hearing; however, she had not submitted a request
for hearing and, therefore, was not considered as a Respondent in the instant proceeding.
Teacher Claire Eichenberg (Eichenberg) had filed a request for hearing but then subsequently
wrote an email on April 9, 2012, to the District indicating that she did not wish to contest her
lay-off. Eichenberg, therefore, was not considered as a Respondent in the instant proceeding.

2

Instrumental Music
Photo
Auto

TOTAL

0.60
0.20
1.00

15.20

8.

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services is

neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.

9.

The reduction or discontinuance of services is related to the welfare of the
District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated
employees as determined by the Board.

10.

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees' seniority
dates (first date of paid service in a probationary capacity), credential information, and
current assignments.

11.

The District used the seniority list and developed staff reduction flow charts of
the least senior certificated employees currently assigned in the particular kinds of services
that it was seeking to reduce in this layoff proceeding. The District then determined how
many certificated employees assigned in the particular kinds of services are retiring or
resigning; whether the least senior certificated employees in these particular kinds of services
hold other credentials, can perform in other service areas, and are entitled to bump other
more junior certificated employees; whether certain certificated employees should be skipped
and retained; how many certificated employees would be bumping into each service area;
and how many certificated employees in each service area must be reassigned or laid off.

12.

The Resolution established tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative
seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.
It
provided that the order of termination shall be based on the needs of the District and its
students in accordance with the criteria stated therein. Specifically, the tiebreaker criteria
provide for points to be awarded for, among other things, certain evaluations, degrees,
credentials, certificates, positions, and services. The more points awarded to a teacher, the
In the event of a tie after
higher the seniority within the shared date of first paid service.
reference to all listed criteria, a lottery would be held.

13.

Respondent Moriates challenged the application of the tie-breaking criteria.
One of the tie-breaking criterion, listed as “Category G,” provided that one point would be
given to a teacher who served as a high school advisor. The criterion stated, “One (1) point
of service for each year of service as an Elementary, Intermediate or High School Advisor as
specified in Article XVIII of the SVEA Contract during the last three (3) years: (09/10,
10/11, 11/12).” The criterion does not specify that the position has to be served for the entire
year in order for a teacher to receive a point pursuant to the criterion. Moriates served as the
ASB advisor at Silverado High School for a portion of the 2011-2012 school year. The ASB
Advisor for the 2011-2012 year was originally Kelly Tombleson (Tombleson), who then

3

went on maternity leave. Prior to leaving, Moriates started working with Tombleson for
several months before he officially took over the position on March 9, 2012. Moriates was
asked to take over the position by his school principal, David Gordon. According to the
District, he will be paid the prorated portion of the stipend allocated for the ASB advisor
position. Although the District’s position was that Moriates would have to serve the entire
year to receive the tie-breaking point, no authority was offered to support this position.
Therefore, the District should have given Moriates an additional point for serving as the ASB
advisor. The District must adjust his position on the seniority list to reflect the additional
point.

14.

Since the District had not given the ASB advisor tie-breaking criterion point to
Moriates, it found Moriates, Godfrey, and McAlister, who shared the same seniority date of
September 8, 2009, to be in a three-way tie and conducted a lottery on April 16, 2012, to
determine their relative positions. The results of the lottery were ranked in order of Godfrey
first, Moriates second, and McAlister third. However, since the District should have given
Moriates the point for his service as ASB advisor, he should be ranked higher on the
seniority list than Godfrey and McAlister.

15.

Teacher Shew was hired to teach a categorically funded position for the
current year, as well as for the 2010-2011 and 2009-2010 school years.3 Shew was
employed to teach under “Title 1” federal funding. At hearing, the District explained that
Title 1 funding is funding given to districts to allow students to receive free and reduced cost
lunches. Shew teaches English at Los Alisos, a designated Title 1 school in the District.

16.

In Stockton Teachers Assn. CTA/NEA v. Stockton Unified School Dist. (2012)
204 Cal.App.4th 446, the court held that in a layoff proceeding, the district had the burden of
proof to establish that those teachers it claimed were temporary employees were, in fact,
properly hired in a temporary capacity. The court held that to prove that laid-off employees
were temporary under section 44909 (the statute authorizing school districts to hire
temporary employees for categorically funded projects), the district was required (1) to show
that the employees were hired to perform services conducted under contract with public or
private agencies or categorically funded projects which were not required by federal or state
statutes; (2) to identify the particular contract or project for which services were performed;
(3) to show that the particular contract or project expired; and (4) to show that the employees
were hired for the entire or remaining term of the contract or project. The court further held
that if the district did not meet its burden of proof, the teachers must be classified as
probationary employees,
the so-called “default classification” described in Bakersfield
Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006) 145 Cal.App. 4th 460.

17.

In the instant proceeding, Lewis testified that the District will be receiving
Title 1 funding for the next school year, but that the District does not know the amount it will

3 Shew’s temporary contract for the 2009-2010 year indicates that she was hired
under section 44909 (district categorical or contract program) as well as section 44920
(replacement for certificated employee on a leave of absence).

4

be receiving. There was no evidence presented that the funding for the program has
terminated or that the project has expired. On the contrary, Lewis testified that “funding
itself is not unknown but the amount of funding is unknown.” No evidence was presented
that the Title 1 funding that the District will receive will be less than what it received in the
current school year. Applying Stockton, therefore, the District should have classified Shew
as a probationary employee and her seniority date would correctly be September 13, 2010.
(See section 44918.)

18.

Shew’s reclassification does not impact her lay-off status; however, it does
affect other Respondents. Given Shew’s probationary classification and seniority date of
September 13, 2010, she would still remain junior to Moriates. Since Moriates should have
been given an additional tie-breaking point, he is entitled to bump into Shew’s position.4
Both possess a single subject English credential, but Moriates has a seniority date of
September 8, 2009.

19.

The District over-noticed .40 English teachers. Hence, since Godfrey came

first in the lottery, she would be entitled to the .40 position in English.

20.

No other permanent certificated employee with less seniority will be retained

to render a service that the Respondents are certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections

44949 and 44955 were met, by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 6.

2.

The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services that
could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The Board’s
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious,
and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of
Education Code section 44949.

3.

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,

4 A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.
In doing so, the
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)

5

178-179.)

4.

Pursuant

reclassify Shew as a
probationary employee and assign her a seniority date of September 13, 2010, by reason of
Factual Findings 14 through 17.

to Stockton,

the District

supra,

shall

5.

The District shall allocate one additional tie-breaking point to Moriates who is

entitled to bump Shew, by reason of Factual Findings 11 through 18.

6.

The results of the April 16, 2012 lottery keep Godfrey in the first tie-breaking
position, allowing her to serve the .40 over-noticed position in English, by reason of Factual
Findings 11 through 19.

7.

Cause exists, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, to reduce
the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction and discontinuation
of particular kinds of services, by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 20, and Legal
Conclusions 1 through 3.

RECOMMENDATION

1.

The District shall classify Respondent Lorinda Shew as a probationary

employee and assign her a seniority date of September 13, 2010.

2.

The District shall allocate one additional tie-breaking point to Respondent
Andrew Moriates, provide him with the bumping rights that follow allocation of his
additional point, and rescind the layoff notice and/or dismiss the Accusation as to
Respondent Andrew Moriates.

3.

Notice may be given to Respondents Lynn Alexander, Bridget Down, Lauren
Godfrey, Navaz Kerawalla, Michele Mock, Maria Nadal, Christina Schramm, and Lorinda
Shew that their employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year and
that their services will not be needed for the 2012-2013 school year. However, Respondent
Lauren Godfrey shall be entitled to the serve the .40 position in English.

Dated: May 4, 2012

___________________________
JANKHANA DESAI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

ATTACHMENT A: LIST OF RESPONDENTS

1. Lynn Alexander

2. Bridget Down

3. Lauren Godfrey

4. Navaz Kerawalla

5. Michele Mock

6. Andrew Moriates

7. Maria Nadal

8. Christina Schramm

9. Lorinda Shew

7

