BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
BELLFLOWER UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

KELLY AVALOS, et al.,

OAH No. 2012030528

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

David B. Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Bellflower, California, on April 24,
2012.

Eric Bathen, Attorney at Law, represented Bellflower Unified School District

(District).

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Kelly Avalos,

Eleanora Bassi, Karen Bomgaars, Sadie Cousins, Teresa Driscoll, Daniel Droessler,
John Kevin Gaffney, Maria Gonzalez-Valdovinos, Holly Leas, Victoria Martinez,
Charmaine McLaughlin, Kelli Olmedo and Robert Tully, who were present at the
hearing except as noted below.

Respondents Stacy Johnson, Karen Meisner and Leah Moak represented
themselves. Respondents Sadie Cousins, Maria Gonzalez-Valdovinos and Leah
Moak were not present at the hearing.

Evidence was received by stipulation, testimony, and documents. The record

was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 24, 2012.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Brian Jacobs, Ed.D. is the District’s Superintendent. Lisa Azevedo is

the District’s Assistant Superintendent for Instructional Personnel and Programs.
Their actions were taken in their official capacity. Dr. Jacobs made and filed the
Accusation in his official capacity. The District serves approximately 13,000 students
and has over 400 teachers who work at its two comprehensive high schools (grades 7-
12), one alternative high school, or ten elementary schools.

1

2.
District.

Respondents in this proceeding are certificated employees of the

3.

On March 9, 2012, the District provided written notice to respondents
pursuant to Education Code1 sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not
be required for the 2012-2013 school year.

4.

On March 26, 2012, the District filed and thereafter served the

Accusation and related documents on respondents. Each respondent appearing in this
matter filed a timely Notice of Defense requesting a hearing for a determination of
whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2011-2012 school year or, if no
Notice of Defense was filed, the District has waived the requirement to do so. All
prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

5(A). On March 8, 2012, the Board of Education (Board) of the District

adopted Resolution of the Board of Education’s Intention to Reduce and/or
Discontinue Particular Kinds of Service (Exhibit 3), which provides for the
elimination of 20 full time equivalent (FTE) positions described as follows:

“[T]wo (2) single subject FTE reduction due to the elimination of the district

instructional coaches (TOSA), two (2) multiple subject FTE reduction due to the
elimination of the district instructional coaches (TOSA), ten (10) multiple subject
FTE reduction, due to the anticipated reduction in student enrollment and the need for
further budget reductions, four (4) designated subjects vocational education FTE
reduction due to the elimination of the Adult School, two (2) designated subjects adult
education FTE reduction due to the elimination of the Adult School, for a total of
twenty (20) FTE reductions of particular kinds of services in grades K-Adult School.”

5(B). The same resolution indicated that the District could retain certain

certificated employees, regardless of their seniority, if they were “considered
necessary to meet the District’s program staffing needs. Such employees shall be
retained based upon their qualifications and credentials and include, but are not
necessarily limited to, special education teachers, speech and language specialists,
and math and science teachers. In accordance with Education Code Section 44955(c)
the Governing Board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that
employees shall be retained to render any service which seniority and qualifications
entitle them to render.”

1

otherwise.

All statutory citations are to the Education Code, unless indicated

2

5(C). The services set forth in Factual Finding 5(A) are particular

kinds of services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of
section 44955.

6.

On March 8, 2012, the Board of the District adopted Resolution of the
Board of Education to Determine the Order of Termination of Certificated Personnel
(Exhibit 4), which establishes tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority
of certificated employees with the same date of first rendered paid service to the
district. The resolution used the same criteria used for the prior two years. The
criteria establish a point system and process to be applied.

7.

The Board took action to reduce the services set forth in Factual

Finding 5(A) because of uncertainty surrounding future funding from the State as well
as an anticipated decrease in enrollment of students for elementary schools. Ms.
Azevedo estimated that the projected budget deficit for next year was seven million
dollars. The decision to reduce services was not related to the capabilities and
dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.
The decision to eliminate the particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor
capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s discretion.

8.

Ms. Azevedo was responsible for implementation of the technical
aspects of Board’s Resolutions. She reviewed available information to compile a
tentative seniority list containing seniority dates, current assignments, credentials,
certifications and other pertinent data. The list was available for review by
certificated employees within the District for them to verify, update or correct
pertinent information.

9.

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of
the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced,
including whether more senior employees affected by the layoffs held credentials in
another area and were entitled to displace or “bump” other less senior employees. In
determining who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District
counted the number of reductions not covered by the known vacancies, and
determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority. The District
then checked the credentials of affected individuals and determined whether they
could “bump” other employees.

10.

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations,
retirements and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of layoff
notices to be delivered to employees by March 15, 2012.

11.

The District rescinded the layoff notices to Kathleen Callahan, Amy

Gehrig, Lori Ann Miyakawa and Lauro Sanzaro, due to further resignations after
March 15, 2012.

3

12.

The parties stipulated that the seniority date for Eleanora Bassi should

be changed from September 13, 1999, to August 25, 1997.

13.

Respondents questioned the manner in which the District skipped Jane
Nishimoto, whose seniority date is August 27, 2003, and who holds a multiple subject
credential. Ms. Azevedo explained that Ms. Nishimoto is assigned to a self-contained
classroom in the BAE Center, which is the District’s alternative high school, attended
by students who have been expelled from the other high schools or placed there by
administrative assignment. Specialized training is required for the position, such that
Ms. Nishimoto is in the process of becoming highly qualified under the No Child Left
Behind law in the four core subjects needed for her assignment. She is more than
halfway through this training, which is paid for by the District. When the position
was open approximately two tears ago, it was available to other certificated
employees of the District; however no other employees expressed interest in the
position except Ms. Nishimoto. Respondents did not establish that any of them had
the special training and experience necessary to teach in that position.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Section 44949 provides in pertinent part:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by
the governing board that his or her services will not be required for the
ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section 44955, the governing
board and the employee shall be given written notice by the
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the
reasons therefore.

2.

Section 44955 provides in pertinent part as follows:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for
causes other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and
Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, and no probationary employee
shall be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as specified
in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive.

(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year,
. . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it
shall have become necessary by reason of any of these conditions to
decrease the number of permanent employees in the district,
the
governing board may terminate the services of not more than a
corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the district,

4

permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school year.
Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent
employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while
any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority,
is retained to render a service which said permanent employee is
certified and competent to render.

[¶] . . . [¶]

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on
the same date,
the governing board shall determine the order of
termination solely on the basis on needs of the district and the students
thereof. Upon the request of any employee whose order of termination
is so determined, the governing board shall furnish . . . a statement of
the specific criteria used in determining the order of termination and the
application of the criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group . . . .

(c) . . . [S]ervices of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse
of the order in which they were employed, as determined by the board
in accordance with Sections 44844 and 44845.
In the event that a
permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices and a right
to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be
deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such
a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which
their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. . . .

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of
the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrated a specific need for personnel to
teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated
employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that
course or course of study or to provide those services, which others
with more seniority do not possess.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949

and 44955 were met.

3.

4.

Boards of education hold significant discretion in determining the need

to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services, which is not open to second-
guessing in this proceeding. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified

5

School Dist. (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) Such policy-making decisions are not
subject to arguments as to the wisdom of their enactment, their necessity, or the
motivations for the decisions. (California Teachers Assn. v. Huff (1992) 5
Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.) Such decisions and action must be reasonable under the
circumstances, with the understanding that “such a standard may permit a difference
of opinion.” (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116
Cal.App.3d 831, 845.) Numerous cases stand for the proposition that the process of
implementing layoffs is a very flexible one and that school districts retain great
flexibility in carrying out the process. (Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v.
Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796.)

5.

The services set fort in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of

services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.
The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither
arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the
reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s
schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

6.

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section

44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce service’
by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board
of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

7.

Cause exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44945 to reduce the

number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or
discontinuation of the particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 5(A).
The District properly identified the certificated employees providing the particular
kinds of services that the Board directed be reduced or discontinued.

8.

9.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if

the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior
counterparts lack. (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184
Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara, supra.) This “skipping” is a process, under section
44955, subdivision (d)(1), wherein a school district may choose to demonstrate a
specific need and that an employee has the special training and experience to meet
that need. In fact, school districts have been permitted to present at hearing, for the
first time, evidence of the type of tie-breaking that might apply. (Zalac v. Governing
Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838; Bledsoe v. Biggs
Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127.) In the case of Ms. Nishimoto, the
decision to retain her was proper under the general language of the resolution

6

allowing the board to deviate from strict seniority to retain her, based upon her
qualifications and credentials and to meet the needs of the District, as well as the
statutory authority under section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

ORDER

The Bellflower Unified School District may give notice to respondents Kelly

Avalos, Eleanora Bassi, Karen Bomgaars, Sadie Cousins, Teresa Driscoll, Daniel
Droessler, John Kevin Gaffney, Maria Gonzalez-Valdovinos, Stacy Johnson, Holly
Leas, Victoria Martinez, Charmaine McLaughlin, Karen Meisner, Leah Moak, Kelli
Olmedo and Robert Tully, that their services will not be required for the 2012-2013
school year.

Dated: April 24, 2012

__________________________
DAVID B. ROSENMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

