BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
EMPIRE UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF STANISLAUS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

MICHAEL LINGG,

Case No. 2012040230

Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, State

of California, heard this matter on April 23, 2012, in Modesto, California.

Attorney Roman J. Munoz represented the Empire Union School District (District).

Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, David Garcia also attended the hearing on
behalf of the District.

Respondent Michael Lingg represented himself.

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for

decision on April 23, 2012.

SUMMARY

The Board of Trustees of the Empire Union School District has determined that it is

necessary to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services at the end of the 2011-2012
school year and therefore seeks to reduce or eliminate a 1.00 full-time equivalent (FTE)
certificated position. Mr. Lingg has been given preliminary notice that his services will be
reduced or eliminated at the end of the 2011-2012 school year. As discussed below, cause
exists for the Board of Trustees to reduce or eliminate a 1.00 FTE certificated position. No
junior certificated employee is being retained to perform a service which Mr. Lingg is
certificated and competent to perform. Therefore, the District may give him notice that his
services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

David Garcia is the Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, of the

District. He made and filed the Accusation solely in his official capacity.

Mr. Lingg is a permanent certificated employee of the District. Prior to March

15, 2012, the District served him with written notice that it had been recommended that
notice be given to him pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that his
services would be reduced or would not be required for the 2012-2013 school year. The
written notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation and noted that the District’s
Board of Trustees had passed Resolution No. 2011/2012 #2 reducing the certificated staff by
1.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) position. Mr. Lingg timely requested, in writing, a hearing to
determine if there is cause for not reemploying him for the ensuing school year.

3.

Assistant Superintendent Garcia made and filed an Accusation against Mr.

Lingg. The Accusation with required accompanying documents and blank Notices of
Defense were timely served on Mr. Lingg. Mr. Lingg timely filed a Notice of Defense to the
Accusation. All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied.

4.

On March 12, 2012, at a regular meeting, the District’s Board of Trustees was

given notice of Assistant Superintendent Garcia’s recommendation that certificated
employees holding 1.00 FTE positions be given notice that their services would be reduced
or not required for the next school year and stating the reasons for that recommendation.

5.

On March 12, 2012, the District’s Board of Trustees determined that it was

necessary to reduce or eliminate programs and services and therefore necessary to reduce or
eliminate certificated services affecting employment of 1.00 FTE position. The Board of
Trustees adopted Resolution No. 2011/2012 #2 providing for the reduction of the Counseling
Program, resulting in the elimination of 1.00 FTE certificated counselor.

In determining the extent by which to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services,
the District’s Board of Trustees considered all positively assured attrition up to and including
the date of the resolution. The total number of positions to be reduced or eliminated under
this resolution is 1.0 FTE certificated position. The Board of Trustees determined that the
services of a corresponding number of certificated employees shall be terminated at the close
of the current 2011-2012 school year.

6.

The District maintains a seniority list for all certificated employees who hold
non-teaching positions, such as school nurses, psychologists, and counselors. Mr. Lingg is a
school counselor and holds a clear pupil personnel services credential, with an authorization
in school counseling. His seniority date is August 24, 1994, a date he shares with no other
certificated employee. There are four certificated employees who are not employed in
teaching positions and are junior to Mr. Lingg in terms of seniority – Marilyn Glinskas,
Laura Forystek, Bobbie Ables-Smith, and Lorraine Dugan. Mss. Glinskas and Dugan both
hold a professional school nurse services credential and are employed as school nurses, a

2

service which Mr. Lingg is neither certificated nor competent to perform. Mss. Forystek and
Ables-Smith both hold clear pupil personnel services credentials, with an authorization in
school psychology. Ms. Ables-Smith has an additional authorization in school counseling.
Both Mss. Forystek and Ables-Smith are employed as school psychologists, a service which
Mr. Lingg concedes he is neither certificated nor competent to perform.

7.

No permanent or probationary certificated employee with less seniority is

being retained to render a service for which Mr. Lingg is certificated and competent to
perform.

8.

The reduction or elimination of the particular kinds of services set forth in

Resolution No. 2011/2012 #2 are related to the welfare of the schools and the students
thereof within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. The Board of
Trustees’ decision to reduce or discontinue these services is neither arbitrary nor capricious,
but rather a proper exercise of its discretion

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides the following with

regard to a school district’s authority to layoff certificated employees.

Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all
of the schools of a district for the first six months in which
school is in session shall have declined below the corresponding
period of either of the previous two school years, whenever the
governing board determines that attendance in a district will
decline in the following year as a result of the termination of an
interdistrict tuition agreement as defined in Section 46304,
whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school
year, or whenever the amendment of state law requires the
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary
by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding
percentage of the certificated employees of the district,
permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school
year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while any probationary employee, or any other
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

3

2.

Education Code section 44949 provides the following with regard to a school

district’s jurisdiction to layoff certificated employees:

In computing a decline in average daily attendance for purposes
of this section for a newly formed or reorganized school district,
each school of the district shall be deemed to have been a school
of the newly formed or reorganized district for both of the two
previous school years.

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would
not exist without such a requirement.

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee, or in the case of a district which has no superintendent
by the clerk or secretary of the governing board, that it has been
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and
stating the reasons therefor.

Until the employee has requested a hearing as provided in
subdivision (b) or has waived his or her right to a hearing, the
notice and the reasons therefor shall be confidential and shall
not be divulged by any person, except as may be necessary in
the performance of duties. However, the violation of this
requirement of confidentiality, in and of itself, shall not in any
manner be construed as affecting the validity of any hearing
conducted pursuant to this section.

4

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing. The
notice provided for in subdivision (a) shall advise the employee
of the provisions of this subdivision.

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency
therein, except that all of the following shall apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any,
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation
and he or she shall be notified of this five-day period for filing
in the accusation.

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the
Government Code shall be available only if request is made
therefor within 15 days after service of the accusation, and the
notice required by Section 11505 of the Government Code shall
so indicate.

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be
prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the

5

charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds.

The board may adopt from time to time such rules and
procedures not inconsistent with provisions of this section as
may be necessary to effectuate this section.

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the
employee.

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) any
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the
Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) which
occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which
occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be
extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth above.

(Factual Findings 2 and 3.)

3.

The services identified in Resolution No. 2011/2012 #2 are particular kinds of
services that may reduced or eliminated under Education Code section 44955. The Board of
Trustees’ decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or
discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and their
pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

4.

The District correctly identified the certificated employees providing the

particular kinds of services that the Board of Trustees directed be reduced or discontinued in
Resolution No. 2011/2012 #2.

5.

6.

No permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained

to render a service for which Mr. Lingg is certificated and competent to perform.

Cause exists to give notice to Mr. Lingg that his services will be reduced or

will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year because of the reduction or
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.

6

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.

2.

Cause exists for the Empire Union School District to reduce or eliminate a

1.00 full-time equivalent certificated position at the end of the 2011-2012 school year.

Notice may be given to Mr. Lingg that his services will be reduced or will not

be required for the 2012-2013 school year.

DATED: April 25, 2012

____________________________
COREN D. WONG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

