BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD
NORTH MONTEREY COUNTY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

MARY THERESE GILL,

OAH No. 2012040081

Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

Mary-Margaret Anderson, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Moss Landing on April 16, 2012.

Kevin R. Dale, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo,

represented the North Monterey County Unified School District (District).

Respondent Mary Therese Gill represented herself.

The record closed on April 16, 2012.

SUMMARY

The Governing Board of the North Monterey County Unified School District decided

to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by certificated employees for
the 2012-2013 school year for financial reasons. The decision was not related to the
competency and dedication of the employees whose services were proposed to be reduced or
eliminated. The selection process complied with Education Code requirements.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Sergio Montenegro filed the Accusation in his official capacity as

Superintendent of the District.

2.

3.

Mary Therese Gill (Respondent) is a certificated employee of the District.

On March 8, 2012, the Governing Board of the District adopted Resolution

No. 2011-1239, in which the Board resolved to reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds
of services for the 2012-2013 school year. The decision was grounded in budgetary

1

concerns. The Board directed the Superintendent or his designee to send notice to all
employees whose positions may be affected by the action.

The reduction of services is as follows:

High School Classroom Instructional Services

Spanish Teaching Services
Social Science Teaching Services
Physical Education Teaching Services

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

High School Counseling Services

Grade Level Coordinator Services

1.0 FTE

ROP Instructional Services

ROP Computer Repair
ROP Adobe/Web Design
ROP Multimedia
ROP Intro to Health
ROP Certified Nursing Assistant (CNA) Program

.2 FTE
.2 FTE
.2 FTE
.2 FTE
.4 FTE

Other Positions

Migrant Education Resource Teacher
Migrant Education Student Case Manager

Total:

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

7.2 FTE

4.

On March 9, 2012, Superintendent Montenegro mailed written notice to five

certificated employees that it had been recommended that notice be given them that their
services would not be required for the 2012-2013 school year. All of the noticed employees
filed timely requests for hearing, and an Accusation was filed and served. All of the noticed
employees who requested a hearing filed a notice of defense.

5.

On the hearing day all of the noticed employees, except Respondent, settled

their cases with the District and withdrew their requests for hearing.

6.

Respondent is presently a high school principal. She has been released from
that position and has been reassigned to a physical education teaching position based upon
her single subject physical education credential. Respondent’s position on the seniority list
causes her to fall within the one full-time equivalent (FTE) physical education position slated
for reduction; therefore, she received a preliminary notice.

2

7.

Respondent represented that she is currently on administrative leave from her

position as high school principal, but that she is well aware of the master class schedule at
the high school and related issues. She is concerned that the reduction of physical education
teachers by one position will negatively affect the ability of staff to properly supervise
students. She is therefore concerned that student safety might be compromised, particularly
in the locker rooms.

8.

Jamie Marantz is the District’s Assistant Superintendent of Curriculum and

Instruction. She did not discuss student safety in the physical education classes with anyone
in the physical education department. Nonetheless, she credibly testified that the District
will be able to provide the mandated physical education services despite the reduction of one
FTE position.

9.

No certificated employee junior in seniority to Respondent is being retained by

the Board to perform services that Respondent is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and

44955 have been provided as required. The District has therefore established jurisdiction for
this proceeding as to Respondent.

2.

Respondent did not demonstrate that the reduction of one FTE physical

education position will violate state law or regulation, or that she is not properly the subject
of the proposed reduction. Accordingly, the District may serve her with a final layoff notice.

3.

Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to reduce

the number of certificated employees in 7.2 FTE positions due to the reduction or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The decisions made relate solely to the
welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section
44949.

4.

All contentions made by Respondent not specifically addressed above are

found to be without merit and are rejected.

3

ORDER

Notice may be given to Respondent Mary Therese Gill that her services will not be

required for the 2012-2013 school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of
particular kinds of services.

DATED: April 26, 2012

_____________________________
MARY-MARGARET ANDERSON
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

4

