BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF
THE CENTINELA VALLEY UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH No. 2012030515

36.06 Full Time Equivalent Certificated
Employees of the Centinela Valley Unon
High School District,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Chris Ruiz, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative

Hearings, heard this matter on April 10, 2012, in Lawndale, California.

Carly A. Dadson, Esq., represented the Centinela Valley Union High School District

(District). Also present was Candace Bandoian, Esq., and Bob Cox, Assistant
Superintendent Human Resources.

Lawrence B. Trygstad, Esq., represented the Respondent teachers (Respondents).

Also present was Sandra Goins, Executive Director, South Bay United Teachers.

The District served a Notice of Layoff and Accusation packets on Respondents.

During the hearing, the parties resolved some of the issues by stipulation. The remaining
Respondents whose employment remains at issue are listed on Exhibit D (Secondary
teachers) and Exhibit E (Adult Education teachers), which are both incorporated by reference
as if fully set forth herein. The District withdrew the Accusation as to Caryn Charles and
Nathan Cooke. The matter was submitted for decision on April 10, 2012.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Bob Cox, Assistant Superintendent of the District, acting in his official

capacity, caused all pleadings, notices and other papers to be filed and served upon each
Respondent pursuant to the provisions of Education Code sections 44949, 44955, and
44929.25 (adult education teachers). All pre-hearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

2.

Respondents are employed by the District as permanent, probationary, intern,

pre-intern, emergency permitted, waiver, and/or temporary certificated employees of the
District.

3.

On March 6, 2012, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949, 44955, and

44929.25 (adult education teachers) the Governing Board of the District (Board) issued
Resolution numbers 11-12/022, 11-12/023, and 11-12/024 (tie-breaker criteria), which
approved the recommendation by the Assistant Superintendent that notice be given to
Respondents that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year and stating
the reasons for that recommendation.

4.

Prior to March 15, 2012, Respondents were given written notice of the

recommendation that notice be given to Respondents, pursuant to Education Code
sections 44949, 44955, and 44929.25 that their services will not be required for the ensuing
school year and stating the reasons for that recommendation.

5.

It was established that cause exists, within the meaning of Education Code

sections 44949, 44955, and 44929.25 for not reemploying Respondents for the ensuing
school year for all of the reasons set forth below.

6.

The District decided the following:

The following particular kinds of services of the District will be
reduced or eliminated no later than the beginning of the 2012-2013
school year:

PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES

NUMBER OF FULL-TIME
EQUIVALENT (FTE) POSITIONS

Secondary Teaching Services

18.6 FTE

Adult Education

17.46 FTE

TOTAL FTE REDUCTION

36.06 FTE

7.

The Board decided that it is necessary to decrease the number of certificated

employees as a result of the reduction in services. These services are “particular kinds of
services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section
44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was
not arbitrary or capricious, but rather, constituted a proper exercise of discretion. The Board

2

is faced with a budget shortfall. A detailed list of the particular kinds of services to be
eliminated is stated in Exhibit 1, page D-1, which is hereby incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein.

8.

The reduction or discontinuation of these particular kinds of services is related

to the welfare of the District and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuation of particular
kinds of services is necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District
as determined by the Board. This reduction is necessary because of budget reductions.

9.

The Board properly considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements
and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be
delivered to its employees prior to March 15, 2012. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627 at 636).

10.

The District properly created its seniority list by determining the first date of

paid service of each certificated employee and properly utilized reasonable “tie-breaker”
criteria when necessary. The District “skipped” over certain specified categories of
personnel as described in Exhibit D-2, which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully
set forth herein. Respondents did not challenge these “skips” of science teachers.
Respondents did not challenge the lay-off process, as a whole, other than as discussed below.

Respondent DIS Counselors

11.

The District provides services at three high schools, one “independent study”

program, and one adult school. The District proposes to lay-off its only two Designated
Instructional Services (DIS) counselors. These DIS counselors assist special education
students with issues “beyond the classroom,” such as legal, family, or other matters.
Respondents contended that the District would be unable to perform, or that it would be very
difficult to perform, mandated tasks required by state and/or federal law. The evidence
presented was mixed. Assistant Superintendent Bob Cox testified that the services provided
by the DIS counselors are “mandated.” It was not established what law, or otherwise,
mandates such services. Mr. Cox spoke with George Zuk in the Special Education
department and Zuk told Cox that the District would still be able to provide the mandated
services even after laying off the DIS counselors. This issue is a very close call. Mr. Cox
had no personal knowledge regarding what act(s) the District would take to resolve this
issue. Respondents established that the reductions will make compliance with the
“mandates” difficult. However, Mr. Zuk’s statement to Mr. Cox established, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the reductions in force will not prevent the District from
providing the services at issue.

Assembly Bill 189

12.

Respondents contended that Assembly Bill 189 (AB) mandates an open
hearing before closing the Career Technical Education portion of the Adult Education
department. The District is closings this portion of its Adult Education program, but not its

3

High School Diploma General Education Program and its English as a Second Language,
both programs of the Adult Education department. A fair reading of the AB indicates that it
is intended as a condition precedent to the “receipt of funds,” rather than as a required
condition precedent to reductions in force.

Respondent Matthew Labbe

13. Matthew Labbe (Labbe) was hired on April 18, 1994. Labbe contended that

his date of hire should also be his seniority date. The District contended that Labbe was
initially hired as a substitute teacher and did not work a sufficient number of hours to change
his status to “probationary” until September 9, 1995. In the District’s Adult Education
section, the District classifies a teacher as an FTE if the teacher works 20 hours per week.
The District classifies an Adult Education Administrator and a Secondary
Teacher/Administrator as an FTE if the employee works 40 hours per week. An Adult
Education teacher, as is Labbe, is classified as “probationary” if he/she works 12 hours or
more per week. If the teacher works less than 12 hours, he/she is classified as “temporary.”
Labbe contended, and established, that he was not given written notice that he was being
hired as a temporary employee at the time he was hired. Labbe also contended that case law
supports his contention that because he was not notified that he was being hired as a
temporary employee, he should therefore be classified as “probationary” from his date of
hire, which would change his date of seniority to April 18, 1994. The District acknowledged
Education Code sections 44954, 44915, and 44916, as well as recent case law. However, the
District contended that Education Code section 44929.25 is more specific, and applicable, to
Adult Education teachers like Labbe.

14.

Education Code section 44916 states:

The classification shall be made at the time of employment
and thereafter in the month of July of each school year. At the time
of initial employment during each academic year, each new
certificated employee of the school district shall receive a written
statement indicating his employment status and the salary that he is
to be paid. If a school district hires a certificated person as a
temporary employee, the written statement shall clearly indicate the
temporary nature of the employment and the length of time for which
the person is being employed. If a written statement does not
indicate the temporary nature of the employment, the certificated
employee shall be deemed to be a probationary employee of the school
district, unless employed with permanent status. (Emphasis added.)

15.

Education Code section 44929.25 states:

When a teacher of classes for adults serves sufficient
probationary time as provided in Sections 44929.20 to 44929.23,
inclusive, and Section 44908 to be eligible for election to permanent

4

classification in that district, his or her tenure shall be for the
service equivalent to the average number of hours per week that he or
she has served during his or her probationary years. In no case
shall the employee be classified as permanent for more than one
full-time assignment. The service for which the person has acquired
tenure may be reduced in conformity with Sections 44955 and 44956.
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, in a district
that has, or in a district that is one of two or more districts
governed by governing boards of identical personnel that have a
combined average daily attendance of 400,000 or more, as shown by the
annual report of the county superintendent of schools for the
preceding fiscal year, no person who is assigned 10 hours or less a
week in adult classes in the district shall be eligible for election
to permanent classification in the district on account of the
assignment in adult classes. Notwithstanding any other provision to
the contrary, any person who is employed to teach adults for not more
than 60 percent of the hours per week considered a full-time assignment
for permanent employees having comparable duties shall be classified
as a temporary employee, and shall not become a probationary employee
under the provisions of Section 44954. (Emphasis added.)

16.

The District’s argument regarding Laffe is convincing. Laffe
did not establish that his “seniority date” is incorrect. He did not become a probationary
employee until September 9, 1995. Education Code section 44929.25 is directly applicable
to Laffe’s situation and that section clearly overrides other contrary provisions.

17.

All other arguments presented by Respondents were unconvincing
and were not established by the evidence. Respondents did not establish that the District did
not follow the required procedures or that the District acted in an arbitrary and capricious
manner.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.

2.

3.

Jurisdiction for these proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code sections

44949, 44955, and 44929.25.

Each of the services set forth in Findings 5 – 10 is a particular kind of service

which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and case law.

The District’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither

arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.

4.

One issue is whether the District may lay off the two DIS counselors’. Neither
parth established any minimum standards regarding the employment of these two employees.
How the District will fulfill its obligations under local, state, or federal law, or otherwise, in

5

the upcoming school year is properly determined by the District. Courts have permitted
districts to discontinue particular kinds of services as long as the mandated services continue to
be performed. (See, e.g., Gallup v. Alta Loma School District Board of Trustees (1996) 41
Cal.App.4th 289; San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 639-640.)

5.

Cause exists to reduce the District's teaching positions as described above and
to give notice to the affected teachers pursuant to Education Code section 44955. (Campbell
v. Abbot (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796; Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d
689). Based on the above Findings, including the preamble to this Proposed Decision, the
names of the affected teachers, those as to whom final notices of layoff may be given, are as
follows:

All Respondents listed in Exhibits D and E, with the designation “at issue”
next to them, with the exception of Respondents Caryn Charles and Nathan
Cooke, as to whom the Accusation was dismissed by agreement between the
parties.

ORDER

Because of the reductions of services, the District may give notice to the teachers
identified in Legal Conclusion No. 5 that their services will not be required for the 2012-
2013 school year.

Dated: April ___, 2012.

___________________________
CHRIS RUIZ
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

