BEFORE THE
SUPERINTENDENT
MERCED OFFICE OF EDUCATION
COUNTY OF MERCED
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction or Elimination
of Particular Kinds of Services and the
Employment Status of:

CERTAIN PERMANENT OR
PROBATIONARY, CERTIFICATED
EMPLOYEES,

Respondents.

OAH No. 2012031021

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Stephen J. Smith, Office of Administrative Hearings, State

of California, heard this matter at the Merced County Office of Education District Office,
Merced, California, on April 20, 2012.

Todd A. Goluba, Attorney at Law, of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Rudd and Romo, a

Professional Corporation, Attorneys, represented the Merced County Office of Education.
Eva Chavez, Associate Superintendent for Human Resources and Personnel (the Associate
Superintendent), appeared on behalf of the Merced OE.

Ernest H. Tuttle, III, Attorney at Law, Tuttle and McCloskey, A Professional

Corporation, Attorneys, represented all respondents.

The matter was submitted on April 20, 2012.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Steven L. Gomes, Merced County Superintendent of Schools (the
Superintendent) made and filed the Accusation in his official capacity as the
Superintendent of the Merced County Office of Education (Merced OE). At
all times relevant to this Decision, the Associate Superintendent acted as the
Superintendent’s duly authorized designee.

1

2.

3.

Respondents are, and at all times relevant to this Decision were, permanent
and/or probationary certificated employees of the Merced OE.

On or just before March 12, 2012, in accordance with Education Code sections

44949 and 44955, the Associate Superintendent notified the Superintendent of the Merced
OE in writing of the Associate Superintendent’s recommendation that certain particular kinds
of services would have to be reduced or eliminated for the upcoming school year. The
Associate Superintendent’s notice specified the particular kinds of services to be reduced or
eliminated, as set forth below. The Associate Superintendent also notified the
Superintendent that a corresponding number of certificated employees of the District would
have to be laid off to effectuate the reduction or elimination of the particular kinds of
services. The Associate Superintendent notified the Superintendent that respondents had
been identified as persons to whom notice should be given that their services would not be
required for the ensuing school year. The recommendation that respondents’ services for the
Merced OE would not be required for the upcoming school year was not related to their skills
or abilities as teachers.

4.

The Superintendent adopted Resolution of the Merced County Superintendent

of Schools Regarding the Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of Services
(Certificated Layoff) number 2012-05 (the Resolution) on March 12, 2012. In the
Resolution, the Superintendent resolved to reduce or eliminate 18.69 full time equivalent
(“FTE”) particular kinds of services currently being offered by the Merced OE. The
Resolution authorized and directed the Associate Superintendent to give notice to an
equivalent number of certificated employees of the Merced OE that their services would not
be required for the upcoming school year in order to effectuate the reductions/eliminations.
The Resolution authorized the elimination of the following services now being offered in the
Merced OE:

Special Education Teaching Services
Deaf and Hard of Hearing Teaching

Career and Technical Education Teaching Services

Accounting/Comp. Office Tech Instructor
Office Tech/Marketing/Customer Service Instructor
Warehousing/Logistics Instructor
Business Occupations Instructor
Marketing/Sports and Entertainment Instructor
Medical Occupations Instructor

Home School Charter School Teaching Services
Charter School Teacher

Independent Study Teaching Services
Independent Study Teacher

2

4.00 FTE

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
.47 FTE
.47 FTE
.25 FTE
.50 FTE

1.0 FTE

3.0 FTE

Court and Community School Teaching Services
Middle School Teacher
High School Math Teacher
High School Science Teacher
High School Social Science Teacher
High School Elective (Leadership) Teacher
Teacher on Special Assignment

Total FTE Reduced or Eliminated

3.0 FTE
2.0 FTE
.33 FTE
.50 FTE
.167 FTE
eliminated
no FTE red.

18.69 FTE

5.

The Associate Superintendent caused 22 respondents to be served with a

written Notice of Intention to Dismiss (Preliminary Notice) on March 12, 2012. The
Associate Superintendent also caused 13 additional respondents to be served with a written
Precautionary Notice of Intention to Dismiss (Precautionary Notice) on March 12, 2012.
The written Preliminary and Precautionary Notices advised each of the respondents of the
Superintendent’s adoption of Resolution 2012-05, and that their services would not be
required or would be reduced for the upcoming school year. The Preliminary and
Precautionary Notices advised each respondent of the reasons for the action.

6.

Many but not all respondents receiving a Preliminary Notice or a

Precautionary Notice timely filed written Requests for a Hearing to determine if there was
cause for not reemploying them for the upcoming school year. The Associate Superintendent
timely served Accusation packages with required attachments on each respondent who
timely filed a Request for Hearing. Each remaining respondent timely filed a Notice of
Defense to the Accusation. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.

7.

The nine respondents upon whom a Preliminary Notice of Layoff was served

and who requested a hearing are as follows (with their respective positions on the Merced
OE Seniority List and dates of hire):

Janette Alvarado (47, but First Year Probationary Status -June 22, 2001);
Laura Andrews (64-January 21, 2004);
Elizabeth Avila Aviz (100-September 12, 2006);
Christy Bronson (99-August 28, 2006);
John Chavez (49-June 22, 2001);
Crandell Farmer (42-August 16, 2000);
Christopher Lewis (139-September 1, 2011);
Melissa Madeiros (71-August 23, 2004); and
Anna Miller (93-July 25, 2006).

Five respondents receiving a Precautionary Notice of Layoff also requested a

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

8.

1.

hearing; they are as follows:

Alan Armas;

3

Candy Moua;
Maria Villanueva;
Lucile Westrope; and
Bonita Wynn.

2.
3.
4.
5.

9.

The Associate Superintendent also caused to be served on three of the

respondents, Anna Miller, Laura Andrews and Melissa Madeiros, a Notice of Selection
Regarding Layoff (Notice). The Notice sought the recipient respondents’ consent to either
taking an assignment as an Independent Study Teacher (at a reduced pay rate), or an
assignment as a Home School Charter School teacher in the upcoming school year, or both,
in lieu of being laid off. The Notices advised that, in order to exercise displacement rights
into one of the two possible positions, the certificated employee in question must consent to
either or both of the alternative education assignments in question.

10.

Respondents Ms. Medeiros and Ms. Andrews both consented to being

assigned to either the Home Charter School or Independent Study assignments for the
upcoming year. Ms. Miller consented to being assigned to the Home Charter School, but
declined to consent to an Independent Study assignment for the upcoming year. Ms. Miller
confirmed in her testimony that she declined to consent to an Independent Study assignment.

11.

The Merced OE is facing multi-faceted financial pressure that has put the

Merced OE into a projected significant operating deficit for the upcoming school year. The
Associate Superintendent testified that the Merced OE programs are “richly staffed,” and
that, “we cannot afford this.” She testified that the Merced OE receives a significant number
of its students as placements by referrals from other regular education program school
districts in Merced County, and that those placing school districts are retaining a higher
percentage of their students in recent times, rather than referring students to the Merced OE,
resulting in a decline in enrollment. Merced OE does not expect to operate with a balanced
budget in the upcoming school year, and is not projected to come into balance within any of
the next three school years absent significant reductions in services.

12.

The Associate Superintendent testified that the Adult Regional Occupational
Program (ROP), (identified in the Resolution as the Career Technical Education Program)
offered by the Merced OE has been funded in previous school years by a local grant. The
status of that local grant was in question at the time the Resolution was adopted and notices
were issued, so, as a precautionary measure, the reduction and elimination of particular kinds
of services in the Resolution included the ROP Career Technical Education positions funded
by this local grant. After the issuance of the Preliminary and Precautionary Notices of
Layoff, the Merced OE received notice that the local grant will again provide funding in the
upcoming school year. This local grant funding permitted the Merced OE to rescind the
Preliminary Notices of Layoff issued to the personnel providing the adult ROP services in
the Career Technical Education Program, as well as 1.0 FTE of the Deaf and Hard of
Hearing Program slated for layoff; a total rescission of 4.50 FTE. None of the respondents
still seeking a hearing are challenging the reductions, eliminations, assignments and

4

reassignments in either the Special Education-Deaf and Hard of Hearing Program or the
Adult ROP-Career Technical Education Program.

13.

The Associate Superintendent, on behalf of the Merced OE, considered all

known attrition, resignations, retirements and requests for transfer in determining the actual
number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.

14.

There was no evidence that the Merced OE proposes to eliminate any services

that are State or federally mandated.

RESPONDENTS STILL AT ISSUE-BUMPING AND SKIPPING IN THE HOME SCHOOL
CHARTER SCHOOL/INDEPENDENT STUDY/COURT AND COMMUNITY SCHOOL
PROGRAMS

15.

The issues remaining at the time of the evidentiary hearing focused

specifically on “bumping” and “skipping” 1 with respect to as many as eight certificated
employees of the Merced OE, some of whom had not been served with Preliminary or
Precautionary Notices of Layoff. The core issues of the hearing revolved around the basis
upon which the Merced OE skipped certain employees more junior in seniority than those
served with Preliminary Notices of Layoff, and prevented those more senior respondents
from being able to bump into positions that appear to be assigned to more junior employees
in the upcoming school year.

16.

The respondents who have been served with Preliminary Notice of Layoff who

are seeking to bump into positions are Janette Alvarado, Laura Andrews, John Chavez,
Crandell Farmer, Melissa Medeiros, and Anna Miller. As noted above, Ms. Alvarado has
first year probationary status with the Merced OE, despite her long service. The remaining
five respondents are all permanent employees. The Merced OE skipped employees Mark
Pintor, Crystal Souza and Paul Sanchez. Of the three employees skipped, Mr. Pintor has first
year probationary status, and Ms. Souza and Mr. Sanchez have permanent status. The
Associate Superintendent testified that Mr. Sanchez has “special status.” She did not explain
what she meant by “special status.” None of the three skipped employees were served with
Preliminary or Precautionary Notices of Layoff. None of the other Merced OE employees
served with a Preliminary Notice of Layoff and an Accusation raised issues or challenged the
Merced OE action during this hearing.

17.

The Resolution, Sections 2-5, resolved, in pertinent part, as follows:

1 “Bumping” permits a senior certificated employee to displace a more junior
employee if that senior employee is “certificated and competent” to provide the service the
junior employee is being retained to provide. Education Code section 44955, subdivision
(b), Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 571. “Skipping” permits a
school district to “skip,” or retain a more junior employee over one more senior, under
certain conditions set forth in section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (d). Id.

5

[¶] … [¶]

That for the purposes of implementing this Resolution, a more senior

2.
employee is defined as “competent” for a reassignment into a position
currently held by a more junior employee pursuant to Education Code section
44955, subdivision (b), if the employee:

(A) currently possesses clear or preliminary credential(s) authorizing the
subject(s) to be taught in an alternative education program to which the
employee will be assigned at the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year, and

(B) has taught the subject(s) and taught in the alternative education program
to which he/she will be assigned at the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year
for at least one complete school year in the past five (5) school years, and

(C) has highly qualified teacher status under the No Child Left Behind Act
(NCLB) in the subject(s) he/she will be assigned to teach in the alternative
education program to which he/she will be assigned at the beginning of the
2012-2013 school year, and

(D) for an assignment in the Home School Charter School, the employee has
[a] single subject credential(s) such that he/she may serve as a subject matter
expert in the subject(s) to which he/she will be assigned at the beginning of the
2012-2013 school year, and

(E) for an assignment to a classroom teaching position in the 2012-2013
school year, the employee has taught in a classroom (not independent study or
small group) setting for at least one complete school year in the past five
school years, and

That due to the specific need of the County Office to retain teachers in

3.
its Home School Charter School who possess [a] single subject(s) credential
such that they may serve as subject matter experts in this alternative education
program, the Superintendent or designee is authorized to deviate from
terminating certificated employees in order of seniority (“skipping”) in
instances where the less senior employee possesses one or more single subject
credential(s) and the more senior employee does not possess such
credential(s).

That due to the specific need of the County Office to retain teachers in

4.
its Independent Study Program who possess authorization(s) (i.e. VPSS
Housse) such that they have “highly qualified teacher” status under the No
Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) in the broadest range of subject(s) which are
taught in this alternative education program, the Superintendent or designee is
authorized to deviate from terminating certificated employees in order of

6

seniority (“skipping”) in instances where the less senior employee possesses
more such authorizations and the more senior employee possesses fewer such
authorization(s).

That due to the specific need of the County Office to retain teachers in

5.
its Court and Community School program who possess [a] single subject
credential(s) or supplemental authorization such that they may serve as subject
matter experts in this alternative education program, the Superintendent or
designee is authorized to deviate from terminating certificated employees in
order of seniority (“skipping”) in instances where the less senior employee
possesses one or more single subject credential(s) and the more senior
employee does not possess such credential(s).

[¶] … [¶]

18.

Sections2-5 of the Resolution quoted above set forth the criteria by which the

Merced OE and the Associate Superintendent determined which junior employees the
Merced OE would “skip” in carrying out the reduction and or elimination of the particular
kinds of services set forth in the Resolution regarding the Home School Charter School,
Independent Study and the Court and Community School. It also determined which, and
under what circumstances, more senior employees of the Merced OE currently serving in
assignments in one of these three programs would be able to (or be prevented from )
exercising “bumping” rights against the junior employees the Merced OE had decided to
“skip” in one of those three programs.

19.

It was not disputed that the programs and services offered by the Merced OE
in the Home School Charter School, Independent Study, and Court and Community School
Programs, and the respondents serving in them, at issue in this matter, are all alternative
education services, within the meaning of Education Code section 44865.

OE PROGRAMS UNDER REVIEW-
COURT AND COMMUNITY SCHOOL (VALLEY CONTINUATION SCHOOL),
INDEPENDENT STUDY, AND
HOME SCHOOL CHARTER SCHOOL PROGRAMS

20.

The Merced OE operates the three programs that are at issue in this matter, the

Court and Community School, commonly referred to as the Valley Continuation School
(addressed in the Resolution, part 5, above), the Home School Charter School (Resolution,
part 3, above) and the Independent Study Program (Resolution, part 4, above). None of the
other PKS reductions or eliminations and respondents staffing them or receiving Preliminary
or Precautionary Notices of Layoff remained at issue in this matter.

7

VALLEY COURT AND CONTINUATION SCHOOL

21.

Valley Continuation School (Valley), formally known as the Court and

Continuation School, operates on three campuses throughout Merced County, with a main
campus in Merced, and branch campuses in Los Banos and Atwater. As the title implies, the
Merced OE provides continuation educational services at Valley through both a court-
ordered program and a standard continuation school program.

22.

The students receiving services at Valley through the court program are either
in or out of custody but under the supervision of the Merced County Juvenile Court system,
and remain subject to the Juvenile Court’s jurisdiction. Services at Valley in the court school
program are delivered to some of these juveniles in custody in the County juvenile detention
facility under the supervision of Sheriff’s Department officers (the Detention and
Rehabilitation Center Program, known as DRC) while others not in custody are served at a
Valley campus. Some of these out-of-custody juvenile probationers served in the Valley
DRC program wear ankle monitors, and some not, but all remain subject to the jurisdiction
of the Merced County Juvenile Court.

23.

The non-court based Valley Continuation School Program is provided

primarily on the Valley main campus in Merced, as well as at the branch campuses, to
problem students who generally have been expelled from another Merced County school
district providing a regular educational program, or have been suspended multiple times.
The students typically have serious behavioral and self-control problems as well as
substantial deficits in educational process and learning. Most are exceptionally resistant to
authority and are often violent and disruptive. Students served at Valley, whether in the
court or the regular continuation school program, are generally in the process of experiencing
their last chance at receiving anything resembling a classroom education.

24.

The student population at Valley, in both the court and continuation school

programs, is highly transitory, with some students staying only a few days or weeks. Often
students switch back and forth between the court and continuation school programs within
Valley itself. Based on evidence adduced from the testimony of some of the respondents, it
appears rather uncommon that any respondent providing services in the court or continuation
school programs has any given student in attendance from the beginning to the end of any
given school year.

25.

The Valley educational program, whether court or continuation school,

combines middle school and high school level classroom teaching services to this transitory
student population. Most of the educational services delivered to the students is remedial.
Certificated employees of the Merced OE serving in the Valley educational program,
whether court school or continuation school, must be able to teach all subjects to students,
similar to what is required of a multiple subject self-contained classroom teaching
assignment in a middle school, and additionally structure and restructure delivery of the
educational content to a constantly shifting landscape of students at varying grade levels
whose attendance in the class is constantly in flux. Respondents serving in this Merced OE

8

alternative education program at Valley, whether DRC or continuation school, are required to
provide flexible and adaptable educational services in attempting to meet the needs of a
highly transitory, troubled, often educationally challenged and disruptive student population.
The focal point of the Valley program is to assist students in obtaining a GED or high school
diploma or equivalency. The Valley educational program is not a college preparatory
program.

INDEPENDENT STUDY

26.

The Independent Study Program appears to be small and getting smaller in the

Merced OE. Respondents serving in the Independent Study Program meet with students
typically once per week, obtain and provide assignments, counsel students and monitor their
work product and progress. The evidence was not clear whether the Independent Study
Program involves students strictly in grades nine through 12, or also includes some middle
school students as well. What was clear was that Merced OE certificated employees
assigned to teach the Independent Study Program were required to teach all subjects to all
students and monitor their progress. The Merced OE Independent Study Program also
appears to be largely remedial and not college preparatory. Classroom teaching, as that term
is commonly understood, does not take place within the Independent Study Program.

HOME SCHOOL CHARTER SCHOOL

27.

The Home School Charter School Program has at least some students who are
potentially college-bound. As with most other details regarding the Merced OE’s programs
under review here, the evidence was vague regarding what percentage of the students
involved in the Home School Charter School Program are college-bound, and whether the
Home School Charter School Program is exclusively a grades nine through 12 program, or
whether the program admits and serves middle school students as well.

28.

The Home School Charter School Program is similar to in two senses to
Independent Study; first, both programs appear to be shrinking rapidly, and second, a
respondent assigned to serve in the Home School Charter School Program meets with
students generally once per week to monitor progress, provide and assess assignments,
answer questions and to counsel students. However, unlike the Independent Study Program,
there are occasionally group teaching programs offered, and most distinct, the parents or
guardians of students in the Home School Charter School Program tend to be actively
involved in the educational program with the student. Parents or guardians usually meet
regularly with the respondents providing the Home School Charter School services, and
actively participate in implementation of the educational services provided to enrolled
students. Again, aside from the occasional group activity, it did not appear that classroom
teaching as understood in the usual sense occurs within the Home School Charter School
Program, as most of the educational activity takes place within the student’s home.

9

LEGAL PROVISIONS GOVERNING ACTION

29.

Education Code section 44955 provides, in pertinent part, as follows:

(b) … [W]henever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or

discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year, … and
when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have become
necessary by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate the
services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the
school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section
while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and
competent to render.

[¶] … [¶]

[¶] … [¶]

(c)

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine the order of
termination solely on the basis of the needs of the district and the students
thereof.

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from

(d)
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the
following reasons:

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a

(1)
specific course or course of study… and that the certificated employee has
special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of
study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not
possess.

[¶] … [¶] (Italics added)

SECTION 44955 “CERTIFICATED AND COMPETENT” LANGUAGE GENERALLY

30.

A teacher’s seniority rights are limited, generally, by what he or she is

certificated and competent to teach and by the courses a district has chosen to offer. Subject
to these limitations, a teacher, generally, has a right to be terminated according to his or her
seniority. Seniority cannot be used to determine the order of termination of teachers who

10

have the same date of hire because they all have the same seniority. In this matter, there are
no such situations; all respondents and all employees skipped have different seniority dates.

31.

Section 44955 treats employees with the same seniority date very differently

than those with different seniority dates. Among teachers with different dates of hire, the
Legislature provided very specific standards that a school district or a County Office of
Education must respect. Where there are employees all with the same seniority dates, the
Legislature gave school districts a free hand to establish the order of termination according to
any criteria or preferences the governing board or the County Superintendent chose, so long
as the criteria are based on needs of the district and students.

32.

The Legislature also has provided a few justifications for terminating a senior
teacher while retaining a junior teacher.2 A school district or a County Office of Education
may not create additional justifications for terminating a senior teacher while retaining a
junior teacher. Creating additional justifications for terminating a senior teacher while
retaining a junior teacher would deprive the senior teacher of his or her seniority rights.

33.

The Legislature has provided two limitations on a permanent teacher’s right to

be retained over a probationary or junior teacher. First, the teacher must be certificated to
render the service the probationary or junior teacher is rendering. Second, the teacher must
be competent to render the service.3 A subsequent provision that limits the rights of both
permanent and probationary employees speaks in terms of the services their “qualifications”
entitle them to render.4

34.

A teacher either is or is not certificated to render a service. A school district

or a County Office of Education may not require a higher certification than the law requires.
Creating a super-certification requirement for a senior teacher who is certificated to render a
service would deprive the teacher of his or her seniority rights.

35.

The question of whether a teacher is competent to render a service has to do
with his or her specific training and experience as they relate to the duties of a position. In
determining whether a teacher is competent to render a service, a district or a County of
Office of Education may exercise its discretion. But a district or a County of Office of
Education may not, based on policy, or its preferences, not focused on competency,
determine that a senior teacher is not competent. To permit a district or a County of Office
of Education to base its decisions regarding a teacher’s competence to render a particular
service on policy or preferences that do not relate to his or her specific training and

2 Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d).

3 Id. at subdivision (b).

4 Id. at subdivision (c).

11

experience as they relate to the duties of any particular position, would deprive the teacher of
his or her seniority rights.

36.

As noted above, when there are teachers among whom there is no seniority
issue (employees have the same seniority date), a district or a County Office of Education
has a rather free hand in ranking such employees for termination, so long as the criteria are
based on needs of the district or office of education and its students. As among teachers with
different employment dates, however, the Legislature has specified the criteria that must be
the focus of decisions that prefer less senior employees over more senior employees, such as
those under review here. The criteria Legislature has specified are: (1) the requirement to
have a teacher who is certificated to render a service, (2) the requirement to have a teacher
who is competent to render a service, and (3) an identified and expressed need to have a
teacher who has special training and experience necessary to teach a course for which a
district demonstrates a specific need.

THE ROLE OF SENIORITY IN ECONOMIC LAY OFFS

37.

As set forth in section 44955, subdivision (b), a teacher with more seniority

typically has greater rights to retain employment than a junior teacher. That subdivision
prohibits a school district from terminating a permanent employee while retaining a
probationary employee to render a service the permanent employee is certificated and
competent to render. That subdivision also prohibits a school district from terminating a
permanent employee while retaining any other employee with less seniority to render a
service the permanent employee is certificated and competent to render. A district or a
County Office of Education has an affirmative obligation pursuant to Section 44955,
subdivision (b) to reassign senior teachers who are losing their jobs into positions held by
junior teachers if the senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to occupy such
positions.

38.

The displacement of a junior teacher by a senior teacher is known as

“bumping.” The seniority rule is not absolute, however, and a junior teacher with a needed
credential or skills may be retained even if a more senior teacher is terminated. In order to
depart from a seniority-based economic layoff by “skipping” a more junior employee,
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), requires the District to “demonstrate a specific need for
personnel to teach a specific course or course of study… and that the certificated employee
(to be skipped) has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of
study…which others with more seniority do not possess.”

COMPETENCY AND EXPERIENCE CRITERIA-BUMPING ISSUES

39.

As discussed above, section 44955 expresses a legislative intent to protect the

seniority rights of certificated employees within the context of economic layoffs. The second
paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), does not add to teachers’ seniority rights. It
does, however, make it clear that governing boards must make assignments in such a way as
to protect seniority rights. Employees must be retained to render any service their seniority

12

and qualifications entitle them to render. As noted above, it is reasonable to interpret the
term “qualifications” as meaning “certificated and competent.” Thus, if a senior teacher
whose regular assignment is being eliminated is certificated and competent to teach a junior
teacher’s courses, the district must reassign the senior teacher to render that service. This is
commonly referred to as bumping. The district must then either reassign or terminate the
junior employee.5

40.

Consequently, school districts may not erode the statute’s seniority protections

by imposing unreasonable competency requirements on the ability of senior employees to
bump into positions held by junior employees. Under the statute, a senior employee wishing
to bump a junior employee must establish both that he holds the appropriate certificate for
the position and that he is “competent.” Section 44955 does not define “competent”;
however, from its use of the disjunctive, it is apparent that the term “competent” means more
than merely holding the certificate necessary to teach a position held by a junior employee.

SKIPPING

41.

In Code section 44955, subdivision (d), the Legislature has established four
justifications for a school district’s or County Office of Education’s skipping over a junior
employee, not terminating him or her, but terminating a more senior employee. That is, the
Legislature has established four justifications for deviating from terminating employees
according to their seniority. Only the first one of those four applies here:

a.

A district or County Office of Education may skip over a junior teacher and

terminate a senior teacher if “the district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach
a specific course or course of study.”

42.

A school district or County Office of Education may not create justifications
for skipping. The only permissible justifications are the four listed in Code section 44955,
subdivision (d). Creation of other justifications for skipping would deprive teachers of their
seniority rights.

43.

Education Code section 44865 provides as follows:

A valid teaching credential issued by the State Board of Education or the
Commission for Teacher Preparation and Licensing, based on a Bachelor’s
degree, student teaching, and special fitness to perform, shall be deemed
qualifying for assignment as a teacher in the following assignments, provided

5 The second paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), speaks of the duty of a
school board to make assignments in such a manner that employees will be retained to render
any service “their seniority . . . [entitles] them to render.” (Italics added.) A teacher’s
entitlement to bump a junior teacher out of his or her assignment derives from the senior
teacher’s seniority. Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d
555,568.

13

that the assignment of a teacher to a position for which qualifications are
prescribed by this section shall be made only with the consent of the teacher:

(a)

Home teacher;

[¶] … [¶]

Continuation schools;

Alternative schools;

Opportunity schools;

Juvenile court schools;

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

County community schools; and

[¶] … [¶] (Italics added)

UNDISPUTED FACTS

44.

The Associate Superintendent acknowledged that the following facts are true:

a.

All programs offered by the Merced OE are alternative education services as

defined by the Education Code. Any person possessed of any credential is lawfully able
within the law of the State of California and its Education Code to teach in any of the three
programs at issue in this layoff proceeding;

b.

Each and every one of the respondents listed above being laid off are

possessed of an appropriate credential within the law of the State of California and its
Education Code to provide a service in any and all possible assignments within the scope of
any one of those three programs as those programs will be offered in the upcoming school
year;

c.

There are at least four means by which a certificated employee serving in an
alternative education (California law)/ “Special Situation in Education” (NCLB definition)
position, can attain Highly Qualified (HQ) teacher status in any given subject. These equally
acceptable options include:

Earning or possession of a single subject authorization in the particular

1.
subject for which HQ status is sought;

Passing the CSET examination in the subject for which HQ status is

2.
sought;

14

Attaining a Verification Process in Special Settings (VPSS)

3.
certification in the particular subject for which HQ status is sought; or finally

4.
Possessing a multiple subject credential (MS) receiving certification in
the subject matter for which HQ status is sought through the Housse program
(being “Houssed”).

d.

The Associate Superintendent and counsel for the Merced OE specifically

disclaimed that the Merced OE was making any Bledsoe6-based contention that any junior
certificated employee was being retained because that more junior employee was possessed
of specialized background, training and/or experience required to provide any particular
service that any more senior employee being laid off did not possess. The Associate
Superintendent and the Merced OE contend the Resolution competence and skipping criteria
addresses only employee competence defined exclusively by possession of certifications and
HQ authorizations, or experience serving in any assignment sought within the previous five
school years;

e.

Between certificated employees with different seniority dates, there exists no

State or federal legal requirement that requires a County Office of Education to retain an
employee possessed of a single subject authorization in a particular subject over an employee
possessed of HQ authorizations such as a VPSS certification, or a multiple subjects
credential who has been “Houssed” in that same subject;

f.

Between certificated employees with different seniority dates, there exists no

state or federal legal requirement that requires a County Office of Education to only retain an
employee if that employee has taught within a given assignment in one of the previous five
school years;

g.

Up to the date of service upon respondents of the Preliminary Notices of
Layoff, which included a copy of the Resolution provisions quoted above, none of the
respondents had ever been told by anyone in authority at the Merced OE that a single subject
authorization would be preferred over a VPSS certification, a CSET certification, or a MS
credential with a Housse certification in that same subject, or that one type of certification
was better or more valued by the Merced OE than any other. The Associate Superintendent
confirmed several times in her testimony that the Merced OE strongly encouraged and
provided compensation for all certificated employees to obtain one or more VPSS
certifications or to become Houssed in one or more subjects, but she agreed that never at any
time were any employees told that the Merced OE valued or preferred one certification over
another, or that a single subject authorization was to be preferred over any other subject
matter certification, nor was any employee ever told by anyone in authority at the Merced
OE that if the employee failed to attain at least one VPSS certification, single subject
credential, pass at least one CSET test, or become Houssed in at least one subject, that that

6 Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127 (Rehrg. Den

Jan. 12, 2009, Review den. Apr. 15, 2009).

15

employee would lose his or her position in favor of another less senior employee who did
have at least one such certification at the end of the 2011/2012 school year.

h.

When the Associate Superintendent used the word “competence” in her
testimony, she was referring exclusively to the definition of “competence” set forth in
Section 2 of Resolution 2012-05 quoted above, and as that definition is applied to identify
specific needs of the OE authorizing deviation from seniority and skipping in Sections 3-5 of
the Resolution.

i.

The Associate Superintendent acknowledged that the provisions of Resolution

2012-05, Sections two through five, quoted above, defining competence and authorizing
deviation from seniority for skipping based on claimed specific need, expresses the Merced
OE’s preferences for certain authorizations and certifications over others, or none, is the only
reason that respondents are not deemed by the Merced OE competent to bump junior
employees being retained to provide services in any one of the three alternative education
programs at issue in this matter.

None of the respondents and none of those employees being skipped have the

same seniority dates.

j.

k.

Resolution 2012–05 contains separate provisions that express the identical

competence definition and special needs preferences as set forth in sections two through five,
to be applied to employees with the same seniority date to break ties.

RATIONALE FOR RESOLUTION PREFERENCE PROVISIONS

45.

The Associate Superintendent explained that the Merced OE seeks to retain

teachers with “the most expertise in their subject matter areas.” Sections 2-5 of the
Resolution reflect the manner in which the Merced OE sought to carry out its preference for
retaining teachers with the most expertise in their subject matter areas. The Merced OE
skipped certain junior teachers, as well as prohibited the six more senior respondent teachers
named above from being able to bump, in accordance with this rationale. She testified:

We want to retain teachers with the most expertise in the subject matter area.
It’s all about the quality of education and our instructors … We believe that
retaining single subject credential holders is superior to retaining those holding
the VPSS certifications in the same subject We are striving to have the best
quality for our kids. … These are quality issues and we are trying to grow our
program. We are very concerned to retain more qualified persons.

46.

She continued along the same line when she was asked about why specific

pairs of employees, after identifying their credentials and certifications, were being skipped
or being barred from bumping:

16

VPSS won’t work, we have to have persons delivering these services
[referring to secondary education services specifically in the Home School
Charter School Program] who have single subject credentials … We call a
person with a single subject credential a subject matter expert. … We can get
away with saying or, in the VPSS is okay at secondary. [Although not clear,
presumably referring to services delivered at Valley Court and Continuation
School]. … We want the broadest range of credentials possible in
Independent Study because they have to teach in all areas of instruction. …
The Resolution is the reason the classroom teachers cannot bump into
Independent Study and the Home School Charter School positions [where
junior employees are being skipped] and the reasons why are listed in the
Resolution.

47.

The Merced OE failed to prove that it has the specific needs it claimed it has in

Sections 3-5 of the Resolution in the three major divisions of its educational activities
described in those sections. These three provisions of the Resolution purport to authorize
skipping of junior employees on the basis of claims of specific needs of the OE for certain
authorizations and certifications within each of those three divisions, in derogation of the
seniority of other certificated employees who possess less of those authorizations or
certifications than more junior employees. The evidence was neither persuasive nor credible
that the specific needs claimed exist in other than a general preference and global sense, as
the claims and evidence above in support of those claims was evaluated against the meaning
of “specific needs” as that term is used in Section 44955, subdivision (d). The three
provisions of the Resolution authorizing skipping junior employees was not proved to be
other than what it appears and what the Associate Superintendent said it was quoted above; a
general, global expression of the preference of the Merced OE to “upgrade” generally the
quality of education and educator in the OE. Regardless of the superficial merit of such an
undertaking in the three identified divisions of the OE, a general and program wide effort to
upgrade the quality of education and educator in an OE, all alternative education setting
where any credential holder is presumptively certificated and competent to teach in any
offering within the meaning of section 44955, subdivision (b), is not what Section 44955,
subdivision (d) exempts from the general preference of subdivision (b) for seniority. There
was no evidence offered regarding a specific need for a specific set of qualifications for a
specific class or offering proved, where there was evidence presented supporting a direct
correlation between the claimed special need and any specific class or offering, just general
expressions of desires and preferences. To permit what is sought by the skipping
authorizations of Sections 3-5 of the Resolution would deprive respondents of their seniority
rights without legal justification.

48.

All of the services offered by the Merced OE under review and in dispute in

this matter, as offered by the Merced OE, constitute “alternative education services,” within
the meaning of the provisions of section 44865 set forth above. Section 44865 expands the
meaning of the terms “credentialed and competent” in section 44955, subdivision (b) to
permit any properly credentialed employee, regardless of type of credential or presence or
absence of supplemental authorizations or certifications, to be considered competent to teach

17

in any of the alternative education settings identified in section 44865. Section 44865
provides that possession of “any credential” issued by the Commission on Teacher
Credentialing (CTC) qualifies any credential holder to teach in any of the Section 44865
enumerated situations, and that all of the assignments offered by the Merced OE identified in
this matter fall under the provisions of those enumerated services. Therefore, all of the
certificated employees serving in the Merced OE, including, but not limited to, respondents,
are presumptively “certificated and competent” to teach in any of the educational settings in
any of the three Merced OE programs under review in this matter within the meaning of
Section 44955, subdivision (b). In that all respondents are possessed of the minimum
credentialing requirements of section 44865, in that each of them has been issued a valid
teaching credential by the CTC, all respondents subject to this action are “certificated and
competent,” within the meaning of section 44955, subdivision (b), as the “certificated and
competent” requirement is modified for alternative education settings by Section 44865. The
Merced OE failed to prove any of the six respondents being laid off identified below was not
certificated and competent within the meaning of section 44955, subdivision (b).

THE SKIPPING AND BUMPING CHART

49.

The details of respondents being displaced by the retention of a junior

employee being skipped was assessed and evaluated in Exhibit 16, the Merced County Office
of Education 2012 Certificated Layoff Implementation Chart, also known as a bumping and
skipping chart. In this bumping and skipping chart, the Associate Superintendent attempted
to graphically display how the decisions were made to skip certain junior respondents and
retain them, while the six identified more senior respondents were prohibited from bumping
those or other certificated employees junior to themselves. Each of the individual
respondents, Farmer, Alvarado, Chavez, Andrews, Medeiros and Miller, are being laid off
despite the fact that there exists one or more certificated employee less senior than
themselves being retained to provide a service in one of the three programs identified above
in the upcoming school year. These more senior employees are being displaced by virtue of
a conscious decision made by the Merced OE, based upon the rationale set forth in the
Resolution, sections 3-5, to skip one or more employees with less seniority than those more
senior employees being laid off, as set forth above. The Resolution-based rationale
underlying the conscious decisions of the Merced OE to displace each of these six more
senior employees being laid off, to skip more junior employees, and to prevent any one of
those six to bump a more junior employee being retained, is based upon the Resolution-
expressed claims of specific need, discussed above, are actually expressions of general
preferences for certain types of authorizations, certifications and, in one instance, previous
experience within a set time frame. The net result is the Merced OE’s conclusion that these
six respondents are not competent to serve in the positions for which the junior employees
are being retained because the six identified respondents did not have enough of, or the right
type of authorizations and certifications and/or do not have the preferred amount of previous
experience.

18

SPECIFIC SKIPS

50.

According to the Implementation Chart, Ann Miller (93-July 7, 2006) is being

laid off because Crystal Souza (123-August 24, 2009) is being skipped. Melissa Medeiros
(71-August 23, 2004) is being laid off because Paul Sanchez (88- September 6, 2005) and
Bonita Wynn (85) are being skipped. The parties agreed Bonita Wynn is not relevant to this
analysis because she is possessed of a Special Education credential none of the others have,
and she will be reassigned accordingly. Janette Alvarado (47-October 23, 2000) and
Crandell Farmer (42-August 16, 2000) are each is being laid off because Mark Pintor (56-
January 1, 2007) is being skipped. Mr. Farmer is being bumped by a more senior employee
from his current assignment, and that is why the skip of Mr. Pintor becomes relevant. Laura
Andrews (64-January 21, 2004) is being laid off because Mr. Pintor is being skipped as well,
as she is also being bumped by another employee more senior to herself. As set forth above
and below, these skips unlawfully deprive these identified respondents employees of their
seniority rights, and cannot stand.

DENIAL OF BUMP

MILLER AND SOUZA

51. Mr. Chavez (49-June 22, 2001) is not being laid off because anyone is being

skipped. But he is being denied the opportunity to bump any one of several less senior
employees being retained because he is “not HQT to teach in H/S or in IHS.”

52.

Certificated employees Anna Miller (number 93 on the seniority list), and

Crystal Souza (number 123 on the seniority list) became an exemplar during the hearing for
comparison of a junior employee being skipped and a more senior respondent employee
being denied the opportunity to bump, due to application of the preferential prioritization of
authorizations and certifications criteria in the Resolution. Ms. Miller, although senior to
Ms. Souza, is being laid off due to the reduction in the Home School Charter School
Program. Because one position is being eliminated in the Home School Charter School
Program, only one of these two employees can be retained in the Home School Charter
School Program for the upcoming year. Both employees were evaluated regarding a possible
reassignment to a position at the Valley Court and Community School.

53.

It was not disputed that the position available at the Valley Court and

Community School is a traditional classroom teaching type setting, unlike the Home School
Charter School Program, which is far more like Independent Study and involves very little
traditional classroom teaching. Presumably there is only room in the Merced OE’s budget
for one such employee to move to the Valley Court and Community School.

54.

The comparison of these two employees produced several ironies. Ms. Miller
and Ms. Souza are currently teaching in the same program, performing the same services as
one another, during the current school year. The Associate Superintendent’s earlier
testimony in a different context vigorously articulated her concern that Merced OE be able

19

retain, preserve and augment the highest possible level educational services provided by its
employees and its pressing need to retain “subject matter experts,” which she equated to
possession of a single subject authorization. She pointed out that it was especially important
to retain subject matter experts in the Home School Charter School, the only program the
Merced OE offers that provides a college preparatory program, where one would presumably
want one’s highest quality, most credentialed and certified, and even presumably its most
experienced teachers. Yet the Merced OE has deemed Ms. Miller competent to perform
these presumably high-skill college preparatory teaching services in the Home School
Charter School program throughout each of her six continuous school years of service to the
Merced OE, up to the present.

55. Ms. Souza was hired three full school years after Ms. Miller, and thus has
considerably less experience teaching in the Home School Charter School Program. Ms.
Souza is possessed of two single subject authorizations that Ms. Miller does not have. But
Ms. Miller has four VPSS certifications, two in the same subject matter areas as Ms. Souza’s
single subject authorizations, and in two additional subject matter areas. The Associate
Superintendent and the Merced OE have, as of March 12, 2012, determined that Ms. Miller
is, “not competent to teach at Valley HS,” (where she would be presumably providing
instruction to largely remedial students rather than what she offers her college preparatory
students at the Home School Charter School), per the notation Exhibit 16, the Merced OE
Implementation Chart.

56.

The Associate Superintendent contended in her testimony that Ms. Miller is

less “competent” than Ms. Souza, based solely and exclusively upon the Resolution’s
preference for Ms. Souza’s single subject authorizations over Ms. Miller’s multiple VPSS
certifications, plus the fact that Ms. Miller has not taught at the Valley Court and
Continuation School in any of the last five years. The Associate Superintendent also testified
that one of the two Resolution-supported reasons that Ms. Souza is being skipped is that Ms.
Miller has no previous experience teaching at Valley Court and Continuation School in the
last five years. That particular point was not disputed, because in the previous six years of
her service to the Merced OE, Ms. Miller was teaching the presumably higher level of
education provided in the Home School Charter School program, where her multiple subject
credential and her four VPSS certifications in mathematics, English, science, and social
studies indisputably qualified her as legally competent for the purposes of both state and
federal law to perform those services. The Associate Superintendent also interjected twice
her concern that, “there would only be one employee with subject matter expertise remaining
to teach in the Home School Charter School program if Ms. Souza was laid off.” She
expressed her opinion that it would be “highly undesirable” for the Merced OE to have only
a single employee serving in the Home School Charter School program with such “subject
matter expertise,” which she equated to being possessed of at least one single subject
authorization. This testimony was curious in light of the fact that Ms. Souza was not served
with either a Preliminary or a Precautionary Notice, despite the fact that she is one of the
least senior employees of all employed by Merced OE (number 123 of 144), and is just this
school year finishing her third year of service with the Merced OE. Since Ms. Souza was not
given notice, she cannot be laid-off, regardless of the outcome of these proceedings, and

20

concerns about what the adverse effects the Merced OE might sustain if Ms. Souza was laid
off appear to have been substantially misplaced. As explained above, the Merced OE is not
permitted to create justifications for skipping. Therefore, whether the Merced OE
demonstrated a need for the purported authorizations and certifications as a basis for
skipping junior employees is irrelevant.

57. Ms. Miller expressed how upset and disappointed in the Merced OE she and

her colleagues were when they first read the preferential criteria provisions of the Resolution
quoted above that are at issue here. She testified, “We were never told these criteria would
be prioritized or would result in someone losing their job.” She testified, “We were never
told by anyone in a position of authority by at Merced OE that a single subject authorization
would ever become an issue, or that the OE would value it over a VPSS certification.” She
testified, “We were told by Merced OE Human Resources officials two years ago that VPSS,
CSET, single subject and being Houssed were all acceptable alternatives to meeting the
highly qualified criteria, and we all knew that these alternatives work in a special educational
setting, but we all knew that the Merced OE is all alternative education.”

MR. FARMER

58. Mr. Farmer is the most senior respondent facing layoff. He was hired in 2000

and occupies position number 42 on the Seniority List. He teaches the DRC in-custody
students at the County’s Juvenile Hall in Los Banos. He has served in this capacity for the
past 10 consecutive years. In his first two years working for the Merced OE, he served in the
Independent Study Program. Mr. Farmer confirmed on the record that he consents to serving
in and being reassigned to the Independent Study Program again, if need be.

59. Mr. Farmer processes into the County juvenile custodial facility in Los Banos

each school day and teaches all subjects, at the middle school program level, to juveniles
being held in custody. He typically has a student anywhere from three days to two months.
He observed that absolutely everything takes place in his classroom, including lunch, as the
juvenile detainees are not allowed to be outside the immediate supervisory presence of a
Deputy Sheriff custodial officer.

60. Mr. Farmer has a MS credential. He does not possess any VPSS or Housse

certifications. Mr. Farmer testified that he has always been assured that he is “fully
compliant” with all legal requirements to continue to teach in his assignment by his principal
at Valley Court and Continuation School. He took exception to the Associate
Superintendent’s comments in her testimony that “all” certificated Merced OE employees
were offered Merced OE paid time and tuition to obtain as many VPSS certifications as
necessary or desired. Mr. Farmer credibly and persuasively testified that he was never
offered an opportunity to obtain a VPSS certification or be Houssed by anyone affiliated with
or in a position of authority with the Merced OE, and was never informed of the need to do
so by anyone in a position of authority at the Merced OE before his receipt and review of the
March 12, 2012, Preliminary Notice with the Resolution attached.

21

61. Mr. Farmer expressed disappointment at the manner in which the layoff

process took place. He testified that when he received his Preliminary Notice, he assumed
that he received the notice because his program/position at the DRC was being eliminated.
He observed that he is the only person who has taught the DRC program in the Merced OE at
the Los Banos facility for the past three consecutive school years. Between the time of his
receipt of the Preliminary Notice and the evidentiary hearing, he discovered that his DRC
program will be offered again in the upcoming school year at Los Banos, and will be
assigned to a less senior person being retained.

62. Mr. Farmer is being bumped by a more senior employee, Mr. Ray. According
to the Implementation Chart, the Merced OE intends that Mr. Ray will continue to teach the
assignment he had in the current school year, teaching .67 FTE at Valley Court and
Continuation School at the middle school level, and .33 FTE of social science at Valley
Court and Continuation School at the high school level. Mr. Farmer is being laid off in favor
of skipping Mr. Pintor, who occupies position 56 and taught social sciences and foundational
math in the past. Mr. Pintor was on a “special assignment,” the nature of which was not
disclosed, for the past several years.

63.

Despite his high position on the seniority list, Mr. Pintor actually has no

seniority. Mr. Pintor has first year probationary seniority status. Mr. Pintor is currently
unassigned, as the special assignment has been eliminated due to the PKS reductions and
eliminations. Skipping Mr. Pintor, a probationary employee, in favor of laying off Mr.
Farmer, a permanent employee, presumptively violates the seniority requirements of section
44955, subdivision (b).

64.

The Implementation Chart states that Mr. Farmer is “not HQT to bump less

senior Valley H/S Teacher or into IHS.” If Mr. Pintor cannot be legally skipped in order to
lay off Mr. Farmer, whether and why Mr. Farmer is unable to bump anyone is irrelevant.

MS. ALVARADO

65.

Jeanette Alvarado acknowledged that she is properly classified as a first-year

probationary employee of the Merced OE. She is possessed of a multiple subjects credential
as well as an administrator’s authorization. She occupies seniority list position number 47,
and because she spent most of her career with the Merced OE as an administrator, even
though she was hired in 2000, she is still a first-year probationary employee. The current
school year was her first school year back in the classroom, teaching a combined FTE of
high school mathematics and middle school multiple subjects at Valley Court and
Continuation School. Although she is not possessed of permanent status such that she is in a
position to exercise any bumping rights against a permanent employee, nevertheless, as set
forth above, the Merced OE did not serve Preliminary or Precautionary Notice upon, and
thus intends to retain Mr. Pintor, who is also a probationary first-year employee, but with
indisputably less seniority than Ms. Alvarado. Between the two, Alvarado and Pintor, Ms.
Alvarado must be retained.

22

MR. CHAVEZ

66. Mr. Chavez is one of the most senior Merced OE certificated employees

facing layoff. Hired in 2001, he occupies position number 49 on the Seniority List. Mr.
Chavez teaches middle school classes at Valley Court and Continuation School. He is
possessed of a MS credential, but is not HQ in any subject and has not been Houssed. As set
forth above, no one is being skipped specifically in order to lay off Mr. Chavez. But he is
being denied the opportunity to bump numerous other junior employees due to the
competence criteria of the Resolution. The Implementation Chart, similar to that regarding
Mr. Farmer, denies Mr. Chavez the opportunity to bump any of these junior employees being
retained because Mr. Chavez is “not HQT to teach in H/S of IHS.” Mr. Chavez confirmed in
his testimony that he consents to teach in any assignment in the upcoming school year.

67.

As per the notation in the Implementation Chart and the Associate
Superintendent’s testimony, Mr. Chavez is being deemed not competent to bump into any of
the positions held by junior employees in the upcoming year due to the Resolution language
seeking to redefine section 44955, subdivision (b) “competence” by augmenting the
definition with the Merced OE’s preferences for certain additional authorizations and
certifications Mr. Chavez does not possess. As discussed above, the Resolution’s augmented
definition of competence may not be used to deprive Mr. Chavez of his seniority rights to
and preclude Mr. Chavez from bumping to take any of the positions that he might otherwise
be certificated and competent to teach. Pursuant to the definition of “competent” in an
alternative education setting set forth in section 44955, subdivision (b) relaxed by section
44865, Mr. Chavez is competent to teach in any one of the three programs under review in
this action. The Merced OE contention that Mr. Chavez cannot bump any junior employee
cannot be sustained.

MS. ANDREWS

68. Ms. Andrews is another rather senior permanent employee member of the
Merced OE staff facing layoff, occupying a position number 64 on the OE Seniority List,
being hired in 2004. She currently teaches PE, US History and World History at the Valley
Court and Continuation School. She is possessed of a single subject authorization in social
science, an administrative authorization, and, although not noted on the District Seniority list
or the Implementation Chart, she has a Master’s Degree in Education.

69.

According to the Implementation Chart, Ms. Andrews is being bumped by a

person senior to her, but she is being denied the opportunity to bump Mr. Pintor, who, as set
forth above, is a first-year probationary employee. In addition, Ms. Andrews testified
credibly and persuasively that she is being denied the opportunity to bump junior employees
who are being retained to serve in the Independent Study or the Home School Charter School
due to the recency of experience feature of the Resolution, which she contends arbitrarily
punishes employees who have faithfully served for lengthy periods of time in other
assignments, and unfairly limits employees with seniority and experience in other Merced
OE programs from bumping junior employees.

23

70. Ms. Andrews’ contentions have merit. As set forth above, Ms. Andrews may
not be laid off, as she is being skipped in favor of a probationary employee. In addition, the
same reasoning as set forth above regarding Mr. Chavez and the application of the
Resolution competence criteria to deprive Mr. Chavez of the opportunity to bump applies
equally to Ms. Andrews.

MS. MEDEIROS

71. Melissa Medeiros currently serves as a middle school teacher at Valley Court

and Continuation School. She has served Merced OE continuously since 2004 and is number
71 on the Seniority List. She is possessed of a MS credential with a VPSS certification in
English. She is being laid off in favor of Mr. Sanchez (number 87), who the Merced OE
skipped because of the Resolution competence criteria preference for his single subject
authorization in English. The Associate Superintendent testified in accord with the
Implementation Chart that Ms. Madeiros is precluded from bumping any one of several less
senior employees being retained because, “Others less senior have more VPSS’s.” The
Associate Superintendent testified twice that Mr. Sanchez has a “special situation,” but she
did not elaborate. As set forth above, Ms. Medeiros may not be laid off because the Merced
OE may not skip a less senior employee, Mr. Sanchez. The Merced OE also failed in its
burden to explain what the special situation is that might justify its skipping him.

REMAINING RESPONDENTS

72.

The other Merced OE employees not specifically identified above that
received either Preliminary or Precautionary Notices were not possessed of sufficient
seniority to permit them to bump any other employee, and it was not proved that any one of
them were skipped in favor of any more junior employee.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.
The Merced OE has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the
proposed reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services and the Preliminary Notices
of Layoff served on the respondents still contesting the layoff are factually and legally
appropriate.7 As set forth in detail in the Factual Findings and below, the Merced OE failed
to meet this burden with respect to certificated employees Anna Miller, Crandell Farmer,
Janette Alvarado, John Chavez, Lisa Andrews and Melissa Medeiros. Preliminary Notices of
Layoff served by the Merced OE on these six certificated employees shall be rescinded, and
Final Notices of Layoff may not be given to these employees for the upcoming school year,
as they have been improperly noticed for layoff and are deemed rehired for the upcoming
school year. With respect to all the other respondents receiving Preliminary Notice of

7 Education Code section 44944.

24

Layoff, the Merced OE successfully met its burden, those Preliminary Notices of Layoff
shall be sustained and Final Notices of Layoff may be served on these employees that their
services will not be required for the upcoming school year.

2.

The services the Merced OE seeks to eliminate in this matter are “particular

kinds of services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education
Code section 44955. The Superintendent’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular
kinds of services was not demonstrated to be arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper
exercise of discretion. The reduction/elimination of particular kinds of services identified in
Resolution 2012-05 shall be affirmed.

3.

Other than what is set forth below, the reduction or discontinuation of

particular kinds of services related to the welfare of the Merced OE and the students who
receive the services offered by the certificated employees of the Merced OE. The Merced
OE is facing a significant projected deficit, for the upcoming school year and for the two
school years following. State law prohibits the Merced OE from operating in a continuous
state of deficit and the Merced OE is legally required to make reductions and eliminations of
services necessary to bring its budgets into balance. The reduction in particular kinds of
services proposed is necessary to bring the Merced OE’s operating budget out of deficit in
the upcoming school year and forward.

4.

The provisions of Resolution 2010-05, Sections 2-5, inclusive, quoted in the

Factual Findings above, impermissibly encroach upon the seniority rights of the six
respondents, Farmer, Alvarado, Chavez, Andrews, Medeiros and Miller, and thus violate
section 44955, subdivision (b). Section 2 of the Resolution unlawfully attempts to expand
and enlarge the Section 44955, subdivision (b)’s statutory “certificated and competent”
language with the Merced OE’s own particular preferences in an effort to alter the general
seniority rule. The Merced OE is perfectly at liberty to exercise its discretion to express its
preferences in this matter with respect to employees with the same seniority date. All of the
respondents in this matter have different seniority dates.

5.

As set forth above in the Factual Findings in detail, the Merced OE failed to

prove the claimed specific needs supporting Sections 3-5 of the Resolution. The claimed
specific needs fail to support the Merced OE’s skipping of certain junior employees in
derogation of the seniority rights of respondents Farmer, Alvarado, Andrews, Medeiros and
Miller and the Merced OE’s proposed skips of certain junior employees are legally invalid.
The same criteria are invalid as a basis to deny Mr. Chavez an opportunity to bump into any
one of several positions to be filled in the upcoming school year by an employee junior to
himself. The junior employees the Merced OE seeks to skip or prevent Mr. Chavez from
bumping are being retained to perform services that the six more senior respondent
employees are certificated and competent to provide within the meaning of section 44955,
subdivision (b), read together with section 44865. Application of the Resolution’s Section 2
redefinition of competence, and Section 3-5’s claims of specific needs authorizing skipping
junior employees resulted in the issuance of Preliminary Notices of Layoff to respondents
Crandell Farmer, Jeanette Alvarado, John Chavez, Laura Andrews, Melissa Madeiros or

25

Anna Miller. As a result, the Preliminary Notices of Layoff issued to those employees are
invalid and must be rescinded.

6.

Legal cause exists pursuant to Education Code section 44949 and 44955 for

the Merced County Office of Education to reduce or discontinue 18.69 FTE of particular
kinds of services, as set forth in the Merced OE’s Resolution 2012-05, less the rescission of
4.50 FTE of the discontinuance action that took place following the service of Preliminary
Notices of Layoffs and the adoption of the Resolution. The cause for the reduction or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services relates solely to the welfare of the schools and
the pupils thereof.

7.

As set forth above in the Legal Conclusions, legal cause does not exist to
sustain the Accusations against Crandell Farmer, Jeanette Marie Alvarado, John Joseph
Chavez, Laura Jean Andrews, Melissa Marie Madeiros, and Anna Miller. Preliminary
Notices of Layoff issued to these enumerated employees cannot be sustained, and must be
rescinded. Each of these enumerated employees are deemed rehired for the upcoming school
year.

8.

In all other respects, with all other respondents upon whom Preliminary

Notices of Layoff and Accusations were served, legal cause exists to sustain the Accusations
against each of the remaining unenumerated respondents, and Final Notice may be given of
layoff to these respondents. The County Superintendent may give those remaining
respondents and only those remaining respondents, Final Notice that their services will not
be required by the Merced OE in the upcoming school year, in inverse order of seniority.

The Accusations against respondents Crandell Farmer, Jeanette Marie Alvarado, John

Joseph Chavez, Laura Jean Andrews, Melissa Marie Madeiros, and Anna Miller, are
DISMISSED. Preliminary Notices of Layoff issued to each of these named respondents are
RESCINDED, and Final Notice of Layoff may not be given to any of these respondents.

With respect to all other respondents, the Accusations are SUSTAINED.

The Merced County Office of Education action to reduce or eliminate 18.69 FTE of

particular kinds of services for the 2012-2013 school year is AFFIRMED.

ORDER

26

Final Notice may be given only to respondents against whom Accusations were

sustained, by the Merced Office of Education that their services will not be required for the
upcoming school year. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: May 03, 2012

_____________________________
STEPHEN J. SMITH
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

27

