BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
CHARTER OAK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusations Against:

OAH No. 2012030366

ELIZABETH ALVA, and other named
certificated employees,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Michael A. Scarlett, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings,

State of California, heard this matter on April 25, 2012, in Covina, California.

Margaret A. Chidester, Attorney at Law, represented Terry Stanfill, ED.D., Assistant

Superintendent, Human Resources, Charter Oak Unified School District (District).

Michael R. Feinberg, Attorney at Law, represented the following 11 certificated

employees of the District: Teddi Breaux, Virginia DeAnda, Mary Fabela, Heather Lehigh,
Victoria Raus, Patricia Santiago, Amy Scogin, Carol Sepulveda, Gregory Solis, Stacy
Stirrett, and Gail Troncoso (Respondents), who were all present at the hearing. Respondent
Elizabeth Alva was not represented by counsel and did not appear at the hearing. Elizabeth
Smith, President of the Charter Oaks Educators Association and Phyllis Peters, Staff
Representative, California Teacher Association, were also present at the hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing. On April 26, 2012,
pursuant to an unopposed request at hearing by Respondents, Respondents submitted a copy of
the “The Administrator’s Assignment Manual, Appendix 1 (“Subjects Within the Single
Subjects Area”), First Edition: March 1988, Eighth Revision: September 2007, published by the
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. The document was marked as Respondents’
“Exhibit A” and admitted into evidence. The matter was submitted for decision at that time.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

3.

Terry Stanfill, ED.D., Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, of the

District filed the Accusations in his official capacity.

Respondents at all times relevant were certificated District employees.

On March 1, 2012, the Governing Board of the District (Governing Board),

following the recommendation of the District’s Superintendent, adopted Resolution Number
05-11-12 (Resolution), deciding to reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds of services
(PKS) at the close of the 2011-2012 school year. Pursuant to Education Code1 sections
44949 and 44955, the following particular kinds of services were recommended to be
reduced or discontinued:

Service

FTE2 Reduction

(1.1) K-6 Grade Classroom Instruction
(1.2) K-6 Grade Oak Knoll Virtual Academy Teacher
(1.3)
(1.4)
(1.5) Alternative Ed. Social Science Teacher (Arrow/Bridges)

7-8 Grade English Teacher
9-12 English Grade Teacher

Total

Total

(1.6) Elementary Intervention Positions

6.4
.40
1.0
1.0
1.0

4.0

9.8(FTEs)

4.0(FTEs)

4.

Pursuant to the Governing Board’s Resolution, the Superintendent, or his

designee, was directed to serve notices of termination in accordance with sections 44955 and
44949 to certificated employees whose rights are, or may be affected by the reduction or
discontinuance of the particular kinds of services specified in the Resolution. Assistant
Superintendent Stanfill, on behalf of the Superintendent and District, complied with the
directive. On or before March 15, 2012, Respondents, and nine other certificated permanent
and probationary employees, were given written notice pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955
that their services would not be required for the following school year.

5.

On March 2, 2012, March 5, 2012, and March 14, 2012, the District served upon

21 certificated employees, including Respondents, a written “preliminary” notice that their

1 All further statutory references shall be to the Education Code unless otherwise

specified.

2 Full-time equivalent position.

2

services may not be required for the 2012-2013 school year. In addition to Respondents,
“preliminary” notices were served on the following certificated employees: Margaret Bailey,
Stella Guzman, Luiza Kartouch, Josephine Oliva, Kevin Thomas, Angela Capone, Tami
Chavez, Roberta Koval, and Tammy Peters. Each written notice set forth the reasons for the
recommendation not to reemploy them, including the Governing Board’s decision to reduce
and/or discontinue the particular kinds of services identified in Factual Finding 3.

6.

Respondents filed timely requests for hearing, with the exception of

Respondent Heather Lehigh.3 The District stipulated at hearing that although Respondent
Lehigh’s request for hearing was untimely, the District did not object to her standing to
participate in the lay-off hearing. On or about March 14, 2012, the District filed and
thereafter served the Accusation Packets on Respondents.4 Respondents filed timely notices
of defense to determine whether cause exists for the District not to reemploy them for the
2012-2013 school year.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

7.

8.

The services identified the in Resolution, Factual Finding 3, are particular kinds

of services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955. The
Governing Board’s decision to reduce these services will not result in a reduction of services
below the levels mandated by state and federal law.

9.

The Governing Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth

in Factual Finding 3 primarily because of the budget crisis facing the State of California,
declining enrollments, and the economic uncertainty as a result of these factors, and the need for
the Governing Board to insure the solvency of the District for the upcoming fiscal and school
year. Respondents argued that District’s stated reason for reductions, i.e., budget cuts and
declining enrollments, did not justify the proposed reductions in the particular kinds of

3 Margaret Bailey, Stella Guzman, Luiza Kartouch, Josephine Oliva, Kevin Thomas,

Angela Capone, Tami Chavez, Roberta Koval, and Tammy Peters did not submit requests for
hearing, and thus are not Respondents in this hearing.

4 Respondents contend that because Assistant Superintendent Stanfill did not person-
ally place the Accusation Packets in the mail, as declared in the Declaration of Services, the
service and notice of the Accusations against all Respondents were defective. Education
Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), provides in relevant part that “[n]onsubstantive pro-
cedural errors committed by the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.” Even though Assistant Superintendent
Stanfill did not personally place the Accusation Packets in the mail, he testified that he su-
pervised the preparation of each Accusation Packet, verified the content of the packets, in-
structed a staff member to place the packets in the mail, and confirmed that each packet was
in fact mailed. The evidence established that each Respondent did in fact receive an Accusa-
tion Packet, and thus, no prejudice accrued to any Respondents in this case. Accordingly,
Respondents’ challenge to the service of the Accusation Packets is not persuasive.

3

services because those reductions were so minimal that they would not significantly impact
the District’s budget or solvency. However, Respondents presented insufficient evidence on
this point. Moreover, the decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a
matter reserved to the District’s discretion. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower
Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) A school district has wide discretion in
setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was so unreasonable and
arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion. (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena
Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 318, 322.) The District’s decision to reduce the
particular kinds of services in Factual Finding 3 is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a
proper exercise of the District’s discretion.

10.

The reduction of services set forth in Factual Finding 3 is related to the welfare

of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of
certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board.

11.

The District issued “preliminary” notices to 21 certificated permanent and

probationary employees, even though the Governing Board’s Resolution authorized only 13.8
FTEs to be reduced or discontinued. Assistant Superintendent Stanfill testified that the “over-
noticing” was done as a precaution in the event its tie-breaking criteria or order of layoff was
found to be defective at hearing. It over-noticed employees to account for corrections of
potential errors in its seniority list. At hearing the District identified four Respondents, Gail
Troncoso, Patricia Santiago, Teddi Breaux, and Carol Sepulveda, that it was not seeking to
layoff, even though preliminary notices had been served on these Respondents. The District did
not offer evidence to support laying off these Respondents. Accordingly, the Accusations
against Gail Troncoso, Patricia Santiago, Teddi Breaux, and Carol Sepulveda are dismissed.

12.

In determining the number of layoff notices to issue, the District properly

considered all positively assured attrition, including all known resignations and retirements at
the end of the school year. However, subsequent to the Governing Board authorizing
Resolution No. 05-11-12, the District became aware that Kathryn Reynolds would be retiring
prior to the 2012-2013 school year, which created an additional position. On March 2, 2012,
the District notified Elizabeth Diaz that she was being reassigned from an administrative
position to a classroom teaching position for the 2012-2013 school year. The retirement of
Reynolds and the reassignment of Diaz allowed the District to exclude from layoff the
Alternative Ed. Social Science Teacher 1.0 FTE position for the 2012-2013 school year. None
of the Respondents asserted that they were entitled to this position or possess more seniority
than Diaz. Therefore, the District appropriately considered attrition in implementing the layoff
in this matter.

13.

The District maintains a Seniority List (Exhibit 2) containing employees’
seniority dates, current assignments and locations, credentials, and authorizations.5 The

5 At hearing, the parties stipulated that the Seniority List should be amended to reflect

that the “seniority date” or date of first paid service rendered for Teddi Breaux would be

4

District used the Seniority List to develop a proposed order of layoff of the least senior
employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced. The District then
determined whether the least senior employees held other credentials entitling them to
displace or “bump” other employees. In determining who would be laid off for each kind of
service reduced the District counted the number of reductions not covered by known
vacancies, and determined who must be laid off in inverse order of seniority. Respondents
did not disagree with the accuracy of the list.

14.

Pursuant to Resolution No. 05-11-12 (Exhibit A to the resolution), the

Governing Board sought to exempt or skip “certificated personnel who possess
administrative credentials, who are currently assigned to administrative positions, and who
will be assigned to administrative positions for the 2012-2013 school year.” Respondents did
not challenge the skipping criteria or its application to exempt certain administrative
employees from the layoff.

15.

The Governing Board’s Resolution No. 05-11-12 (Exhibit “B”) established tie-

breaking criteria to determine relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered
paid service on the same date. The validity or application of the tie-breaking process was not
challenged at hearing and thus is not at issue in this case.

Specific Challenge to Layoff

16.

The only specific teacher challenge to the Resolution raised at hearing related

to Respondent Victorias Raus. Ms. Raus is a permanent employee with a seniority date of
August 27, 2008. The seniority list indicates that Ms. Raus teaches English and Yearbook.
The Governing Board’s Resolution authorized the reduction or discontinuance of a “9-12
Grade English Teacher 1.0 FTE” position. Ms. Raus held this position in the prior school
year. At hearing Assistant Superintendent Stanfill testified that although the Resolution
indicated a 1.0 FTE 9-12 Grade English Teacher position, in fact, the District was proposing
to reduce or discontinue a position filled by Victoria Raus in which she performed .80 FTE
as an English teacher and .20 FTE in a Yearbook class. Ms. Raus holds a single subject
credential in English and a clear multiple subject credential. Ms. Raus is the most junior
certificated employee with an English single subject credential. She is subject to layoff, due
to the 1.0 FTE reduction in 9-12 Grade English teaching services. However, because
Resolution No. 05-11-12 simply references “9-12 Grade English Teacher 1.0 FTE,” and
makes no reference to the .20 FTE for the Yearbook class, Ms. Raus cannot be laid off from
the .20 FTE for the Yearbook class. Yearbook is not a PKS identified in the Resolution.

17.

There is no certificated employee more senior to Ms. Raus that is eligible to

“bump” her from the .20 FTE Yearbook position. The only Respondent discussed at hearing
who might have been more senior than Ms. Raus, Elizabeth Alva, does not hold a single
subject credential that would qualify her to teach Yearbook. Assistant Superintendent

changed from September 1, 2004, to August 30, 2004. This change in seniority date did not
impact the proposed order of layoff in this proceeding.

5

Stanfill testified that Yearbook was a departmentalized subject which required a single
subject credential. This testimony was supported by the California Commission on Teacher
Credentialing (CTC), credential certificate for Elizabeth Alva which indicated that Ms.
Alva’s multiple subject credential authorized her to “teach all subjects in self-contained
classes.” Additionally, CTC’s Administrator’s Assignment Manual (Exhibit “A”) specifies
that under California Code of Regulations, Title 5, section 80005, subdivision (a),
“Yearbook” falls within the single subject service area of English and thus is a
departmentalized subject that requires a single subject credential. (See also Cal. Code of
Regs., tit. 5, § 80005, subdivisions (a)(4) and (a)(14).) The District does not dispute either
the determination that “Yearbook” was not a PKS identified in Resolution No. 05-11-12 or
that it is a departmentalized subject requiring a single subject teaching credential. Elizabeth
Alva dose not possess the credential required to bump into the .20 FTE Yearbook
assignment. Because there are no other Respondents more senior to Ms. Raus who is
certificated and competent to bump into the Yearbook position, Ms. Raus must be retained to
teach the .20 FTE Yearbook assignment for the 2012-2013 school year.

18.

According to the District’s proposed layoff list, no junior employee will be
retained to render a service which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to
render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code

sections 44949 and 44955, by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 7.

The services listed in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services within the

meaning of Education Code section 44955 and applicable case law, by reason of Factual
Findings 8 through 10.

3.

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction
of the particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 3, because it relates solely to the
welfare of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of Factual Findings 8 through 10.

4.

By reason of Factual Findings 1 through 18, and Legal Conclusions 1 through 3,

cause exists to terminate the services of the following Respondents: Elizabeth Alva, Virginia
DeAnda, Mary Fabela, Heather Lehigh, Victoria Raus (.80 FTE English Teacher), Amy
Scogin, Gregory Solis, and Stacy Stirrett.

5.

By reason of Factual Findings 16 and 17, cause exists to retain the services of

Respondent Victoria Raus for the .20 FTE Yearbook assignment only.

6

ORDER

1.

The Accusations against Elizabeth Alva, Virginia DeAnda, Mary Fabela,

Heather Lehigh, Victoria Raus (.80 FTE English Teacher only), Amy Scogin, Gregory Solis
and Stacy Stirrett are sustained, and the District may notify them that their services will not be
needed during the 2012-2013 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

2.

3.

The Accusations against Respondents Teddi Breaux, Patricia Santiago, Carol

Sepulveda, and Gail Troncoso are dismissed. The Accusation against Victoria Raus as to the
.20 FTE Yearbook assignment is also dismissed. Ms. Raus must be retained to teach the .20
FTE Yearbook assignment for the 2012-2013 school year.

Dated: May 2, 2012

________________________________
MICHAEL A. SCARLETT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

