BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
NEVADA CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
OF THE NEVADA CITY SCHOOL
DISTRICT,

Respondents.

Case No. 2012030033

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, State

of California, heard this matter on April 10, 2012, in Nevada City, California.

Attorney Allen R. Vinson represented the Nevada City School District (District).

Superintendent Roxanne Brown Gilpatric also attended the hearing on behalf of the District.

Attorney Andrea Price represented respondents Julie Blair, Monica Daugherty,

Kimberly Ewing, Laurie Kempenaar, Vanessa Lackey, Andrea Marks, Jacqueline Nielsen,
Tiffany Rae-Looney, Antonina Shumaker, Jennifer Tayler, Kimberly Weber (Silvera), and
Sharon Whitlock.

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for

decision on April 10, 2012.

SUMMARY

The Board of Trustees of the Nevada City School District has determined that it is

necessary to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services at the end of the 2011-2012
school year and therefore seeks to reduce or eliminate 20.30 full-time equivalent (FTE)
certificated positions. Respondents have been given preliminary notice that their services
will be reduced or eliminated at the end of the 2011-2012 school year. As discussed below,
cause exists for the Board of Trustees to reduce or eliminate 20.30 FTE certificated positions.
But the District incorrectly determined Angela Marks’ seniority date. The District shall
determine whether Ms. Marks has any right to bump a more junior employee based on her
correct seniority date of August 5, 2002. The District also improperly allowed Joe Limov to
“bump” into Jennifer Tayler’s position teaching science because he is not “competent” to

perform such services. Preliminary layoff notices were properly issued to all other
respondents, and the District may give those respondents notice that their services will be
reduced or will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year. Notice shall be given in
inverse order of seniority.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Roxanne Brown Gilpatric is the superintendent of the District. She made and

filed the Accusation in her official capacity.

2.

The parties stipulated that all respondents: 1) were properly and timely served
with a preliminary layoff notice; 2) properly and timely requested an administrative hearing;
3) were properly and timely served with the Accusation, Statement to Respondent, form
Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing, and relevant statutes; and 4) properly and timely filed
a Notice of Defense.1

3.

Each respondent is a certificated employee of the District.

4.

On February 14, 2012, at a regular meeting, the District’s Board of Trustees
was given notice of Superintendent Gilpatric’s recommendation that certificated employees
holding 17.00 FTE positions be given notice that their services would be reduced or not
required for the next school year and stating the reasons for that recommendation.

5.

On February 14, 2012, the District’s Board of Trustees determined that it was
necessary to reduce or eliminate programs and services and therefore necessary to reduce or
eliminate teaching and other certificated services affecting employment of 17.00 FTE
positions. The Board of Trustees adopted Resolution No. 1112-20 providing for the
reduction or elimination of the following particular kinds of services:

Services

Administration Positions

a.

Principal

FTE

1.50

1 The District also served preliminary layoff notices on certificated employees Ericka

Clawson, Renee Creamer, Steve Davies, Brian Ellis, Timothy Floyd, Tracy Green, Evie
Pardini, and Richard Thomas. However, no evidence of the date of service of those notices
was introduced, and no evidence that any of those people requested a hearing to challenge his
or her notice was introduced. None of those employees appeared at the hearing in an attempt
to assert his or her rights under Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a). Therefore,
this Proposed Decision does not apply to any of those certificated employees and no factual
findings or legal conclusions are made with regard to the propriety of any of their
preliminary layoff notices.

2

Certificated Positions

Counseling
Science
Special Education
K-6 Elementary
7-8 Middle School

b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
Total FTE

.50
1.00
1.00
11.00
2.00
17.00

6.

On February 14, 2012, the Board of Trustees also adopted the following “tie-
breaking” criteria for determining the relative seniority of two or more certified employees
who share the same first date of paid service with the District:

A.

B.

C.

D.

E.

F.

G.

Preliminary vs. Clear/Life Credentials
Rating: +1 per preliminary, +2 per clear/life credential
No Child Left Behind compliant
Rating: +1 per Highly Qualified area
Credentials and experience to teach in teacher shortage
areas (e.g., bilingual, math, science, and physical
education)
Rating: +1 per credential, +1 per year of experience
Number of Certifications/Authorizations to teach English
Language Learners
Rating: +1 SDAIE/SB 1969, +2 LDS, +3 CLAD, +3
359, +4 BCLAD
Number of Supplementary authorizations
Rating: +1 per supplementary authorization
Number of teaching and/or special service credentials
Rating: +1 per credential

Final Tie-Breaking Procedure: In the event that certificated
employees who first rendered paid service to this District on the
same date have equal qualifications based on application of the
above criteria[,] the District will the[n] break ties based on:

The number of extra duty assignments (e.g., coaching,
cheerleading, decathlon, journalism, yearbook, etc.) that
each certificated employee is assigned within the current
year.

7.

Sometime after February 14, 2012, but before March 13, 2012, the District

hired two part-time employees to support students in math and reading. Superintendent
Gilpatric determined that those employees needed to be laid off and concluded that the
District’s finances are worse than she previously thought. Therefore, on March 13, 2012, at
a regular meeting, the District’s Board of Trustees was given notice of Superintendent

3

Gilpatric’s recommendation that certificated employees holding 20.30 FTE positions be
given notice that their services would be reduced or not required for the next school year and
stating the reasons for that recommendation.

8.

On March 13, 2012, the Board of Trustees determined that it was necessary to

reduce or eliminate programs and services and therefore necessary to reduce or eliminate
teaching and other certificated services affecting employment of 20.30 FTE positions. The
Board of Trustees adopted Resolution No. 1112-20-A providing for the reduction or
elimination of the following particular kinds of services:

Services

Administration Positions

a.

Principal

Certificated Positions

Counseling
Science
Reading Specialist
Math Instructor
Special Education
K-6 Elementary
7-8 Middle School

b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
Total FTE

FTE

1.50

.50
1.00
.407
.8929

2.00
12.00
2.00
20.302

9.

In determining the extent by which to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of

services, the Board of Trustees considered all positively assured attrition up to and including
the date of the resolution. The total number of positions to be reduced or eliminated under
the resolution is 20.30 FTE certificated positions. The Board of Trustees determined that the
services of a corresponding number of certificated employees shall be terminated at the close
of the current 2011-2012 school year.

10.

For purposes of making assignments and reassignments of certificated

employees in order for the District to meet its obligations under Education Code section
44955, the resolution provided that a certificated employee is deemed “competent” to
perform a particular certificated service if he/she:

a) has preliminary clear, professional clear, lifetime, full
credential or supplementary authorization for the subject matter
in which he/she intends to displace another employee; and b)

2 Resolution No. 1112-20-A incorporates the 17.0 FTE specified in Resolution No.

1112-20.

4

has at least one complete school year actual teaching experience
in the assignment within the past 5 years.

11.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), the Board of

Trustees determined that there is a specific need in the District for personnel to teach specific
courses of study or provide pupil personnel or health services and to retain certificated
employees possessing the special training and experience needed to teach such courses of
study or provide such services that other employees with greater seniority do not possess.
The specific needs of the District are within the following courses of study:

1.
2.
3.
4.

Special education classes
Physical education classes
Technology classes
Bike shop classes

The District’s Seniority List

12.

The District maintains a seniority list that contains the names of all of its

certificated employees and each of their ranking order numbers, which is determined solely
from the employee’s date of fist paid service with the District. The list also includes the
following information about each employee: 1) his or her date of first paid service with the
District; 2) the type of advance degree, if any, he or she has; 4) the number of usable
credentials he or she has; 5) the type, if any, of English Learner certification he or she has; 6)
the type of credential(s) he or she has and their expiration dates; and 7) the number of years
he or she has taught in the District, in public schools elsewhere in California and other states,
and in private schools.

13.

The seniority list is provided to each certificated employee every year on

January 1 for his or her review for accuracy and completeness. Each employee has through
February 15 of that year to notify the District of any inaccurate or missing information.
Superintendent Gilpatric explained that a deadline for providing such information is
necessary because the list is relied upon in determining who will be sent a preliminary layoff
notice. The District reached an agreement with its employees to update the seniority list on
an annual basis, rather than continuously, so all employees will know there is a specific time
period during which the District will publish the list and they may update their information.
However, Superintendent Gilpatric conceded that in reality updates tend to be made on a
continuous basis.

The District’s Tie-Breaking Criteria

14.

As discussed above in Factual Finding 6, the Board of Trustees adopted

criteria for determining the relative seniority between two or more certificated employees
who share the same date of first paid service with the District. Prior to the 2011-2012 school
year, one tie-breaking criterion the District used was each employee’s years of service with
other districts. Based on recent court cases involving the use of such criterion, however,

5

Superintendent Gilpatric recommended that it be eliminated as a tie-breaking criterion, and
the Board of Trustees accepted her recommendation. The Board of trustees acted within its
discretion by eliminating such criterion.

The District’s Competency Standard for Employee Bumping

15.

As previously discussed in Factual Finding 10, the Board of Trustees adopted

a standard for determining whether a certificated employee whose service is being reduced or
eliminated is “competent” to perform the certificated service currently being performed by a
junior employee. Superintendent Gilpatric explained that this is the first time the Board of
Trustees adopted a competency standard for evaluating a certificated employee’s bumping
rights. When she prepared the list of certificated employees whom she recommended to the
Board of Trustees be given preliminary layoff notices, she looked solely at each employee’s
seniority date and credentials. After the Board of Trustees adopted the competency standard
and she applied that standard, she discovered that two senior employees were not
“competent” to perform the services currently being performed by junior employees and
would therefore be laid off. Therefore, the District indicated its intention to “waive” the
competency standard adopted by its Board of Trustees.

The evidence is not clear as to who made the decision to waive the competency

standard. To the extent that the Board of Trustees made that decision, such decision is not
controlling because there is no evidence that the Board of Trustees adopted a resolution
rescinding the competency standard or authorizing Superintendent Gilpatric to waive the
standard. To the extent that it was Superintendent Gilpatric or another District employee’s
decision, such person is powerless to waive the competency standard. (See, Ed. Code, §
35010, subd. (a) [every school district is governed by a board of education or board of
trustees].) Therefore, the competency standard adopted by the Board of Trustees applies to
any instance where a senior certificated employee asserts his or her bumping rights.

Challenges to Individual Preliminary Layoff Notices

16. While each respondent properly and timely requested an administrative
hearing to contest the merits of her preliminary layoff notice as discussed in Factual Finding
2, only six of them actually contested their notice at the hearing.

A.

Julie Blair – Challenge to Tie-Breaking Criteria

17.

Julie Blair is an elementary school teacher at Deer Creek School, the District’s
only traditional elementary school.3 According to the District’s seniority list, she shares the
same date of first paid service with fellow teachers Andrea Marks and Vanessa Lackey –

3 The District also includes Nevada City Charter School, a charter school that serves

the District’s kindergarten through eighth grade students who are being home schooled.

6

August 20, 2002.4 After applying the District’s tie-breaking criteria, the relative seniority for
those three teachers is that Mss. Marks and Lackey are equal to one another in seniority but
are senior to Ms. Blair.

18. Ms. Blair challenges the tie-breaking criteria outlined in Factual Finding 6 as

being arbitrary and vague because there is no “exhaustive list” of all of the criteria. Her
challenge is made in response to Superintendent Gilpatric’s explanation that the list of
“Teacher shortage areas” in Criteria C is intended to provide only examples of such areas
rather than be an exhaustive list of them. She said the same about the examples of “extra
duty assignments” in Criteria G. Ms. Blair’s challenge is to the facial validity of the tie-
breaking criteria, as opposed to the application of those criteria to her or Mss. Marks or
Lackey since she does not argue that she should have been awarded points under a particular
criterion that she was not, or that Mss. Marks or Lackey were inappropriately awarded points
for a particular criterion.

19. Ms. Blair’s arguments are not persuasive. Education Code section 44955,

subdivision (b), provides the following with regard to determining the relative seniority date
between two certificated employees: “As between employees who first rendered paid service
to the district on the same date, the governing board shall determine the order of termination
solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students thereof….” And the law gives
governing broads broad discretion in determining what those particular needs are. (See,
Zalac v. Governing Board of Ferndale Unified School District (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838,
854-855.) The Board of Trustees adopted specific criteria for breaking ties between
employees who share the same first date of paid service with the District, and the fact that
Criteria C and G list examples which meet those particular criteria does not make the criteria
any less specific.

20. Ms. Blair also challenges the criterion based on the number of

certifications/authorizations to teach English Language Learners (Criteria C) a certificated
employee holds on the grounds that it is not based on the “needs of the district and the
students thereof” because there are only a “handful” of students in the District who are
English Language Learners. For the reasons discussed in Factual Findings 18 and 19, her
argument is unpersuasive.

B.

Monica Daugherty – Challenge to the Competency Standard

21. Monica Daugherty teaches sixth grade at Seven Hills School, the District’s

only traditional middle school. Her seniority date is August 21, 2001, which she shares with
no other certificated employee. She has a clear multiple subject teaching credential and a
clear specialist instruction credential in special education, with an authorization for learning
handicap. Ms. Daugherty also has a master’s degree in special education. However, she has
not taught special education classes since the 2003-2004 school year, although she currently
has special education students “mainstreamed” into her sixth grade class.

4 As discussed below, Ms. Marks contends her seniority date should be earlier.

7

22. Ms. Daugherty challenges the application of the Board of Trustees’
competency standard for determining her bumping rights as arbitrary and vague because it
results in the retention of an employee who has less seniority and experience teaching special
education classes than she. Specifically, she contends that Michael Malakian is being
retained to teach a special day class, even though his seniority date is August 15, 2008 –
almost seven years after hers. Ms. Daugherty was originally hired by the District to teach
that special day class. After teaching that class for three years, she was offered, and
accepted, the sixth grade teaching position she currently holds.

23. Ms. Daugherty’s challenge to the Board of Trustees’ competency standard is

not persuasive. Governing boards have broad discretion in determining competency criteria.
(Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 564-565.) This
discretion is limited only by reasonableness, a standard which permits “a difference of
opinion on the same subject.” (Campbell Elementary Teachers Association v. Abbott (1978)
76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.) Here, the Board of Trustees determined that a teacher is deemed
“competent” if she has taught the particular subject for at least one full school year within the
last five years, a standard which the court in Bledsoe v. Biggs (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127,
suggested was reasonable. (Id., at p. 142.) Ms. Daugherty has not taught special education
classes for at least one year within the last five years and is not entitled to “bump” into Mr.
Malakian’s position teaching a special day class. (See, Moreland Teachers Association v.
Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648 [the senior teacher seeking to exercise her bumping rights
has the burden of establishing her competency].)

24. Ms. Daugherty also contends that she has more seniority than Erika Clawson,

a former principal who was recently reassigned to the classroom and then issued a
preliminary layoff notice. According to the seniority list, Ms. Clawson’s date of first paid
service with the District was August 13, 2007 – nearly six years after Ms. Daugherty’s.5
However, Ms. Clawson received a preliminary layoff notice and will not be retained for the
2012-2013 school year. Therefore, Ms. Clawson does not hold a position for Ms. Daugherty
to “bump” into. (See, Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th 127,
131 fn. 1 [“For purposes of a school district reduction in force, ‘bumping’ refers to a senior
teacher moving into the position of a junior teacher.”])

C.

Andrea Marks – Challenge to Her First Date of Paid Service with the District

5 No finding is made about Ms. Clawson’s seniority date because no evidence was

introduced about when she became a principal. (See, Ed. Code, § 44956.4 [“For a
certificated employee initially employed in an administrative position on or after July 1,
1983, who transfers to a teaching position, the period of employment in the administrative
position shall not be included in determining seniority for purposes of Section 44955 and
44956, except for school site administrators who shall earn up to a maximum of three years
seniority while serving as site administrators.”])

8

25.

Andrea Marks teaches second grade at Deer Creek. Her first date of paid

service with the District was August 20, 2002, according to the seniority list, which places
her in a three-way tie with Mss. Bair and Lackey as previously discussed. Based on the
application of the tie-breaking criteria, the District determined the teachers’ relative seniority
to be that Mss. Marks and Lackey share the same seniority date and are senior to Ms. Blair.

26. Ms. Marks agrees that August 20, 2002, was the first day of school for the

school year for which she was hired. She was hired as a reading specialist. She signed her
“paperwork” on July 3, 2002. However, she attended mandatory training from August 5
through 9, 2002, for which she received a $1,000 stipend. The District does not dispute Ms.
Marks’ attendance at the training, the dates of her attendance, the mandatory nature of the
training, or that she received a stipend for attending. The District, however, disputes that it
paid the stipend and contends that the stipend was paid by the Nevada County
Superintendent of Schools, an entity which Ms. Marks concedes is different than the Nevada
City School District.

The District’s argument is unpersuasive. While Ms. Marks agreed that the stipend

was paid by a check from the Nevada County Superintendent of Schools, she also explained
that her regular pay checks come from the same source – a fact that the District did not
dispute. This is consistent with the law designating each county treasury as the depository of
funds for school districts within the particular county. (See, Ed. Code, § 41001.) Therefore,
Ms. Marks’ seniority date shall be adjusted to August 5, 2002, her first date of paid service.
(Ed. Code, § 44845.)6 The District should determine whether Ms. Marks has any right to
bump a more junior employee and, if so, shall rescind her preliminary layoff notice.

D.
Breaking Criteria

Laurie Kempenaar – Challenge to the District’s Application of the Tie-

27.

Laurie Kempenaar teaches physical education and language arts at Seven Hills

School. Her first date of paid service with the District was August 13, 2007, which is the
same date as Rachel Smith’s. Ms. Smith also teaches physical education at Seven Hills
School. Superintendent Gilpatric applied the tie-breaking criteria and awarded Ms. Smith 18
points and Ms. Kempenaar 12 points. Therefore, Ms. Smith was determined to be the more
senior employee and was not issued a preliminary layoff notice, while Ms. Kempenaar was.
Ms. Kempenaar challenges Superintendent Gilpatric’s award of 18 points to Ms. Smith and
contends that Ms. Smith should have been awarded only 11 points, which would make Ms.
Kempenaar the more senior teacher. The specific challenges are to Criteria C (Credentials
and experience to teach in teacher shortage areas (e.g., bilingual, math, science, and physical

6 In light of the adjustment of Ms. Marks’ seniority date, her challenge to the Board of

Trustees’ tie-breaking criteria as arbitrary and vague is moot. Furthermore, the merits of
such challenge is not persuasive for the reasons discussed in Factual Findings 18 and 19
above.

9

education)), D (Number of Certifications/Authorizations to teach English Language
Learners), and F (Number of teaching and/or special service credentials).7

A.

Criteria C: Ms. Kempenaar contends that Ms. Smith should not be

awarded one point for her supplemental introductory authorization for social science because
that subject is not identified as a “teacher shortage area” in the tie-breaking criteria adopted
by the Board of Trustees. But Superintendent Gilpatric explained that the list of shortage
areas in Criteria C is not all-inclusive. She also explained that teacher shortage areas include
those subjects identified as “core” subjects under No Child Left Behind, which social science
is. Ms. Kempenaar did not introduce any evidence to the contrary. Therefore, her argument
is not persuasive.

Ms. Kempenaar also argues that Ms. Smith should not be awarded one point for her
supplemental introductory authorization for social science because such authorization does
not constitute a separate credential. Her argument is persuasive. (See, Ed. Code, § 44256
[the four basic types of teaching credentials are the single subject, multiple subject,
specialist, and designated subject credential]; see also, Cal. Code of Regs., tit. 5, § 80089.3,
subd. (a) [a holder of a multiple subject or single subject credential may have one or more
introductory supplemental authorizations added to her credential].) It is clear from
Superintendent Gilpatric’s testimony that she thought the supplemental introductory
authorization constituted a separate credential, and that is why she awarded Ms. Smith one
point for it. Therefore, Ms. Smith is only awarded one point for her single subject credential
in physical education and two points for her two years of experience teaching physical
education, for a total of three points under Criteria C.

B.

Criteria D: Ms. Smith was awarded three points for having received

both of her teaching credentials under the new SB 2042 requirements for obtaining a
credential. Superintendent Gilpatric explained that it is her understanding that the
requirements for obtaining a CLAD certificate are now imbedded in the requirements for
obtaining a teaching credential required by SB 2042, and that is why she awarded Ms. Smith
three points. Superintendent Gilpatric’s understanding is consistent with the Commission on
Teacher Credentialing’s interpretation of applicable law:

7 Ms. Kempenaar’s challenge to Criteria G (The number of extra duty assignments
(e.g., coaching, cheerleading, decathlon, journalism, yearbook, etc.) that each certificated
employee is assigned within the current year.) is moot since that criterion becomes relevant
only if there is a tie after awarding the applicable points under the other criteria. (Factual
Finding 6.) As discussed below, there is no such tie. For the same reason, her argument that
Superintendent Gilpatric made a mathematical error in calculating the number of points
awarded her (which the District correctly concedes) is also moot. The error made was not
including the one point awarded Ms. Kempenaar under Criteria G in her total number of
points.

10

The Commission has been receiving requests to issue a CLAD
certificate when an individual has already been issued a
credential with either an AB 1059 or SB 2042 English learner
authorization. The reasons given to Commission staff to request
the second English learner authorization is to meet the
stipulations in a stipend given by an employing agency that
states that an individual must hold a CLAD certificate or
emphasis. The Commission does not issue documents that have
duplicative authorizations. In licensure the most important
information on a credential is the authorization. The English
learner content authorization (whether completed as part of an
AB 1059 or SB 2042 program) has the same authorization for
English learner students as the CLAD certificate. The CLAD
emphasis program is being phased out and fewer individuals
will be issued documents listing this subject area. The review
currently being conducted on the CLAD certificate examination
may result in a change in the name of that document. In this
case, the Commission would at some date cease to issue a
CLAD certificate. The Commission suggests that employing
agencies review the language related to their stipends and
change the language from being document specific to
authorization specific….

(Exhibit 3 – CTC Coded Correspondence 04-0001 (Dated January 2, 2004, and updated May
13, 2004), pg. 3; see, In re Cellphone Termination Fee Cases (2011) 193 Cal.App.4th 298,
313, fn. 13 [“‘In general, an agency’s interpretation of statutes within its administrative
jurisdiction is given presumptive value as a consequence of the agency’s special familiarity
and presumptive expertise with satellite legal and regulatory issues.’ (Citation.)”]; see also,
Cal. Code of Regs., tit. 5, §§ 80015 [requirements for obtaining a CLAD certificate are
identical to those for obtaining an English learner authorization], 80015.2, subd. (b) [a
CLAD certificate authorizes the holder to perform the same services as an English learner
authorization].)

Superintendent Gilpatric correctly awarded Ms. Smith three points for obtaining both
of her credentials under the new SB 2042 requirements. While the evidence establishes that
a CLAD certificate and a teaching credential issued pursuant to SB 2042 are two separate
and distinct documents, the Commission on Teacher Credentialing’s Coded Correspondence
04-0001 makes it clear that Ms. Smith cannot obtain a CLAD certificate even though she
completed the same requirements for obtaining such certificate as Ms. Kempenaar did. It
would be arbitrary and capricious for the District to treat a teaching credential obtained under
the new SB 2042 requirement differently from a CLAD certificate for purposes of awarding
tie-breaking points. The District’s action was reasonable and did not constitute an abuse of
discretion.

11

C.

Criteria F: As previously discussed for Criteria C, a supplemental

introductory authorization does not constitute a separate teaching credential. Therefore, Ms.
Smith is only awarded one point each for her single subject credential in physical education
and multiple subject credential, for a total of two points in Criteria F.

Based upon the above adjustments to Criteria C and F, the following is the correct
application of the tie-breaking criteria to Mss. Kempenaar and Smith. Ms. Smith remains
senior to Ms. Kempenaar. Therefore, Ms. Kempenaar failed to establish that she has
bumping rights to the position for which Ms. Smith is being retained.

Rachel Smith
4

Laurie Kempenaar
4

Criteria
A. Preliminary vs. Clear/Life
Credentials. Rating:
+1 per preliminary
+2 per clear/life credential
B. NCLB. Rating:
+1 per Highly Qualified Area
C. Credentials and experience
to teach in teacher shortage
areas (e.g., bilingual, math,
science, and physical
education) Rating:
+1 per credential
+1 per year of experience
D. Number of
Certifications/Authorizations to
teach English Language
Learners. Rating:
+1 SDAIE/SB 1969, +2 LDS,
+3 CLAD, +3 R359, +4
BCLAD
E. Number of supplementary
authorizations. Rating:
+1 per supplementary
authorization
F. Number of teaching and/or
special service credentials
Subtotal:
G. The number of extra duty
assignments (e.g., coaching,
cheerleading, decathlon,
journalism, yearbook, etc.) that
each certificated employee is
assigned within the current

1

3

3

1

2

1

2

3

0

2

12

14
Moot. (Factual Finding 9.)

12

year.

E.

Vanessa Lackey – Raised No Legal Challenges at the Hearing

28.

Vanessa Lackey teaches fourth grade at Deer Creek School. As previously

discussed, she is more senior than Ms. Blair based on the application of the tie-breaking
criteria. Ms. Lackey’s concern that a coin toss not be used to break the tie between her and
Ms. Marks is moot in light of Factual Finding 26.

F.

Jennifer Tayler – Challenge to the District’s Assertion of Joe Limov’s Alleged

Right to Bump into Her Position

29.

Jennifer Tayler teaches science at Seven Hills School. She has a clear single

subject credential in biological sciences. Her date of first paid service with the District is
July 9, 2013, which is the same held by Ms. Kempenaar, Ms. Clawson, and Brian Ellis.
Based on the application of the tie-breaking criteria, she is the least senior of the four – all of
whom received a preliminary notice of layoff. None of the other three teachers has a clear
single subject credential in biological science or any other science field.

30.

Joe Limov was a principal who is reassigned to the classroom. The District

allowed him to assert his bumping rights and “bump” Ms. Tayler out of her position teaching
science and did not issue him a preliminary layoff notice. But Mr. Limov is not “competent”
to teach science because he has not taught that class in at least 11 years, even though he has a
clear single subject credential in general sciences. Furthermore, the District did not
introduce any evidence of Mr. Limov’s seniority date.8 (See, Alexander v. Board of Trustees
of the Delano Joint Union High School District (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 571 [Senior
employees are given “bumping” rights in that they will not be terminated if there are junior
employees retained who are rendering services which the senior employee is certificated and
competent to render.”]) The District did not satisfy its burden of establishing that Mr. Limov
has bumping rights to Ms. Tayler’s position teaching science, and Ms. Tayler’s preliminary
layoff notice must be rescinded.

31. With due consideration and adjustments made for the matters noted above, no
permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service
for which respondents are certificated and competent to perform.

32.

The District’s reductions of particular kinds of services and certificated staff

relate solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and their pupils.

8 For the reasons discussed in footnote 5, evidence of his first date of paid service –

August 26, 1986 – is not persuasive evidence of his seniority date.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

13

1.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides the following with

regard to a school district’s authority to layoff certificated employees.

Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all
of the schools of a district for the first six months in which
school is in session shall have declined below the corresponding
period of either of the previous two school years, whenever the
governing board determines that attendance in a district will
decline in the following year as a result of the termination of an
interdistrict tuition agreement as defined in Section 46304,
whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school
year, or whenever the amendment of state law requires the
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary
by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding
percentage of the certificated employees of the district,
permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school
year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while any probationary employee, or any other
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

In computing a decline in average daily attendance for purposes
of this section for a newly formed or reorganized school district,
each school of the district shall be deemed to have been a school
of the newly formed or reorganized district for both of the two
previous school years.

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for

14

determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would
not exist without such a requirement.

2.

Education Code section 44949 provides the following with regard to a school

district’s jurisdiction to layoff certificated employees:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee, or in the case of a district which has no superintendent
by the clerk or secretary of the governing board, that it has been
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and
stating the reasons therefor.

Until the employee has requested a hearing as provided in
subdivision (b) or has waived his or her right to a hearing, the
notice and the reasons therefor shall be confidential and shall
not be divulged by any person, except as may be necessary in
the performance of duties. However, the violation of this
requirement of confidentiality, in and of itself, shall not in any
manner be construed as affecting the validity of any hearing
conducted pursuant to this section.

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing. The
notice provided for in subdivision (a) shall advise the employee
of the provisions of this subdivision.

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency
therein, except that all of the following shall apply:

15

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any,
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation
and he or she shall be notified of this five-day period for filing
in the accusation.

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the
Government Code shall be available only if request is made
therefor within 15 days after service of the accusation, and the
notice required by Section 11505 of the Government Code shall
so indicate.

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be
prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds.

The board may adopt from time to time such rules and
procedures not inconsistent with provisions of this section as
may be necessary to effectuate this section.

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the
employee.

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) any
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the

16

Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) which
occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which
occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be
extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth above.

(Factual Finding 2; see, Gonzales v. Pacific Greyhound Lines (1950) 34 Cal.2d 749, 754-758
[the parties’ stipulation to facts constitutes a judicial admission of those facts]; see also,
Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Corp. (2006) 140 Cal.App.4th 34, 48 [“A judicial admission is a
party’s unequivocal concession of the truth of the matter, and removes the matter as an issue
in the case.”])

3.

The services identified in Resolution Nos. 1112-20 and 1112-20A are

particular kinds of services that may reduced or eliminated under Education Code section
44955. The Board of Trustee’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the
reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools
and their pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

4.

For the reasons explained in Factual Findings 18 and 19, the Board of

Trustees’ adoption of the tie-breaking criteria outlined in Factual Finding 6 was a valid
exercise of its discretion pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b).

5.

6.

For the reasons explained in Factual Findings 18 through 20, Julie Blair did

not establish cause to adjust her seniority date.

For the reasons explained in Factual Finding 23, the Board of Trustees’

adoption of the competency standard outlined in Factual Finding 10 was a valid exercise of
its discretion. Any subsequent attempt by it to “waive” such standard, however, would be
arbitrary and capricious, and therefore invalid, for the reasons discussed in Factual Finding
15.

7.

Monica Daugherty is not “competent” to teach special education, and Ericka

Clawson has been issued a preliminary layoff notice. (Factual Findings 23 and 24.)
Therefore, Ms. Daugherty has not established that a more junior certificated employee is
being retained to perform a certificated service that she is certificated and competent to
perform in violation of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b).

8.

A certificated employee’s seniority date is determined by her first date of paid

service with the school district. (Ed. Code, § 44845.) For the reasons explained in Factual
Finding 26, respondent Andrea Marks established legal cause for adjusting her seniority date
to August 5, 2002. Before issuing final layoff notices, the District shall determine whether
Ms. Marks has any right to bump a more junior employee and, if so, shall rescind Ms.
Marks’ preliminary layoff notice.

17

9.

For the reasons discussed in Factual Finding 27, the District misapplied the
tie-breaking criteria to determine the relative seniority between Rachel Smith and Laurie
Kempenaar. However, the correct application of the criteria does not change the relative
seniority between them, and Ms. Kempenaar has not established that she is more senior than
a certificated employee who is being retained to perform a certificated service which she is
certificated and competent to perform in violation of Education Code section 44955,
subdivision (b).

10.

For the reasons explained in Factual Finding 30, Joe Limov is not “competent”

to perform the certificated services being performed by Jennifer Tayler and the District did
not establish that Mr. Limov is more senior to Ms. Tayler. Therefore, the District shall
rescind the preliminary layoff notice issued to Ms. Tayler.

11.

The District correctly identified the certificated employees providing the

particular kinds of services that the Board of Trustees directed by reduced or discontinued in
Resolution Nos. 1112-20 and 1112-20A.

12.

After the adjustments set forth in Legal Conclusions 8 and 10, no permanent or

probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service for which
respondents are certificated and competent to perform.

13.

Except as set forth in Legal Conclusions 8 and 10, individually and

collectively, cause exists to give notice to respondents that their services will be reduced or
will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year because of the reduction or
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.

Cause exists for the Nevada City School District to reduce or eliminate 20.30

full-time equivalent certificated positions at the end of the 2011-2012 school year.

2.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 8, the seniority date of respondent Andrea
Marks shall be changed to August 5, 2002. Before issuing final layoff notices, the District
shall determine whether, as a result of the new seniority date, Ms. Marks has any right to
bump a more junior employee and, if so, shall rescind Ms. Marks’ preliminary layoff notice.

3.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 10, the District shall rescind the preliminary

layoff notice issued to respondent Jennifer Tayler.

18

4.

Other than as set forth in Recommendations 2 and 3, notice may be given to

respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2012-2013
school year. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: April 18, 2012

____________________________
COREN D. WONG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

19

