BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
MORENO VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
RIVERSIDE COUNTY
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
Proceeding Involving:

OAH No. 2012030501

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
OF THE MORENO VALLEY UNIFIED
SCHOOL DISTRICT WHO RECEIVED
PRELIMINARY LAYOFF NOTICES FOR
THE 2012-2013 SCHOOL YEAR,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of

California, heard this matter in Moreno Valley, California, on April 30, 2012.

Melanie A. Petersen and Kerrie E. Taylor, Atkinson, Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost,

represented the Moreno Valley Unified School District.

Carlos Perez, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented respondents Alma Abrego; Marisol
Acosta; Marcella Agrusa; Danette Aguilar; Brad Allcock; Eliseo Amerzcua; Cheri Arakawa;
Kimberly Arcos; Tina L. Arias; Juana Arriaga; Normal Avila; Carrie Balderrama; Joanna
Barnett; Anita Barragan; Leah Belote; Maria D. Bennett; Alma Bissot; Julie Blackmon;
Desiree Blackstone; Kristen Blades; Mychelle Blandin; Deborah Bocanegra; Kathleen
Bransford; Kathren Brooks; Rebecca Buckoff; Traci Bulanek; Tania Cabrera; Silvano Cantu;
Nicole Castro; Blanca Chiquito; Shani A. Cigarroa; Heather Clough; Deborah Collins;
Cheryl Conder; Norma S. Cordova; Ruben Cota; Jennifer Covington; Brett Crider; Nicole
Cross; Patricia Damaze; Randy Dargitz; Grant Dolan; Michelle Dotterer; Daniel P. Dufour;
Divina Elbo; Amanda Elkhoury; Patricia Ellis-Greenberg; Teresa Espinosa; Erica Esqueda;
Steve Ferreira; Timothy Frinfrock; Andrea Fingerson; Nicole Flicking; Adam Flores;
Elizabeth Florida; Donielle Flot; Stephanie Fortini; Michael Gallagher; Loren Gamarra;
Sandra E. Garcia; Claudia Garcia-Padilla; Melissa Garrett; Kyle Gerhard; Gina Ghiani;
Tiffany Gilmore; Arthur Giovannini; Gregory Giroux; Horacio Gomez; Eloy Gonzalez; Traci
Goodrich; Gisela Gracian-Olmos; Christine Graves; Ileana Gutierrez; Jose Guttirez; Michael
Gutierrez; Victoria Gutierrez; Jason Gutierrez; Diana B. Hall; Sandra Haro; Cathy Harriman;

1

Shonia Hayes; Rosalba Henneman; Jacqueline Heredia; Veronica N. Herrera; Adriana
Higaldo; Eleanor Duque Holm; Jonathan Helmsman; Susan Hazier; Kristine Huizenga;
Michael Hunter; Alejandra Jauregui; Amy Johnson; Aurora Johnson; Tiffani Johnstone;
Typasha Jones; Alex Kantola; Janelle Kell; Theodore Kellam; Amanda Kellis; Julie Kim;
Stephen Kim; Matthew King; Paul Kopp; Carlos Labrada; Nohemi LaCombe; Frida Lamas;
Jennifer Laramie; Amber Largey; Gerald Lauderman; Sharmayne Lawson; Natasha Leacock-
Harris; Margarita Leal; Lori Lee; Angelica Lepe; Dawn Lndsey; Jennifer Lindsey; Jeanine
Lopez; Stephanie Luddinton; Kathy Maddox; Elsa Magana; Carissa Marin; Lisbeth
Martinez; Lorena Medina; Sharon Mendosa; Almario Mendoza, Jr.; Sandra Merletti-Van
Damme; April Mertz; Karla Michel; Lorena Michel-Jasso; Matthew Moe; Jessica Molletti;
Michelle Montemayor; Sara Montti-Sanchez; Yisel Moreno; Patricia Mota-Cornejo; Estela
Munoz-Gomez; Veronica Murga; Linda Nadziejko; Nadakia Neal; Carol A. Nelson; Marlies
Nelson; Khola Nevels; Lam Nguyen; Julie Nikniai; Olivia Nunez; Pedro Nuno; Katherine
O’Bryan; Joseph Ochoa; Terrence Outlaw; Edma Payne; Jawad Pearson; Isabel Perez; Maria
Perez; Melinda Peterson; Brittany Pierce; Kyle Polston; Enedina Ponce-Perez; Linda Prows;
Natividad Quintanar; Rachelle Ray; Maria Reynoso; Justin W. Rice; Sherry Rice; Christine
Rightnar; Susanna Rodriguez; Gabriela Romo; Daisy Salazar; Gabriela Sanchez; Juan
Sanchez; Ruben Sarabia, Jr.; Isaac Saucedo; Darlene Schmittle; Monica Lee Scullion; Curt
Sell; Yesenia Serrano; Kelee Shearer; Salma Shehto; Daniel Singer; Cynthia Smith; Allison
Soileau; Khunara Sok; Lynn C. Solorio; Jeffrey Soria; Janeia Sotomayor; Deepika
Srivastava; Rachel Storch; Kristina Strathman; Cherie Suchan; Kimberly Swanson; Jennifer
Tapia; Erika Tellez-Armijo; Anita Thompson; Erika Torres; Zenaida (Paula) Torres; Tera
Trotter; Joann Valencia; Jacqueline Vargas; Howard Virgo; Matthew Vaudrey; Arlene Vega;
Sandra Vilas; Cheryl Wagner; Denise West Katherine Willers; Eltonia Williams; Stephanie
Williams; Lerrie D. Williams-Wyatt; Megan Witt; Veronica Younger-Jones; Carol E.
Young; Jennifer Lynette Young; Marissa Zarate; John Ladd Zorn, Jr.; Rosanna Ackerson-
Bravo; Brandon Annette; Karina Aragon; Mary Baez; Jennifer Baker; Camille Bates;
Katelyn Beaman; Claudine Bond; Bradley Byers; Janice Carter; Robin Charkins; Denise
Chavez; Jennifer Dieffenbacher; Le Ann Duong; Jacquelyn Espinosa; Steven Fager; Matthey
Fairbanks; James Fenton; Christopher Fuertes; Adrian Garcia; Esmeralda Gonzalez-Tenneco;
Jennifer Harahan; Linda Harte; Janet Hernandez; Maria LaBrie; Allison Montejano; Yolanda
Mouton; Aimee Porter; Shawnee Vasher; Antonio Vega; Gabriel Vega; Karina Vitelli; Marie
Wright; and Kimberly S. Johnson.

The matter was submitted on April 30, 2012.

The Moreno Valley Unified School District

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Moreno Valley Unified School District is located in Moreno Valley,

Riverside County. The District maintains and operates five elementary schools, six middle
schools, five comprehensive high schools, and five alternative schools. The District provides
services to approximately 36,000 students from preschool through 12th grades. The District

2

employs approximately 3,000 persons, about 1,170 of whom are certificated employees.
Employee salaries and benefits comprise about 85 percent of the District’s annual
expenditures. The District has a projected budget of approximately $256 million in revenues
and $285 in expenditures for the 2012-2013 school year, resulting in a $29 million shortfall.

2.

The District is governed by an elected five member Board of Education. Judy
D. White, Ed.D., is the Board’s Chief Executive Officer and the Superintendent of Schools.
Henry H. Voros is the Assistant Superintendent of Schools, Human Resources Division.
Sharon Bowman is the Director of Human Resources.

The Fiscal Crisis

3.

Public schools rely on financing from the State of California. A school district

cannot determine the level of state funding it will receive until the state budget is chaptered,
an event that is supposed to occur each year in late June. Before then, a school district’s
governing board, which has the duty to produce and file a balanced budget with the County
Department of Education, must take steps to ensure that financial ends meet if the worst-case
financial scenario develops.

California’s recent economic problems have had a crippling impact on the Moreno

Valley Unified School District and other public school districts. If the District cannot meet
its financial obligations, the County Office of Education has the authority to intervene and
take over the District’s operations.

The District’s Response

4.

In response to the anticipated budgetary shortfall for the 2012-2013 school

year, District administrators reviewed services and staffing. The District embarked upon a
program to reduce its budget. Among other matters, the District decided to trim expenditures
by reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services provided by credentialed employees.

5.

On March 13, 2012, following a review of the District’s budgetary situation,
financial projections for the 2012-2013 school year, and Assistant Superintendent Voros’s
recommendation, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2011-12-47, which provides:

WHEREAS, the Governing Board of the Moreno Valley
Unified School District has determined that it shall be
necessary to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of
services of the District as itemized in Exhibit A at the
close of the current school year; and

WHEREAS, it shall be necessary to terminate at the end
of the 2011-12 school year, the employment of certain
certificated employees of the District as a result of this

3

reduction or discontinuance in particular kinds of
services;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Education Code §44955(c), the
Governing Board has determined that for the purpose of
assignment and reassignment those persons assigned or
reassigned to a position shall possess the necessary
credential(s), subject matter authorization(s),
certificate(s), and permit(s) in order to comply with all
state and federal assignment requirements;

THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the
Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee is
directed to send appropriate notices to all employees
whose services shall be terminated by virtue of this
action. Nothing herein shall be deemed to confer any
status or rights upon temporary or categorically funded
project certificated employees in addition to those
specifically granted to them by statue.

THE FOREGOING RESOLUTION WAS ADOPTED
by the Board of Education of the Moreno Valley Unified
School District on the 13th day of March 2012.

6.

Exhibit A provides:

EXHIBIT A

Recommended Reduction in 2012-13 Programs/Services
for the Moreno Valley Unified School District

The Superintendent recommends that the Governing
Board adopt a resolution to reduce the programs and
services for 2012-13 as follows:

Item

Job Title

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Art
Business
Categorical Funded Positions

Counselors
Cmptr Based
EL Specialist
ELA
English/Math Coach

4

FTE

5.00
1.00

10.00
1.00
3.00
1.00
1.00

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

Read 180
Title 1
Cal-Safe

Computer
Consumer Science
Dance
ELD
Elementary
English
French
Independent Study
Industrial Tech/Engineering
Math
Music
Physical Education
ROTC Instructors
Science (Bio/Life)
Science (Chem,/Physics)
Science (Earth)
Science (General)
Science (Health)
Sixth Grade
Social Science
Spanish

1.00
1.00
0.60
3.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
119.00
36.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
42.00
3.00
12.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
8.00
5.00
27.00
24.00
6.00

328.60

TOTAL

The Particular Kinds of Services

7.

The services identified in Exhibit A were the kinds of services that could be
reduced under the Education Code. The Board’s enactment of Resolution No. 2011-12-47
was neither arbitrary nor capricious; its enactment was well within the Board’s discretion; no
particular kind of service was lowered to a level below that mandated by state or federal law;
the enactment of Resolution No. 2011-12-47 related solely to the economic crisis, the
Board’s duty to balance the budget, and was in the best interest of the District and the
students thereof.

The District’s Seniority List

8.

The District maintains a seniority list, a constantly evolving document that is

updated as new certificated employees are hired and as other employees retire, resign, or
otherwise become separated from service. The seniority list is a spreadsheet that is
organized from the District’s most senior certificated employee to the most recently hired
certificated employee. The list contains each employee’s number, seniority date (the first
paid date of service with the district), the employee’s name, the employee’s assignment, the

5

credentials the employee holds, the school site where the employee provides service, and the
employee’s status (permanent, probationary, temporary or otherwise).

9.

When it became apparent that a reduction in force might become necessary,

the District forwarded the seniority list to all school sites and requested employees to review
it and make any corrections. The seniority list was also posted on the District’s website. If
an employee had a question or additional information, it was verified and the seniority list
was updated or corrected as required. The updated seniority list was used to determine who
should and should not receive a preliminary layoff notice.

Tie-Breaking Criteria

10.

In order to determine the order of termination of employees who rendered paid
service to the District on the same date, the Board enacted Resolution No. 2011-12-49. That
resolution provides:

WHEREAS, pursuant to provisions of Education Code
§44955, the Board of Education is required to determine
the District needs should it become necessary to
determine the order of termination for employees who
first rendered paid service to the District on the same
day.

WHEREAS, for the 2012-13 school year only, to meet
the requirements of Education Code §44955, the Board
of Education determines the needs of the District and the
students by establishing the following tie-breaking
criteria:

WHEREAS, the following rating system shall be applied
in determining the order of termination of certificated
employees:

A. Credentials and credentialed experience to teach or
serve in a particular program or provide a particular
service of need by the district (English, Foreign
Language, Math, Science). Rating: +1 per credential; +1
per year of credentialed experience.

B. Special programs credential and experience to teach
(bilingual, special education). Rating: +1 per credential;
+1 per year of experience.

6

C. Years of experience employed as a full-time K-12
certificated employee in a public school. Rating: +1 per
year.

D. Number of supplementary authorizations. Rating: +1
per supplementary authorization.

E. Number of valid teaching and /or special service
credentials. Rating: +1 per credential.

F. Earned degrees beyond the BA/BS level. Rating: +1
per degree.

G. Preliminary vs. Clear/Life Credentials. Rating: +1 per
preliminary credential; +2 per clear/life credential.

TIE-BREAKING PROCEDURE

THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, in the event that
common day hires have equal qualifications based on the
application of the above criteria, the District will then
break ties by utilizing a lottery.

PASSED AND ADOPTED this 13th day of March 2012.

The Issuance of Preliminary Layoff Notices/Jurisdictional Documents

11.

Using the updated seniority list, Resolution No. 2011-12-47, the tie-breaking

criteria set forth in Resolution No. 2011-12-49, and considering all positive attrition, the
District’s administrative staff identified those employees who should receive preliminary
layoff notices and those who should not. Whenever an employee providing a particular kind
of service held a position that was reduced eliminated by Resolution No. 2011-12-47 and
was identified as being in line to receive a preliminary layoff notice, that employee’s
seniority and credentials were carefully examined to determine if that employee had the
seniority, credentials, and competence to “bump” a junior employee and assume the position
held by the more junior employee.

12.

The District timely served respondents, each of whom was a certificated

employee, with notice that the District’s Superintendent had recommended that the
respondent not be reemployed in the upcoming 2012-2013 school year. The District timely
served respondents with an Accusation, Statement to Respondent, and a blank Notice of
Defense form, accompanied by relevant sections of the Education Code and Government
Code. These documents were filed and served by the District’s Superintendent in her official
capacity.

7

The District considered all respondents served with the Accusation and related

documents to be entitled to a hearing, regardless of whether the respondent timely filed a
Notice of Defense.

The District served respondents with a Notice of Hearing, setting the hearing in this

reduction in force proceeding for April 30 and May 1, 2012, to commence each day at 10:00
a.m.

The Administrative Hearing

13.

On April 30, 2012, the record in the reduction in force proceeding was opened.

The District rescinded and withdrew the preliminarily layoff notices served on

respondents Meagan Witt (seniority number 974); Diana B. Hall (seniority number 977);
Maria Wright (seniority number 975); Zenaida (Paula) Torres (seniority number 1206);
Nicole Phillips (seniority number 1305); Cathy Harriman (seniority number 1330); and Paul
Kopp (seniority number 1315). There was no objection to the rescission and withdrawal.

Jurisdictional documents were introduced; the caption was amended; opening
comments were given by an attorney for the District; a written stipulation concerning
jurisdictional matters and several exhibits was received; sworn testimony was taken;
documentary evidence was received; Director Bowman testified about the budgetary crisis,
the impact of that crisis on the District’s operations, the layoff process, the seniority list, the
bumping of senior employees who were credentialed and competent (NCLB compliant in the
subject matter to be taught and holding an appropriate EL authorization if required) into
positions held by more junior employees, and the District’s determination to retain the
services of Debra McQuain. Assistant Superintendent Voros testified about the temporary
employees inclusion in the reduction in force proceeding, the prohibition against retaining
temporary employees over permanent and probationary employee and the release of
temporary employees from service, and the skipping process. Following the taking of
evidence, closing comments were given; the record was closed; and the matter was
submitted.

Skipping

14.

Debra McQuain (seniority number 1490) holds a clear single subject credential

in Physical Education and has a seniority date of August 21, 2007. She teaches dance at
Valley View High School. She is a permanent employee and is the most senior employee
who teaches dance. Ms. McQuain is not the most senior Physical Education instructor, and
the District wishes to retain her in the 2012-2013 to teach five periods of dance and
choreography. Ms. McQuain has taught dance and choreography at the District for many
years, has worked with the District’s dance teams, and has additional training and
coursework in choreography that no other employee possesses. The District is concerned
that its failure to retain Ms. McQuain’s services will result in a decline in the District’s dance
programs. No certificated employee senior to Ms. McQuain has the special training and

8

experience in dance and choreography that is necessary to teach these courses. There was no
testimony that contradicted the testimony of Director Bowman and Assistant Superintendent
Voros concerning the District’s need to retain Ms. McQuain to teach dance and
choreography as a result of her special education and training that no other employee
possesses. Skipping Ms. McQuain is reasonable under the circumstances.

The Rescission of Seven Preliminary Layoff Notices

15.

Before the taking of evidence, the District rescinded and withdrew the

preliminary layoff notices previously served on respondents Meagan Witt, Diana B. Hall,
Maria Wright, Zenaida (Paula) Torres, Nicole Phillips, Cathy Harriman, and Paul Kopp. As
to Ms. Witt and Ms. Hall, the rescission was due to application of a tie-breaker. As to Ms.
Wright, Ms. Torres, Ms. Phillips, Ms. Harriman, and Mr. Kopp, the rescissions were due to
the lawful capacity of each of these individuals to move from teaching in elementary school
to teaching in middle school because each of them possessed the seniority, credentials, and
qualifications to teach in the middle school positions.

The District’s decision to rescind and withdraw the preliminary layoff notices

previously served on these employees is sustained and upheld.

The Reduction in Force Proceeding

16.

The enactment of Resolution No. 2011-12-47 was the result of a budgetary

crisis; it was enacted in good faith; the tie-breaking criteria set forth in a separate resolution
were reasonable and were applied in an evenhanded manner; enacting the resolutions was in
the best interest of the District and its students. The District used seniority, credentials, and
competence as the basis for “bumping” and retaining the services of senior, competent, and
appropriately credentialed employees to provide services that were provided by more junior
employees. The District demonstrated good cause to support the skipping of Ms. McQuain.
The District complied with all jurisdictional requirements.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Statutory Authority - Reduction in Force Proceedings

1.

Education Code section 44949 provides in part:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee . . . that it has been recommended that the notice be
given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.

9

[¶] . . . [¶]

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . .

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency
therein, except that all of the following shall apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any,
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation
and he or she shall be notified of this five-day period for filing
in the accusation.

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the
Government Code shall be available only if request is made
therefor within 15 days after service of the accusation, and the
notice required by Section 11505 of the Government Code shall
so indicate.

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be
prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the

10

charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds . . .

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the
employee. . . .

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) any
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the
Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) which
occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which
occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be
extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her
position for causes other than those specified . . . and no
probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position
for cause other than as specified . . .

(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school
year . . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the
district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in
the district, the governing board may terminate the services of
not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at
the close of the school year. Except as otherwise provided by
statute, the services of no permanent employee may be
terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less
seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render . . .

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides in part:

11

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would
not exist without such a requirement.

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given before
the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and
services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of
the order in which they were employed, as determined by the
board in accordance with the provisions of Sections 44844 and
44845. In the event that a permanent or probationary employee
is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the
ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments
in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any
service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to
render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not
previously taught, and for which he or she does not have a
teaching credential or which is not within the employee’s major
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject
matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of
seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to
teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide services
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that

12

the certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide
those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the
laws.

Jurisdiction

3.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied
as to all respondents.

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

4.

A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service should be
reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the governing board acted unfairly
or improperly simply because it made a decision it was empowered to make. (Rutherford v.
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.) A school board’s decision to reduce or
discontinue a particular kind of service need not be tied in with any statistical computation.
It is within the discretion of a school board to determine the amount by which it will reduce
or discontinue a particular kind of service as long as the school district does not reduce a
service below the level required by law. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144
Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)

Competence

5.

The Education Code leaves to a school board’s discretion the determination of
whether an employee must also be competent to be employed in a vacant position in addition
to possessing seniority. The term “competent” relates to an individual’s specific skills or
qualifications, including academic background, training, credentials, and experience, but it
does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance. (Forker v. Board of Trustees
(1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)

Seniority, Bumping, Skipping

6.

Seniority: Under Education Code section 44845, seniority is determined by

the date a certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”

7.

Education Code section 44846 provides in part: “The governing board shall
have power and it shall be its duty to correct any errors discovered from time to time in its
records showing the order of employment.”

13

8.

The Statutory Scheme: Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff

statute, provides in subdivision (b), in part:

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while . . . any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is
certificated and competent to render.

Essentially this statutory language provides “bumping” rights for senior certificated

and competent employees, and “skipping” authority to retain junior employees who are
certificated and competent to render services which more senior employees are not.

9.

Bumping: The district has an obligation under Section 44955, subdivision (b),

to determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be
assigned to another position. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th
127, 136-137.)

10.

Skipping: Subdivision (d)(1) of Section 44955 provides an exception to

subdivision (b) where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific
course of study and that a junior certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated employee does not possess.
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at pp. 134-135.) There is nothing in the statute
that requires such special needs be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job
descriptions, or program requirements. (Id., at p. 138.)

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district and
establishing requirements for employment. This discretion encompasses determining the
training and experience necessary for particular positions. Similarly, school districts have
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)

Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees

11.

As a result of the Governing Board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of

service, cause exists under the Education Code to authorize the District to give final notice to
those respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment will be terminated at
the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed by the District
for the 2012-2013 school year.

14

Determination

12.

The charges set forth in the Accusation were sustained by a preponderance of
the evidence except as otherwise stated herein. Good cause supported the District’s skipping
of one certificated employee. The District’s rescission and withdrawal of the preliminary
layoff notices serviced on seven certificated employees was appropriate, based upon
objective standards, and was in the best interest of the District and the students thereof. The
Board’s enactment of the resolutions applicable in this reduction in force proceeding was
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils. The District made necessary assignments
and reassignments in such a manner that the most senior credentialed employees were
retained to render services that their seniority and qualifications entitled them to provide.

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the Moreno Valley Unified School

District issue final layoff notices to the following certificated employees:

Alma Abrego
Rosanna Ackerson-Bravo
Marisol Acosta
Marcella Agrusa
Danette Aguilar
Brad Allcock
Eliseo Amezcua
Brandon Annette
Karina Aragon
Cheri Arakawa
Kimberly Arcos
Tina Arias
Juana Arriaga
Norma Avila
Mary Baez
Jennifer Baker
Carrie Balderrama
Joanna Barnett
Anita Barragan
Camille Bates
Katelyn Beaman
Leah Belote
Maria D. Bennett
Alma Bissot
Julie Blackmon
Desiree Blackstone
Kristen Blades
Mychelle Blandin

Deborah Bocanegra
Claudine Bond
Kathleen Bransford
Kathren Brooks
Rebecca Buckhoff
Traci Bulanek
Bradley Byers
Tania Cabrera
Silvano Cantu
Janice Carter
Nicole Castro
Robin Charkins
Denise Chavez
Blanca Chiquito
Shani Cigarroa
Heather Clough
Deborah Collins
Cheryl Conder
Norma Cordova
Ruben Cota
Jennifer Covington
Brett Crider
Patricia Damaze
Randy Dargitz
Jennifer Dieffenbacher
Grant Dolan
Michelle Dotterer
Daniel Dufour

15

LeAnn Duong
Amanda Elkhoury
Patricia Ellis-Greenberg
Teresa Espinosa
Jacquelyn Espinoza Rathbun
Erika Esqueda
Steven Fager
Matthew Fairbanks
James Fenton
Steven Ferreira
Jamie Fiedler
Timothy Finfrock
Andrea Fingerson
Nicole Flicking
Adam Flores
Elizabeth Florido
Donielle Flot
Stephanie Fortini
Michael Francis
Christopher Fuerte
Marisol Gallegos
Loren Gamarra
Adrian Garcia
Sandra E. Garcia
Melissa Garrett
Kyle Gerhard
Gina Ghiani
Tiffany Gilmore

Arthur Giovannini
Gregory Giroux
Horacio Gomez
Eloy Gonzalez
Esmeralda Gonzalez Tinoco
Traci Goodrich
Gisela Gracian-Olmos
Christine Graves
Ileana Gutierrez
Jose Gutierrez
Michael Gutierrez
Victoria Gutierrez
Jason Guttirez
Jennifer Hanrahan
Linda Hardtke
Sandra Haro
Shonia Hayes
Rosalba Henneman
Jacqueline Heredia
Janet Hernandez
Sujana Herrera
Veronica N. Herrera
Adriana Hidalgo
Eleanor Holm
Rachell House
Timothy Howard
Jonathan Huelsman
Susan Huizar
Kristine Huizenga
Michael Hunter
Mercedes Jackson
Alejandra Jauregui
Wesley Jeffries
Amy Johnson
Aurora Johnson
Kimberly Johnson
Tiffani Johnstone
Kalah Jones
Typasha Jones
Diana Jones Rivera
Alex Kantola
Janelle Kell
Theodore Kellam
Amanda Kellis
Julie Kim
Stephen Kim

Matthew King
Carlos Labrada
Maria LaBrie
Gabrielle Ladner Mejia
Frida Lamas
Jennifer Laramie
Amber Largey
Gerald Lauderman
Sharmayne Lawson
Natasha Leacock-Harris
Margarita Leal
Lori Lee
Angelica Lepe
Dawnn Lindsey
Jennifer Lindsey
Jeanine Lopez
Stephanie Luddington
Kathy Maddox
Elsa Magana
Carissa Marin
Liseth Martinez
Lorena Medina
Sharon Mendonsa
Almario Mendoza, Jr.
Sandra Merlett Van Damme
April Mertz
Karla Michel
Lorena Michel Jasso
Leah Mikkelsen
Matthew Moe
Jessica Molletti
Allison Montejano
Michelle Montemayor
Sara Montti
Yisel Moreno
Patricia Mota Cornejo
Yolanda Mouton
Estela Munoz Gomez
Veronica Murga
Linda Marie Nadziejko
Nadakia Neal
Carol Nelson
Marlies Nelson
Khola Nevels
John Nguyen
Lam Nguyen

16

Julie Nikniai
Olivia Nunez
Pedro Nuno
Katherine O’Bryan
Joseph Ochoa
Joshua Parsons
Edma Payne
Jawad Pearson
Isabel Perez
Maria S. Perez
Melinda Petersen
Brittany Pierce
Kyle Polston
Enedina Ponce Perez
Aimee Porter
Lyndsey Presnell
Rosa Prins Padro
Linda Prows
Valerie Putnam
Natividad Quintanar
Rachelle Ray
Tanya Reed
Maria Reynoso
Allison Reynoso
Justin Rice
Sherry Rice
Christine Rightnar
Susanna Rodriguez
Gabriela Romo
Daisy Salazar
Gabriela Sanchez
Juan Sanchez
Ruben Sarabia, Jr.
Deborah Saravia
Isaac Saucedo
Darlene Schmittle
Monica Scullion
Curt Sell
Yesenia Serrano
Kellee Shearer
Salma Shehto
Daniel Singer
Cynthia Smith
Allison Soileau
Khunara Sok
Lynn Solorio

Tera Trotter
Megan Tuntland
Joann Valencia
Michelle Vandenburgh
Howard Vargo
Shawnee Vasher
Matthew Vaudrey
Antonio Vega
Arlene Vega
Gabriel Vega
Sandra Vilas
Xaviera Villegas
Karina Vitelli

Dat Vo
Cheryl Wagner
Denise West
Eltonia Williams
Stephanie Williams
Lerrie Williams Wyatt
Veronica Yonker Jones
Carole E. Young
Jennifer L. Young
Marissa Zarate
John L. Zorn, Jr

Jeffrey Soria
Janeia Sotomayor
Deepika Srivastava
Elliot Stone
Rachel Storch
Kristina Strathman
Cheri Suchan
Shari Sutherlin
Kimberly Swanson
Jennifer Tapia
Erika Tellez Armijo
Anita Thompson
Erika Torres

Dated: May 1, 2012

____________________________
JAMES H. AHLER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

17

