BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
LEMON GROVE SCHOOL DISTRICT

STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation
Against:

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE
LEMON GROVE SCHOOL DISTRICT

Respondents.

Case No. 2012030801

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Lemon Grove, California, on April 20, 2012.

William A. Diedrich, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented the

Lemon Grove School District.

Jon Y. Vanderpool, Esq., Tosdal, Smith, Steiner & Wax, represented Kevin Andreen,

Jessica Bargenquast, William Brookolo, Darryl Cooke, Jeannette Estrada, Kyle Griffith,
Kelly Jaynes, Francisco Lacsamana, Yadira Melendrez-Ramos, Teresa Moudry, Susan
Nunez, Cynthia Piligian, Irma Poulin, Marcia Reisch, Silvia Sana, Diane Sievenpiper, Sarah
Slade, Gustavo Vazquez, and Erin Walker.

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Laurel Dehnel, Shari Erlendson, or Anne

Oswalt.

The matter was submitted on April 20, 2012.

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION

The Board of Education of the Lemon Grove School District determined to reduce or

discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers for budgetary reasons. The
decision was not related to the competency and dedication of the individuals whose services
are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.

1

The District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process

involving review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” “skipping,” and breaking ties
between/among employees with the same first dates of paid service. The selection process
was in accordance with the requirements of the Education Code.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” (Respondents) are certificated employees

of the Lemon Grove School District (District).

Ernest Anastos, the District’s Superintendent (Superintendent), notified the

District’s Governing Board (Board) of his recommendation that the District reduce or
discontinue particular kinds of services for the 2012-2013 school year.

3.

On February 28, 2012, the Board adopted Resolution No. 11-12-12 reducing

or eliminating particular kinds of services for the ensuing school year, establishing
“competency” criteria for purposes of displacement, and establishing criteria for resolving
ties among certificated employees with the same date of first paid probationary service. The
Board directed the Superintendent or his designated representative to send notices to all
employees possibly affected by the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.

Resolution No. 11-12-12 states, in pertinent part:

Particular Kinds of Service
Elementary (K-6) Self Contained Classroom Teaching
Services
Specialized Academic Instructor (RSP Teacher)
Middle School Physical Education Teaching Services
Elementary School Principal
Middle School Assistant Principal
Middle School Dean of Students
Subtotal

Temporary services as follows:*
Elementary (K-6) Self Contained Classroom Teaching
Services
Middle School Social Science Teaching Services
Social Worker
EDP Lead Teacher Services
Teacher on Special Assignment Services

2

Full Time
Equivalent

6.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.57
10.57

6.0
1.0
2.2
1.0
1.43

Elementary (K-6) Intervention Support Teaching Services
Specialized Academic Instructor (RSP Teacher)

13.71
0.2

25.54

Subtotal

* Inclusion of temporary services within this Resolution is not intended to grant those
individuals who are impacted any rights greater than provided by law, nor to nullify any
provisions within each impacted individual’s employment contract, nor to supersede any
other Resolution by this Governing Board to release or otherwise terminate the services of
any impacted individual.

The proposed reductions totaled 25.54 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.

4.

The Board established “competency” criteria in its Resolution, which states, in

part:

WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a significant
population of English language learners with specialized educational
needs, a specific and compelling need exists to retain certificated
employees who have Bilingual Cross-cultural Language, and Academic
Development ("BCLAD") authorization to teach English language
learners and the special training and experience that comes therewith;
and

WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a significant
population of English language learners with specialized educational
needs, a specific and compelling need exists to retain certificated
employees who teach in the District's bilingual dual
immersion
program and therefore possess the special training and experience that
comes therewith; and

WHEREAS, this Board has determined that there is a significant
and compelling need to retain teachers who have attained National
Board Certification, and therefore possess the training and experience
that comes therewith; and

WHEREAS, Education Code section 44955(d) authorizes this
Board to deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of
seniority for the above reasons, if necessary.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Governing

Board of the Lemon Grove School District:

[¶] . . . [¶]

7.

That

the seniority and qualifications of some of the

3

employees in the services being reduced or eliminated are such
that they have displacement rights, and that no employee will be
terminated while a less senior employee is retained to render a
service which the more senior employee is both certificated and
competent to render.

8.
That in observing the statutory rights of a more senior
certificated employee performing services in a subject matter or
field identified by the District for reduction or elimination to
displace a less senior certificated employee, the more senior
certificated employee may displace less senior certificated
employee if it is established to the satisfaction of the District
that the more senior certificated employee is both competent and
credentialed to render the services performed by a less senior
certificated employee.

That "competency" as described in Education Code
9.
section 44955(b) and referenced in paragraph 8 above, for the
purposes of displacement, shall necessarily include possession
of: (1) a valid credential in the relevant subject matter area; (2)
"highly qualified" status under the No Child Left Behind Act in
the position to be assumed; (3) if displacing an employee who
possesses a BCLAD certification, possession of a BCLAD
certification; (4) special training and experience necessary to
meet the job requirements of specialized positions (such as
AVID teachers, EDP lead teachers, Dual Immersion teachers);
(5) if displacing an employee who possesses a National Board
Certification, possession of a National Board Certification; (6)
for elementary (K-5) teaching positions, or a self contained 6th
grade classroom teaching position, at
(1) year of
experience in the past five (5) years teaching at the elementary
level or in a sixth grade self contained classroom; and (7) for
positions involving instruction to 6'n 7'h and/or 8'h grade students,
other than a self contained 6'h grade classroom, at least one (1)
year of experience in the position or assignment within the last
five (5) years. . . .

least

The Board established the competency criteria for purposes of bumping or displacing more
junior employees with senior employees who were competent and credentialed to hold the
position held by the junior employees. There is no evidence that the competency criteria
were arbitrary or capricious or otherwise invalid.

5.

In its Resolution, between employees who first rendered paid service to the
District on the same date, the Board adopted “Criteria to be Applied to Determine Order of
Layoff for those Certificated Employees with the Same Date of First Paid Probationary

4

Service” and clear instruction for implementation of the criteria. The order of termination
was based on the needs of the District and its students.

6.

On February 28, 2012, the Board adopted Resolution No. 11-12-13, ordering
the release of temporary certificated employees from their temporary assignment at the end
of the 2011 – 2012 school year in order to effectuate the reduction of particular kinds of
services; further, the Board directed the Superintendent or his designated representative to
notify the temporary employees of the foregoing. The District complied and allowed the
temporary employees to participate in the hearing. There is no issue regarding the temporary
status of any employee in this District. Pursuant to Resolution No. 11-12-13, all temporary
certificated employees will be released at the conclusion of the 2011-2012 school year.1

7.

On March 12, 2012, Glenn Heath, the District’s Director of Human Resources

(Human Resources Director) served permanent and probationary certificated Respondents
with “Notice of Recommendation that your Services Will Not Be Required for the Ensuing
School Year (2012-2013),” a copy of Board Resolution No. 11-12-12, and the reasons for the
Board’s action. In addition, the Human Resources Director advised Respondents of the right
to hearing, that a Request for Hearing was required to be delivered to the District’s office no
later than March 22, 2012, and that the failure to request a hearing would constitute waiver of
the right to hearing.

8.

On March 12, 2012, the Human Resources Director served Respondents

employed under a temporary contract of employment with “Notice of Recommendation that
your Services Will Not Be Required for the Ensuing School Year (2012-2013).” In the
Notice, the Human Resources Director stated, in part:

The District provides you with this notice of layoff and right to
request a hearing in connection with the layoff proceedings
applicable to probationary and permanent employees under
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. This notice is
provided to you as a precaution by the District. Based on your
service under a valid temporary contract of employment, the
District believes you are correctly classified as a temporary
employee, and not entitled to participate in the layoff or hearing
process. However, this notice is provided in the event you
believe, or it is determined, your status is other than that of a
temporary employee, and you wish to contest your release as a

1

The District requested an order affirming its Decision releasing temporary employees.

Pursuant to Resolution No. 11-12-13, the Board released all temporary employees at the
conclusion of the 2011 – 2012 school year. Given the facts in Finding 8, the issue is moot
and outside the scope of the jurisdiction (Education Code sections 44949 and 44955) of this
hearing.

5

temporary employee or otherwise seek a determination whether
there is cause for not reemploying you for the next school year.

By providing this right to request a hearing, it is not the
District’s intent to convert your temporary employment status to
that of a probationary or permanent employee. In the event it is
determined you are a probationary or permanent employee by
operation of law, your right to a hearing and any accompanying
layoff rights, has been afforded under Education Code sections
44949 and 44955 via this notice.

He attached a copy of the Board Resolution No. 11-12-13 and stated the reasons for the
Board’s action. In addition, the Human Resources Director advised Respondents of the right
to hearing, that the Request for Hearing must be delivered to the District’s office no later
than March 22, 2012, and that the failure to request a hearing would constitute waiver of the
right to hearing.

9.

Respondents submitted a timely Request for Hearing to determine if there was

cause for not re-employing him or her for the ensuing school year.

10.

On March 23, 2012, the Superintendent made and filed an Accusation Against
Certificated Employees. He served Respondents who submitted a Request for Hearing with
an Accusation, Notice of Defense, Notice of Hearing and relevant sections of the Education
Code and the Government Code. The Superintendent notified Respondents that “….unless a
Notice of Defense signed by you or on your behalf, is received by the District on or
before March 28, 2012 the Board may proceed on the Accusation without a hearing. If
you decline or fail to request a hearing by the above date, such declination or failure
will constitute a waiver of your right to a hearing.”

11.

Any Respondent who filed a Request for Hearing participated in the hearing,

irrespective of whether or not a Notice of Defense was filed in a timely manner.

12.

The District served Respondents with a Notice of Hearing setting the hearing

for April 20, 2012, in accordance with Government Code section 11509.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied.

13.

14.

The Human Resources Director was responsible for implementing the

technical aspects of the layoff. The District developed a seniority list for probationary or
permanent certificated staff that included, among other matters, the name of the certificated
employee, first date of paid service, assignment, position, credentials, graduate degree(s),
area of emphasis, status, CLAD2, and application of tie-breaker criteria.

2

Crosscultural Language and Academic Development Certificate

6

15.

The Human Resources Director used the seniority list to develop a proposed
order of layoff list to determine the least senior employees currently assigned in the various
services being reduced. Then, the District determined whether the least senior employees
held credentials in another area that would entitle them to “bump” other junior employees.
In determining who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District counted
the number of reductions and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of
seniority. Then, the District checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they
could “bump” other employees.

16.

The District considered all positively assured attrition in determining the

actual number of final layoff notices to be delivered to its certificated employees.

17.

The services that the Board proposed to reduce were “particular kinds of

services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section
44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was
not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.

18.

The Board’s reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services related

to the welfare of the District and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuance of particular
kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the
District as determined by the Board.

19.

No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform

any services that any Respondent was certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3.

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the Lemon

Grove School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services. The cause for the
reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to the welfare of
the schools and the pupils thereof.

4.

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a
continuing position that he/she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior

7

employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position. (Lacy vs.
Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 469.)

5.

The District has the discretion to determine whether teachers are certificated
and competent to hold the position for which said teachers have been skipped and retained.
(King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016) Junior teachers may
be given retention priority (skipped) over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess
superior skills or capabilities that their more senior counterparts lack. (Poppers v. Tamalpais
Union High School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara Federation of
Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116
Cal.App.3d 831)

6.

7.

No employee with less seniority than any Respondent is being retained to

perform a service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.

All arguments not addressed herein are not supported by the evidence and/or

the law and therefore rejected.

ORDER

1.

The Accusation served on Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” is sustained.

Notice shall be given to these Respondents before May 15, 2010 that their services will not
be required for the 2012-2013 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of
particular kinds of services.

2.

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: April 27, 2012

_______________________________________
VALLERA J. JOHNSON
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

8

LEMON GROVE SCHOOL DISTRICT
EXHIBIT “A”
RESPONDENTS

Andreen, Kevin
Bargenquast, Jessica
Brookolo, William
Cooke, Darryl
Dehnel, Laurel
Erlendson, Shari
Estrada, Jeannette
Griffith, Kyle
Jaynes, Kelly
Lacsamana, Francisco
Moudry, Teresa
Nunez, Susan
Oswalt, Anne
Piligian, Cynthia
Poulin, Irma
Reisch, Marcia
Sana, Silvia
Sievenpiper, Diane
Slade, Sarah
Vazquez, Gustavo
Walker, Erin

9

