BEFORE
THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
CALEXICO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Layoff of

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE
CALEXICO UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT

Respondents.

OAH No. 2012030454

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Calexico, California, on April 25, 2012.

Eran M. Bermudez, Esq., and Erika D. Anderson, Esq., represented the Calexico

Unified School District.

Jon Y. Vanderpool, Esq., and Jon R. Cadieux, Esq., Tosdal Smith Steiner & Wax

represented all Respondents, except Margarita Buchanan.

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Respondent Margarita Buchanan.

The matter was submitted on April 25, 2012.

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION

The Board of Education of the Calexico Unified School District determined to reduce

or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers for budgetary reasons. The
decision was not related to the competency and/or dedication of the individuals whose
services the Board seeks to reduce or eliminate.

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving

review of credentials and seniority, “bumping” and breaking ties between/among employees
with the same first date of paid service. The selection process was in accordance with the
requirements of the Education Code.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Respondents listed in Exhibit “A” (Respondents) are certificated employees of

the Calexico Unified School District (District).

On February 23, 2012, Richard P. Fragale, the District’s Superintendent

(Superintendent), notified the District’s Governing Board (Board) of his recommendation to
reduce and/or eliminate particular kinds of services being provided by certificated employees
due to financial conditions for the 2012-2013 school year.

3.

On February 23, 2012, the Board adopted Resolution No. 27-02-12 reducing

or eliminating particular kinds of services for the ensuing school year and establishing
“competency” criteria for purposes of displacement and criteria for resolving ties among
certificated employees with the same date of first paid probationary service. Further, the
Board directed the Superintendent or his designated representative to send notices to all
employees possibly affected by the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.

Resolution No. 27-02-12 states in part:

Particular Kind of Service

Reduction

Full time Equivalents

Academic Support Teacher/Resource
Resource Assessment – Teacher on
Special Assignment services
English teaching services

Math teaching services

AVID teaching services

Physical Education teaching services

Art/Art Appreciation teaching
services
Social Science teaching services

Spanish teaching services

Adult Education teaching services

Counselors services

Special Education services

Estudiantina

Video Production/Computer Design

reduction
reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

reduction

2

1.0
2.0

7.0

5.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

6.0

4.0

3.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

1.0

Particular Kind of Service

Reduction

Full time Equivalents

Ag. Biology/Vet. Science teaching
services

Resource Teacher
Curriculum Resource Teacher
Preschool teaching services
K-6 teaching services

reduction

reduction
reduction
reduction
reduction
TOTAL FTE

1.0

1.0
1.0
3.0
42.0
86.0

The proposed reductions totaled 86.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.

4.

The Board established “competency” criteria in its Resolution, which states in

NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, DETERMINED AND ORDERED

by this Governing Board, as follows:

part:

[¶ . . .¶]

5.

Subject to requirements (if any) within the Educational Employment Relations
Act, that for purposes of “competency” as to “bumping” (displacement) rights
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955 (b) and as to
reemployment rights within the meaning of Education Code sections 44956
and 44957, to the extent such might apply, “competency” shall be based upon
the following: possession and current filing of a preliminary or clear credential
for the subject matter into which the employee would bump for the 2012-2013
school year or be reemployed.

The Board established the competency criteria for purposes of bumping or displacing
more junior employees with senior employees who were competent and credentialed to hold
the position held by the junior employees. There is no evidence that the competency criteria
were arbitrary or capricious or otherwise invalid.

5.

In its Resolution, between/among employees who first rendered paid service to

the District on the same date, the Board included “Criteria for Breaking Seniority Ties” and
provided clear instruction for implementation of the criteria. The order of termination under
the tie-breaking portion of the resolution was based on the needs of the District and its
students.

6.

On March 12, 2012, Teresa Estrada, the District’s Director of Human

Resources (Human Resources Director) served permanent and probationary certificated
Respondents with “Notice of Recommendation that your Services Will Not Be Required for

3

7.

8.

11.

12.

the Ensuing School Year (2012-2013),” a copy of the Board Resolution No. 27-02-12, and
stated the reason for the Board’s action. The Human Resources Director advised
Respondents of the right to hearing, that the Request for Hearing had to be delivered to the
District’s office no later than March 23, 2012, and that the failure to request a hearing would
constitute waiver of the right to hearing.

Respondents submitted a timely Request for Hearing to determine if there was

cause for not re-employing him or her for the ensuing school year.

On April 3, 2012, the Superintendent made and filed an Accusation Against

Certificated Employees. He served the Accusation upon Respondents who submitted a
Request for Hearing, along with a blank Notice of Defense and relevant sections of the
Education Code and the Government Code. Paragraph 7 of the Accusation stated:

Respondent may request a hearing by filing a Notice of Defense as provided in
Government Code section 11506 and Education Code section 44949(c)(1)
within five (5) days after service upon Respondent of this Accusation. Failure
to file a timely Notice of Defense will constitute a waiver of Respondent’s
right to a hearing. A Notice of Defense form is enclosed with this Accusation.

9.

Respondents filed a Notice of Defense in a timely manner.

10.

The District served Respondents with a Notice of Hearing, setting the hearing

for April 25, 2012, in accordance with Government Code section 11509.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied.

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Respondent Margarita Buchanan.

13.

The District rescinded layoff notices issued to Respondents Jessica Grijalva,

Danjomi Ramirez, and Cathy Ray.

14.

The District considered all positively assured attrition in determining the

actual number of final layoff notices to be delivered to its certificated employees.

15.

The Human Resources Director was responsible for implementing the

technical aspects of the layoff. She developed a seniority list for probationary or permanent
certificated employees who received preliminary notices of layoff. It included, among other
matters, the teacher’s name, seniority date, status, site, assignment, and credential(s) and
subject(s) authorization(s).

16.

The Human Resources Director used the seniority list to develop a proposed
order of layoff. Then, the District determined whether the least senior employees subject to
the layoff held credentials in another area that would entitle them to “bump” into the position
held by a more junior employee. In determining who would be laid off for each kind of

4

service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions and determined the impact on
incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority. Then, the District checked the credentials of
affected individuals and whether they could “bump” other employees, considering the
District’s “competency” criteria established by the Board in its Resolution.

17.

Respondent Debra Buchanan was laid off 1.0 FTE as a result of the reduction

of 1.0 FTE physical education teacher. She holds a single subject credential in Physical
Education. Respondent Debra Buchanan challenged her release from the District, arguing
that class size will be increased and she questioned whether mandated services would be
provided.

During the 2011 – 2012 school year, along with three other physical education

teachers, Respondent Debra Buchanan was assigned to William Moreno Middle School.
Debra Buchanan teaches five sections, four contain 40 students, and the fifth has 44 students.
According to the collective bargaining agreement between the District and the teachers, class
size is limited to 40 students; if the class size is greater than 40 students, it is considered
“overload”, and the teacher is paid $4 for each student over 40, for each period. Debra
Buchanan explained that it is more difficult to manage a class with more than 40 students.

Respondent Debra Buchanan testified that, for the 2012 – 2013 school year, William

Moreno is projected to have an enrollment of 780 students. As such, with three physical
education teachers assigned to this school, each class will have 52 students. As such, it will
be more difficult to teach the classes and more costly for the District than retaining
Respondent Debra Buchanan.

The Human Resources Director testified that, despite the proposed elimination or
reduction of services, all mandated services will be provided. There is no evidence to the
contrary. The issue of class size is outside the jurisdiction of this proceeding.

Considering the facts in the foregoing paragraphs, the District properly issued a layoff

notice to Respondent Debra Buchanan.

18.

Respondent Eliza Pereda (Respondent Pereda) asserted that she improperly
received a layoff notice because there are more junior teachers being retained to perform
services that she is certificated and competent to teach.

Respondent Pereda has a seniority date of November 13, 2006, and she holds a
multiple subject credential with a supplemental authorization in English that authorizes her to
teach English to students in 9th grade and below. During the 2011-2012 school year, Pereda
was assigned to teach 9th grade English.

Luz Espinoza (Espinoza) and Marilu Fletes (Fletes) each have a seniority date of

August 21, 2007, and each holds a Single Subject Credential in English. During the 2011-
2012 school year, Espinoza was assigned to teach English Language Arts to 10th through

5

12th grade students, and Fletes was assigned to teach English Language Arts to 12th grade
students.

Respondent Pereda contends that her BCLAD credential authorizes her to teach 10th
through 12th grade English Language Arts (ELA). She is mistaken. Students in 10th through
12th grade receive credit in English for the classes taught by Espinoza and Fletes because
these teachers possess a Single Subject Credential in English. If the District assigned
Respondent (with her BCLAD) to teach students in 10th through 12th grade ELA, the students
would not receive English credit because Respondent Pereda, unlike Espinoza and Fletes,
does not possess a Single Subject Credential in English. As such Respondent Pereda is not
credentialed and competent to provide the services performed by Espinoza and Fletes.

Considering the foregoing, Respondent Pereda properly received a layoff notice.

19.

Luisella Martinez-Godinez (Respondent Martinez-Godinez) contends that the

district maintained an incorrect seniority date for her and therefore improperly issued a layoff
notice to her.

Her first date of paid service with the District was August 1999; the District employed

Respondent Martinez-Godinez continuously thereafter until July 2006; at that time, as a
permanent employee of the District, she resigned.

Respondent Martinez-Godinez testified that when she submitted her letter of
resignation, the District’s Director of Personnel represented to her that if she returned within
39 months she would retain her status and seniority date.

Respondent Martinez-Godinez returned to the District on September 18, 2007. At

that time, her status as a permanent employee and seniority date of August 1999 were
restored. She did not receive a layoff notice at the end of the (2011-2012) school year
because the District listed her seniority date as August 1999. On March 5, 2012, following
an audit of the seniority list, the District corrected and changed Respondent’s seniority date
to September 18, 2007.

Respondent Martinez-Godinez contends that, given the facts of her case, the District

should be estopped from changing her seniority date from August 1999 to September 18,
2007.

20.

The doctrine of equitable estoppel prevents a party who intentionally misleads

another, by statement or conduct, to believe that a particular circumstance is true and to act
upon such belief from subsequently asserting a contradictory position in any litigation arising
from such statement or conduct. (See Cal. Evid. Code § 623; Driscoll v. City of Los Angles
(1967) 67 Cal.2d 297). In general, equitable estoppel requires the presence of four elements:
(1) the party to be estopped must be apprised of the facts; (2) she must intend that her
conduct shall be acted upon, or must so act that the party asserting the estoppel had a right to

6

believe it was so intended; (3) the other party must be ignorant of the true state of facts; (4)
she must rely upon the conduct to his injury. (Driscoll, supra at 305).

“[The] doctrine of equitable estoppel may be applied against the government where

justice and right require it” (City of Long Beach v. Mansell, (1970) 3 Cal.3d 462,493).

21.

Education Code section 44948 states in part:

When any certificated employee shall have resigned . . . and shall thereafter have
been reemployed by the board, his date of employment shall be deemed to be the date
on which he first accepted reemployment (if reemployed before July 1, 1947) or
rendered paid service (if reemployed after June 30, 1947) after his reemployment. . . .

Education Code section 44931 states in part:

Whenever any certificated employee of any school district who, at the time of his or
her resignation, was classified as permanent, is reemployed within 39 months after his
or her last day of paid service, the governing board of the district shall, disregarding
the break in service, classify him or her as, and restore to him or her all of the rights,
benefits and burdens of, a permanent employee, except as provided in this code. . . .

In other words, when a teacher resigns, the teacher’s seniority date is deemed to be

the first day the teacher rendered paid service following rehire. In San Jose Teachers
Association v. Allen, the Court of Appeal upheld this rule and held that when a permanent
certificated employee resigns and is reemployed within 39 months, his/her date of
employment for seniority purposes is the date of re-employment and the employee does not
regain his or her original hiring date. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144
Cal.App.3d 627, 641.)

The foregoing rule has been applied in cases where a certificated employee asserted
estoppel after a school district representative assured the employee that he would keep his
original seniority date. In Board of Education v. Round Valley Teachers Association, the
Court ruled that the district had no authority, by its own action or by formal collective
bargaining agreement, to confer statutory employment rights in excess of those provided for
under the Education Code. (Board of Education v. Round Valley Teachers Assn. (1996) 23
Cal4th 269.)

In this case, after attaining permanent status with the District, Respondent Martinez-

Godinez left the District for less than 39 months. When she returned, she was entitled to
regain her status as a permanent employee but she was not entitled to retain her original
seniority date. Despite any representation that she asserts may have been made by the
District, the District could not have lawfully agreed to confer upon Respondent Martinez-
Godinez any seniority date other than the date expressly provided for under the Education
Code. The District cannot be estopped from asserting an employee’s proper seniority date as
mandated by Education Code section 44848 and San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen.

7

22.

Respondent Martinez-Godinez’s seniority date is September 18, 2007, the first

date of paid service after she was rehired. Therefore, she is subject to layoff.

23.

The services that the Board proposed to reduce were “particular kinds of

services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section
44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was
not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.

24.

The Board’s reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services related

to the welfare of the District and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuance of particular
kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the
District as determined by the Board.

25.

No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to perform

any services that any Respondent was certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3.

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the Calexico

Unified School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services. The cause for
the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to the welfare
of the schools and the pupils thereof.

4.

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a
continuing position that he/she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position. (Lacy vs.
Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 469.)

5.

The District has the discretion to determine whether teachers are certificated
and competent to hold the position for which said teachers have been skipped and retained.
(King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016.)

6.

No employee with less seniority than any Respondent is being retained to

perform a service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.

8

7.

All arguments not addressed herein are not supported by the evidence and/or

the law and therefore rejected.

ORDER

1.

The layoff notices issued to Respondents Jessica Grijalva, Danjomi Ramirez

and Cathy Ray are rescinded. The Accusation served upon Respondents Jessica Grijalva,
Danjomi Ramirez and Cathy Ray is dismissed.

2.

Except as provided in the foregoing paragraph of this Order, the Accusation

served on Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” is sustained; notice shall be given to these
Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” before May 15, 2012 that their services will not be
required for the 2012-2013 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of
particular kinds of services.

3.

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: May 1, 2012

_______________________________________
VALLERA J. JOHNSON
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

9

Exhibit “A”

Alvarado Chavarin
Arroyo
Aviña
Ayala
Bercovich
Buchanan
Buchanan
Buenrostro Zepeda
Campos
Carrillo
Cerros
Colunga
Cordero-Flores
Costa
Cota
Cuesta
De La O
Delgado
Dominguez
Dominguez
Dreesen
Escutia
Espinoza
Esquer
Fifer
Figueroa
Fimbres
Garcia
Garcia
Gonzalez
Gradillas
Grijalva
Gutierrez
Hansanugrum
Hernandez
Herrera
Hopkins
Hurtado
Jackson-Lopez

Carlos M.
Jose
Nelly
Susana
Blanca
Debra
Margarita
Antonio
Yesenia
Ana Maria
Leticia
Christine
Rosana
Kristina A.
Blary Ruhama
Lourdes
Gisela
Brenda
Guadalupe R.
Juan Carlos
Darla M.
Claudia Denisse
Uriel
Noemi
Elizabeth
Rodrigo
Patricia D.
Robert P.
Mayra Y.
JuanGabriel C.
Ana Hilda
Jessica
Roberto O.
Pollavet
Zeltzin
Cecilia Patricia
Theron James
Delia Susana
Liliana

10

Jimenez
Jimenez
Kovac
Leon
Leos
Leyva
Lopez
Magallanes
Magaña
Marquez
Martinez
Martinez
Martinez- Godinez
Mayo Wells
Medina
Melendez
Meza
Miramon
Munguia
Munoz
Nogales
Ojeda
Padilla
Padilla Jr.
Peralta
Pereda
Perez
Perez
Ramirez

Ramirez
Ramos
Rangel
Ray
Rivera
Rodriguez
Rodriguez
Romero
Rosiles Padilla
Sanchez
Sanchez-Romero

Jorge
Cecilia
Paul
Rocio R.
Xavier
Martin
Silvano
Karla
Adriana Y.
Janet
Marina
Mike
Luisella
Giovanna D.
Victoria Susan
Zahira O.
Claudia
Marco A.
Carolina
Maria A.
Florencia
Guadalupe
Juan Carlos
Francisco
Marcela
Eliza
Maura
Mercedes L.
Juan P.
Danjomi (Daniel Jose
Miguel)
Susan K.
Alejandrina
Cathy A.
Yordan
Maricella S.
Elsa Maria
Elizabeth
Brenda R.
Laura
Maria Elena P.

11

Stone III
Torres
Valdez
Valenzuela
Velasquez
Verduzco
Villanueva

Robert L.
Martha
Karla J.
Elizabeth
Leyda Illiana
Diana
Hector

12

