BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
SANTA BARBARA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

SCOTT S. BRENNAND,

OAH No. 2012040033

Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

Ralph B. Dash, Administrative Law Judge with the Office of Administrative

Hearings, heard this matter on May 2, 2012, at Santa Barbara, California.

Meredith G. Karasch, Attorney at Law, represented Santa Barbara Unified School

District (District).

Alexis Ridenour, Attorney at Law, represented Scott S. Brennand (Respondent).

The record was left open for receipt of additional evidence regarding Respondent’s
qualifications vis-à-vis the District’s “competency criteria” for the purpose of determining
Respondent’s “bumping rights.” On May 11, 2012, the District filed the following
documents, which collectively were marked as Exhibit 17 and admitted: FAX cover sheet;
Declaration of Meredith G. Karasch; and Declaration of Ann Peak with attached exhibits.
The matter was deemed submitted on May 11, 2012.1

Oral and documentary evidence having been received and the matter having been

submitted, the Administrative Law Judge makes the following Findings of Fact.

1

This matter was originally set for hearing on April 17, 2012. Pursuant to the

District’s unopposed motion for continuance, the matter was re-scheduled for hearing on
May 2, 2012. Accordingly, under the provisions of Education Code section 44949,
subdivision (e), this Proposed Decision must be submitted to the District’s Governing Board
on or before May 29, 2012.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.

David E. Cash, Superintendent of the District, acting in his official capacity,

caused all pleadings, notices and other papers to be filed and served upon Respondent
pursuant to the provisions of Education Code2 sections 44949 and 44955. All pre-hearing
jurisdictional requirements have been met with respect to the District and Respondent.

2.

On February 28, 2012, the District's Governing Board adopted a Resolution

(Resolution) to reduce and discontinue the services of full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated
positions at the close of the 2011-2012 school year, as follows:

Elementary
Computer Typing
Math
English/Theater
Social Science
Biology/Geoscience
Health
PE
Child Development

TOTAL FTE

22
1
5
10
5
5
2
6
4

60

3.

On March 13, 2012, the District’s Governing Board adopted another resolution

(Amended Resolution), the net effect of which was to discontinue the same total FTE in the
same kinds of services as set forth in the Resolution, except that the one FTE in “Computer
Typing” was changed to .667, and “Tech Skills .333” was added. Respondent taught
computer typing and tech skills during the 2011-2012 school year.

4.

The services described in the Resolution and the Amended Resolution are
“particular kinds of services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of
Education Code section 44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these
particular kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise
of discretion.

5.

The reduction or discontinuation of these particular kinds of services related to
the welfare of the District and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds
of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District as
determined by the Board.

6.

The Board properly considered all known attrition, resignations, retirements,

deaths and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices

2

Except as otherwise noted, all statutory references are to the Education Code.

2

to be delivered to its employees as of March 15, 2012. (San Jose Teachers Association v.
Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 636 (1983).3

7.

In its Resolution and Amended Resolution, the Board directed the

Superintendent or his designee to serve notices of termination in accordance with and in the
manner prescribed by sections 44949 and 44955.

8.

At the times it adopted the Resolution and the Amended Resolution, the Board

also adopted criteria to be used in determining the order of termination of certificated
employees who first rendered paid service to the District in a probationary position on the
same date. The Board resolved that the order of termination of said employees would be
determined by reference to certain tiebreaker criteria. It is found that such criteria best serve
the needs of the District and its students.

9.

At the times it adopted the Resolution and the Amended Resolution, the Board

also adopted “competency criteria” for certificated personnel that it would use to determine
whether a more senior employee who was being laid off was certificated and competent to
render those services then expected to be provided in the coming school year by a junior
employee.

10.

Pursuant to the Resolution and the provisions of sections 44949 and 44955, the

Superintendent gave timely written notice to the affected certificated personnel, including
Respondent, that he had recommended to the Board that notice be given to them that their
services would not be required for the 2012-2013 school year. Respondent, among others.
requested a hearing to determine if there is cause for not employing him for the ensuing
school year.

11.

The District filed and timely served an Accusation, copies of the Resolution

and Amended Resolution, a Statement to Respondent, a blank Notice of Defense, Request for
Discovery, and pertinent sections of the Government and Education Codes upon Respondent,
who filed timely a Notice of Defense.

12.

At the start of the hearing, the District announced that it had rescinded all

layoff notices to those certificated personnel receiving same, save and except for
Respondent.

13.

The District maintains a seniority list (Exhibit 8) which contains employees’
seniority dates, current assignments, and credentials. The District used the seniority list to
develop a proposed lay-off list of the least senior employees currently assigned to the various
services being reduced. In determining who would be laid off for each kind of service
reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by the known vacancies

3

All layoffs were for particular kinds of service, and not “average daily

attendance” which might have required positively assured attrition to be considered through
May 15, 2012.

3

and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority. The District then
determined whether these employees held credentials in another area and were entitled to
displace and replace (bump) other, more junior employees.

14.

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district
and establishing requirements for employment. (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35
Cal.3d 294, 299-300.) Similarly, school districts have the discretion to determine particular
kinds of services that will be eliminated, “even though a service continues to be performed or
provided in a different manner by the district.” (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41
Cal.App.4th 1571, 1582-1585; Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172
Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)

15. What amounts to a particular kind of service for lay-off purposes varies
according to the circumstances, and must in each case be determined in the light of the
particular facts. A particular kind of service may be a certain subject, it may be the teaching
of the subject for a particular purpose, or it may be a particular manner of teaching the
subject. (Walsh v. Board of Trustees of Redlands High School Dist. (1934) 2 Cal.App. 2d
180, Fuller v. Berkeley School Dist. of Alameda County (1934) 2 Cal.2d 152; Gallup v.
Board of Trustees, (1996) 41 Cal. App. 4th 1571.) CTA vs. Goleta Union School District
(1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32, holds that elementary teaching is a distinct particular kind of
service. In Gallup, the court specifically noted that the issue is not who will perform the
services, but how the services will be performed. (Gallup, supra at 1588.)

16.

In order to justify skipping a junior employee in a reduction in force, a District
must demonstrate a specific need for personnel with special training and experience to teach
a specific course of study or to provide certain services, and that the more senior employee
does not possess those skills. (Ed. Code § 44955, subd. (d).)

17.

Appellate court decisions in the layoff context have held that where

competency is not demonstrated by a senior employee, a junior employee having the ability
to serve the needs of a program may be retained by the school district even though it may
result in the senior employee's termination. (Brough v. El Segundo Unified Sch. Dist. (1981)
118 Cal.App.3d 702, citing Moreland Teachers Ass'n v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648,
655.) Courts have reasoned that the law requires “that someone make informed
determinations whether a laid-off employee . . . is both ‘certificated and competent,’” and
that “these determinations necessarily involve ‘discretionary decisions’ by a school district's
responsible officials because they ‘have a special competence’ to make them.” (King v.
Berkeley Unified Sch. Dist. (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1023; Duax v. Kern Community
College Dist. (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.) In making this determination, a school
district must consider not only legal qualifications (i.e., whether a teacher is appropriately
credentialed) but also actual competence, or “the correlation between the applicant's specific
training and experience and the duties of the available position.” (King, supra, 89
Cal.App.3d at 1019.)

4

18.

In Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School, 170 Cal.App.4th 127 at 131, a senior

English and social science teacher challenged the retention of two junior teachers teaching in
a community day school, stating that the junior teachers were improperly skipped because
the senior teacher was certificated and competent to render the services they were providing.
The teacher argued that only formal, written program requirements are relevant in
determining the District's needs and the teacher's competence to fill these needs. (Id. at 138.)
The court rejected the teacher's argument, finding instead that subdivision (d)(1) of section
44955 “expressly allows a district to demonstrate its specific ‘needs’ and there is nothing in
the statute that requires such needs to be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job
descriptions, or program requirements.” (Ibd.) The court went on to specifically find that
while the teacher may have the base qualifications necessary to be certificated and competent
because she held the appropriate credential to teach in the community day school,
“subdivision (d)(1) recognizes a district may have specific needs for personnel to teach a
specific course of study that go beyond base qualifications.” (Ibid.)

19.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he services of no

permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.” (Emphasis added.)
“Certificated” is defined by the provisions of the Education Code pertaining to credentials, but
“competent” is not specifically defined. In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994) 160 Cal.App.3d
13, 19, the Court defined the term in a reemployment proceeding under section 44956, a statute
that contains the same “certificated and competent” requirement, in terms of the teachers’ skills
and qualifications, specifically, as “relating to special qualifications for a vacant position, rather
than relating to the on-the-job performance of the laid-off permanent employee.” In doing so,
the Court noted that courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing Board
(1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109
Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, and had interpreted the term in a similar manner.

20.

As the Forker court recognized, school districts have the discretion to define
competency, as had been permitted in earlier reemployment cases, King v. Berkeley Unified
School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016 (King) and Martin v. Kentfield School District
(1983) 35 Cal.3d. 294 (Martin). In King, the court upheld a district’s requirement that laid off
teachers have prior teaching experience in the open jobs in which they claimed competency,
namely, mathematics and physical education. In Martin, a district was permitted to require prior
teaching experience in middle school before deeming laid off elementary school teachers
competent to teach in middle school, if such requirement was equally applied to all certificated
employees, not just those on a preferential rehire list.

21.

In Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565

(Duax), a case arising under the community college reduction in force statute, now section
87743, the governing board had established a standard of competency that required one year of
full-time teaching in the subject area within the last ten years. After acknowledging the
discretion afforded to school districts, and set forth in King and Martin, the court stated: “While
these decisions stress the discretion reposed in a school board in defining the term ‘competent,’

5

the court in Forker . . . added further assistance in stating, ‘[a]s interpreted by the Martin court,
the term ‘competent’ as used in section 44956 relates to specific skills or qualifications required
of the applicant. Decisions prior to Martin have interpreted that term in a similar manner.” (Id.
at p. 9; see also Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal. App.3d 648, 654-655;
Ozsogomonyan, Teacher layoffs in California: An Update (1979) 30 Hastings L.J. 1727, 1749-
1751). Hence, from these authorities we conclude that a board’s definition of competency is
reasonable when it considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.”
The Duax court upheld the governing board’s definition of competence as a reasonable exercise
of its discretion.

22.

Respondent’s counsel did not challenge the appropriateness of the competency

criteria used by the District to determine the bumping rights of senior teachers who were to
be laid off while junior employees were retained. So far as is applicable to the facts of this
case, the competency criteria in the Resolution and Amended Resolution include “NCLB
(No Child Left Behind) Compliance in Discipline”4 and “Prior experience in discipline
within the last 10 years.” As more fully explained below, Respondent is neither certificated
to teach Economics nor “NCLB compliant” in that subject when the same is taught through
the Social Sciences curriculum. Accordingly, it is not necessary to determine whether
Respondent has the experience required by the competency criteria to teach the subject.

23.

There are a number of ways for a teacher to become NCLB Compliant (i.e.

highly qualified) to teach a given subject. One way is to have a baccalaureate degree in the
subject one teaches. Another way is via examination offered by a national testing agency.
According to the District’s personnel coordinator, a teacher must be NCLB Compliant before
teaching a “core” (i.e. required for graduation) subject, such as English, Math or Economics.
Respondent has a bachelor’s degree in psychology. On July13, 1996, he passed a national
examination in business education. He holds a single subject credential in Business. Under
California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80005, subdivision (a)(3), Respondent’s
“Business” credential permits him to teach such subjects as accounting, business marketing,
typing and “economics.” A single subject business credential does not authorize one to teach
“Social Sciences,” which also authorizes the teaching of economics.5 Respondent contends
that he should be permitted either to bump a junior employee who currently teaches 12th
grade Economics, or that he should be retained to teach Economics in the Santa Barbara
County Regional Occupational Program (ROP) in which the District participates.

24.

The ROP provides career technical education classes in areas such as

information technology, agriculture, business, culinary arts, healthcare, construction and auto
technology. ROP classes are funded and staffed through the County. The District does not
know, during any school year, whether the County will offer a particular ROP during the

Being “NCLB Compliant” carries the same meaning, for these layoff

proceedings, as being “highly qualified” to teach a given subject.

See, California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80005, subdivision

4

5

(a)(16).

6

following school year. In this matter, no evidence was presented to suggest that economics
In any event, the county, not the
will be taught in the ROP in the 2012-2013 school year.
District, staffs the ROP program and Respondent has no right to bump any teacher in that
program.

25.

One issue could not be determined based on the evidence presented at the
hearing. That issue was whether Respondent’s having passed a national examination in
business education meant that he is highly qualified to teach Economics. The answer was
that Respondent is considered highly qualified to teach “business economics,” but his
business credential does not entitle him to teach economics offered as part of the Social
Science curriculum. As noted above, the record was left open to obtain additional
information regarding Respondent’s bumping rights. One attachment to Ms. Peak’s
declaration (part of Exhibit 17) is a copy of email correspondence between Ms. Peak and
Lynda Nichols, Education Programs Consultant, Title II, Part A State Coordinator, Title II
Leadership Office, California Department of Education.6 Ms. Peak sent Ms. Nichols a copy
of Respondent’s certification that he had passed a national examination in business education
(Exhibit C) and inquired whether Respondent’s having passed the examination and his
holding of a business credential entitled him to teach Economics in the District. Ms.
Nichols’ response was as follows: “If the economics class is a social science class (i.e. 12th
grade standard driven class) someone holding a business credential would not be authorized
or highly qualified to teach the class. If the economics class is an alternative pathway to
graduation course (i.e. business economics) [Respondent] would be appropriately authorized
and highly qualified for the assignment.” As noted above, Respondent seeks to bump a
junior teacher who currently teaches 12th grade Economics that is part of the Social Science
curriculum. His business credential does not permit him to teach that subject. Accordingly,
Respondent is not “certificated and competent,” within the meaning of Section 44955,
subdivision (b), to teach Economics for which a junior employee was retained.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.

2.

Jurisdiction for these proceedings exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955.

The services set forth in Findings 2 and 3 are particular kinds of service which

may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and case law. A
district may reduce services, within the meaning of Education Code Section 44955,
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

6

At hearing, the parties stipulated that the anticipated email exchange could be
received in evidence without the need for the information received from the Department of
Education to be under penalty of perjury.

7

3.

Cause exists because of the reduction in particular kinds of services to reduce
the District's teaching positions as set forth in the Board Resolutions and to give notice to the
affected teachers pursuant to Education Code section 44955. (Campbell v. Abbot (1978) 76
Cal.App.3d 796; Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)

4.

5.

The District’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither arbitrary

nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the District's discretion.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services

which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

ORDER

As a result of the reductions of services, the District may give notice to Respondent

Scott Brennand that his services will not be required for the 2012/2013 school year.

Dated:____________________

___________________________
RALPH B. DASH
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

8

