BEFORE THE
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
SAN DIEGO COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Employment Status of
26 Certificated Employees of the San Diego
County Office of Education,

OAH No. 2012030344

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of

California, heard this matter in San Diego, California, on April 13, 2012.

Mark R. Bresee, and Jabari A. Willis, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo,

represented the San Diego County Office of Education.

Fern Steiner, Tosdal, Smith, Steiner, & Wax, represented respondents Wendy
Aguilar; Wendy Aja; Tara Barrows; Jose Bello; Samantha Bielman; Jessica Billeci; Douglas
Connor; Karen Daley; Valentin Escanuela; Mirsha Garcia; Kimberley Gudeth; Samantha
Howerton; Tim Kobayashi; Jerry Lindsey; Sally Lopez; Kathleen Loyd; Bethesda Manrique;
Dionne Marijana; Marco Moore; Mike Nguyen; Emilio Nunez; Erendira Ramirez; Scott
Riddick; Dyane Sendaydiego; Sherrell Tyler; and Martin Walker.

The matter was submitted on April 13, 2012.

The San Diego County Office of Education

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

There are 47 school districts that fall under the jurisdiction of the San Diego
County Office of Education (SDCOE), which operates under the authority of the California
Constitution, the State Legislature, California Education Code, and the California State
Board of Education. SDCOE has many responsibilities including serving as the appeals
board for student expulsions, acting as the appeals board for inter-district transfers, acting as
the appeals board for Charter School petitions, and providing various educational programs.

SDCOE is directed by the San Diego County Board of Education, which consists of
five publically elected board members. The Board members’ terms are staggered to allow
for continuity. From among its members, the Board elects a president and vice president.

1

Randolph E. Ward, Ed.D., serves as the Board’s secretary and SDCOE’s Chief
Executive Officer. Superintendent Ward, with assistance of the Board, staff, and the public,
develops programs and services authorized by statute and as determined by needs or
requests. He provides educational leadership and administers mandated services. He has
direct oversight responsibilities for approving and assuring school district budgets, calling
school district elections, and assisting school district in meeting emergencies by providing
necessary services.

2.

SDCOE provides various educational programs within the county including

the Juvenile Court and Community Schools (JCCS) program, a migrant education program,
and an outdoor education program.

SDCOE’s Budget Constraints

3.

Lora Duzyk, SDCOE’s Assistant Superintendant of Business Services,

established that budget problems affecting the nation and state have impacted SDCOE’s
operations. Last year, SDCOE had a deficit budget. This year, as a result of possible cuts in
transportation funding and a reduction in average daily attendance rates, additional budgetary
problems are anticipated. SDCOE has made efforts to overcome some of the anticipated
deficit by eliminating long-term substitute teachers and by not replacing teachers who have
retired, but taking these steps will not balance SDCOE’s budget and permit SDCOE to
maintain a prudent reserve.

4.

On March 12, 2012, Claudette Inge, Assistant Superintendent, Student
Programs and Services District, sent the following notice to Superintendent Ward and
SDCOE’s Board.

The undersigned, Claudette Inge, Assistant
Superintendent, Student Programs and Services Division
of the San Diego County Office of Education, hereby
gives notice to the County Superintendent pursuant to
subdivision (a) of section 44949 of the Education Code
and recommends that County Superintendent reduce
and/or eliminate the programs set forth in Exhibit A
attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference.

It is necessary to decrease the number of
employees of the San Diego County Office of Education
for the 2102-2013 school year consistent with the
recommended reduction and/or elimination of the
described particular kinds of service. The county
Superintendent should send a notice to the affected
employees pursuant to the Education Code sections
44949 and 44955 that their services will be reduced
and/or eliminated effective at the end of the 20121-12
school year.

2

Exhibit A provided:

EXHIBIT A

RECOMMENDATION TO REDUCE AND/OR ELIMINATE PARTICULAR KINDS OF
SERVICES OR PROGRAMS

Particular Kind of Service or Program

Number Of Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Positions
To Be Eliminated

Juvenile Court and Community School (JCCS)

 Resource Teacher

 Court Schools
 Community Schools
Independent Study

 Youth Day Treatment Center


JCCS Principal

SELPA-North Coastal Special Education Region
Discovery Hill/Valley Day Treatment Center

 Discovery School Teacher

Total FTE

Executive Order 001-11-12

5.

Based on his review of available information, Superintendent Ward concurred
with Assistant Superintendent Inge’s recommendations. Superintendent Ward expressed his
determinations in Executive Order No. 001-11-12 as follows:

A.

The Assistant Superintendent, Student
Services and Programs Division has recommended to
this Superintendent of Schools that those programs and
services performed by certificated employees and shown
in Exhibit “A” attached hereto and incorporated herein
by reference be reduced and eliminated, effective at the
end of the 2011-12 school year.

B.

The Superintendent finds it is in the best

interest of the County Office of Education to reduce and
eliminate the programs and services shown in Exhibit
“A”, effective at the end of the 2011-12 school year.

1.00

7.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
1.00

1.00

20.00

3

NOW, THEREFORE, THE SUPERINTENDENT
DETERMINES THAT:

1. The above recitals are true and correct;

2. The programs and services described in
Exhibit “A” attached to this Resolution are reduced and
eliminated, starting with the 2012-13 school year in
accordance with the recommendations of the Assistant
Superintendent;

3. The Executive Director, Human Resources is
authorized and directed to determine which employees’
services will not be required for the 2012-2013 school
year as a result of this reduction and elimination in
programs and services and to take all steps necessary
under the law not to employ those certificated employees
of the County Superintendent, because of the reduction
and elimination of these programs and services;

4. The Executive Director, Human Resources, or

designee is authorized and directed to determine the
order of layoff for those certificated employees having
the same seniority date solely on the basis of needs of the
San Diego County Office of Education and the students
thereof;

5. In selecting those probationary and permanent

certificated employees who shall receive notice of
termination pursuant to this Resolution, Education Code
section 44955 allows the Superintendent to deviate from
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority
by virtue of their competence, credential(s), assignment,
and the specific needs of the County Office of Education
and its students.

6. The criteria that will be applied to deviate

from terminating certificated employees who may
otherwise be terminated by order of seniority, are based
on the needs of the students of the County Office of
Education, and will ensure that no employee will be
terminated while a less senior employee is retained to
render service which the more senior employee is both
certificated and competent to render.

4

7. In observing the statutory rights of more senior

certificated employees performing services in a subject
matter or field identified by the County Office of
Education for reduction or elimination to displace a less
senior certificated employee, those more senior
certificated employees may displace less senior
certificated employee if it is established to the
satisfaction of the County Office of Education that the
more senior certificated employee is both competent and
credentialed to render the services performed by a less
senior certificated employee.

8. Additionally, the Executive Director, Human
Resources or designee is authorized and directed to take
such other action as may be necessary as a result of this
action, pursuant to applicable provisions of law and San
Diego County Office of Education policy and
procedures, including but not limited to affording laid-
off employees those re-employments rights to which they
are entitled by law.

The Reduction in Force Determination

6.

In accordance with Executive Order 001-11-12, Michele Fort-Merrill,

SDCOE’s Executive Director of Human Resources Services, determined which SDCOE
employees were subject to the executive order’s reduction in force. In addition to the 20
employees subject to the reduction in force, six additional employees were identified to
receive precautionary notices.

The Service of Preliminary Layoff Notices

7.

On March 12, 2012, pursuant to Executive Order 001-11-12, respondents, each

of whom was employed as a certificated employee by SDCOE in a teaching position, was
served with a Preliminary Notice of Layoff, which advised each employee of the right to
request a hearing and contained Executive Order 001-11-12, Assistant Superintendent Inge’s
notice dated March 12, 2012, a copy of Exhibit A, relevant Education Code provisions, and a
blank notice of defense.

The following employees/respondents were served with the preliminary layoff
notices: Wendy Aguilar; Wendy Aja; Tara Barrows; Jose Bello; Samantha Bielman; Jessica
Billeci; Douglas Connor; Karen Daley; Valentin Escanuela; Mirsha Garcia; Kimberley
Gudeth; Samantha Howerton; Tim Kobayashi; Jerry Lindsey; Sally Lopez; Kathleen Loyd;
Bethesda Manrique; Dionne Marijana; Marco Moore; Mike Nguyen; Emilio Nunez; Erendira
Ramirez; Scott Riddick; Dyane Sendaydiego; Sherrell Tyler; and Martin Walker.

5

Jurisdictional Matters

8.

On April 13, 2012, the record in the reduction in force proceeding was opened.

Attorneys Mark R. Breese and Jabari A. Willis appeared on behalf of SDCOE. Attorney
Fern Steiner appeared on behalf of all respondents. Counsel for SDCOE gave a brief
opening statement. Counsel for respondents waived the presentation of an opening
statement. Jurisdictional documents and a written stipulation were presented. SDCOE’s
counsel advised that SDCOE had rescinded the preliminary layoff notice related to the
elimination of the JCCS Principal position. Sworn testimony was given; documentary
evidence was received; closing argument was provided; the record was closed; and the
matter was submitted.

The Seniority List, Bumping Charts, Bumping, Skipping

9.

SDCOE maintains a seniority list for its certificated employees that sets forth

each employee’s name in order from the most recently hired employee to the most senior
employee; the employee’s first and last name; the kind of service provided (e.g., teacher;
special education teacher; speech and language specialist, early intervention specialist, etc.);
the worksite where services were provided; the employee’s full-time equivalent status1; the
employee’s seniority date (first paid date as a probationary employee); the employee’s status
(probationary or tenured); whether the employee was served with a preliminary layoff notice
(N) and requested a hearing (H); the employee’s teaching credential(s); a running column
that indicates the extent of the reduction in force through that employee; and employee notes.
The “notes” section of the list contains such comments as “retain, counselor” (meaning the
counselor employee’s service was not subject to layoff in the Executive Order);”Layoff,
Bumped by [Name]”; and SKIP.

Executive Director Fort-Merrill established that the seniority list was delivered to

employees for review before the hearing. No employee contested the validity of the
information contained in the seniority list as it related to what the employee taught, the
seniority dates, where services were provided, whether an employee was a probationary or a
tenured, or the nature of the credential held.

10.

Executive Director Fort-Merrill’s list established bumping charts that

identified the particular kinds of services being reduced or discontinued under the Executive
Order, the employees who provided those services, and whether employees displaced by the
Executive Order had the seniority and qualification to displace (bump) a more junior
employee. The process used to prepare the bumping charts complied with the economic
layoff statutes found in the Education Code, which generally require the retention of senior
certificated employees over more junior employees and the retention of permanent
employees over probationary employees and others with less seniority except for five
instances involving skipping.

1

A full-time employment position is a 1.0 full-time equivalent (FTE).

6

Bumping and Skipping

11.

For purposes of a school district reduction in force, “bumping” refers to a

senior teacher moving into the position held by a junior teacher; “skipping” refers to a junior
teacher being retained by a district for specified reasons that go beyond base qualifications.

12.

The general rule in reduction in force proceedings is that an employer –

whether a school district or a board of education – must make assignments and reassignments
in such a manner that employees will be retained to render any service which their seniority
and qualifications entitle them to render. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) But, an exception
to this general rule exists when the employer demonstrates a specific need for personnel to
teach a specific course or course of study and the certificated employee who is being skipped has
special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide
those services which others with more seniority do not possess. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d).)
Nothing in the statute requires special needs to be evidenced by formal, written policies, course
or job descriptions, or program requirements.

13. With respect to Monarch School, a school that provides services to homeless
children, Executive Director Fort-Merrill and Joel Garcia, the Principal of Monarch School,
established that a Kindergarten-First Grade (K-1) teaching position requires early elementary
school teaching experience and bilingual skills.2 Principal Garcia testified that at least half
the Monarch School students in K-1 were Latino and spoke Spanish, and that these early
education students had special needs in literacy, social issues, and meeting academic
expectations that could not be provided by a teacher who was not bilingual and who did not
also possess experience in early education instruction. The K-1 position was posted with
those qualifications being listed, but no one who applied for the K-1 position who was senior
to Kathleen Lloyd met the special qualifications.

Kathleen Loyd, a probationary teacher with SDCOE, holds a seniority date of

October 31, 2011. Ms. Lloyd has bilingual skills which she uses and she possesses early
elementary school teaching experience. SDCOE decided to skip Ms. Loyd over more senior
teachers who were credentialed to teach elementary school, but either were not bilingual or
lacked experience in early elementary instruction or both.

No respondent senior to Ms. Lloyd was bilingual and possessed the special training and

experience necessary to teach the K-1 position at Monarch School. Skipping Ms. Lloyd was
appropriate because of her special experience and training.

14. With respect to its outdoor program, SDCOE operates Camp Cuyamaca, a
five-day residential educational program for sixth grade students. The camp’s curriculum

2

For the purpose of skipping in this reduction in force proceeding, SDCOE has
determined that the term bilingual necessarily includes an employee’s the ability to speak,
write, and communicate in the Spanish language, both with students and the parents of
students. An employee’s possession of a BCLAD certification was not required to establish
required bilingual skills for skipping purposes.

7

includes life science, biology, botany, earth science, geology, meteorology, astronomy,
outdoor skills, Native American lore, recreation activities, and crafts. Camp Cuyamaca is
headed by a principal and is divided into three villages. Each village is supervised by a
credentialed teacher, known as the head teacher. Each head teacher has eight specialists
whom he supervises. The specialists provide direct instruction and supervision to students.
The four head teachers who are employed during the day are each responsible for the 72 boys
and 72 girls who live in a village for the school week. In addition, Camp Cuyamaca employs
a head teacher who is responsible for supervising the camp at night.

Tina Chin, the Senior Director of SDCOE’s outdoor education program, testified

about the unique education, training, and responsibilities required to hold employment as a
head teacher. All head teachers have previously served as specialists, and head teachers must
know about the operation of Camp Cuyamaca, the operation of the villages, the curriculum,
the trails and hiking areas that surround the camp, the flora and fauna, and the emergency
procedures that must be followed. Student safety requires a head teacher have actual
experience in working at Camp Cuyamaca, and the position of head teacher requires far more
than simply holding an appropriate teaching credential.

Douglas Connor is a head teacher at Camp Cuyamaca with a seniority date of
August 29, 2011. For the past year, Mr. Connor has been in charge of Camp Cuyamaca at
night. Before he became a head teacher, Mr. Connor was employed a specialist at Camp
Cuyamaca for several years.

Scott Riddick is a head teacher at Camp Cuyamaca with a seniority date of August 27,

2008. For the past year, Mr. Riddick has been in charge of a Camp Cuyamaca village.
Before he became a head teacher, Mr. Connor was employed a specialist at Camp Cuyamaca
for several years.

SDCOE skipped Mr. Connor and Mr. Riddick over more senior teachers who were

credentialed to teach elementary school but lacked experience in teaching outdoor programs
and lacked teaching experience at Camp Cuyamaca.

No other respondent possessed the special training and experience necessary hold the

position of head teacher at Camp Cuyamaca.

15.

SDCOE provides services to Spanish-speaking students who are awaiting

deportation. Executive Director Fort-Merrill established SDCOE’s need for teachers with
bilingual skills to provide service in these positions.

Wendy Aguilar, a probationary teacher with SDCOE, held a seniority date of
December 2, 2010. She has bilingual skills and possesses a multiple subject teaching
credential, a BCLAD certification, and a mild-moderate special education credential. As a
result of her bilingual skills, SDCOE decided to skip Ms. Aguilar over more senior teachers
who were credentialed to teach elementary school, but did not possess needed bilingual
skills. Ms. Aguilar uses her bilingual skills in the position she currently holds and she will
be required to use those skills in the position into which she is being skipped. No respondent

8

senior to Ms. Aguilar was bilingual and possessed the special training and experience necessary
to teach in this position.

Samantha Bielman, a probationary teacher with SDCOE, held a seniority date of
October 4, 2010. She has bilingual skills and possesses a multiple subject teaching credential
and an EL certification. She currently teaches in a residential, non-court school setting
where she utilizes her Spanish-speaking skills. As a result of her bilingual skills, SDCOE
decided to skip Ms. Bielman over more senior teachers who were credentialed to teach
elementary school, but did not possess required bilingual skills. Ms. Bielman will be
required to use her bilingual skills in the position into which she is being skipped. No
respondent senior to Ms. Bielman was bilingual and possessed the special training and
experience necessary to teach in this position.

Other Evidence

16. Martin Walker is a permanent certificated employee with SCCOE whose

seniority date is October 29, 2007. Mr. Walker was on active duty with the United States
Marine Corps from 1983 through 1985, where he served as a drill instructor. Much of his
time was spent outdoors instructing Marine recruits. Mr. Walker was not required to hold a
teaching credential in this capacity. Mr. Walker gained experience as a teacher at the Army-
Navy Academy in Carlsbad, California, from 2000 through 2002, where he was not required
to hold a teaching credential. Mr. Walker obtained 90 to 120 days of teaching experience as
a long term substitute at the Oak Hills Boys Home, where he taught first through third grades
in 2006. Mr. Walker’s employment with SDCOE since then has been as a middle school and
high school teacher.

Mr. Walker did not establish that he was not subject to the reduction in force

proceeding by reason of his credential and seniority.

17.

Twenty respondents entered information onto Exhibit 17 adjacent to their

names that mentioned whether they held a BCLAD certification, experience teaching early
elementary school, and/or experience teaching outdoor classes.

The information provided did not establish that SDCOE improperly determined

bumping rights, that any employee whose employment is being terminated possesses the
seniority and qualifications that would entitle him or her to be assigned to another position,
or that the five junior teachers who were being retained do not possess special training and
experience required for their retention in accordance’s with SDCOE’s exercise of discretion.

18.

A copy of the Decision in OAH 2009030208 was submitted.

Ultimate Conclusions Regarding SDCOE’s Reduction in Force

19.

The termination of respondents as a result of Superintendent Ward’s executive

order was totally unrelated to the quality of the professional services provided by these fine

9

teachers. The length of service provided by these employees bespeaks of their value to
SDCOE, as does their academic achievements and professional accomplishments.

20.

Superintendent Ward resolved to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of
services provided by SDCOE certificated employees for legitimate reasons. This decision
was unrelated to the competency or dedication of the employees whose services were
proposed to be reduced and discontinued. Superintendent Ward’s determination was lawful,
reasonable, and ultimately in the best interest of SDCOE and its students.

SDCOE’s administrative staff initiated and followed a systematic procedure to
identify employees who were directly affected by the executive order. The staff conducted a
careful evaluation to verify each employee’s seniority date, tenured status, credentials and
authorizations, and qualifications to determine what bumping rights, if any, an employee had.
SDCOE properly retained the services of Kathleen Lloyd, Douglas Connor, Wendy Aguilar,
Samantha Bielman, and Scott Riddick based upon each employee’s special training and
experience, SDCOE’s need to retain employees possessing such special training and
experience, and the fact that other employees with more seniority did not possess such required
special training and experience. SDCOE did not retain any junior credentialed employee to
provide services which a more senior employee was certificated, competent and qualified to
render. SDCOE properly and in good faith applied relevant provisions of the Education
Code in this reduction in force proceeding.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Statutory Authority

1.

Education Code section 44944 provides in part:

No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services
will not be required for the ensuing year . . . . the
governing board and the employee shall be given written
notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee . . . . that it has been recommended that the
notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons
therefor . . . .

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if
there is cause for not reemploying him or her for the
ensuing year . . . . If an employee fails to request a
hearing on or before the date specified, his or her failure
to do so shall constitute his or her waiver of his or her
right to a hearing . . . .

10

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee,
the proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with . . . . the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an
agency therein, except that all of the following shall
apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense,
if any, within five days after service upon him or her of
the accusation and he or she shall be notified of this five-
day period for filing in the accusation.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative
law judge who shall prepare a proposed decision,
containing findings of fact and a determination as to
whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related
to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. The
proposed decision shall be prepared for the governing
board and shall contain a determination as to the
sufficiency of the cause and a recommendation as to
disposition. However, the governing board shall make
the final determination as to the sufficiency of the cause
and disposition. None of the findings, recommendations,
or determinations contained in the proposed decision
prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding
on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing
board of the school district shall not constitute cause for
dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial
errors. Copies of the proposed decision shall be
submitted to the governing board and to the employee on
or before May 7 of the year in which the proceeding is
commenced . . . .

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides in part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or
her position for causes other than those specified in
Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947,
inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be
deprived of his or her position for cause other than as
specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive.

11

(b) Whenever . . . . a particular kind of service is to be
reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of
the following school year . . . and when in the opinion of
the governing board of the district it shall have become
necessary . . . . to decrease the number of permanent
employees in the district, the governing board may
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding
percentage of the certificated employees of the district,
permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the
school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the
services of no permanent employee may be terminated
under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less
seniority, is retained to render a service which said
permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

As between employees who first rendered paid service to
the district on the same date, the governing board shall
determine the order of termination solely on the basis of
needs of the district and the students thereof . . . .

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given
before the 15th of May . . . . and services of such
employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order
in which they were employed, as determined by the
board in accordance with the provisions of Sections
44844 and 44845. In the event that a permanent or
probationary employee is not given the notices and a
right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or
she shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school
year.

The governing board shall make assignments and
reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be
retained to render any service which their seniority and
qualifications entitle them to render. However, prior to
assigning or reassigning any certificated employee to
teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught,
and for which he or she does not have a teaching
credential or which is not within the employee’s major
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the

12

3.

Education Code section 1294.5 provides:

governing board shall require the employee to pass a
subject matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district
may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in
order of seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for
personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or
to provide services authorized by a services credential
with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated
employee has special training and experience necessary
to teach that course or course of study or to provide those
services, which others with more seniority do not
possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving
compliance with constitutional requirements related to
equal protection of the laws.

Any county superintendent of schools may employ
persons possessing an appropriate credential as
certificated employees in programs and projects to
perform services conducted under contract with public or
private agencies, or other categorically funded projects
of indeterminate duration. The terms and conditions
under which such persons are employed shall be
mutually agreed upon by the employee and the county
superintendent and such agreement shall be reduced to
writing. Service pursuant to this section shall not be
included in computing the service required as a
prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to,
classification as a permanent employee unless (1) such
person has served pursuant to this section for at least 75
percent of the number of days the regular schools of
county superintendent by which he is employed are
maintained, and (2) such person is subsequently
employed as a probationary employee in a position
requiring certification qualifications. Such persons may
be employed for periods which are less than a full school
year and may be terminated at the expiration of the
contract or specially funded project without regard to

13

other requirements of this code respecting the
termination of probationary or permanent employees.

This section shall not be construed to apply to any
regularly credentialed employee who has been employed
in the regular educational programs of the county
superintendent of schools as a probationary employee
before being subsequently assigned to any one of these
programs.

Jurisdiction

4.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and
44955. All notices and other jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were
satisfied as to all respondent employees identified herein.

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

5.

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in

with any statistical computation. It is within the governing authority’s discretion to
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law. (San Jose
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) A school district has wide
discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or
so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of
law. (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d
318, 322.)

Competence

6.

The Education Code leaves to the governing authority the discretion to

determine whether in addition to possessing seniority an employee is also “certificated and
competent” to be employed in a vacant position. The term “competent” in this regard relates
to an individual’s specific skills or qualifications including academic background, training,
credentials, and experience, but does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance.
(Forker v. Board of Trustees (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.) In addition to seniority the
only limitation in placing a teacher in a vacant position is that the teacher that is selected be
“certificated and competent” to render the service required by the vacant position. Among
employees who meet this threshold limitation, there is no room in the statutory scheme for
comparative evaluation. (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299.) An
employee holding a special credential or needed skill, if such credentials or competence are
not shared by a more senior employee, may be retained though it results in termination of a
senior employee. (Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.)

14

Seniority, Bumping, Skipping

Seniority

7.

Under Education Code section 44845, seniority is determined by the date a

certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”

8.

Education Code section 44846 provides in part: “The governing board shall
have power and it shall be its duty to correct any errors discovered from time to time in its
records showing the order of employment.”

The Statutory Scheme

9.

Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff statute, provides in

subdivision (b), in part:

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of
no permanent employee may be terminated under the
provisions of this section while . . . . any other employee
with less seniority, is retained to render a service which
said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

Essentially this language provides “bumping” rights for senior certificated and

competent employees, and “skipping” authority to retain junior employees who are
certificated and competent to render services which more senior employees are not.

10.

The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to

determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be
assigned to another position. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th
127, 136-137.)

Bumping

Skipping

11.

Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to subdivision (b)
where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study
and that a junior certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach
that course that the senior certificated employee does not possess. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified
School Dist., supra, at pp. 134-135.) There is nothing in the statute that requires such special
needs to be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job descriptions, or program
requirements. (Id., at p. 138.)

15

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district and
establishing requirements for employment. This discretion encompasses determining the
training and experience necessary for particular positions. Similarly, school districts have
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)

Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees

12.

As a result of Superintendent Ward’s lawful decision to reduce or discontinue
particular kinds of service being provided by certificated employees, cause exists under the
Education Code to give notice to that their employment will be terminated at the close of the
current school year and that their services will not be needed by the district for the 2012-
2013 school year.

Determination

13.

The charges set forth in the accusation were sustained by a preponderance of
the evidence and related to the welfare of SDCOE and the students thereof. SDCOE’s staff
made assignments and reassignments under Executive Order 001-11-12 in such a manner
that the most senior SDCOE employees were retained to render services which their seniority
and qualifications entitled them to render. No SDCOE employee with less seniority than any
respondent will be retained to render a service which any respondent is certificated,
competent and qualified to render.

Superintendent Ward’s decision to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of services

is totally unrelated to the competence of these fine teachers whose employment is subject to
this economic layoff proceeding.

16

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that Superintendent Ward give notice to Wendy Aja, Tara

Barrows, Jose Bello, Jessica Billeci, Karen Daley, Valentin Escanuela, Mirsha Garcia,
Kimberley Gudeth, Samantha Howerton; Jerry Lindsey; Sally Lopez, Bethesda Manrique,
Dionne Marijana; Marco Moore; Mike Nguyen; Emilio Nunez; Erendira Ramirez; Dyane
Sendaydiego, Sherrell Tyler, and Martin Walker, that their services will not be required for
the 2012-2013 school year.

DATED: April 16, 2012

___________________________
JAMES AHLER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

17

