BEFORE THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
OF THE BEAR VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Employment Status of:

SUZY CARPENTER, et al.,

OAH No. 2012031117

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Robert Walker, Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Blue Jay, California, on April 20, 2012.

Tod M. Robbins, Attorney at Law,1 represented the complainant, the superintendent

of the Bear Valley Unified School District.

The respondents are listed in exhibit A.

Michael Hersh, Staff Attorney, Department of Legal Services,2 California Teachers

Association, represented the respondents listed in exhibit B.

No appearance was made by or on behalf of Jana Roberts.

The matter was continued for 14 days to May 4, 2012, to provide the parties with an

opportunity to submit briefs on the following issue: When teachers share a seniority date and
all teachers with that date are given preliminary layoff notices, must the district, nevertheless,
apply tie-breaking criteria in order to establish an order of termination? Complainant
submitted a brief that was marked for identification as exhibit 19. Respondents submitted a
brief that was marked for identification as exhibit A.

1Todd M. Robbins, Attorney at Law, 3450 Fourteenth Street, Riverside, California

92501.

2Michael Hersh, Staff Attorney, Department of Legal Services, California Teachers

Association, P.O. Box 2153 Santa Fe Springs, California 90670-0153.

1

The continuance was granted for good cause pursuant to Government Code section

11524. Thus, pursuant to Education Code3 section 44949, subdivision (e), “the dates
prescribed in [Code section 44949], subdivision (c), that occur on or after the date of
granting the continuance and the date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 that
occurs on or after the date of granting the continuance shall be extended for a period of time
equal to the continuance.”

DEFAULT

As to Jana Roberts, on proof of compliance with Government Code sections 11505

and 11509, this matter proceeded as a default pursuant to section 11520.

General Findings Concerning Statutory Requirements

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Code sections 44949 and 44955 provide for two notices to be given in

connection with terminating certificated employees. The first notice, which will be referred
to as the Preliminary Layoff Notice, is given by the superintendent. It is given to the
governing board and to the employees the superintendent recommends for layoff. The
Preliminary Layoff Notice gives the board and the employees notice that the superintendent
recommends that those employees be laid off. The superintendent must give the Preliminary
Layoff Notice no later than March 15. There is no requirement that a governing board take
any action in March. But while it is unnecessary, governing boards usually adopt a
resolution ratifying the superintendent’s recommendations.

2.

The second notice is a notice of a governing board’s decision to terminate the

services of an employee. That notice is provided for in Section 44955 and must be given
before May 15. That notice advises a teacher that the district will not require his or her
services for the ensuing school year. That notice will be referred to as a Termination Notice.

3.

In this case, not later than March 15, the superintendent notified the governing

board and the respondents that he recommended that the respondents not be retained for the
ensuing school year.

4.

The Preliminary Layoff Notice stated the reasons for the recommendation.

The recommendation was not related to respondents’ competency.

3 All references to the Code are to the Code unless otherwise specified.

2

5.

A Preliminary Layoff Notice was delivered to each respondent, either by

personal delivery or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, registered, postage
prepaid, and addressed to respondent’s last known address.

6.

The Preliminary Layoff Notice advised each respondent as follows: He or she
had a right to a hearing. In order to obtain a hearing, he or she had to deliver a request for a
hearing in writing to the person sending the notice. The request had to be delivered by a
specified date, which was a date that was not less than seven days after the notice was
served.4 And the failure to request a hearing would constitute a waiver of the right to a
hearing.

7.

Respondents either timely filed written requests for a hearing or obtained a

waiver of their failure to file. An accusation was timely served on respondents. Respondents
were given notice that, if they were going to request a hearing, they were required to file a
notice of defense within five days after being served with the accusation.5 Respondents
either filed timely notices of defense or obtained a waiver of their failure to file. All
prehearing jurisdictional requirements were either met or waived.

8.

The governing board of the district resolved to reduce or discontinue particular
kinds of services. Within the meaning of Section 44955, the services are “particular kinds of
services” that can be reduced or discontinued. The decision to reduce or discontinue these
services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.

Services the District Intends to Reduce or Discontinue

9.

The governing board of the district determined that, because particular kinds

of services are to be reduced or discontinued, it is necessary to decrease the number of
permanent or probationary employees in the district.

10.

The particular kinds of services the governing board of the district resolved to

reduce or discontinue are:

4 Employees must be given at least seven days in which to file a request for a hearing.

Code section 44949, subdivision (b), provides that the final date for filing a request for a
hearing “shall not be less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served upon
the employee.”

5 Pursuant to Government Section 11506, a party on whom an accusation is served
must file a notice of defense in order to obtain a hearing. Code section 44949, subdivision
(c)(1), provides that, in teacher termination cases, the notice of defense must be filed within
five days after service of the accusation.

3

Particular Kind of Service
Continuation High School Teaching Services
Continuation High School Special Education Teaching
Services
High School Social Studies Teaching Services
High School English Teaching Services
High School Math Teaching Services
High School Science Teaching Services
High School Spanish Teaching Services
High School Freshman Studies Teaching Services
High School French Teaching Services
High School Physical Education Teaching Services
Teacher on Assignment - Elementary Instructional Coach
Teacher on Assignment - Middle School Instructional Coach
Teacher on Assignment - High School Instructional Coach
Elementary K-6 Classroom Teaching Services
Middle School P.E. Teaching Services
Middle School Math Teaching Services
Total

Notices to be Rescinded

Full Time
Equivalent
1

1
1
1
1
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.6
3
1
0.3
6
0.4
0.2
18.3 F.T.E.

11.

The district stipulated that it will rescind the Preliminary Layoff Notices

served on the following respondents:

Carpenter, Suzy
Kendall, Diane

Use of Tie-Breaking Criteria Based on the Current Needs of the District and Students

12.

Pursuant to Section 44955, subdivision (b), the governing board of the district

adopted criteria for determining the order of termination as among employees who first
rendered paid service on the same day. In the event a district terminates the services of some
but not all of a group of teachers who first rendered paid service on the same day, section
44955, subdivision (b), requires a district to adopt criteria that are based on “needs of the
district and the students thereof.” The district’s tie-breaking criteria are as follows:

[I]n the event of a certificated layoff the following criteria shall
be applied in order based on information on file as of February
1, [2011], one step at a time until the tie is broken, to resolve
ties in seniority between certificated employees:

4

Highly Qualified Status under NCLB in area of

1.
assignment.

Possession of an authorization to teach English Language

2.
Learners in order of priority:

Bilingual Cross Cultural Language and Academic

a.
Development (BCLAD)
Cross Cultural Language and Academic
b.
Development (CLAD), SB 1969 or SB 395 Certificate,
Language Development Specialist Certificate,
Supplemental Authorization for English as a Second
Language, Specially Designated Academic Instruction in
English (SDAIE), other

Credential status in area of assignment, in order of

3.
priority:

Clear, Life, Standard Secondary, etc.
Preliminary
Intern
Provisional, STC, other

Possession of a Clear or Preliminary Single Subject

4.
credential in the following areas, in order of priority:

a.
b.
c.
d.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

a.
b.
c.
d.

Special Education
Math
Science
Social Science
English

Math
Science
Social Science
English

5

Possession of a supplemental authorization to teach in

5.
the following areas, in order of priority:

Total number of Clear or Preliminary credentials in

6.
different subject areas.

Total number of supplementary authorizations in

7.
different subject areas.

Number of years of credentialed teaching experience

8.
prior to employment with District, as indicated by initial salary
schedule placement.

9.

Possession of a Doctorate Degree, earliest date prevails.

10.

Possession of a Masters Degree, earliest date prevails.

Total number of post-secondary credits on file with the

11.
District by February 1.

If ties cannot be broken by using the above criteria then

12.
order of seniority shall be determined by a random drawing
among employees in the individual tie.

13.

The district concluded that there was no need to apply the tie-breaking criteria.

Does a Teacher Have a Right to Know His or Her “Order of Termination” in Order to be
Able to Anticipate the Likelihood of Being Rehired?

14.

Code section 44955 concerns the rights of teachers regarding termination of

their services because of a decline in average daily attendance (ADA) or because a particular
kind of service (PKS) is to be reduced or discontinued. Generally, teachers have a right to
have their services terminated according to their seniority. Code section 44955, subdivision
(b), speaks in terms of the services of no permanent employee being terminated while a less
senior employee is retained to render a service the permanent employee is certificated and
competent to render.

15.

Both permanent and probationary teachers whose services have been

terminated pursuant to Code section 44955 have reappointment rights and rights to be
preferred for substitute teaching positions. Pursuant to Code section 44956, permanent
employees have those rights for 39 months, and pursuant to Code section 44957,
probationary employees have those rights for 24 months. Generally, employees hold those
rights “in the order of original employment . . . .” (Ed. Code § 44956, subd. (a)(1), and §
44957, subd. (a)(1).

6

16.

Code section 44845 provides that an employee is deemed to have been
employed on the date on which he or she first rendered paid service in a probationary
position.

17.

A group of teachers may have been employed on the same day so that, as

among the members of the group, there is no order of employment and no one is senior to
anyone else. With regard to seniority, the members of the group are tied.

18.

Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides for breaking ties with regard to

termination. That subdivision provides, in part:

19.

Code section 44846 provides for breaking ties with regard to reappointment.

That section provides, in part:

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. (Italics added.)

As between two or more employees who first rendered paid
service to the district on the same date, and who, following the
termination of services, have a statutory preference to
reappointment in the order of original employment, the
governing board shall determine the order of reemployment
solely on the basis of the needs of the district and the students
thereof. Any terminated employee subject to the conditions of
this section shall, upon request, be furnished in writing, no later
than 15 days following such request, the reasons and basis of the
needs of the district and the students thereof utilized by the
governing board in determining which employee or employees
shall be reappointed. (Italics added.)

20.

In the present termination case, groups of employees share the same seniority

dates, but everyone in each group is slated for layoff. For example, nine teachers share a
seniority date of July 28, 2008, and all nine are slated for layoff. Thus, the district did not
need to apply tie-breaking criteria in order to determine which teacher or teachers were to be
laid off.

7

21.

The respondents in each group contend that the district is not permitted to

terminate the services of everyone in the group without determining each individual’s “order
of termination.” They contend they have a right to be ranked in a particular order of
termination so that they can make informed decisions about whether to look elsewhere for
employment.

22.

In the present case, the district stipulated as follows: If, during the period of
preferred right to reappointment, the number of employees is increased or the discontinued
services are reestablished, the district will apply tie-breaking criteria in order to establish the
order in which teachers have a right to be rehired.

23.

The teachers who are in the groups with the same seniority dates contend that
the district’s failure to apply tie-breaking criteria deprives them of information to which they
have a right – information they need in order to be able to make informed decisions about
their lives. Counsel for respondents points out that “Knowing where one stands specifically
in an order of reinstatement permits an unemployed teacher to make critical life decisions:
Do I move my family elsewhere? Accept employment elsewhere? Do I go back to school to
obtain a new credential?”

24.

Counsel for respondents infers that the tie-breaking provision in Code section
44955, subdivision (b), which concerns termination, somehow applies to reappointment. But
that cannot be. The legislature set out two tie-breaking provisions – Code section 44955,
subdivision (b), which concerns termination, and Code section 44846, which concerns
reappointment. Both provide that a school board shall base its tie-breaking decisions solely
on the needs of the district and the students thereof.

25.

Nothing, however, assures that the needs of the district and the students will be
the same at the time of a termination and the time when a district is in a position to reappoint
some of the teachers whose positions were terminated. It is quite possible that a district
would have one set of needs at the time of a termination and a different set of needs at a later
time when it was in a position to reappoint.

26. Moreover, the Legislature did not give teachers the same right to transparency

concerning the two situations. With regard to termination, a teacher has a right to
transparency only if his or her order of termination was determined by tie-breaking. Thus,
with regard to a group of teachers who share a seniority date and who are all being laid off,
there is no right to transparency. On the other hand, a teacher whose order of termination
was determined by tie-breaking has a right to transparency – a right to detailed information
about the tie-breaking. A district must provide that information no later than five days prior
to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance with Section 44949. A teacher who
intends to challenge the tie-breaking process as it was applied needs a few days before a
hearing in order to prepare.

27.

Teachers with reappointment rights have different rights regarding
transparency. That right to transparency comes into play when a governing board determines

8

which employee or employees shall be reappointed. A teacher who was not one of those
reappointed may make a request for the reasons and basis for the decisions and has a right to
that information within 15 days.

28.

Thus the tie-breaking provisions are discrete, and there is no reason to infer
that the one the Legislature specified for termination has any application to reappointment.

29.

Counsel for respondents contends that the board’s resolution required

application of the tie-breaking criteria whether or not it was needed to determine the order of
termination. The board’s resolution provided, in part, “[T]he following criteria shall be
applied . . . until the tie is broken, to resolve ties in seniority . . . .” The resolution should be
read in the context of Code section 44955, which concerns “determining the order of
termination.” There is nothing about the board’s resolution that suggests the board intended
to go beyond what the code requires, and the requirement in the code concerns how and
order of termination shall be determined. The code does not require that an order be
determined when there is no need for one.

30.

Counsel next contends that Code section 44955, subdivision (b), must be read

as requiring application of tie-breaking criteria whether or not it is needed to determine the
order of termination because there is no administrative proceeding in which teachers can
challenge application of tie-breaking criteria in connection with reappointment rights. The
Legislature chose to provide teachers with remedies in an administrative proceeding
regarding termination. There are many matters, however, regarding which the Legislature
has not chosen to provide a hearing at an administrative level. The fact that there is no
administrative remedy concerning a matter is never a justification for expanding the scope of
an administrative remedy concerning something else.

31.

In Karbach v. Board of Education (1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 355, the Court of

Appeal dealt with a circumstance in which teachers with relatively high seniority had been
lulled into a false sense of security because it appeared that the superintendent had erred
substantially on the side of being overly cautious in calculating how many notices to send.

32.

In order to preserve a board’s right to do ADA or PKS terminations in May, a

superintendent must comply with preliminary notice procedures no later than March 15.
Section 44949, which provides for the preliminary notice, does not require a governing board
to do anything. No later than March 15, a superintendent must give notice to both the
governing board and the employee that the superintendent recommends certain ADA or PKS
terminations. After a superintendent serves a preliminary notice and before a final notice
may be served, the employee is entitled to a hearing to determine whether there is cause not
to reemploy him or her. A final notice of such termination, in order to be effective, must be
given before the 15th of May.6

6 Ed. Code, § 44955(c).

9

33.

Karbach concerned a circumstance in which a superintendent served a

preliminary notice and specified ADA layoffs as the reason for his recommendations. On
April 4 the board adopted a resolution in which it reported a 6.06% drop in average daily
attendance. Six percent of the teachers equaled approximately 13 teachers. The
superintendent had caused notices to be sent to 43 teachers – substantially more than six
percent. Thus, many of the more senior teachers to whom notices had been sent had no real
reason to think that they might be laid off – that is, they had no real reason to think that they
needed to look for other jobs. The district then, pursuant to the drop in average daily
attendance, sent final termination notices to 13 teachers. But the district also sent final
termination notices to an additional 30 teachers pursuant to a reduction in or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The teachers filed suit, and the Court of
Appeal held that, because the superintendent had not specified PKS layoffs in the
preliminary notices as a reason for his recommendation, the board could not terminate the
services of teachers pursuant to a reduction in or discontinuation of services. After referring
to the legislative history of the section that requires a preliminary notice (now section
44949), the court said:

This history is consistent with the board’s concession in its brief
that a primary purpose of the notice of recommendation is “to
notify the employee of the probability that his services will not
be required for the ensuing year so that he may consider looking
elsewhere for employment.”

Early notification is more significant in relation to reductions in
the number of employees of a school district than it is in case of
individual dismissal for cause. Greater competition for alternate
jobs is logically to be expected, and the pendency of the
proceedings is no impediment to obtaining them, as it might be
in the case of a dismissal for cause.

It is, therefore, appropriate to construe the provisions of the
1970 amendment to section 13447 [now 44955] as intending to
insure that, before the March 15 date, the affected employee be
informed of facts upon which he can reasonably assess the
probability he will not be reemployed.

Under the facts of this case, it is easily demonstrated that the
reason stated in the notice of recommendation did not inform
many of the petitioners that their jobs were in jeopardy. A list
of the first and second year probationary teachers, in order of
seniority, was received in evidence by the hearing officer. [¶] . .
. [¶] The teacher with highest seniority on said list is petitioner
Judith Udko; presumably, 42 teachers were subject to
termination before she was. Since the reduction in average daily
attendance was approximately 6 percent, which would justify

10

termination of only 13 teachers, petitioner Udko was not given
any reasonable basis for seeking alternative employment.

Though the above example may not be typical, it serves to
illustrate the fact that if the requirement of notice of
recommendation is to have its intended effect, the subsequent
proceedings must be limited to termination for a reason stated
therein.7

34.

The dilemma the teachers in the present case face is not the same as the

dilemma Ms. Udko and others in Karbach faced. In Karbach, Ms. Udko and other teachers
with relatively high seniority were lulled into a false sense of security because it appeared
that the superintendent had erred substantially on the side of being overly cautious in
calculating how many notices to send.

35.

The present case is very different. Even if teachers knew their relative ranking

within the group with whom they share a seniority date, they would not know whether the
district was going to be able to reappoint some teachers.

36.

In cases after Karbach, courts have held that, in a preliminary lay-off notice,
nothing more is required than to say that the superintendent has recommended ADA or PKS
layoffs or both ADA and PKS layoffs. Santa Clara Federation of Teachers8 was a case in
which each respondent received written notice that it had been recommended to the board
that his or her services would not be required for the ensuing school year because of a
decline in average daily attendance and because of a decision to reduce particular services.
The trial court found these notices invalid, “in that they failed to specify the specific reason
for the recommendation for termination of the individual Petitioners.” The court of appeal
reversed. The court acknowledged the holding in Karbach9 as follows:

Because the March 15 notice is intended to insure that the
affected employee is informed of the facts upon which he can
reasonably assess the probability he will not be reemployed, the
notice must state the reasons for the recommendation. If the
notice specifies only one of the two statutory reasons for
dismissal, the Board may not later attempt to justify dismissal
on the other ground.10

7 Karbach, 39 Cal.App.3d at p. 362.

8 Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App3d

831.

9 Karbach v. Board of Education (1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 355.

10 Id. at p.p. 361-362.

11

37.

But the court in Santa Clara held:

The March 15 notice is only the first step in the termination
process. Karbach does not require that this preliminary notice
specify the precise number of teachers to be terminated or the
specific positions to be eliminated; those details emerge as the
administrative hearing process progresses. It is enough that the
Board specify in the March 15 notice the statutory grounds set
forth in section 13447 (now section 44955) for staff reduction.

38.

In San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen11, the court followed Santa Clara.
“The preliminary notice is sufficient if it specifies the statutory grounds set forth in section
44955.”12

39.

Respondents failed to establish that the district’s failure to apply the tie-
breaking criteria deprived the respondents of information to which they were entitled.

Deviation from Seniority (Skipping)

40.

Pursuant to Section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), a district may deviate from

terminating the services of employees in the order of seniority, i.e., a district may skip
teachers with a particular qualification and terminate the services of more senior teachers
who do not possess that qualification. In this case, the district did not engage in skipping.

Right to be Retained According to Seniority and Qualifications – (Bumping)

41.

The second paragraph of section 44955, subdivision (c), does not add to

teachers’ seniority rights. It does, however, make it clear that governing boards must make
assignments in such a way as to protect seniority rights. Employees must be retained to
render any service their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. Thus, if a senior
teacher whose regular assignment is being eliminated is certificated and competent to teach a
junior teacher’s courses, the district must retain the senior teacher and reassign him or her to
render that service. This is commonly referred to as bumping. The district must either
reassign or terminate the services of the junior employee.

42.

In this case the district identified teachers who had a right to bump into

positions held by less senior employees and either reassigned or sent layoff notices to those
less senior employees.

11 San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627.

12 Id. at p. 632.

12

Mandated Services

43.

State and federal laws mandate that certain services be provided at or above
mandated levels. There was no evidence that the district is reducing those services below
mandated levels.

Summary of Findings Regarding Retention of Employees

44.

Pursuant to the district’s stipulation, the district shall rescind the Preliminary

Layoff Notices served on the respondents listed in Finding 11.

45. With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district will not

be retaining any probationary employee to render a service that such a respondent is
certificated and competent to render.

46. With regard to respondents who are permanent employees, the district will not
be retaining any employee with less seniority than such a respondent has to render a service
that the respondent is certificated and competent to render.13

47. With regard to respondents who are either permanent or probationary
employees, the district will not be retaining any employee with less seniority than such a
respondent has to render a service that the respondent’s qualifications entitle him or her to
render. 14

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

General Conclusions

1.

2.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Sections 44949 and 44955. All notice

and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.

Within the terms of Sections 44949 and 44955, the district has cause to reduce

or discontinue particular kinds of services and to give Termination Notices to certain
respondents. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils.

13 Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides seniority protection for a permanent

employee in terms of the services the employee is “certificated and competent to render.”

14 Section 44955, subdivision (c), provides seniority protection for both permanent
and probationary employees in terms of the services an employee’s “qualifications entitle
[him or her] to render.”

13

Cause Exists to Terminate the services of Certain Respondents

3.

Cause does not exist to terminate the services of the respondents listed in
Finding 11. With that exception, cause exists to give notice to the respondents that their
services will not be required for the ensuing school year.

ORDER

1.

Pursuant to stipulation, the district shall rescind the Preliminary Layoff

Notices served on the following respondents, and the district shall not give Termination
Notices to them:

Carpenter, Suzy
Kendall, Diane

2.

3.

As to those respondents, the accusation is dismissed.

The district may give Termination Notices to the remaining employees who

were served with Preliminary Layoff Notices.

Dated: May 10, 2012

_________________________________
ROBERT WALKER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

14

EXHIBIT A

EMPLOYEES WHO SUBMITTED A REQUEST FOR HEARING

BEAR VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

2012

Maybin, Jennifer
McLinn, Andrea
Meagher, Sharon
Oberneder, Susan
Parks, Karin
Pierce-Estes, Lynda
Roberts, Jana
Ward, Shauna
Williams, Katherine
Wright, Joy

Carter-Sokolowski, Deneece

Edwards, Rachel
Ellis, Amy

Hahn, Michael
Jaeger, Dottie
Kent, John
Little, Jeremy

Carpenter, Suzy

Kendall, Diane

15

EXHIBIT B

RESPONDENTS REPRESENTED BY MR. HERSH

BEAR VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

2012

Maybin, Jennifer
McLinn, Andrea
Meagher, Sharon
Oberneder, Susan
Parks, Karin
Pierce-Estes, Lynda

Ward, Shauna
Williams, Katherine
Wright, Joy

Carter-Sokolowski, Deneece

Edwards, Rachel
Ellis, Amy

Hahn, Michael
Jaeger, Dottie
Kent, John
Little, Jeremy

Carpenter, Suzy

Kendall, Diane

16

