BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
SACRAMENTO CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SACRAMENTO
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL
EMPLOYED BY THE SACRAMENTO
CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,

OAH No. 2012020744

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Ann Elizabeth Sarli, Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California heard this matter in Sacramento, California on April 24-
27, and April 30, 2012.

Dulcinea Grantham, Attorney at Law and Thomas R. Manniello, Attorney at

Law, Lozano Smith, represented the Sacramento City Unified School District
(District).

Margaret Geddes Attorney at Law and Costa Kerestenzis, Attorney at Law,
Beeson, Tayer, & Bodine, APC, represented the respondents identified in Exhibit A
attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.

Respondent Miles Krier represented himself.

Respondents Annah Kiambati and Thellis Panacek timely filed Requests for

Hearing and Notices of Defense, but did not appear at hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the parties made oral closing

arguments. The record was closed and the matter submitted on April 30, 2012.1

1 On April 27, 2012, the final date set for hearing, the hearing was continued to
April 30, 2012. Accordingly, pursuant to Education Code sections 44955 and 44949,
subdivision (e), the date for service of the proposed decision on respondents (May 7)
and the date for issuances of Final Notices to respondents (May 15) were extended by
one day. The ALJ and the parties elected not to extend the dates by a period of time
equal to the continuance (3 days).

1

Jurisdiction

FINDINGS

1.

Jess Serna is the Chief Human Resource Officer for the District.

Jonathan P. Raymond is the Superintendent of the District. Serna is the
Superintendent’s designee for the certificated layoff process. The actions of
Raymond and Serna, and the actions of the District’s Board of Education (Board),
were taken in their official capacities.

2.

On February 16, 2012, the Superintendent recommended that the Board
reduce and/or discontinue particular kinds of certificated services (PKS) no later than
the beginning of the 2012-13 school year in the amount of 397.8 full-time equivalent
(FTE) positions. The Board adopted Resolution No. 2683 (PKS Resolution) that
determined it was necessary to reduce and/or discontinue PKS in the amount of 397.8
FTE positions.

3.

The Board further determined that it was necessary by reason of the
reduction and/or discontinuance of services to decrease the number of permanent
and/or probationary certificated employees at the close of the 2012-13 school year by
a corresponding number of FTE positions. The Board directed the Superintendent or
his designee to send appropriate notices to all employees whose services would be
terminated as a result of the Board’s action to reduce or eliminate PKS.

4.

On or before March 15, 2012, the District served 435 affected

certificated employees (not including administrators), including respondents, with
written notice, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955,2 that their
services would not be required for the next school year (preliminary notice). Each
preliminary notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation. The preliminary
notice attached and incorporated by reference Resolution No. 2683, which listed the
services to be reduced or discontinued, resulting in a proposed reduction in the
certificated staff by 397.8 FTE positions.

5.

6.

Respondents herein timely filed requests for hearing to determine if

there is cause for not reemploying them for the next school year.

Serna made and filed Accusations against each of the certificated

employees who requested a hearing. The Accusations with required accompanying
documents and blank Notices of Defense (Accusation packet) were timely served on
the respondents.

2 All statutory references are to the California Education Code unless

otherwise indicated.

2

7.
the Accusation.

8.
of the District.

All respondents filed timely individual or group Notices of Defense to

All respondents are certificated permanent or probationary employees

9.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education

Code sections 44949 and 44955.

Cause for Reduction or Elimination of Services

10.

The District is a large urban school district that provides services to

approximately 41,000 students at 85 school sites in and surrounding the City of
Sacramento. The District employs approximately 2,669 certificated employees.

11.

The District has a projected budget deficit of $28 million for the 2012-

13 school year, and an additional $15 million budget shortfall if the Governor’s
proposed budget is not passed. The District is at risk that it will be “certified with a
negative budget” by the State, and will lose local control.

12.

About 90 percent of the District’s budget is comprised of personnel

costs (salaries and benefits for certificated and classified staff). As a consequence of
the anticipated budget shortfall, the District recognized that it would need to reduce
programs and services for the 2012-13 school year.

Services to be Reduced or Eliminated

13.

The PKS Resolution authorized the Superintendent or his designee to
take action to reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the
2012-13 school year:

Services

Assistant Principals
Elementary Teachers
Teacher, Middle (CORE)
Teacher, Resource
Training Specialist
Counselors
Librarians
Music

Number of FTE
Positions

9.0
153.0
2.0
9.0
1.0
23.8
14.5
11.6

3

Nurse
School Psychologist
High School Math
Middle School Math
English
Spanish
Psychology
Physical Science
Social Science
PE
Life Science
Biology
Computer
Health Science
ROP Office Occupations
ROP: Computer Applications
Social Worker
Art
Family Consumer Education

8.5
1.0
9.0
10.0
27.0
7.0
1.0
5.0
16.0
21.0
4.0
3.0
1.0
1.0
2.0
1.0
11.4
2.0
1.0

Sub-Total:

355.8 FTE

Adult Education Teachers

42.0 FTE

Total Full Time Equivalent Reductions

397.8 FTE

14.

The services set forth in the PKS Resolution are “particular kinds of

services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.
There was no evidence that the Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the
identified services was arbitrary or capricious. The reduction or elimination of the
services set forth in the PKS Resolution constituted a proper exercise of the Board’s
discretion, within the meaning of section 44955.

Competency Criteria

15.

The PKS Resolution states that Education Code section 44955,

subdivision (b), does not define “competent.” Exhibit B to the PKS Resolution states
that “‘competent’ shall be defined according to the following…” and lists the
following criteria for an individual to be deemed competent under section 44955,
subdivision (b) (competency criteria):

(A) Highly Qualified status, as required by the No Child
Left Behind Act [NCLB];

4

(B) Possession of a BCLAD, CLAD or other equivalent
English Language Learner Authorization to the extent
required by the position;

(C) In order to work in a Priority School, training and/or
experience teaching in a Priority School setting;

(D) In order to work in a Waldorf School, formal
training/coursework in the Waldorf method of teaching;

(E) In order to work in the Accelerated Academy,
training in Accelerated Academy programs and
experience relevant to working with the Accelerated
Academy student population;

(F) In order to work in a Dual Immersion program, one
(1) year of experience in the past five (5) years teaching
in a Dual Immersion program;

(G) In order to be assigned to a high school math position, possession
of a credential that authorizes the holder to teach the full breadth of
math assignments up to and including calculus offered at the high
school level.

Skipping Criteria

16.

On February 16, 2012, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2685, entitled

“Resolution to Determine Criteria for Deviation from Terminating a Certificated
Employee in Order of Seniority (“Skipping Criteria”).” “Exhibit A” to the
Resolution includes skipping criteria and states:

For the 2012-2013 school year, to meet the requirements
of Education Code section 44955, the Board of
Education determines the needs of the District and the
students by establishing the following skipping criteria:

A.

Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in classes
requiring Bilingual Cross-Cultural Language and
Development (“BCLAD”) certification, to the
extent necessary to staff BCLAD required
positions.

B.

Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in a Special
Education assignment.

5

C.

D.

E.

F.

G.

H.

Individuals fully-credentialed to teach the full
breadth of high school math assignments up to
and including calculus.

Individuals currently serving in a Priority School
assignment, who will also be teaching in a
Priority School assignment for 2012-2013.

Individuals who have one (1) or more years of
experience teaching in a Dual-Language
Immersion Program.

Individuals who have two (2) or more years of
experience teaching and/or specialized training in
a home or hospital setting.

Individuals who have formal training/coursework
in the Waldorf method of teaching.

Individuals with specialized training and
experience in the Accelerated Academy Program.

For purposes of the above-referenced criteria, “fully-
credentialed” is defined to mean an employee who
possesses a preliminary, clear or internship credential.

Tie-Breaking Criteria

17.

At the February 16, 2012, meeting, the Board also adopted Resolution

No. 2684, Resolution of Determination for Tie-Breaking Criteria. The Tie-breaker
Resolution set forth criteria for breaking ties when two or more certificated
employees with the same first day of paid service were facing potential layoff. The
Board listed categories for consideration and assigned points to each category. The
Tie-Breaking Criteria were used to break ties in seniority dates among multiple
certificated employees. There were no challenges to the content or application of the
Tie-Breaking Criteria in this proceeding.

Verification of Seniority Date, Employment Status, and Other Information on the
District’s Seniority List

18.

The District maintains a list of certificated employees that contains data
on the first date of paid service in probationary status with the district (seniority date),
certifications and authorizations held, current assignments and other data. In
November 2011, in preparation for budget reductions, the Human Resource Services
Department sent Verification Statements, with attached Employee Information Report

6

298e, to all site and department administrators of the District for distribution to each
certificated employee. If employees made corrections to the Employee Information
Report, District personnel checked the information and, if correct, entered the
corrected information into the District data system. Any corrections were reflected in
the master seniority list. The District relied on the verifications provided by
certificated employees in updating the District’s seniority list, which it then used to
determine the order of layoff.

19.

At hearing, the District made some changes to the seniority list based
on application of Tie-Breaking Criteria, change in status from categorical/temporary
to probationary status and other information requiring changes in seniority date. The
District updated its records to reflect this information. One respondent argued at
hearing that his seniority date should be changed.3 This contention is discussed below
in Findings 22-23.

Method of Effectuating the Reduction in Services and Identifying Affected Employees

20.

The Board’s Resolutions delegated to the Superintendent and his
designees the authority to implement the reduction and elimination of the listed
particular kinds of services, to identify and determine which District employees
would be affected by the reductions and to draft and serve the preliminary notices
upon those employees. Serna, Human Resources Director Cancy McArn and the
Human Resource Services Department personnel analysts (HR staff) worked together
to identify the services to be reduced as set forth in the PKS Resolution. After
identifying the positions to be eliminated, HR staff used the seniority list to identify
the least senior employees providing those services. Those least senior employees
who fit the skipping criteria were skipped. HR staff then applied the competency
criteria to the remaining employees to determine which employees were competent
under the criteria to bump into positions held by junior employees. HR staff created a
“bumping chart” that was used to identify the certificated employees who could bump
junior employees. The end result of the process was that the District identified the
most junior employees who were not skipped and were not eligible to bump more
junior employees. The District issued preliminary notices to these employees.

21.

The District identified and issued preliminary notices to employees

occupying 37.2 FTE more than the 397.8 FTE positions identified in the PKS
Resolution, to account for rescissions that might result from successful challenges at
hearing, application of the Tie-Breaking Criteria or other causes. Prior to and during

3 Joan Cochrane and Melissa Becker also argued their seniority dates should be

changed. During closing argument, respondents’ counsel withdrew Cochrane’s and
Becker’s challenges in this proceeding, reserving their right to challenge their
seniority dates in other forums.

7

the hearing, the District rescinded the preliminary notices issued to several
respondents and other certificated employees who are not respondents. The
rescissions were based on the fact that certain potential challenges were not made at
hearing, and took into account “positively assured attrition” (i.e., resignations,
retirements, and other permanent vacancies and leaves of absence). As a result of the
rescissions, there are no valid arguments that the District has issued more preliminary
notices than authorized under the PKS Resolution.

Individual Issues – Seniority Dates

22.

Section 44845 provides; “Every probationary or permanent employee

employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on the date
upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”

23.

Preston Jackson has a seniority date of September 5, 2006. He claims

that his seniority date should be backdated to February 1, 2006, “at the latest.”
Preston was hired as a substitute teacher in the beginning of the 2005-06 school year.
In early November of the 2005-06 school year he was hired as a long-term substitute.
On February 1, 2006, he received an emergency substitute permit and continued in his
long-term substitute placement through the school year. He was employed by the
District for the 2006-07 school year and obtained his teaching credential on
September 5, 2006. The District then classified him as a probationary teacher with a
seniority date of September 5, 2006. The District argues that Jackson could not be
classified as a probationary employee until he obtained his teaching credential on
September 5, 2006. The District’s argument is not persuasive. In California
Teachers Assn. v. Governing Bd. of the Golden Valley Unified School Dist. (2002) 98
Cal.App.4th 369, the court held that teachers holding emergency permits may be
classified as probationary employees. (Id. at p. 383.) The District offered no other
argument or information that would bar Jackson from being classified as a
probationary employee in February 2006. Accordingly Jackson’s seniority date shall
be changed to the date in February 2006 on which he first rendered paid service to the
District under an emergency substitute permit, according to the District records.

Individual Issues – Fred Jackson’s Bumping Rights

24.

Fred Jackson has a seniority date of September 3, 1996. The seniority
list indicates he is not assigned to a school site and that he is assigned to teach in the
high school Regional Occupation Program (ROP). Jackson maintains he is teaching
in regular high school classrooms and is not assigned under the ROP program.
Jackson holds a vocational education teaching credential, clear designated subject
business management and computer application, that authorizes him to teach business
management and computer application to grade 12 and below and adults. This
credential authorizes Jackson to teach these subjects in a technical, trade or vocational
program. Jackson received a preliminary notice under the PKS reduction of “ROP:
Computer Applications.” He maintains that he should bump into one of the positions

8

of teachers junior to him who are teaching computer applications and technology
within the District. This argument was not persuasive. Jackson’s credential limits
him to teaching vocational, trade and technical classes. The classes he seeks to bump
into are academic classes requiring multiple subject or single subject credentials. The
fact that he may have been assigned to teach academic classes in the past does not
compel the District to continue mis-assigning him. The District may not legally
assign a teacher to teach a subject for which he is not certificated.

Individual Issues – Miles Krier’s “Self-Skip”

25. Miles Krier has a seniority date of November 2, 2007. He holds a

single subject teaching credential in physical education, with a CLAD and a
supplemental authorization in biology and is highly qualified (HQ) in biology. The
seniority list does not reflect the supplemental authorization and HQ in biology. Krier
received a preliminary notice under the PKS reduction of “PE.” The seniority list
indicates the he teaches 1.0 FTE physical education at Bowling Green Elementary.
He testified that he currently teaches physical education and fourth through sixth
grade science. He testified that 57 percent of his assignment is PE and the remainder
is biology. He maintains that he should not be laid off because he is important to
Bowling Green Elementary for many reasons, but particularly because of his ability to
teach both physical education and the core subject biology. Krier’s argument is not
persuasive. District layoff procedures are governed by sections 44949 and 44955.
These sections establish a seniority-based lay off proceeding that mandates that
employees shall be terminated in the inverse order in which they were employed.
Under limited and specific circumstances, the District has the authority to deviate
from seniority-based layoffs by skipping junior employees. The statute does not
permit employees to establish that they should be skipped because their certifications
and experience render them more valuable to the District than other employees. In
Martin v Kentfield (1983) 35 Cal. 3d 294, the Supreme Court, while analyzing
analogous language regarding reinstatement rights, held: “In section 44956, the
Legislature has made seniority the sole determinant as to which tenured teachers on
layoff status should be appointed to a vacant position. The only limitation is that the
teacher selected be ‘certificated and competent’ to render the service required by the
vacant position. Among employees who meet this threshold limitation, there is no
room in the statutory scheme for comparative evaluation.” (Id. At p. 299.) It is the
District’s right and burden, not the employee’s, to demonstrate a specific need for
personnel or services such that those qualifications may be skipped in the layoff
process. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d); Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008)
170 Cal.App.4th 127, 135 (Bledsoe).)

Individual Issues – Cheryl Sims’s Constitutional Argument

26.

Cheryl Sims has a seniority date of February 4, 2004. She is assigned

to teach at C.P. Huntington Elementary School. She holds a multiple subject teaching
credential with a CLAD. She argued that section 44955, subdivision (d)(2), exempts

9

her from seniority-based layoffs because she is of African-American descent and is
the only teacher of this ethnicity in her school. Sims also alluded to an argument that
she should be exempt from layoff because of protections against age discrimination.
She presented evidence that there has been historical discrimination against African-
Americans teaching in school districts. Section 44955, subdivision (d), provides that
there may be deviations from seniority-based layoffs under certain specific
circumstances. That section provides:

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate
from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for
either of the following reasons:

[¶…¶]

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.

27.

There are no constitutional requirements that certificated employees of

African-American descent or persons over 40 be exempt from layoff. There is no
authority for the proposition that African-American employees or persons over 40
years of age do not receive equal protection of the law if they are subject to layoff
with their colleagues, when the layoff is based on seniority with limited exceptions
based on District needs. There is no evidence that the District is under a court order
to comply with a particular affirmative action or other remedial plan in regards to the
racial composition or age of the teaching staff. Extending preferential treatment to
some employees based upon ethnicity or age would violate the equal protection rights
of the remaining employees. The United States Supreme Court has held that a school
board’s policy of extending preferential protection against layoffs to some employees
because of their race violated the Fourteenth Amendment. (Wendy Wygant v. Jackson
Board of Education etc., et al. (1986) 478 U.S. 1014) Further, to the extent that Sims
was maintaining that students were deprived of equal protection because of her layoff,
her argument was not persuasive.

Individual Issues –Special Education Skip

28.

Carol Lambert has a seniority date of August 18, 2003. She holds a

pupil personnel services credential and is a school social worker at John Morse
Therapeutic. Lambert received a preliminary notice under the PKS reduction of
“Social Worker.” She maintains that she should be skipped under skipping criteria B:
“Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in a Special Education assignment.” Lambert
does not hold a special education teaching credential. Her argument was not
persuasive.

10

Individual Issues –Home/Hospital Skips

29.

Beth Conklin has a seniority date of September 6, 2005. She holds a

multiple subject credential and is assigned to teach at Golden Empire Elementary.
John Gorman has a seniority date of September 2, 2003. He holds a multiple subject
credential and is assigned to teach at Abraham Lincoln Elementary. Both contend
they should be skipped under Board skipping criteria F: “Individuals who have two
(2) or more years of experience teaching and/or specialized training in a home or
hospital setting.” They maintain that the language of criteria F includes them,
because each has experience in one of these areas. Neither Conklin nor Gorman
holds a special education credential, which is now a requirement to bump into a
position in the home and hospital teaching program. But, they contend that if their
experience and training qualifies under criteria F, they should be skipped regardless
of their assignments and regardless of whether assignment to the home and hospital
program now requires a special education credential. Their arguments illustrate that
Criteria F is not related to District needs. The District has no need for individuals
who have experience teaching and/or specialized training in a home or hospital
setting, unless those individuals hold a special education credential as well.

30.

No respondent challenged the implementation of Criteria F; indeed
Conklin and Gorman want it implemented. Thus, no finding is made on whether
Criteria F is an improper skipping criteria. However, assuming Criteria F is a proper
skipping criteria, neither respondent would qualify for skipping. Gorman’s
experience in home teaching has been on a part-time, as needed basis, after school,
about five hours a week for 27 months and does not constitute two years of
experience teaching in a home setting. Conklin garnered her experience in a hospital
setting (Shriners Hospital) as a teacher’s aid in a classified position and for two
months as a teacher’s assistant. Her experience does not constitute teaching and/or
specialized training. The arguments of Conklin and Gorman were not persuasive.

Challenges to Skipping Criteria and to Competency Criteria For Bumping

31.

Respondents contend that implementation of many of the District

skipping criteria violates their rights to a seniority-based layoff proceeding under
section 44955. Respondents challenge skipping of junior employees through
implementation of: criteria B (Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in a Special
Education assignment); criteria C (Individuals fully-credentialed to teach the full
breadth of high school math assignments up to and including calculus); criteria D
(Individuals currently serving in a Priority School assignment, who will also be
teaching in a Priority School assignment for 2012-2013); criteria E (Individuals who
have one (1) or more years of experience teaching in a Dual-Language Immersion

11

Program) and criteria H (Individuals with specialized training and experience in the
Accelerated Academy Program).4

32.

Additionally, individual respondents who assert bumping rights to

positions held by junior employees challenge competency criteria C (In order to work
in a Priority School, training and/or experience teaching in a Priority School setting);
criteria E ( In order to work in the Accelerated Academy, training in Accelerated
Academy programs and experience relevant to working with the Accelerated
Academy student population) ; criteria F (In order to work in a Dual Immersion
program, one (1) year of experience in the past five (5) years teaching in a Dual
Immersion program) and criteria G (In order to be assigned to a high school math
position, possession of a credential that authorizes the holder to teach the full breadth
of math assignments up to and including calculus offered at the high school level).

Controlling Authority

33.

Education Code section 44955 controls the order in

which certificated employees shall be dismissed in a reduction in force.
This section provides in pertinent part:

[¶ ¶]

(b) Whenever … a particular kind of service is to be
reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of
the following school year, or whenever the amendment
of state law requires the modification of curriculum, and
when in the opinion of the governing board of the district
it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these
conditions to decrease the number of permanent
employees in the district, the governing board may
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding
percentage of the certificated employees of the district,

4 It appeared at times in respondents’ closing arguments that they were

challenging the Waldorf training and experience skip (criteria G) and the
Home/Hospital Setting skip (criteria F). However, during the hearing respondents
stipulated that they were not challenging the Waldorf skip. No respondent claimed
that he or she was adversely affected by the Home/Hospital Setting skip. During
closing argument, respondents acknowledged that they were not challenging
implementation of criteria A: (Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in classes
requiring Bilingual Cross-Cultural Language and Development (“BCLAD”)
certification, to the extent necessary to staff BCLAD required positions).
Accordingly, there are no issues regarding these skips and they are not discussed
herein.

12

permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the
school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the
services of no permanent employee may be terminated
under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less
seniority, is retained to render a service which said
permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render….

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given
before the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in
Section 44949, and services of such employees shall be
terminated in the inverse of the order in which they were
employed…

The governing board shall make assignments and
reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be
retained to render any service which their seniority and
qualifications entitle them to render…

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district
may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in
order of seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for
personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or
to provide services authorized by a services credential
with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated
employee has special training and experience necessary
to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services,
which others with more seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance
with constitutional requirements related to equal
protection of the laws.

34.

The Education Code was enacted in 1943 as a recodification of the

School Code and other provisions of law related to education. No substantive
changes were made in the law and the Education Code represented a definite and
needed advancement in the clarification and arrangement of the laws therein.5 The

5 Governor’s File- State Archives Center – letter from the Department of

Education to Earl Warren, Governor of California, April 2, 1943.

13

Education Code has been amended numerous times since 1943. In 1983, the
Legislature enacted various amendments and added subdivision (d) to section 44955,
relating to deviating from the order of seniority during reeducations in force.

35.

The Education Code contains an extensive network of statutes

governing the employment rights of public school teachers. “The purpose of the
tenure law is to give employment security to teachers while protecting the community
from ineffective teachers.” (Curtis v. San Mateo Junior College Dist. (1972) 28
Cal.App.3d 161,165.) “A school district may not avoid the purposes of the tenure
law by use of a subterfuge.” (Mitchell v. Board of Trustees (1935) 5 Cal.App.2d 64,
68. “Thus, administrative practices that circumvent valid expectations of
reemployment created by the tenure statutes are not permitted.” (Santa Barbara
Federation of Teachers v. Santa Barbara High School Dist. (1977) 76 Cal.App.3d
223, 230.) This requirement of seniority-based layoffs under section 44955 dates
back to the 1930’s. School Code 5.711 was enacted and amended in 1935 and
required, when layoffs were implemented that, “employees shall be dismissed in the
inverse of the order in which they were employed.” (Statutes of 1935, Chapter 690;
See also Chambers v. Bd. of Trustees of City of Madera School Dist. (1940), 38
Cal.App.2d 561, 566.)

36.

The Education Code permits school districts to implement layoffs of
certificated employees to effect a reduction or discontinuance of a particular kind of
service (PKS layoff). (§ 44955, subd. (d).) Layoffs must proceed in accordance with
the criteria set forth in section 44955 and the procedures prescribed by section 44949.
The district is statutorily authorized to reduce teaching staff and is required to proceed
according to seniority principles. The statute specifically protects tenure rights and
seniority. Teachers must be laid off, rehired, assigned and reassigned based on their
seniority. (§§ 44955, 44956, 44957). Section 44955 prohibits the layoff of a senior
employee, if a junior employee is retained to perform a service which the senior
employee is credentialed and competent to render.

37.

The manifest intent of the Legislature is that discontinuance of a
position must result in termination of the most junior qualified employee, and
therefore districts must appoint (“bump”) the most senior, qualified teacher to a
position.
399, 405-06.)

(Poppers v. Mount Tamalpais Unified School Dist. (1986), 184 Cal.App.3d

38.

In sum, respondents who have acquired permanent tenure in the District
are entitled to preference over the probationary and less senior teachers therein whose
services they are capable of performing. If respondents are competent to perform the
service rendered by less senior employees, they are entitled to be assigned to that
employment. Senior certificated employees have a conditional vested right to that
preference. “[I]n the discretion of a school board a particular kind of service may be
dispensed with, and when that is done in good faith, permanent employees of the
district may be dismissed when, on that account, their services are no longer required.

14

But when such service is discontinued in a school where probationary teachers are
employed, the permanent teacher may not be discharged if she is capable of
performing the service rendered by any such probationary teacher. The permanent
teacher thus is given preference over all probationary teachers whose particular
service she is capable of performing. When a special service is discontinued it
follows that it becomes the duty of the board, when probationary teachers are
employed in the school, to ascertain and determine whether such probationary
teachers, or any of them, are performing services which the permanent teacher is
capable of doing. If there are probationary teachers in the school so engaged, the
permanent teacher is entitled to her job, and if the services of both are not required,
then the probationary teacher must be discharged and not the permanent teacher.”
(Davis v. Gray (1938), 29 Cal.App.2d 403, 406-407.)”

39.

It is well established that the rule making authority conferred on the
governing boards of school districts by the Legislature is limited to the adoption of
rules not in conflict with other statutory restrictions. “The governing board of each
school district shall prescribe and enforce rules not inconsistent with law, or with the
rules prescribed by the State Board of Education, for its own government.” (Patton v.
Governing Board (1978) 77 Cal.App.3d 495, 501; see also Education Code section
35010, subdivision (b).) The tenure system “has raised immeasurably the dignity and
professional competency of our teachers, and the legislative act which established it
requires an interpretation which carries out, and not one which defeats its purpose.”
(Fuller v. Berkeley School Dist. (1934) 2 Cal.2d 152, 159 (dissenting opinion of
Langdon, J).

40.

In Bledsoe,6 the court determined whether, given the protections

afforded to seniority by section 44955, a school district could lay off a senior
certificated employee when it skipped two junior employees who were teaching in a
community day school, a self contained classroom for students who had been
expelled or who had extreme behavioral difficulties. The Bledsoe court defined
“skipping” thusly: “For purposes of a school district reduction in force, ‘skipping’
refers to a junior teacher being retained for specified reasons.” (Id. at p. 130, FN 3.
The Bledsoe court determined there had been substantial evidence, including a
seniority list showing their credentials and NCLB qualifications, district
superintendent's testimony that both skipped teachers had the necessary temperament
to serve students with extreme behavioral difficulties, and a prior administrative law
decision7 showing that both teachers had a long period of continuous service in

6 As Modified on Denial of Rehearing Jan. 12, 2009.

7 The prior decision (authored by the undersigned) involved other senior
teachers besides Bledsoe. It “involved consideration of the District's specific need for
its community day school and the special training and experience of Gates and
Sormano to meet those needs in the context of the exception provided by section
44955, subdivision (d). The decision concluded the District had met its burden to

15

community day schools and that they had extensive background and training in areas
such as aggression management and drug abuse recognition. “Gates had 10 years of
experience teaching as of 2004, eight of which involved working with disabled
populations. Gates has a bachelor's degree in applied psychology. He has extensive
training in mediation, aggression management, abuse recognition, and other areas of
training related to working with difficult student populations. The administrative law
decision [in 2004] indicates Sormano also has extensive background and training in
specialized areas related to teaching at a community day school. Specifically, he has
extensive training in management of assaultive behavior and drug abuse recognition.
He has experience working with special needs children and utilizing behavioral
modification techniques.” (Id. at pp. 139-140.)

41.

In Bledsoe, the District presented substantial evidence that, even though

the senior employee was credentialed and competent to teach in the positions the
junior employees occupied, the District had a specific need for the two junior teachers
to teach in the community day school, and the two junior teachers had special training
and experience necessary to teach in a community day school that the senior teacher
did not possess. The Bledsoe court therefore found that, consistent with section
44955, subdivision (d)(1), the school district could skip the two junior employees and
lay off the more senior employee. The court held that subdivision (d)(1) of section
44955 “expressly allows a district to demonstrate its specific ‘needs.’” (Id. at p. 138.)
“While teachers qualified under section 44865 may have the base qualifications
necessary to be certificated and competent to render services at a community day
school for purposes of section 44955, subdivision (b), subdivision (d)(1) recognizes a
district may have special needs for personnel to teach a specific course of study that
go beyond base qualifications.” (Id. at 139.)

42.

Not only does the District have the burden of showing it may skip a

junior employee pursuant to section 44955, subdivision, (d)(1), the district also has an
affirmative obligation to assess qualifications to determine if there is a senior
credentialed employee who may bump into the position held by the junior employee
who the District proposes to skip. (Bledsoe, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th at pp. 142- 43.)

43.

The District’s skipping and bumping criteria challenged by respondents

in Findings 31 and 32, are examined below in the light of the above authority.

Math Skips

44.

The PKS resolution reduced high school math by 9.0 FTE and reduced
middle school math by 10.0 FTE. In skipping criteria C, the Board determined that it

prove such exception when it retained Gates and Sormano and gave layoff notices to
more senior teachers in the prior reduction in force. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School
District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 129 FN4)

16

was necessary to skip “[I]ndividuals fully-credentialed to teach the full breadth of
high school math assignments up to and including calculus.”

45.

Only those employees holding single subject math credentials are fully-

credentialed to teach the full breadth of high school math assignments up to and
including calculus. Those holding foundational math credentials are authorized to
teach math through algebra II, but not trigonometry, math analysis, or calculus.

46.

In applying skipping criteria C, HR staff skipped 26 employees holding

single subject math credentials. As a result, there were several respondents senior to
those skipped who hold foundational level math credentials and received preliminary
notices. They challenge the skip of junior single subject credential holders because
many of the junior single subject holders are not currently assigned to teach
trigonometry, math analysis, or calculus (advanced subjects) and there is no current
plan to assign them to teach advanced subjects. In essence, respondents argue that
foundational level math credentials authorize the holder to teach the bulk of math
courses offered in the District, and it is improper to lay off senior teachers in favor of
junior teachers who are teaching the same classes as the senior teachers.

47.

The District countered that it wishes to have “maximum flexibility” to

assign math teachers to teach advanced subjects and that in the future there may be
more advanced math classes taught throughout the District. The District has had
difficulty recruiting teachers with a single subject math credential and wishes to retain
those it has on staff. Additionally, the District argued that single subject holders have
a deeper understanding of the theory of math than those who hold foundational
credentials and are therefore superior teachers in their lower level math classes.

48.

Because the junior teachers are not assigned to teach trigonometry,

math analysis, or calculus and there are no immediate plans to have them teach these
advanced subjects in the 2013-13 school year, the District is essentially retaining a
group of junior employees to avoid potential difficulties recruiting future employees
and to improve flexibility in future scheduling. As a result of these administrative
planning concerns, junior employees are being retained to render services (teaching
foundational level math) that senior employees are qualified and entitled to render, in
violation of section 44955, subdivisions (b): “…. the services of no permanent
employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to
render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render….” and (c): “The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments
in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which their
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render…”

49.

The District maintains that it has demonstrated under section 44955,

subdivision (d)(1), that it may deviate from terminating certificated mathematics
teachers in order of seniority . The District argues that it has demonstrated a specific

17

need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study and that the
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that
course or course of study which others with more seniority do not possess. It is clear
that only holders of single subject math credentials are authorized to teach advanced
math classes. It is also clear that there are a limited number of advanced math classes
being taught in the District, which are fully staffed by single subject credential
holders. There was no evidence of a concrete plan to increase those advanced classes
by any number in the 2012-13 school year, which would warrant skipping a
corresponding number of junior single subject holders to staff those positions.
Accordingly, the District has not identified a “specific need” for holders of single
subject math credentials to teach any “specific [advanced math] course.”

50.

The wholesale dismissal of senior math teachers who hold a

foundational level credential for the simple reason that the District wishes to have a
pool of single subject math teachers available in the event it could use them in the
future completely defeats the intent of the Legislature in enacting seniority based
retention rights. With this rationale, a district could skip any group of certificated
employees based on a notion of what its future needs might be, or because a staff
holding certain credentials affords the district more flexibility in assignments. The
skipping exception set forth in section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), recognizes this
tendency of a district to define its needs broadly and twice demands that the district
invoking the skip demonstrate (prove) specificity: proof of a “specific need” to skip a
senior person and proof of a “specific course or course of study” occupied by the
skipped person.

51.

The District’s argument that single subject holders have a deeper

understanding of the theory of math than those who hold foundational credentials and
are therefore superior teachers in their lower level math classes is not relevant to a
layoff proceeding. In Martin v Kentfield, supra, 35 Cal.3d 294, the Supreme Court
while analyzing analogous statutory language regarding reinstatement rights held: “In
section 44956, the Legislature has made seniority the sole determinant as to which
tenured teachers on layoff status should be appointed to a vacant position. The only
limitation is that the teacher selected be ‘certificated and competent’ to render the
service required by the vacant position. Among employees who meet this threshold
limitation, there is no room in the statutory scheme for comparative evaluation.” (Id.
at 299 (Italics in original).)

52.

The District maintained that the undersigned, in a recent layoff

proposed decision (Stockton Unified School District (SUSD) OAH No. 2011010763),
determined that the District need not show that it planned to place skipped employees
in specific teaching assignments in the upcoming school year in order to effectuate a
skip. District counsel maintained that the proposed decision held that a district could
retain junior employees to maintain flexibility of scheduling. The District is
mistaken. As set forth in the proposed decision, SUSD proposed to skip one junior
probationary employee who held single subject teaching credentials in biological

18

sciences; biological sciences (specialized); science: chemistry; science; geosciences
and an administrative services credential. He taught honors chemistry to 10th-graders
and a ninth-grade academic decathlon honors class at a Stockton charter school. The
charter school provided accelerated and enriched honors and advanced placement
classes. All the students were required to take math and pre-calculus, AP chemistry
and biology and nine units of college classes. The district wished to skip this junior
teacher so that he could teach chemistry classes at the charter school the following
school year. The SUSD also wished to skip this junior teacher to provide teaching
services under his other four credentials, because the school curriculum was
expanding to include anatomy/physiology, physics, AP biology and AP chemistry
over the next two years and the junior teacher’s credentials would allow him to teach
these courses. Those senior employees who challenged his skipping were not
credentialed to teach chemistry or were not credentialed to teach the advanced honors
courses the district proposed he teach.

53.

SUSD did the opposite of what the District proposes here. It selected a
junior employee who was teaching a specific course, chemistry, and proposed to have
him continue teaching that specific course the following year and, in addition,
demonstrated concrete plans to use his other credentials to teach specific courses in
the same advanced program within two years. The SUSD was not proposing to
develop a pool of teachers to have available in the event it could use them throughout
the district in the future.

54.

Finally, the District maintains that competency criteria (G) bars

reassignment of senior respondents who hold a foundational math credential and wish
to bump into positions at the high school level. Competency criteria G provides “In
order to be assigned to a high school math position, possession of a credential that
authorizes the holder to teach the full breadth of math assignments up to and
including calculus offered at the high school level.” Competency criteria must be
reasonable and valid and must relate to teacher skills and credentialing. (Duax v.
Kern Community College District (1987) 186. Cal.App.3d 555, 565-566.) They must
relate to actual district needs. As discussed above, there is no real need to demand
that all high school math teachers possess single subject math credentials. The
District may feel the need to be prepared in upcoming years to offer more advanced
math courses. But, the District may not, in the interests of achieving administrative
goals, declare teachers who are certificated to teach certain high school classes,
especially those now teaching those high school math classes, to suddenly be
incompetent to teach them.

55.

The parties have records of those respondents who hold foundational

math credentials and who are senior to any of the 26 teachers who were skipped under
criteria C. As set forth in the Legal Conclusions and the Order below, the District
shall determine which, if any, of the 26 skipped teachers are currently teaching in a
position requiring a single subject credential in math and who also will be teaching in

19

the 2012-13 school year in a position requiring a single subject credential in math.8
Those teachers are properly skipped. As regards the remaining of the 26 teachers
who were skipped under criteria C, the District shall determine whether any of the
respondents who received preliminary notices based on math reductions are senior to
any of the 26 teachers who were not otherwise properly skipped. Pursuant to
Alexander v. Board of Trustees of Delano Joint Unified High School District (1983)
139 Cal. App. 3d 567, 576-577, (Alexander) a corresponding number of the most
senior of the respondents who received preliminary notices shall have their
preliminary notices rescinded.

Special Education Skips

56.

In skipping criteria B, the Board determined that it was necessary to

skip “Individuals fully-credentialed to serve in a Special Education assignment.” The
District skipped the following persons under criteria B.

Adam Eisner has a seniority date of September 4, 2008 and holds a single
subject credential in physical education and an adaptive physical education
specialist credential. According to the seniority list, he is currently assigned to
teach physical education at the Edward Kemble Elementary School.

Thea Singleton has a seniority date of September 7, 2004 and holds a multiple
subjects credential, a single subject credential in foundational math and an
educational specialist instruction credential in mild and moderate disabilities.
According to the seniority list, she is not currently assigned to any teaching
duties.

Janet Spilman has a seniority date of September 3, 2002 and holds a resource
specialist certificate of competence, a single subject teaching credential in
social science, a specialist instruction credential in special education and a
pupil personnel services credential in school counseling. According to the
seniority list, she is currently assigned as a counselor at the West Campus
High School.

57.

As with the math skips, District personnel testified as to the difficulty

in recruiting special education teachers, and the need for the District to retain teachers
with special education credentials for special education positions. Respondents
argued that the District did not meet its burden to demonstrate that Eisner, Singleton
and Spilman should be skipped because they are currently assigned to teach special
education classes or will teach special education classes in the upcoming school year.

8 Respondents contend that only 6 of the 26 skipped math teachers are
currently assigned to teach a subject that requires a single subject math credential:
trigonometry, pre-calculus or calculus. However, documentary evidence of this claim
is unclear.

20

The evidence at hearing was not conclusive as to whether the assignments of Eisner
and Spilman and the anticipated assignments, if any, of Singleton involved teaching
or counseling under their special education credentials. The indications are that they
are not performing services under special education credentials.

58.

The skipping exception set forth in section 44955, subdivision (d)(1),
requires that the district invoking the skip demonstrate (prove) specificity: proof of a
“specific need” to skip a junior person and proof of a “specific course or course of
study” occupied by the skipped person. The District did not present evidence that
Eisner, Spilman or Singleton are being retained to teach or provide counseling
services in special education.

59.

As set forth in the Legal Conclusions, the parties have records of those

respondents who are senior to Eisner, Singleton and Spilman and who have the
credentials necessary to bump into the current assignments of Eisner and Spilman and
the last assigned position of Singleton. Pursuant to Alexander,supra, 139 Cal. App. at
pp. 576-577, a corresponding number of the most senior of the respondents who
received preliminary notices shall have their preliminary notices rescinded.

Dual Language Immersion Competency Criteria - Carolina Avina Mora

60.

In competency criteria F, the Board determined that competency

required: “In order to work in a Dual Immersion program, one (1) year of experience
in the past five (5) years teaching in a Dual Immersion program.” Carolina Avina
Mora has a seniority date of August 2, 2004. She holds a multiple subjects credential
with a BCLAD in Spanish and teaches at the William Land Elementary School. She
is senior to some of the employees with Spanish BCLADs, who are teaching in the
Dual-Language Immersion Program (DLIP). Avina Mora did not testify and there
was no evidence presented as to any experience she might have teaching in a DLIP.
She challenges the competency criteria and maintains that she is certificated and
competent to bump into one of the DLIP positions because she holds a BCLAD, and
no specialized training or experience was required of new hires.

61.

Iris Taylor, Ph.D., is the District’s assistant superintendent of

curriculum and instruction. Her duties include oversight of the DLIP. She explained
that the program goal is for students to exit the program being bilingual in English
and their native (target) language. The students should be able to read and write in
both languages and to understand the customs and traditions of both cultures.
Students should be “bilingual, biliterate and bicultural.” The DLIP differs from
bilingual programs in the District. Bilingual programs provide target language
support, but the end goal is English acquisition. After a certain period of time a
student in a bilingual program transitions completely out of the target language into
English. The DLIP continues to teach both languages, with the target language
decreasing over time. The curriculum of the DLIP is presented in both languages
through a variety of instructional strategies that help students acquire both languages.

21

There are a host of second language acquisition strategies to help make the input of
language comprehensible in a class, such as use of graphic organizers or visual aids
and representations and modeling.

62.

Taylor confirmed that a BCLAD is required for the DLIP positions.

There is professional development training unique to DLIP teachers. When teachers
enter as instructors in the DLIP they attended a dual language immersion conference.
Taylor was unsure whether the conference lasted more than one day. She explained
that DLIP teachers meet on a continuous basis once or twice a month, where they
engage in professional learning. At a couple of the sites, particularly the newer sites
like the Hmong DLIP, teachers meet with an outside consultant to help them
understand teaching in a cultural context.

63.

Taylor acknowledged that there were two new hires to the DLIP

program on August 31, 2011, who did not have one year of experience teaching in a
DLIP. Nor did the job description for these hires require one year of experience in
the past five teaching in a DLIP. The new teachers will have the one year of
experience at the conclusion of this school year, and the District intends to offer the
DLIP programs in 2012-13 school year. The new hires attended the dual language
immersion conference after they were employed and have been attending the ongoing
teacher meetings.

64.

The evidence is not persuasive that competency criteria F can be used

to bar Avina Mora from bumping a junior employee being retained to teach in a
Spanish DLIP program. The District did not establish that this competency criteria
was reasonable as applied to Avina Mora. Avina Mora holds a BCLAD and has been
teaching in the District for eight years. There is no persuasive evidence that a teacher
holding a BCLAD is not competent to teach in a DLIP program without having
previously taught in that program for a year. The evidence is to the contrary; new
hires are not required to have one year of experience. Training requirements are
minimal and are acquired at the commencement of the school year. Avina Mora, like
the other DLIP teachers, can acquire this training rapidly and probably at the
beginning of the 2012-13 school year as well.

65.

There are several employees junior to Avina Mora who hold BCLADs
in Spanish and are teaching in the District’s Spanish DLIPs. As set forth in the Legal
Conclusions, Avina Mora may bump the least senior of these employees and her
preliminary notice shall be rescinded.

Accelerated Academy Program Skips

66.

In skipping criteria H, the Board determined that it was necessary to

skip “Individuals with specialized training and experience in the Accelerated
Academy Program.” The Board also determined that those wishing to bump into the
Accelerated Academy Program (Accelerated Academy) would be deemed competent

22

only if they had “training in Accelerated Academy programs and experience relevant
to working with the Accelerated Academy student population.”

67.

The District proposed to skip five of the seven certificated teachers in

the Accelerated Academy as well as the counselor. The skipped employees are:

Keoni Chock holds a single subject credential in social sciences with an
ELA and has a seniority date of October 29, 2010.

Cory Fukuoka holds a single subject foundational math credential and a
multiple subject credential with a CLAD and has a seniority date of
September 5, 2006.

Jennifer Healey holds a single subject credential in math with an ELA
and has a seniority date of October 31, 2007.

You Lor holds a single subject credential in English with an ELA and
has a seniority date of October 4, 2010.

Sara Taylor holds a single subject credential in social sciences with an
ELA and a multiple subject credential with an ELA, and has a seniority
date of September 2, 2008.

Onisha Hardin holds a pupil personnel services credential in school
counseling, school social work. She has a seniority date of December
1, 2004. She is employed in a .50 FTE position.

68.

Respondents who are senior to these teachers maintain they are

certificated and competent to bump into positions held by these teachers.
Respondents with PPS credentials in counseling, senior to Hardin, contend that they
are certificated and competent to bump into the .50 counselor position held by Hardin.
(Hardin was laid off .50 FTE of her 1.00 FTE in counseling and is a respondent in this
matter.) The District maintains that it has demonstrated a specific need to retain the
employees in the Accelerated Academy and they have specialized training and
experience which respondents do not possess.

69.

The District’s Accelerated Academy is an alternative education

program, serving primarily high school juniors and seniors. It is a “credit recovery
program,” in that it assists students who would be unable to graduate from a
comprehensive high school due to credit deficiency to graduate on time. It also
assists students who are deficient in their credits to earn credits on an accelerated
basis so that they may return to their home high schools at the same level as their
classmates. The Accelerated Academy program addresses the needs of students who
are not successful in a comprehensive high school environment for various reasons,
including behavioral issues, as well as students who do not attend high school because

23

they are pregnant, have children, have been bullied or have other reasons not to attend
high school. The students are predominantly African-American and Hispanic. Many
of the students are 100 to 200 credits deficient for graduation when they enroll in the
Accelerated Academy. The program has been effective in timely graduating students
and in preventing students from dropping out of high school.

70.

The Accelerated Academy students complete courses on the Internet,

through Aventa Learning (Aventa), a vendor that provides the curriculum and on-line
instruction. Aventa’s teachers serve as the student’s teacher of record. Students
attend class five days a week, from 8 a.m. to noon or from noon to 4 p.m. The
students work continuously for a four hour session. The students access class
materials using the Aventa online computer software system. The program has six
classrooms that are set up as computer labs, with 30 workstations with a computer at
each workstation. There are 30 students in each four-hour class; a total of 360
students participate in the two sessions of the program. Due to the popularity of the
program, there is a waiting list for enrollment and the District plans to increase the
capacity of the classrooms/computer labs in the 2012-13 school year.

71.

The Accelerated Academy has a “lead teacher” who oversees the day-
to-day operation of the program, and seven teachers assigned to the program. There
is a certificated District teacher in each classroom and an instructional aide who
roams between classrooms to help students and supervise. The teachers are present
throughout the school day to provide one-on-one assistance to students while they are
working on-line.

72.

Brandon Young has been a teacher and a lead teacher at Accelerated
Academy for several years. He currently serves as coordinator of the program. He
testified that although many of the students have come to the Accelerated Academy
voluntarily because they had behavioral issues at comprehensive high schools, the
school atmosphere was “pretty calm and very conducive to them getting their work
done.” He confirmed that there were not a lot of discipline issues or behavioral issues
on campus. He explained that when students come to their placement office,
behavioral rules are laid out very clearly for them. The students are there voluntarily
and they “don't really have any issues with gangs.”

73.

Young testified that the staff members are certificated in a specific

subject area, they possess a keen insight to the type of students and have a very good
understanding as to the types of issues and circumstances that surround the students.
They establish relationships with the students and their families, and they understand
that empathy is a large part of dealing with this population of students. He testified
that many students first come to school with a history of negative interactions with
adults. In a couple of months, they “start to open up and maybe build a sense of
trust.” The program tries to build on this relationship and transition 11th-graders into
the next school year with the same teacher.

24

74.

Young testified that the lead teacher helps with the implementation and

use of the online program at the Accelerated Academy, oversees disciplinary issues
and attendance and serves as the conduit to the high schools in communicating with
the registrars and reviewing transcripts. Accelerated Academy teachers do not deliver
curriculum or instruction. They do not grade students. The Aventa certificated
teachers are responsible for delivering curriculum. However, the Accelerated
Academy teachers review and assess transcripts to determine where students are
deficient, put together learning plans with students to meet these deficiencies and
spend a lot of time facilitating the students in their use of the online program. The
teachers make sure that the online teaching comports with a learning plan.

75.

Young testified that when a teacher is assigned to the Accelerated

Academy “we do some in-services during the latter part of the summer” to help them
in developing learning plans. The teachers also are trained to distinguish between
some of the titles of Aventa classes and the titles of comparable classes in the District.
The new teachers are also trained by Aventa, which is contractually obligated to
provide training. Aventa sends a representative late in the summer or early in the
school year to train the staff for two days. All teachers participate in this training
every year. Over the course of the year, Aventa sends a representative when Aventa
is launching a new product or adding a feature to their Website. Young also pointed
out that over the course of the year teachers collaborate and come up with best
practices in terms of what is working for them in the classroom. They usually do this
at the end of staff meetings. This collaboration is important because Young believes
Aventa and a lot of other online companies “weren’t necessarily meant for this
population of students… and so to adapt the program and then make it work for this
population is something of an ongoing learning curve for us.” The program was
meant more for general student populations that for struggling students. Currently, all
of the staff are receiving ongoing training in positive behavioral intervention and
support. The Accelerated Academy has also had registrars from high schools speak
with staff about how to read transcripts, source codes, course offerings, graduation
requirements from their districts.

76.

Young testified that the part-time counselor (Hardin) facilitates the
classroom. She assists the teachers in reviewing transcripts. “Largely, she helps
students with their transition to higher education.” He pointed out that she has
relationships with some of the community colleges in the area and helps students
transition into community college and obtain financial aid. Hardin exposes students
to different career Expos and workshops. She makes referrals for social and
emotional counseling as well. Hardin has not had the Aventa training and does not
work with the Aventa website at the Accelerated Academy.

77.

Young acknowledged that teachers Lor and Chock were first employed

at the Accelerated Academy at the start of the present school year. They are both
probationary employees. Both were trained in a brief summer program before the
start of their school years. In addition, the Accelerated Academy increased its

25

positions by two in the 2011-12 school year. Erlinda Villahermosa and Kirk Arnoldy
(lead teacher) are new hires and are not included on the skip list. The Accelerated
Academy was able to train them when they began work.

78. Many of the respondents use Aventa and are familiar with the program.

Most have worked or are working in schools that have similar population
demographics as the Accelerated Academy: historically low performing students,
students from disadvantaged families, students in single parent families, students
whose financial circumstances entitled them to free school breakfast and lunch and
students with behavioral issues. Many respondents have had training in managing
student behavior. Several have performed work which involves analyzing transcripts.
Many respondents have worked or work in schools that assist students with credit
recovery.

79.

It was clear from the evidence that the “specialized training and

experience” provided to Accelerated Academy employees was minimal and could
easily be obtained in the summer before the school year or at the inception of the
school year. The District acknowledged that the “most important” reason it wanted to
retain Accelerated Academy employees was because the employees have established
relationships with students, and sometimes with their families. The District
speculates that students will lose their trust in adults, and that the effectiveness of the
program would be devastated if these bonds were severed when senior teachers arrive
on the scene.9 This is not a valid ground for skipping junior employees. In all
Districts, in all programs, employees and students develop relationships. To allow a
District to set aside the seniority-based protections of the Education Code in favor of
vague, subjective and mercurial matters like employee-student relationships, would
allow a District to skip junior employees with minimal justification and would defeat
the intentions of the statute.

80.

Finally, the District maintains that competency criteria H (Individuals
with specialized training and experience in the Accelerated Academy Program) bars
reassignment of senior respondents to the Accelerated Academy. Competency
criteria must be reasonable and valid and must relate to teacher skills and
credentialing. Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 186. Cal. App 3d
555, 565-566. Criteria H is not reasonable and valid. As set forth above, there is
minimal training or experience required to provide services in the Accelerated

9 The District points out that in vulnerable student populations, when there are

layoffs, students can lose the one adult in their lives they can trust. But, it is
inevitable that if a teacher is the one adult a student can trust, the student will lose that
relationship when the student graduates or moves back to her/his home school or
when the teacher voluntarily transfers or leaves employment. Vulnerable students in
all of the District schools, not just the Accelerated Academy, lose trusted adults in the
event of layoffs.

26

Academy, and for those who are not already familiar with the Avanta program, or
with analyzing transcripts, that training and experience can be acquired in advance of
and during the first few months of employment.

81.

The parties have records of those respondents who are senior to any of
the five teachers who were skipped under criteria H and records of those respondent
counselors who are senior to Hardin. As set forth in the Legal Conclusions and
pursuant to Alexander, supra, 39 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 576-577, a corresponding
number of the most senior of the respondents who received preliminary notices shall
have their preliminary notices rescinded.

Superintendent’s Priority Schools Skips

82.

In skipping criteria D, the Board determined that it was necessary to

skip “Individuals currently serving in a Priority School assignment, who will also be
teaching in a Priority School assignment for 2012-2013.” The Board also determined
that those wishing to bump into Priority Schools would be deemed competent only if
they had “training and/or experience teaching in a Priority School setting.”

83.

The District proposed to skip all of the 100 certificated teachers,

counselors and social workers currently serving in the seven Superintendent’s Priority
Schools. Many of the respondents are senior to the employees skipped. At least 37 of
the skipped employees have seniority dates in 2010 or 2011.10

Threshold Issue-Counselor and Social Worker Skips at Priority Schools

84.

Respondents’ first challenge to the skip of Priority School employees is

that counselors and social workers cannot be skipped because the Skipping
Resolution only refers to individuals who will be “teaching” in a Priority School
assignment. The District contends that counselors and social workers are part of the
“teaching team,” and thus are properly skipped under the language of the Skipping
Resolution. This contention is not persuasive. However, there is no statutory or other
authority that requires a District to adopt skipping criteria by resolution. In contrast,
there is authority that requires that a District adopt FTE reductions and tie-breaking
criteria by resolution.
senior employees with special training and experience to teach a particular course of
study without the district’s governing board having adopted a resolution authorizing
the skip.

In Bledsoe, the court upheld the district’s right to skip less

85.

The District may skip counselors and social workers assigned to
Priority Schools if it can “demonstrate a specific need for personnel to provide

10 For example, 19 employees have seniority dates of August 31, 2011 and 12

have seniority dates of September 7, 2010.

27

services authorized by a services credential with a specialization in . . . pupil
personnel services . . . [and] the certificated employee has special training and
experience necessary to .. . provide those services, which others with more seniority
do not possess.” ( § 44955, subd, (d)(1).) That analysis is conducted below

Threshold Issue-Course of Study

86.

Respondents’ second challenge to the skip of Priority School

employees is that the Priority Schools do not constitute a “specific course or course of
study,” and therefore the District may not skip Priority School employees under
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). This section provides in pertinent part:

87.

Section 51014 defines “course of study” as “the planned content of a

series of classes, courses, subjects, studies, or related activities.”

88.

Section 51002 states:

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district
may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in
order of seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for
personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or
to provide services authorized by a services credential
with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated
employee has special training and experience necessary
to teach that course or course of study or to provide those
services, which others with more seniority do not
possess. (Italics added)

The Legislature hereby recognizes that, because of the
common needs and interests of the citizens of this state
and the nation, there is a need to establish a common
state curriculum for the public schools, but that, because
of economic, geographic, physical, political and social
diversity, there is a need for the development of
educational programs at the local level, with the
guidance of competent and experienced educators and
citizens. Therefore, it is the intent of the Legislature to
set broad minimum standards and guidelines for
educational programs, and to encourage local districts to
develop programs that will best fit the needs and interests
of the pupils, pursuant to stated philosophy, goals, and
objectives.

28

89.

Section 51204 states: “Any course of study adopted pursuant to this

division shall be designed to fit the needs of the pupils for which the course of study
is prescribed.”

90.

Section 51224 states:

The governing board of any school district maintaining a
high school shall prescribe courses of study designed to
provide the skills and knowledge required for adult life
for pupils attending the schools within its school district.
The governing board shall prescribe separate courses of
study, including, but not limited to, a course of study
designed to prepare prospective pupils for admission to
state colleges and universities and a course of study for
career technical training.

91.

The District maintains that the Education Code in the above sections

defines the “broad minimum standards” of “adopted” courses of study for elementary
and high school students statewide. The District argues that inherent in this language
is the understanding that a “course” and a “course of study” includes the programs
and techniques designed to deliver course content in various settings, such as the
Priority Schools.

92.

As recited above, section 51014 defines “course of study” as “the

planned “content” of a series of classes, courses, subjects, studies, or related
activities.” Clearly, the “delivery” of content is the medium, not the message. The
method of instruction is not the content of the course being studied. However, as the
District pointed out, section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), which allows deviation from
seniority if the District demonstrates that the skipped employee has special training
and experience necessary to teach a course or course of study, would be meaningless
if only the content of the course was at issue, as anyone with the appropriate
credential could teach the course. This section contemplates that the skipped
employee will have skills beyond command of content. Accordingly, respondent’s
argument that the skip of Priority School employees should be denied because
Priority Schools do not constitute a “specific course or course of study” is rejected.

93.

Additionally, this “issue” appears to be merely a semantic problem.

The District actually seeks to skip every certificated employee in all its Priority
Schools. Each certificated employee teaches a course or provides a service under a
PPS credential. The District is really proposing to skip 100 or so persons who are
teaching courses/providing PPS services. The issue has been mischaracterized as a
skip of a “school or a program” rather than a skip of persons teaching or providing
services under a PPS credential.

29

Priority School Skips

94.

In the spring of 2010, the Superintendent announced the Priority

Schools Initiative for the 2010-11 school year. The Superintendent designated the
following six schools as Priority Schools: Oak Ridge Elementary; Father Keith B.
Kenney Elementary; Jedediah Smith Elementary; Fern Bacon Basic Middle; Will C.
Wood Middle; and Hiram Johnson High School (HJHS). A seventh school, Rosa
Parks Middle School, was identified as a Priority School for the 2011-12 school year.

95.

The Priority Schools were established to provide additional assistance
and resources to focus on improving underperforming schools. The seven designated
schools are among the 20 percent lowest performing schools in California, with Oak
Ridge Elementary in the lowest five percent in the state. They were persistently
underperforming, in that four of the six schools have been in Performance
Improvement status (PI) for seven years, and all had been in PI for five or more years,
They had had low yearly improvement rates in the Academic Performance Index and
had failed to meet federal and state standards in English-Language Arts (ELA) and
mathematics. They had low percentage rates of Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in
ELA and mathematics. HJHS had the lowest rate of passage of the CAHSEE (high
school exit examination) and the lowest graduation rate of the traditional high schools
in the District.

96.

The student population served in the Priority Schools are primarily

economically disadvantaged minority students with more than 90 percent of the
students in five of the schools living in or near poverty. The schools have large Title
1 (free or reduced-price meals) participation. In addition, the schools have significant
enrollment of English-language learner (EL) students. The school population is not
significantly different from the student populations in most of the District’s 84
schools.

97.

The District intended that the Priority Schools be “incubators of

innovation” where innovative instructional techniques and environments could be
used and, if successful, exported to the other District schools. The Priority Schools
are “at least a three year experiment.” The District dedicated substantial resources to
replacing the former administrators at the Priority School sites, cleaning up school
buildings, improving the classroom and school environments and providing training
and support to staff.

98.

The District seeks to exempt all certificated employees at the seven

District Prior to Schools for several reasons, among them: (1) The programs have a
unique and experimental design and the District wishes to keep all personnel in place
to properly assess the program and its effects, (2) Many certificated employees
voluntarily have left the program, and to lay off the remaining employees would
“devastate” the programs and (3) the teachers and counselors have formed
relationships and bonds with the students and families and breaking those bonds

30

would be detrimental to students. None of these rationales constitute grounds for
deviating from the seniority-based order of layoff under the specific and narrow
provisions of section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), which relate to the employee’s
specialized training and experience necessary to teach a course/course of study or
provide services.11

99.

The District’s only legal ground for deviating from a seniority-based
order of layoff is proof that the certificated employees in the Priority Schools have
special training and experience necessary to teach the courses and perform services in
the Priority Schools, which the more senior teachers do not possess. Pursuant to a
reading of the statute and Bledsoe, this analysis should be conducted on a case-by-
case basis, where the District establishes that a particular assignment requires a
teacher with special training and experience, the District establishes that the
individual teacher assigned has the necessary training and experience and the District
establishes that the individual senior employees do not have the necessary training
and experience.

100. Here, the District maintains that all of the 100 certificated employees at
the Priority Schools have special training and experience necessary to teach or
provide services at those schools and that all of the senior respondents do not have the
training and experience, by virtue of the fact that they have not been working at the
Priority Schools and did not receive the same training as Priority School personnel.
Respondents contend that the District’s failure to analyze the training and experiences
of the individuals skipped and their seniors violates section 44955, subdivision (d)(1),
and voids the skip of Priority School employees. This argument is not persuasive.
The lengthy hearing in this matter provided parties with the opportunity to present
evidence of the training and experiences of the affected individuals.12

101. The District maintains that intensive training is required to teach in its
Priority Schools. At a minimum, the District required the following training during
the two years the Priority Schools have been in operation:

a. DataWise/ Data Inquiry Training (DataWise) is a multi-day training

provided by an outside consulting firm, Transformation by Design, which
does follow-up training at each of the school sites and provides coaching
and mentoring to teachers to implement the DataWise analysis process in

11 The District also advances constitutional arguments which are discussed

below.

12 In Bledsoe, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th at p. 143, the court found that the
District should have assessed Bledsoe’s qualifications prior to issuance of the
preliminary notice, but he was not prejudiced by this failure because his qualifications
were assessed at the hearing.)

31

their classrooms. The DataWise process involves collecting data from
multiple sources to assess student work/achievement, and requires
extensive staff collaboration to identify learner-centered problems. The
teachers engage in “data inquiry” by performing assessments of the data,
determining what strategies and interventions might be successful,
implementing the strategies, and assessing success. The process of data
analysis, strategic planning, implementation of the plan and measurement
of the outcome is collaborative, and completion of each round of the
process is know as a “cycle of inquiry.” Staff use Common Planning
Time (CPT) in addition to other meeting time, for collaboration and
implement the DataWise process.

b. WriteTools is a training program in academic writing. Teachers receive
initial and follow up training. In order to integrate the training into daily
classroom teaching, trainers provide classroom coaching and modeling of
the WriteTools techniques. Area-3 Writing training has replaced some
Write Tools training because of its focus on EL and because of its more
comprehensive approach to integrating reading and writing into curriculum
and activities.

c. Culturally Responsive Teaching Strategies (CRTS) addresses the various

learning styles of students, and provides strategies and techniques to design
lessons to appeal to these styles of learning (visual, auditory, and
kinesthetic). The purpose of this training is to enhance the ability of
teachers to deliver content to students in a way that is accessible through
different learning modalities.

d. Home Visit Training is provided to train staff in how to conduct home visits

of students and their families.

Skip of HJHS Staff

102. Due to the size of the staff at HJHS (120 teachers), the District did not

provide DataWise/Data Inquiry training to the entire staff. Rather, in the 2010-11
school year, the District provided the multi-day DataWise training to a team of HJHS
teachers who were to train their colleagues during common planning time, a “train the
trainer” model.” The “train the trainer” model” proved unsuccessful and the District
acknowledges that such training is not comparable in intensity or scope to the direct
DataWise training provided in its other Priority Schools. Transformation by Design
did provide some training to teachers in the HJHS English and mathematics
departments to assist with implementation of the DataWise/Data Inquiry process.
According to District Exhibit 38 c, a record of professional development activities of
HJHS certificated employees, in the 2011-12 school year, no certificated staff
engaged in the trainings identified in Finding 101 a through d. Mary Shelton, District
Chief Accountability Officer, testified that HJHS elected to participate in GLAD

32

(Guided Language Acquisition Design) because of its large EL population. There
was no evidence that the HJHS staff was involved in the cycle of inquiry, or that it
devoted more common planning time or professional development time to
DataWise/Data Inquiry or Write Tools/Area-3 Writing then did any other District
high school.

103. The evidence established that although HJHS is a Priority School, its

staff has not been intensely trained in the teaching strategies the District maintains are
critical to the Priority School mission. And without these strategies in place, it
follows that merely working in the HJHS does not provide specialized experience.
Accordingly, the District did not meet the requirements of section 44955, subdivision
(d)(1). It did not establish a specific need for specially trained personnel to provide
services at HJHS, or that its personnel had special training or experience that more
senior employees do not possess.

104.

Finally, the District maintains that competency criteria C (In order to

work in a Priority School, training and/or experience teaching in a Priority School
setting) bars reassignment of senior respondents to the HJHS. Competency criteria
must be reasonable and valid and must relate to teacher skills and credentialing.
(Duax v. Kern Community College District, supra,186. Cal.App 3d at pp. 565-566.)
Criteria C is not reasonable and valid as it pertains to HJHS. As set forth above, there
is minimal specialized training or experience required to provide services in the
HJHS.

105. The parties have records of those respondents who are senior to any of
the employees who were skipped due to their assignment to HJHS. As set forth in the
Legal Conclusions, pursuant to Alexander, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at pp. 576-577, a
corresponding number of the most senior of the respondents who received
preliminary notices and are certificated to serve in these assignments shall have their
preliminary notices rescinded.

Skip of Staff at Oak Ridge Elementary, Father Keith B. Kenney Elementary,

Jedediah Smith Elementary, Fern Bacon Basic Middle, Will C. Wood Middle

106. The District has provided Data Wise and Data Inquiry training, Write

Tools/Area-3 Writing, CRTS and Home Visits training as well as coaching and
support to its teams of teachers at these schools. These school staffs spend a
significant amount of time in common planning devoted to these teaching and
assessment strategies. Several respondents testified that they have participated in
DataWise training and, as trainers, provided the training to the staffs at their schools.
Many respondents testified that they used the DataWise process and collaborated on
these strategies during common planning time. Other respondents testified that they
have received training in the DataWise process from teachers at their schools who
attended District training. Many respondents have had CRTS, Write Tools and Home
Visit training and use these trainings in their teaching.

33

107. The DataWise process is in various stages of implementation at many,

if not most, of the schools in the District. However, the Priority Schools identified
here have fully integrated the DataWise process into instruction and assessment, and
the teachers have received much more coaching and support to integrate the DataWise
process in their day-to-day teaching. Many of the Priority School teachers have
completed one to three of the lengthy cycles where data is reviewed, strategies
devised and tested and results assessed. In contrast, the training and experience of the
respondents in these techniques is dated or has been sporadic and the DataWise and
Write Training techniques, with the dedicated common planning time, have not been
fully integrated into the school programs in which they teach. Respondents’ training
has not been to the level of focused intensity, school-wide, or with the ongoing
follow-up and support that has been given to the Priority Schools.

108. The evidence is persuasive that many of the employees at these Priority

Schools have specialized training in the priority school setting which senior teachers
do not possess. Many, though, do not. Counselors, social workers and physical
education teachers do not participate in DataWise and Write Tools Training. They
participate in the common planning time in which assessments are made and
strategies are designed, but they do not deliver academic instruction and thus do not
implement any of the teaching strategies adopted by the Priority Schools. The
evidence is persuasive that senior counselors, social workers and physical education
teachers are competent to perform the functions of those junior to them in these
Priority Schools.

109. The parties have records of those respondents who are senior to any of
the employees who were skipped due to their assignment to counselor, social worker
or physical education positions at the Priority School Middle and Elementary Schools.
As set forth in the Legal Conclusions, pursuant to Alexander, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d
at pp. 576-577, a corresponding number of the most senior of the respondents who
received preliminary notices and are certificated to serve in counselor, social worker
or physical education assignments shall have their preliminary notices rescinded.

110.

In addition, there are numerous teachers at these schools who are in

their first year of service in a District Priority School. Although the schools in which
they work are in their second year of operation, these employees will have completed
only one year of experience when the 2012-13 school year commences. They will not
have completed even one cycle of inquiry. Their experience in implementing their
trainings has been limited. Senior employees, by virtue of their tenure and experience
with the District and its largely disadvantage student population, can step into the
shoes of these employees and complete the DataWise, Write Training/Area-3 Writing,
CCR and Home Visit training to the extent they have not already completed this
training. It is noted that most of the staff in these school received their intensive
DataWise/Data Inquiry training during the summer months before their employment.

34

111. The parties have records of those respondents who are senior to any of

the first year employees who were skipped due to their assignment to teaching
positions at the Priority School Middle and Elementary Schools. Pursuant to
Alexander, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at pp. 576-577, a corresponding number of the
most senior of the respondents who received preliminary notices and are certificated
to serve in these assignments shall have their preliminary notices rescinded.

112. Competency criteria C does not bar reassignment of senior respondents
to these elementary and middle schools. Competency criteria must be reasonable and
valid and must relate to teacher skills and credentialing. (Duax v. Kern Community
College District, supra, 186. Cal.App.3d at pp. 565-566. Criteria C is not reasonable
and valid, for the reasons set forth above.

Skip of Staff at Rosa Parks Middle School

113. Rosa Parks Middle School is in its first year of operation. Between
August 1, and August 5, 2011, 22 of its 29 certificated employees took 40 hours of
training in Data Inquiry/Project Design through Transformations by Design. (Exhibit
38 e, a record of professional development activities of Rosa Parks certificated
employees, in the 2011-12 school year, through 1/25/12). One of the 22 trainees is a
librarian and one is a physical education teacher. Denise Lee has not taken the
DataWise training and is a probationary 2 science teacher with a seniority date of
September 7, 2010. Christine Ha has not taken DataWise training and is a
In addition,
probationary 1 teacher with a seniority date of November 30, 2010.
Exhibit 38 e shows that none of the Rosa Parks employees has taken Write Tools/
Area3 Writing, CCR or Home Visit training. Accordingly, the claim that Rosa Parks
Middle School employees have special training rests on the 40 hours of DataWise
training most, but not all, of the teachers have taken.

114. The claim that Rosa Parks Middle School employees have special

experience rests on their service in a priority school for six months (September
through February 2012 as of the date of the Skipping Resolution). While it is true
that most if not all of the employees will compete the 2012-13 school year, one year
of experience is not sufficient to engage in the cycles of data inquiry, the District
maintains is so critical to Priority School teaching. It is axiomatic that a District
resolution which skips employees based on their specialized training and experience
cannot be based on the prospective training and experiences of the skipped
employees.

115. The District has not demonstrated that the employees it seeks to skip at
Rosa Parks Middle School have the specialized training or experience required under
section 44955, subdivision (b)(2) and articulated in Bledsoe.

116. The parties have records of those respondents who are senior to any of

the employees who were skipped due to their assignment to Rosa Parks Middle

35

School. As set forth in the Legal Conclusions, pursuant to Alexander, supra, 139
Cal.App.3d at pp. 576-577, a corresponding number of the most senior of the
respondents who received preliminary notices and are certificated to serve in these
assignments shall have their preliminary notices rescinded.

117. Competency criteria C does not bar reassignment of senior respondents
to Rosa Parks Middle School. Competency criteria must be reasonable and valid and
must relate to teacher skills and credentialing. Duax v. Kern Community College
District, supra, 186. Cal.App.3d at pp. 565-566. Criteria C is not reasonable and
valid, for the reasons set forth above.

Constitutional/Equal Protection Argument (Section 44955, subdivision (d)(2))

118. As a separate basis for skipping certificated employees at the seven

Priority Schools, the District asserted that it was entitled to deviate from terminating
certificated employees in order of seniority “[f]or purposes of maintaining or
achieving compliance with constitutional requirements related to equal protection of
the laws.” (section 44955, subd. (d)(2).) The District contended that, for the seven
Priority Schools, the imposition of layoffs would violate the fundamental right of the
students at those schools to “basic equality of educational opportunity” guaranteed by
the State Constitution (Butt v. State of California (1992) 4 Cal.4th 668, 685.) The
District further contended that, because the fundamental right of education is at issue,
strict scrutiny is triggered. (Id., at pp. 685-686 [“heightened scrutiny applies to State-
maintained discrimination whenever…the disparate treatment has a real and
appreciable impact on a fundamental right or interest.”].) For that reason, the District
claims that there must be a compelling state interest justifying seniority-based layoffs
at particular schools where layoffs negatively impact students’ educational
opportunities.

119. The District’s argument is not persuasive. Even assuming that it is true
that laying off junior employees and replacing them with seasoned senior employees
deprives students of an equal education (an unproven and counter-intuitive
hypothesis), all of the District schools are affected by layoffs, not just the Priority
Schools. At least 44 of the District’s 85 schools are currently in Program
Improvement status, and have been for two years or more, many for five years or
more. Approximately 68 percent of the District’s students live at or near the poverty
line, and an estimated 60 to 65 schools are designated as Title 1 schools. The
testimony of many of the respondents demonstrated the devastating effect that layoffs
will have on other District schools with demographics similar to the Priority Schools
that are not being skipped.

120. The District did not establish that it needed to skip the entire

certificated staff of the Priority Schools in order to provide equal educational
opportunity to Priority School students. Moreover, the District’s argument ignores
the “equal protection” rights of students at the many other low-performing schools.

36

These students would not be treated equally with Priority School students and would
be disproportionately burdened by the additional layoffs necessitated by skipping staff
at the seven Priority Schools. Layoffs are clearly disruptive and detrimental to the
academic programs of all low-performing schools, not just the Priority Schools. The
Priority School skip cannot be justified based on section 44955, subdivision (b)(2).

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code

sections 44949 and 44955. All notices and other jurisdictional requirements of
sections 44949 and 44955 were met.

2.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”13 The burden is on
the District to demonstrate that the reduction or elimination of the particular kinds of
services is reasonable and that the District carefully considered its needs before laying
off any certificated employee.14

3.

The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next
school year is an appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955.
As stated in San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-
639, the reduction of particular kinds of services on the basis of financial
considerations is authorized under that section, and, “in fact, when adverse financial
circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section 44955 is the only
statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.” The
District must be solvent to provide educational services, and cost savings are
necessary to resolve its financial crisis. The Board’s decision to reduce services was
a proper exercise of its discretion.

4.

Legal cause exists to reduce or eliminate 397.8 15 FTE of particular

kinds of services offered by the District as set forth in detail in the Findings. Cause

13 Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.

14 Campbell Elementary Teachers Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d

796, 807-808

15 The District requested that the Administrative Law Judge find legal cause to

reduce or eliminate 398 FTE, pursuant to District policy to avoid partial FTE layoffs
and to round up fractional FTEs. Respondents did not contest this policy. However,

37

for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the
District’s schools and pupils, within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

5.

Legal cause also exists to reduce the number of certificated employees
of the District due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.

6.

As set forth in Finding 23, Preston Jackson’s seniority date shall be
changed to the date in February 2006 on which he first rendered paid service to the
District under an emergency substitute permit, according to the District records.

7.

Math Skip: As set forth in Findings 44 through 55, the proposed math

skipping criteria is invalid. In accordance with Finding 55, the parties have records of
those respondents who hold foundational math credentials and who are senior to any
of the 26 teachers who were skipped under criteria C. The District shall determine
which, if any, of the 26 skipped teachers are currently teaching in a position requiring
a single subject credential in math and who also will be teaching in the 2012-13
school year in a position requiring a single subject credential in math. Those teachers
are properly skipped. As regards the remaining of the 26 teachers who were skipped
under criteria C, the District shall determine whether any of the respondents who
received preliminary notices based on math reductions are senior to any of the 26
teachers who were not otherwise properly skipped. Pursuant to Alexander, supra, 139
Cal.App.3d at pp. 576-577, a corresponding number of the most senior of the
identified respondents who received preliminary notices shall have their preliminary
notices rescinded.

8.

Special Education Skip: As set forth in Findings 56 through 59, the
proposed special education skipping criteria is invalid. In accordance with Finding
59, the parties have records of those respondents who are senior to Eisner, Singleton
and Spilman and who have the credentials necessary to bump into the current
assignments of Eisner and Spilman and the last assigned position of Singleton.
Pursuant to Alexander, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at pp. 576-577, a corresponding
number of the most senior of the identified respondents who received preliminary
notices shall have their preliminary notices rescinded.

9.

Dual Language Immersion Competency Criteria - Carolina Avina

Mora: As set forth in Findings 60 through 65, there are several employees junior to
Avina Mora who hold a BCLAD in Spanish and are teaching in the District’s Spanish
DLIP. Avina Mora may bump the least senior of these employees and her
preliminary notice shall be rescinded.

legal cause exists only to reduce or eliminate the actual number of FTEs adopted
pursuant to Board resolution. The Administrative Law Judge is without authority to
find legal cause for reduction of another .2 FTE.

38

10.

Accelerated Academy Program Skip: As set forth in Findings 66

through 81, the proposed Accelerated Academy Program skipping criteria is invalid.
In accordance with Finding 81, the parties have records of those respondents who are
senior to any of the five teachers who were skipped under criteria H and records of
those respondent counselors who are senior to counselor Hardin. Pursuant to
Alexander, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at pp. 576-577, a corresponding number of the
most senior of the identified respondents who received preliminary notices shall have
their preliminary notices rescinded.

11.

HJHS Priority School Skip: As set forth in Findings 94 through 105,
the proposed Priority School skip of HJHS employees is invalid. The parties have
records of those respondents who are senior to any of the employees who were
skipped due to their assignment to HJHS. Pursuant to Alexander, supra, 139
Cal.App.3d at pp. 576-577, a corresponding number of the most senior of the
respondents who received preliminary notices and are certificated to serve in HJHS
assignments occupied by junior employees shall have their preliminary notices
rescinded.

12.

Skip of Staff at Oak Ridge Elementary, Father Keith B. Kenney

Elementary, Jedediah Smith Elementary, Fern Bacon Basic Middle, Will C. Wood
Middle: As set forth in Findings 94 through 101 and Findings 106 through 111, this
skip is invalidated in part.

A.

The skip of counselor, social worker and physical education positions is

invalid. The parties have records of those respondents who are senior to any of the
employees who were skipped due to their assignment to counselor, social worker or
physical education positions at the Priority School Middle and Elementary Schools.
Pursuant to Alexander, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at pp. 576-577, a corresponding
number of the most senior of the respondents who received preliminary notices and
are certificated to serve in counselor, social worker or physical education assignments
shall have their preliminary notices rescinded.

B.

The skip of employees in their first year of service in a District Priority
Schools is invalidated. The parties have records of those respondents who are senior
to any of these employees who were skipped due to their assignment to teaching
positions at the Priority School Middle and Elementary Schools. Pursuant to
Alexander, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at pp. 576-577, a corresponding number of the
most senior of the respondents who received preliminary notices and are certificated
to serve in these assignments shall have their preliminary notices rescinded.

13.

Skip of Staff at Rosa Parks Middle School: As set forth in Findings 94

through 101 and Findings 113 through 117, this skip is invalid. The parties have
records of those respondents who are senior to any of these employees who were
skipped due to their assignment to teaching positions at Rosa Parks Middle School.
Pursuant to Alexander, supra, 139 Cal.App.3d at pp. 576-577, a corresponding

39

number of the most senior of the respondents who received preliminary notices and
are certificated to serve in these assignments shall have their preliminary notices
rescinded.

14.

Other than the foregoing, no employee with less seniority than any

respondent is being retained to render a service which any respondent is certificated
and competent to render. Except as set forth above, the Board may give the
remaining respondents whose preliminary notices have not been rescinded final notice
before May 16, 2012, that their services will not be required for the 2012-13 school
year.

15.

All other contentions and claims not specifically discussed herein were

considered and are DENIED.

ORDER

1.

The District shall comply with Legal Conclusions 7 through 13.

2.

Except as noted above, notices may be given to respondents that their
services will not be required for the 2012-13 school year because of the reduction or
discontinuation of particular kinds of services. Notice shall be given to respondents
in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: May 8, 2012

_____________________________
ANN ELIZABETH SARLI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

40

EXHIBIT A

LIST OF RESPONDENTS

Tina
Tammy
Yvette
Zolaikha
Thomas
Allison
Olivia
Courtney
Teresa
Alejandra
Michelle
Carolina
Heidi

Aasen
Abdo
Acquisto
Ahmadzai
Ainslie
Alair-Saito
Alvarado
Amioka
Anderson
Arellano
Arnott
Avina Mora
Avis
Bachman-Tavianini Theresa
Ballante
Baradat
Barsotti-Hopson
Baty
Beall
Becker
Beckett
Benzing
Boe
Boettner
Borcich
Borgman
Borrelli
Bradshaw
Bristow
Brown
Brown
Brown
Bryant
Burkhouse
Campbell
Campbell
Campos
Campos
Cannady IV
Catlett

41

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Anne-Catherine
Nicole
Rhonda
Roy (dual notice) only temp. notice rescinded
Julie
Melissa
Erik
Ebony
Jeri
Julie
Cynthia
Christina
Hillary
Patricia
Laura
Amy
Anne
James
Zachary
Craig
Jill
Rebekah
Danilo
Ramon
William
Emily

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.

Rescinded

Rescinded .7 FTE

Michelle
Cazel-Mayo
Norma
Chadwell
Ian
Chang
Ellen
Chapman
Wendy
Chen
Chris
Chu
Bonnie
Chufar-Comstock
Rachel
Clarin
Jennifer
Cleland-Brinzer
Kristen
Cluff
Joan
Cochrane
Whitney
Cole
Beth
Conklin
Brandie
Conner
Jody
Cooperman
Alejandro
Corona
Kelly
Costello-Toomey
Erin
Crivelli
Janelle
Daigle
Andrienne
Davis
Sandra
de Anda
Bennae
Dillingham
Erica
Dobbins
Lorraine
Doll
Elissa
Downey
James
Downing
Monica
Dyer
Camica
Edwards
Diane
Eid
Brenda
Elazier
Ana (dual notice) only temp. notice rescinded
Elias-Morales
Jason
Elkins
Eller
Courtney
Esquivel-Abrahams Anna Lisa
Evans
Feagins
Feliciano
Fernald
Finegan
Flores
Fong
Forman
Frazier
Gallardo-Martinez
Galvan

Joanna
Char
April
Ryan
Sean
Mia
Adrienne
Rebecca
Steven
Leticia
Katrina

Rescinded .2 FTE

Rescinded

Rescinded

42

86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
126.
127.
128.
129.
130.

Garcia
Garcia
Garcia
Garrett
Geronimo-Uribe
Gonzalez
Goodwin
Gordon
Gorman
Gosney
Griffen
Hack
Hammond
Hansen
Hardin
Harris
Hensley
Hernandez
Hernandez
Herzog-Kruse
Hetzel
Hill
Hoekstra
Hogan
Hoffhines
Irwin-DiLoreto
Ishimaru
Jackson
Jackson
Jackson
Jaime-Razo
Jarvis
Jensen
Jewett
Johnson
Johnson
Johnson
Johnson
Johnson
Johnston
Jones
Jones
Kachagin
Kapp
Kerns

43

Jose E.
Lucille Ann
Lyudmila
Sarah
Josefina
Jenny
Michelle C.
Julie
John
Chris
Janene
Brandy
Jeremy
Barbara
Onisha
Kathryn
Katherine
Jesse
Jose Ramiro
Joy
Danielle
Megan
Lara
Kathryn
Amy
Kevin
Susan
Adriane
Fred
Preston
Alicia
Lisa
Erika
Irene
Audrey
Cristopher
Elisabeth
Jeffrey
Wallace
Michael
Phillip Marc
Rory
Anna Lisa
William
Patricia

Rescinded .1FTE
Rescinded .4 FTE

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Michael
Alexis
Stephanie
Christina
Carol
Christina
Danny
Mary
Cynthia
Joanie
Tiffany
Robert
Kristi
Louise
Angela
Janet
Mary
William S.
Frank
Davin
Ryan(dual notice) only temp. notice rescinded

Rescinded .5 FTE

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded .3 FTE

131.
132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.
138.
139.
140.
141.
142.
143.
144.
145.
146.
147.
148.
149.
150.
151.
152.
153.
154.
155.
156.
157.
158.
159.
160.
161.
162.
163.
164.
165.
166.
167.
168.
169.
170.
171.
172.
173.
174.
175.

Kerze
Koren
Kuroda
Lam
Lambert
Lanzaro
Lee
Lee
LeRiche
Liuzzi
Lo
Lobese
Lofton
Lofton
Lopez
Love
Lucca
Maddox
Maestas
Main
Mangan
Manning-Taormina Saralyn A
Martin
Martinez
Mashinini-Nigl
Matoba
Mayer
Mayer
McAfee
McCaffrey
McCoy
McCumiskey
McGee
McPeters
Mego
Messineo
Meyer
Millard
Miller
Miller
Mitchell
Moore
Moua
Moua-Yang
Musleh

Danielle
Juan
Siphiwe
Marge
Julia
Karen
Leslie
Geoffrey
Monica
John
Jim
Kenneth
Maria
Vincent
Todd
Consuelo
Katie
Kristie
Brian
Brian
Si
Mai
Cristina

44

Rescinded

Rescinded .4 FTE

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

176.
177.
178.
179.
180.
181.
182.
183.
184.
185.
186.
187.
188.
189.
190.
191.
192.
193.
194.
195.
196.
197.
198.
199.
200.
201.
202.
203.
204.
205.
206.
207.
208.
209.
210.
211.
212.
213.
214.
215.
216.
217.
218.
219.
220.

Nakamura
Navarette
Navarro
Newman
Nguyen
Nguyen
Nickel
Nim
Noma
Norris
Nouchi
O'Flaherty
O'Hara
Pattow-Vigil
Pedley
Perez
Perez
Perez
Pineda
Plant
Power
Prabhjot
Prentice
Price
Pullano
Rambo
Reeder-Esparza
Reilly
Reinke
Reyes
Roach
Ruiz
Rule
Ryan
Saldana
Salk
Samaan
Sanchez
Sandoval
Schmelling
Schnack
Schon
Selseleh
Shaffer
Simonsen

45

Howard
Ray
Llecenia
Jean
Kieu
Kim Anh
Kimberly
Veasna
Lisa
Claire
Nadine
Kenneth
Sheilah
Barbara
Sandra
Herson
Mirna
Rafael
Marcos
Gregory
Deborah
Rai
Gary
Lauren
Jacquelyn
Sonia
Pamela
Patrick
Jennie
Kim
Michael
Rosario
Daniel
Kelly
Juanita
Heidi
Lynne
Debra
Adriana
Evelyn
Sarah
Julie
Mary
Kimberly
Nicole

221.
222.
223.
224.
225.
226.
227.
228.
229.
230.
231.
232.
233.
234.
235.
236.
237.
238.
239.
240.
241.
242.
243.
244.
245.
246.
247.
248.
249.
250.
251.
252.
253.
254.
255.
256.
257.
258.
259.
260.
261.
262.
263.
264.
265.

Sims
Skvarla
Slagle
Smith
Smith
Sorkin
Springmeyer
Stansfield
Stephens
Stevens
Stincelli
Stinson
Sunahara
Swoboda
Synhorst
Tamanaha
Tapia
Taylor
Taylor
Tellez
Teweles
Thao
Thao
Thompson
Thompson
Thurman
Triche
Tsue
Udell
Van Vliet
Vang
Vang
Vaughn Bechtold
Viggiano
Vue
Wagers
Webb
Webb
Wells-Artman
White
Whitehead
Willover
Winick
Wolthius
Wong

46

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded
Rescinded

Cheryl
Julieann
Antonia
Nicole
Philip
Ellen
Shannon
Curtis
Joyce
Lisa
David
Lisa
Heather
Dawn
Ryan
Fumi
Esmeralda
Christopher
M. Kathryn (dual notice) only temp. notice rescinded
Mayra
Benjamin
Chia
Shoua
Ena
Kelly
Melissa
David
David
Bertha
Kelli
Jade
Kenneth
Kerry
Linda
Vanessa
Heather
Rachel
Terri
Christie
David
Tony
Valerie
Judy
Thomas
Rose Kit

Rescinded

Rescinded

Rescinded

266.
267.
268.
269.
270.
271.
272.
273.
274.

Xiong
Yaangh
Yang
Yang
Yang
Yates
Young
Zierenberg
Nevarez

Nhia
Stacy
Chong
Julia
Ka
Grace
Gregory
Carolyn
Jackie

47

