BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
SOMIS UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusations Against:

OAH No.: 2012031104

LAURIE ALLEN, and other named
Certificated Employees of the Somis
Union School District,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Michael A. Scarlett, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on May 1, 2012, at Somis, California.

Barbara J. Ginsberg, Attorney at Law, represented Dr. Colleen Robertson,
Superintendent/Principal (Complainant) of the Somis Union School District (District).

Laurie Allen, Carol Anderson, Jane Coleman, Lorin Maygren, Francis Smith,

and Alice Watson (Respondents), were present at hearing and represented themselves.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the matter was submitted for
decision on May 1, 2012. The original hearing date of April 17, 2012, was continued
for good cause to the May 1, 2012, hearing date. Consequently, the statutory
timelines were extended pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (e),
thereby extending the statutory timelines for 14 days to May 21, 2012.

The Administrative Law Judge now finds, concludes and orders as follows:

SUMMARY

The Superintendent of the District has recommended to the Board of

Education (Board) that particular kinds of services be reduced or discontinued no later
than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year due to a lack of funds. Included in
the particular kinds of services are all of the employees at the Somis Academy
Charter School (Somis Academy), a dependent charter governed by the Somis Union
School District Board of Trustees. The District also has a traditional K-8 school,
Somis School, which operates a separate home study program within the Somis
School. All six Respondents are certificated employees at the Somis Academy.

1

The District seeks to layoff all employees at the Somis Academy due to a lack

of funding and the concern that Somis Academy is projecting a $230,000 budget
deficit for the 2012-2013 fiscal year. The District emphasizes that it is not seeking to
close the Somis Academy or to revoke its charter. The District is attempting to
restructure the Somis Academy and address the budget shortfall before the next
school year. It determined that it must take the current action to preserve its fiscal
solvency.

Respondents object to the District’s proposal to layoff all of the employees at
the Somis Academy. Essentially, Respondents argue that the District’s layoff failed
to comply with the Somis Academy Charter Renewal Petition (CRP) (Exhibit A)
which states that the District must notify and consult with the Charter Advisory Panel
(CAP) (Exhibit B) before any action may be taken regarding the Somis Academy.1
Respondents also seek to assert their right to bump back into the Somis School
despite a Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) provision prohibiting bumping
between the Somis Academy and the Somis School. The Somis Academy teachers
also challenge the District’s bumping criteria contained in the Board’s resolution.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Parties

2.

3.

1.

Complainant Colleen Robertson, Superintendent of Somis Union

School District (Superintendent) filed the Accusation in this proceeding in her official
capacity.

Respondents at all times relevant were certificated District employees.

On March 13, 2012, the Board, following the recommendation of the

District’s Superintendent, adopted Resolution Number 11/12-14 (Resolution),
deciding to reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds of services (PKS) no later
than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year. Pursuant to Education Code2
sections 44949 and 44955, the following particular kinds of services were
recommended to be reduced or discontinued:

1 The CAP serves as the advisory body for the Somis Academy and is

intricately involved in all decision making regarding the school’s management,
budget, charter implementation, etc. The CRP incorporates the Charter of the Somis
Academy and contains a description of how the charter is organized and how it will
operate.

2 All further statutory references shall be to the Education Code unless

otherwise specified.

2

AT SOMIS SCHOOL:
Somis School Elementary Reading Teacher
Somis School English Learners Instruction
AT SOMIS ACADEMY:
Somis Academy Director
Somis Academy Supervising Teacher (Grades 6-12) plus
Yearbook and ASB
Somis Academy Supervising Teacher (Grades 9-12)
Somis Academy Supervising Teacher (Grades K-8) plus
Library and Enrichment
Somis Academy Counselor and Testing Coordinator
Somis Academy Social Studies Instruction (Grades 6-12)
Somis Academy Supervising Teacher (Grades K-12) plus
Art Instruction (Grades K-12)
Somis Academy Supervising Teacher (Grades K-12)
plus CELDT instruction and Foreign Language
Instruction
Somis Academy High School Math Instruction and
Grades 6-12 Physical Education Instruction
Somis Academy Visual Arts and Performing Arts
Instruction and English Instruction
Somis Academy English Instruction and Business
Instruction
Somis Academy Supervising Teacher (Grades K-8)
Somis Academy Supervising Teacher (Grades K-5)
Somis Academy Math Instruction (Grades 6-12)
Somis Academy Special Education English Instruction
Somis Academy Special Education Math Instruction
Somis Academy Science Instruction (Life Science,
Biology, Marine Biology, Advanced Placement) (Grades
9-12)
Somis Academy Driver Education Instruction
Somis Academy Science Instruction (Physical Science,
Physics, Chemistry) (Grades 6-12)
Somis Academy Science Instruction (Junior High)
Somis Academy Psychologist
Somis Academy Speech and Hearing Instruction
Somis Academy Supervisor of Special Education
Instruction

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

1.0 FTE

0.5 FTE

1.0 FTE

1.0 FTE

1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
FTE

1.0

0.5 FTE

0.5 FTE

0.5 FTE

1.0 FTE

0.5 FTE
0.5 FTE
HOURLY
HOURLY
HOURLY

HOURLY

HOURLY

HOURLY

HOURLY
HOURLY
HOURLY

HOURLY

TOTAL 12.0 FTE plus HOURLY

4.

Pursuant to the Board’s Resolution, the Superintendent, or her designee,
was directed to serve appropriate notices in accordance with sections 44955 and 44949
to all permanent and probationary employees possibly affected by virtue of the reduction

3

or discontinuance of the particular kinds of services specified in the Resolution. The
Superintendent, on behalf of the District, complied with this directive. On or before
March 15, 2012, Respondents, and 18 other certificated employees, were given
written notice pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be
required for the following school year. Each notice contained an attached copy of the
Board’s Resolution which specified the reasons for the recommendation not to
reemploy them, including the Board’s decision to reduce and/or discontinue identified
particular kinds of services.

5.

Of the 24 employees sent notices by the District, Respondents were the

only employees to file timely requests for hearing. Any certificated employee who
failed to file a request for hearing has waived his or her right to a hearing, and is
subject to layoff by the District. On March 30, 2012, the District filed, and thereafter
served, the Accusation on Respondents. The District stipulated that all Respondents
had filed timely notices of defense. Respondents are all certificated employees
currently employed at the Somis Academy.

6.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

Reduction of Services

7.

In identifying the particular kinds of services it intends to reduce or

discontinue in Factual Finding 3, the District indentified several positions at the
Somis Academy which it stated were “hourly.” The Superintendent testified that
some employees of the Somis Academy were hired as “hourly” employees to provide
services to the students, including instructional services. However, the District does
not specify an FTE for the “hourly” positions, and the record is void as to the identity
or status of these employees. Consequently, the District has not sufficiently identified
the particular kind of service these “hourly” employees represent because there is no
indication of the number positions or FTEs effected. It is noted, however, that the 12
FTE positions identified by the District, and sought to be reduced in this proceeding,
do not include the “hourly” positions. The Respondents in this case are not “hourly”
employees and therefore are not impacted by the “hourly” positions in the Resolution.
To the extent the District seeks to layoff certificated probationary or permanent
employees based upon the “hourly” positions referenced in the Resolution’s in
Factual Finding 3, the term “hourly does not define with sufficient specificity the
FTEs for the positions. Thus, the “hourly” positions may not be considered a
particular kind of service subject to reduction or discontinuance if the “hourly”
position is for a certificated probationary or permanent employee. All other services
identified in the Resolution (Factual Finding 3) are particular kinds of services that may
be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.

8.

The Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth in

Factual Finding 3 due to a lack of funding and the need for the Board to ensure the
solvency of the District for the upcoming fiscal and school year. Specifically, the

4

Superintendent testified that the Somis Academy is operating with a deficit of
approximately $187,000 for the 2011-2012 school year, and that unless a plan is
developed to bring the budget into balance, the District would not be able to keep
Somis Academy open. The Superintendent also cited declining enrollment and a
decline in average daily attendance, which impacts funding for the Somis Academy, as
additional reasons for the budget deficit. 3

9.

The Board’s decision to reduce the particular kinds of services in Factual

Finding 3 will not result in a reduction of services below the levels mandated by state
and federal law. Respondents did not argue that the layoff would reduce the District
services below levels mandated by law and no evidence was offered to establish this
fact. However, the District only seeks to layoff the employees at the Somis Academy to
restructure the charter school and avert financial insolvency. The District does not seek
to permanently close the charter academy, and intends to rehire employees as needed
after the restructuring.

10.

The Board’s decision to reduce the particular kinds of services in Factual
Finding 3 is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the Board’s
discretion.

11.

The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare
of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of
certificated employees as determined by the Board, with the noted exceptions.

12.

The District properly considered all positively assured attrition, including

all known resignations and retirements as of March 15, 2012.

13.

The District maintains a Seniority List (Exhibit 4) containing

employees’ first date of paid service, current assignments and locations, credentials,
and authorizations. The District used the Seniority List to develop a proposed order
of layoff of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being
reduced. The District then determined whether the least senior employees held other
credentials entitling them to displace or “bump” other employees. In determining
who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District counted the
number of reductions not covered by known vacancies, and determined who must be
laid off in inverse order of seniority. Respondents did not disagree with the accuracy
of the Seniority List.

3 Respondents did not argue that the District’s layoff should be based upon

average daily attendance (ADA) as opposed to a reduction in the particular kinds of
services (PKS). But, the District has broad discretion in determining whether to base
the layoff upon PKS or ADA. ADA was but one factor cited by the District for the
layoff. The lack of funds and the Somis Academy’s budget deficit were the primary
reasons cited for the layoff.

5

14.

Article 17.9 of the CBA between the District and the Somis Teachers

Association provides, in relevant part, that:

The District and the Somis Teachers Association therefore agree, in
accordance with Government Code section 3543.2(c)4, that when the
Board takes action to reduce particular kinds of service, and it becomes
necessary to reduce the number of certificated employees, unit members
assigned to District schools/programs (including home study independent
program) will not be eligible to displace unit members assigned to the
Somis Academy, and unit members assigned to the Somis Academy will
not be eligible to displace unit members assigned to District
schools/programs. In all other aspects the layoff of Somis Teachers
Association unit members shall be governed by the provisions of the
California Education Code. This provision becomes effective July 1,
2011.

15.

In addition to section 17.9 of the CBA, the District has also established

“bumping” criteria which it included the Board’s Resolution. In pertinent part, the
Board’s Resolution provides that a more senior employee is defined as certificated and
competent for reassignment into a position currently held by a more junior employee if
he or she:

(1) currently possesses a clear, professional clear, life, or

preliminary credential in the subject(s) or grade level to which
the employee will be assigned at the beginning of the 2012-
2013 school year (in the case of displacing junior employees
teaching in a departmentalized setting, single subject
credential(s) or subject matter authorization in that subject
area);

(2) is compliant with the provisions of the No Child Left Behind
Act and holds the status of “highly qualified” in the subject(s)
or grade level to which the employee will be assigned at the
beginning of the 2012-2013 school year;

(3) has an appropriate EL authorization for the assignment;

4 Government Code section 3543.2, subdivision (c) provides that

“Notwithstanding Section 44955 of the Education Code, the public school employer
and the exclusive representative shall, upon request of either party, meet and negotiate
regarding procedures and criteria for the layoff of certificated employees for lack of
funds. If the public school employer and the exclusive representative do not reach
mutual agreement, then the provisions of Section 44955 of the Education Code shall
apply.”

6

(4) in the case of displacing junior employees teaching in a

traditional classroom setting at Somis School, has at least one
complete year of experience teaching in a traditional
classroom setting at the Somis School in the last five years in
the subject matter area to be assumed.

The Resolution’s “bumping” criteria incorporate section 17.9 of the CBA by providing
that in accordance with said section:

a more senior employee currently serving at the Somis Academy is
specifically not competent for reassignment into a position currently held
by a more junior [employee] at the Somis School (including home study
independent study program), and a more senior employee currently
serving at the Somis School (including home study independent study
program) is specifically not competent for reassignment into a position
currently held by a more junior employee at the Somis Academy.
Moreover, in no event may a more senior employee displace a more
junior employee unless the more senior employee is both certificated and
competent for the entire assignment of the more junior employee.

16.

The Board’s Resolution No. 11/12-14 (Exhibit 2) established tie-

breaking criteria to determine relative seniority of certificated employees who first
rendered paid service on the same date. The validity or application of the tie-breaking
process was not challenged at hearing and is not at issue in this case. But the tie-
breaking criteria are determined to be reasonable and were appropriately applied by
the District.

Somis Academy

17.

Somis Academy is a dependent charter school for grades K-12 which is

closely aligned with the District although its budget is separate and apart from the
Somis School’s budget. Somis Academy is governed by the District and the Somis
Union School District Board of Trustees (SUSBDT). The Superintendent of the
District retains supervisory and oversight responsibility for the Somis Academy, is
responsible for its budget, and acts as a liaison between the Somis Academy and
SUSBDT. Somis Academy’s charter was renewed for a second five year term in
2007 and the current charter is scheduled for expiration and/or renewal in August
2012. The CRP provides that Somis Academy’s staff are employees of the District
and that they will participate in the State Teacher’s Retirement System, the Public
Employee’s Retirement System and the federal Social Security System according to
the same guidelines and requirements applicable to other District staff members.

18.

According to the CRP, Somis Academy’s instructional program

emphasizes individualized learning for each student. The school offers curriculum
through classroom, web based school to home and home based education. Its primary

7

mode of deliverance of the curriculum is home based education through the use of the
internet and email. Students are typically assigned a “supervising teacher” who meets
with the student and the student’s family on a weekly basis. There are also teachers
who provide specific subject matter instruction to the students, some as certificated
permanent employees of the District, others as hourly employees of the District.
Supervising teachers also provide subject matter instruction to students, when
required. Teachers, supervising teachers, and students communicate primarily
through a school-provided, secure email system. Assignments are made and
coursework submitted through the school’s reporting system, a School Pathways
product called “Report Writer Web.” The teacher and/or supervising teacher gives
assignments on a monthly basis, and monitors the student’s weekly progress.
Students having difficulty may meet with the teachers either by web cam or by
personal visit, and teachers have office hours to facilitate student visits. Teachers also
provide instruction to students using in person “labs” in computer, science, art,
performing arts, and foreign languages. The method of teaching and delivering
instruction in the home study educational program at the Somis Academy is markedly
different than the instruction provided in the Somis School traditional classroom
environment. The testimony established that a different skill set is required for
teachers in the Somis Academy to effectively teach students in the individualized
manner employed in the home study program at the charter academy.

19.

The Superintendent testified that if the Somis Academy’s $187,000

budget deficit is not addressed, the District could risk insolvency. She stated that the
budget deficit for the charter school is projected to increase to $230,000 for the 2012-
2013 school year if no action is taken. The Superintendent clarified that the District
was not seeking to close the Somis Academy, but instead, was attempting to
restructure and balance the school’s budget to reduce the risk of financial exposure to
the District. She believed that the layoff was the only way to ensure the solvency of
the District. The District will consider rehiring teachers and employees as necessary
to meet the needs of the Somis Academy after restructuring is complete and fiscal
solvency is assured.

Specific Challenges to Layoff

20.

Respondents collectively argued that the District failed to comply with

Somis Academy’s CRP (Exhibit A) dispute resolution provisions and the bylaws of
the CAP (Exhibit B) in seeking to layoff the employees at Somis Academy.
Specifically, Respondents argue that the layoff notice provisions in Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955 do not conform to the notice requirements in the CRP
which require the District to notify the CAP of any noncompliance by the Somis
School and give the CAP 15 days to respond in writing. The CAP bylaws also
require that the CAP be consulted prior to any decision by the District that effects the
operation of the Somis Academy. Consequently, Respondents assert that the
District’s layoff has denied them due process because the CAP was not properly

8

notified of the layoff and was not given an opportunity to respond. Respondent’s
argument on this issue is not persuasive.

21.

The Somis Academy is a dependent charter that is governed by the

SUSDBT and is closely aligned with the District. The Somis Academy charter was
granted pursuant to Education Code section 47600 et seq., and the District is deemed
its exclusive public school employer pursuant to Education Code section 47611.5.
The CRP provides that the District is the “Charter School Employer” for purposes of
the Education Employment Relations Act (EERA)5 and that the teachers at Somis
Academy are represented by the bargaining representative for the District. The CRP
further provides that all of the Somis Academy employees are employed by the
District. Essentially, the CRP provides that certificated employees at Somis Academy
are entitled to the rights and protections afforded by the statutes and regulations
governing public school employers, and thus, the tenure, merit, and civil service
provisions applicable to public school employers are also applicable to Somis
Academy. (See § 47611.5, subds. (b) and (c).)

22.

Although Education Code section, 47610 provides that charter schools

are exempt, with specified exceptions, from laws governing school districts, this
provision applies to the charter school and its operation, and not to the certificated
employees employed by a dependent charter who has a school district acting as the
public school employer. The District must comply with the layoff provisions
contained in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 before laying off a
certificated employee. Provisions of the CRP that require the SUSDBT and the
District to consult with the CAP before making decisions regarding the Somis
Academy are not applicable to the layoff proceedings. The layoff proceedings are
intended to ensure that the District complies with notice and seniority protections
afforded certificated employees when the District determines that it necessary to
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.

23.

To the extent Respondents assert that the District is improperly
attempting to close the charter school without complying with the notice and
procedure requirements in the CRP and the CAP bylaws, such disputes are between
the Somis Academy, SUSDBT and the District, and are not proper issues for
resolution during a layoff hearing. These disputes are more appropriately addressed
under the statutory provisions governing charter schools, section 47600 et seq., more
specifically section 47607, which provides the process for appeals, notice, and
hearings for charter school disputes. These disputes are ultimately heard and decided
by the County Board of Education and/or the State of Board of Education. (See §
47607.)

5 Government Code section 3540 et seq.

9

CBA’s Prohibition Against Bumping

24.

The District contends that the Somis Academy certificated employees

are prohibited from bumping into the District’s Somis School (traditional school)
because section 17.9 of the CBA (Factual Finding 14) between the District and the
Somis Teachers Association prohibits bumping between the two schools in the event
of a teacher layoff.

25.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part that “[t]he
services of no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this
section while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and
competent to render.” Section 17.9 of the CBA effectively nullifies this statutory
provision if a more senior teacher at the Somis Academy who is certificated and
competent is prohibited from bumping into a position that a less senior employee at the
Somis School has been retained to fill. The same is true for a teacher at the Somis
School seeking a position at the Somis Academy.

26.

The EERA, Government Code section 3540 et seq., seeks to improve

personnel management and employer-employee relations within the public school
system and gives collective bargaining rights to teachers. Government Code section
3543.2, subdivision (c), provides in pertinent part that “notwithstanding Section 44955
of the Education Code, the public school employer and the exclusive representative
shall, upon requests of either party, meet and negotiate regarding procedures and criteria
for layoff of certificated for lack of funds.” However, Government Code section 3540
provides that “nothing contained herein shall be deemed to supersede other provisions of
the Education Code and the rules and regulations of the public school employers which
establish and regulate tenure or a merit or civil service system….”

27.

The California Supreme Court has held that in enacting the EERA the

Legislature intended to preclude contractual agreements which would replace, set aside,
or annul statutory provisions that mandate particular procedures, protections, or
entitlements. (San Mateo City School District v. Public Employment Relations Board
(1983) 33 Cal3d 850, 864-66 (the court in a layoff case found a provision of a CBA
invalid because it replaced or set aside a provisions of the Education Code relating to the
layoff of classified employees, noting Gov. Code § 4501, subd. (g), and Ed. Code §§
45114, 45115, 45117, 45298, and 45308).) In Board of Education of the Round Valley
Unified School District vs. Round Valley Teachers Association (1996) 13 Cal.App.4th
269, a decision involving a teacher dismissal under Education Code section 44944, the
Court also held that a CBA provision which set forth procedures for the dismissal or
decision not to reelect probationary teachers, was invalid because the CBA provision
was directly contrary to, and superseded the procedures established in Education Code
section 44929.21, subdivision (b), which specifies procedures that a school district must
follow when notifying a probationary employee of its decision “to reelect or not reelect
the employee for the next succeeding school year to the position.” (Board of Education

10

of the Round Valley Unified School District vs. Round Valley Teachers Association,
supra, 13 Cal.App.4th 269, at pp. 284-286.)

28.

Government Code section 3540, and the Supreme Court’s interpretation
of that provision, invalidate CBA provisions that are contrary to, or directly in conflict
with a provision of the Education Code, thereby superseding or annulling the Education
Code provision. Sections 44949 and 44955 require certain procedures for layoffs that
are intended to ensure that seniority rules and regulations are not violated during a layoff
of certificated employees. Section 44955, subdivision (b), specifically prohibits the
District from retaining a less senior employee to perform a service that a more senior
employee is certificated and competent to perform. Section 17.9 of the CBA is contrary
to this provision and is therefore invalid for the purpose determining the bumping rights
of the certificated employees in this proceeding.

Challenge to the Bumping Criteria in the Resolution

29.

The District has established “bumping” criteria (Factual Finding 15) that

incorporates the bumping prohibition between the Somis Academy and the Somis
School in the CBA, in addition to requiring that the certificated employee possess (1)
credential or authorization for the subject or grade level being sought; (2) with NCLB
and “highly qualified” in the subject or grade level being sought; (3) has an appropriate
EL authorization; and (4) has at least one complete year of experience teaching in a
traditional classroom setting at the Somis School in the last five years in the subject
matter area to be assumed to displace a less senior employee teaching in a traditional
classroom at the Somis School. Because the bumping prohibition in the CBA is invalid,
and all Respondents meet the first three bumping criteria, this court need only consider
the requirement that certificated teachers must have at least one year teaching in a
traditional classroom environment in order to bump into the Somis School, the only
positions available to the Respondents.

30.

As stated above, section 44955, subdivision (b), provides that no

permanent employee may be terminated while an employee with less seniority is
retained to render a service the terminated employee is certificated and competent to
render. “Certificated” is defined by the provisions of the Education Code pertaining to
credentials, but “competent” is not specifically defined. In Forker v. Board of Trustees
(1994) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 19, the court defined the term in a reemployment proceeding
under section 44956, in terms of the teachers’ skills and qualifications, specifically, as
“relating to special qualifications for a vacant position, rather than relating to the on-the-
job performance of the laid-off permanent employee.” In doing so, the court noted that
courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing Board (1981) 118
Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109
Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, had interpreted the term in a similar manner.

Courts in analogous layoff and reemployment contexts, construing provisions

similar to section 44955, have recognized that school districts have discretion to

11

establish rules to define teacher competency. Thus, after reviewing earlier cases, the
Court in Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565
(Duax), wrote: “Hence, from these authorities we conclude that a board’s definition of
competency is reasonable when it considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher
threatened with layoff.” (See Martin v. Kentfield School District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294,
299-300; Forker v. Board of Trustees, supra.)

In Duax, the governing board had established a standard of competency that

required one year of full-time teaching in the subject area within the last ten years. The
Court found such standard “clearly related to skills and qualifications to teach” and
therefore a reasonable one. (Duax, supra, 196 Cal. App.3d 555, at p. 567.) The Court
also concluded that the standard did not define competency too narrowly.

31.

Here, the District contends that the a competency standard or criteria

that requires one year of teaching in the last five years in a traditional classroom
setting at the Somis School is needed to ensure that teachers are competent to teach in
traditional classrooms prior to being assigned to the Somis School. The
Superintendent testified that the District is a small school district with essentially
three different instructional programs that are separate and distinct from one another.
The District has the Somis School program for grades K-8 with traditional classroom
instruction, and approximately 225 students housed on the District’s single school
campus. There is also the Somis Academy, the dependent charter for grades K-12
that is a separate home based educational program, which has approximately 167
students and whose staff is house off-site. Finally, the District has an independent
home study program within the Somis School, but that is housed off-site for grades
K-8 and has approximately 55 students.

32.

The Somis Academy and the Somis School educational programs are

significantly different in their approaches to teaching in that the Somis Academy does
not utilize traditional classroom instruction and relies heavily on individualized
teaching methodology. Teachers primarily work with students and their families on a
one-to-one basis through web based communication devices and processes.
Conversely, the Somis School requires its teachers to instruct very diverse classroom
populations with structured, traditional curriculums and lesson plans. The
Superintendent testified that it requires teachers to have at least one year in the last
five years teaching in a traditional classroom to ensure that teachers who have been in
the home-study based program are currently skilled and qualified to instruct a
traditional classroom. The Somis Academy and Somis School, with the exception of
the home study program within the Somis School, employ two very different
educational teaching methodologies. It is not unreasonable or arbitrary for the
District to impose the one year in the last five years requirement for teaching in a
traditional classroom.

33.

However, the District may not use its bumping criteria in Factual

Finding 15 to prohibit Somis Academy certificated employees from bumping into the

12

Somis School independent home study program because that program does not
employ the traditional classroom teaching techniques and it was the model upon
which the Somis Academy’s home study program was designed.

34.

Respondents, although admitting that the Somis Academy and the

Somis School teaching methods are significantly different, nevertheless argued that as
teachers for many years, the Somis Academy teachers were still competent to teach in
traditional classrooms. Although Respondents suggested that the reverse would not
be true for a teacher in a traditional classroom setting attempting to assume a position
at the charter academy. Respondents admitted that a special skill set was required to
teach in the web based home study program at the Somis Academy because of the
lack of frequent personal interaction with the students in the home study program.
However, several Respondents claimed that they still taught in the traditional
classroom setting, although not nearly as frequent as the teachers in the Somis School.

35.

The District’s bumping criteria, with the exception of the section 19.9

CBA prohibition, as set forth in Resolution 11/12-14 and quoted in Factual Finding 15,
relates to the skills and qualifications of its certificated employees, as required by the
foregoing authorities, and may be used by the District in implementing the layoffs. The
time period established in the competency rule is not unduly restrictive.

Respondents’ Individual Challenges to the Bumping Criteria

Carol Anderson

36.

Carol Anderson (seniority date November 1, 1996) currently serves in the

position of the Director of the Somis Academy. The position was eliminated by
Resolution 11/12-14. Ms. Anderson holds a multiple subject clear credential entitling
her to teach self-contained multiple subject classrooms and an administrative services
credential. Ms. Anderson has never taught in a classroom setting, although she was
instrumental in setting up the Somis School independent home study program, and had
served as a teacher in the home study program for the Somis School. Ms. Anderson was
asked to start up the Somis Academy dependent charter school because of her
experience in setting up the home study program for the Somis School. The Somis
School’s independent home study program is currently staffed by Heidi Moon and
David Jackson, certificated employees who are less senior to Ms. Anderson. Ms. Moon
and Mr. Jackson are the only two certificated teachers in the Somis School home study
program.

37.

At hearing, the District stipulated that Ms. Anderson was certificated

and competent to bump into the independent home study position at the Somis School

13

held by Ms. Moon (seniority date October 14, 1998).6 Ms. Moon will be reassigned
to a position that became available due to the retirement of a certificated employee
after March 15, 2012. The independent home study position is not in a traditional
classroom at the Somis School. Thus, the requirement of teaching one year in the last
five years in a Somis School traditional classroom would not apply to this position.
No other Respondent with more seniority than Ms. Anderson can challenge for the
independent home study position offered to Ms. Anderson at the Somis School.
Respondents also can not challenge the position held by Mr. Jackson (seniority date
August 25, 1999) because no Respondent is more senior than Mr. Jackson.
Therefore, the District has agreed to rescind its notice to terminate the services of Ms.
Anderson, and the Accusation against Ms. Anderson will be dismissed.

Lorin Maygren

38.

Lorin Maygren (seniority date August 21, 2003) is currently a
supervising teacher at the Somis Academy, a position that was eliminated by
Resolution 11/12-14. He has a “standard secondary” life credential, major Physical
Education, and a supplemental authorization in Biological Science, which entitles him
to teach Physical Education and Science in departmentalized classrooms grades 7-12
and to teach introductory courses within the general area of any subject(s) listed as
majors for grades 7-12. Mr. Maygren has not taught in a traditional Somis School
classroom in the last five years. He did not assert at hearing that there was a less
senior employee being retained in the Somis School to perform services that he was
certificated and competent to perform. Accordingly, the District may proceed with its
proposed layoff of Mr. Maygren.

Laurie Allen

39.

Laurie Allen (seniority date August 23, 2005) is currently a visual and
performing arts and 9-12 grade English teacher at the Somis Academy, a position that
was eliminated by Resolution 11/12-14. She has a “standard secondary” life
credential in Music and a supplemental authorization in English, grades 7-12, which
entitles her to teach Music and English in departmentalized classrooms grades 7-12
and to teach introductory courses within the general area of any subject(s) listed as
majors for grades 7-12. Ms. Allen has not taught in a traditional Somis School
classroom in the last five years. She did not assert at hearing that there was a less
senior employee being retained in the Somis School to perform services that she was
certificated and competent to perform. Accordingly, the District may proceed with its
proposed layoff of Ms. Allen.

6 Although Mr. Jackson is less senior than Ms. Moon, Mr. Jackson is also a

third grade elementary teacher in a traditional classroom. Thus, Ms. Anderson could
not bump Mr. Jackson because of his traditional classroom assignment.

14

Alice Watson

40.

Alice Watson (seniority date August 23, 2005) is currently a

supervising teacher K-12 and a K-12 Art teacher at the Somis Academy, a position
that was eliminated by Resolution 11/12-14. She has a multiple subject professional
clear credential, which entitles her to teach multiple subjects in self-contained
classrooms, or core subjects or classes to the same group of students under
circumstances not relevant here. Ms. Watson has not taught in a traditional Somis
School classroom in the last five years, but she did work as a teacher in the Somis
School independent home study program four years ago. She does not assert that she
is entitled to the independent home study teacher position that will be offered to
Respondent Carol Anderson. However, she asserts that she would be entitled to
bump into a position held by Carolyn Gass (seniority date August 25, 2005) at the
Somis School who teaches Social Studies, English, and Drama, grades 6-8. She also
asserts that she is entitled to bump into a position held by Allison Brinkman (seniority
date August 30, 2006) at the Somis School who teaches sixth grade. Ms. Watson
testified that she teaches three to twelve students in a classroom environment at a
church in Simi Valley at least five times per week, for one hour each class. She
admitted however, that the availability of the students for these classroom sessions
depends entirely upon the student’s parents making the students available for the
session. She stated that she spends significant time preparing lesson plans.

41. Ms. Watson did not establish that she has had one year of experience in

the last five years teaching in a traditional classroom at the Somis School. Although
she does meet with her students at Somis Academy in the classroom setting on
occasion, these meetings or sessions are rather infrequent and far less formal than a
traditional classroom setting. Thus, she does not meet the competency requirement
expressed in the Board’s Resolution. Accordingly, the District may proceed with the
proposed layoff of Ms. Watson.

Jane Coleman

42.

Jane Coleman (seniority date September 15, 2005) is currently a
supervising teacher and a Special Education and Spanish teacher at the Somis
Academy, a position that was eliminated by Resolution 11/12-14. She has a multiple
subject life credential and supplemental authorizations in English grades K-8 and
Introductory Spanish grades K-8, which entitles her to teach multiple subjects in self-
contained classrooms, or core subjects or classes in English and Spanish to the same
group of students under circumstances not relevant here. Ms. Coleman has not taught
in a traditional Somis School classroom in the last five years. She did not assert at
hearing that there was a less senior employee being retained in the Somis School to
perform services that she was certificated and competent to perform. Accordingly,
the District may proceed with the proposed layoff of Ms. Coleman.

15

Francine Smith

43.

Francine Smith (seniority date March 1, 2006) is currently a Social

Science teacher grades 6-12 at the Somis Academy, a position that was eliminated by
Resolution 11/12-14. She has a single subject professional clear credential in Social
Science which entitles her to teach departmentalized classes K-12 in Social Science.
Ms. Smith also has supplemental authorizations in Introduction to Music and
Introduction to English which would entitle her to teach these subjects in
departmentalized classes grades K-12. Ms. Smith has not taught in a traditional
Somis School classroom in the last five years. She asserts that she is entitled to bump
into a Music class position previously held by Cora Branchflower (seniority date
August 29, 2011) at the Somis School. Ms. Branchflower is no longer in this position
effective March 28, 2012, and the position is currently being advertised for hire by the
District. Ms. Smith testified that she has taught eighth grade English and Music and
that she teaches in a classroom environment at the Somis Academy. She stated that
she conducts “labs” in her History classes at least twice per semester for each class
and that she teaches History for grades 6-11. The labs are typically set for one hour
but sometimes last about two hours, and attendance varies between 1 to 15 students.
Ms. Smith stated that she prepares lesson plans and has a set agenda for her classes.

44. Ms. Smith did not establish that she has taught in a traditional
classroom setting in the Somis School for one year in the last five years. Although
she meets with her students in a classroom environment, these classroom meetings are
far less frequent than that which is required in the traditional classroom at the Somis
School and appear to be less structured. There was also insufficient evidence to
conclude that the lesson plans and agendas prepared by Ms. Smith for her students at
the Somis Academy were equivalent to the lesson plans and curriculums prepared at
the Somis School. Accordingly, the District may proceed with the proposed layoff of
Ms. Smith.

45.

The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to

Respondents to render services that Respondents are certificated and competent to
render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949

and 44955 were met. Therefore, jurisdiction was established for this proceeding as to
all Respondents by reason of Findings 1 through 6.

2.

The services listed in Factual Finding 3, Board Resolution No. 11/12-

14, with the noted exception of the “hourly” positions, are particular kinds of services
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955, by reason of Factual Findings 3
through 11.

16

3.

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees by 12.0

FTEs due to the reduction of the particular kinds of services described in Factual
Finding 3, by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 45. The District did not establish
that the “hourly” positions at Somis Academy were particular kinds of services, and
thus, may not layoff probationary or permanent certificated employees in “hourly”
positions, by reason of Factual Findings 3 through 11.

4.

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the
reduction of the particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 3, because it
relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils, by reason of Factual
Findings 1 through 45.

5.

Cause exists to give notice to Respondents Laurie Allen, Jane Coleman,

Lorin Maygren, Francis Smith, and Alice Watson, pursuant to Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955, that their services will not be required for the 2012-13
school year, by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 45.

6.

Cause does not exist to terminate the services of Respondent Carol

Anderson, by reason of Factual Finding 1 through 45, and the District shall rescind its
layoff notice to Respondent Carol Anderson.

ORDER

1.

The District’s Accusation Against Respondents Laurie Allen, Jane
Coleman, Lorin Maygren, Francis Smith, and Alice Watson is sustained, and the
District may notify them that their services will not be needed during the 2012-2013
school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

2.

3.

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

The Accusation against Respondent Carol Anderson is dismissed.

Dated: May 21, 2012

MICHAEL A. SCARLETT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

17

