BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
MOUNT DIABLO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of:

The Certificated Employees identified in
Appendix A,

OAH No. 2012030378

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was submitted for decision before Administrative Law Judge Jill

Schlichtmann, State of California, Office of Administrative Hearings.

Gregory Rolen and Deborah A. Cooksey, Attorneys at Law, represented the Mount

Diablo Unified School District.

Ernest H. Tuttle, Attorney at Law, represented the respondents identified in Appendix

A.

Prior to the hearing that was set for April 18, 2012, the parties agreed to submit the

matter on stipulated facts without a hearing. The parties’ stipulations, and the exhibits
attached thereto, were marked collectively as Exhibit I and admitted into evidence. The
record remained open to permit the parties to file simultaneous closing briefs, which were
timely filed. The District’s brief was marked for identification as Exhibit II and respondents’
brief was marked for identification as Exhibit III.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Dr. Steven Lawrence made and filed the accusation against respondents in his
official capacity as the superintendent of the Mount Diablo Unified School District (District).

Respondents are all certificated employees of the District.

2.

3.

On March 12, 2012, the Mount Diablo Board of Education (Board) passed a

resolution (PKS Resolution) finding it necessary to terminate certain employees due to a
reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services for the 2012-2013 school year.
The PKS Resolution reduces the following 98.855 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions:

District Wide
Program Specialist, Categorical Programs, Site Based
Coordinator, Student Services 6-8
Coordinator, Student/Community Services 9-12
Music
Library Media Teachers
Resource Specialist
Special Day Class
Psychologist

1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
2.80 FTE
.30 FTE
.20 FTE
1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
.20 FTE

Elementary Teaching Positions
K-5 Classroom Teachers (Multiple Subject)

24.675 FTE

Middle School Teaching Positions
Core (Multiple Subject)
Reading
AIMS
Geometry
Social Science
PE
Math
Science
English
Library Media

High School Teaching Positions
World History
PE
Geometry
Math
Algebra
Trigonometry
English
Art
Social Science
Foreign Language: Spanish
Foreign Language: French
Woodworking
Work Experience Education (WEE)
Ceramics
Earth Science
Biology
Chemistry
Music
(ROP) Radio Program
Alternative Education Teacher

Total:

2

5.51 FTE
1.17 FTE
.84 FTE
.20 FTE
1.17 FTE
.17 FTE
.34 FTE
2.34 FTE
.34 FTE
.20 FTE

.20 FTE
.20 FTE
.60 FTE
9.20 FTE
1.20 FTE
.20 FTE
14.80 FTE
2.80 FTE
5.00 FTE
2.60 FTE
1.40 FTE
.60 FTE
.40 FTE
.40 FTE
.60 FTE
3.40 FTE
2.20 FTE
1.00 FTE
.60 FTE
2.00 FTE

91.855 FTE

4.

5.

8.

9.

The PKS Resolution authorized the superintendent to send appropriate notices

to all employees affected by the reduction.

On March 13, 2012, the District gave appropriate notice to the affected

employees, all of whom requested a hearing. On March 23, 2012, the District timely served
accusations on respondents, all of whom filed a notice of defense.1 All prehearing
jurisdictional requirements have been met.

6.

On February 6, 2012, the Board passed a resolution (Tie-Breaker Resolution),
in which it identified the criteria to be applied to resolve ties in seniority between certificated
employees.

The District’s employer-employee relations specialist and the president of the
District’s teachers’ union applied the tie-breaking criteria to employees with the same
seniority date on February 14, 2012. Ties between teachers with the same seniority date
were resolved via lottery.

7.

The PKS Resolution provides for skipping employees holding Bilingual

Cross-Cultural Language and Academic Development (BCLAD) credentials who will be
using that credential in the 2012-2013 school year. Pursuant to the resolution, the District
skipped bilingual psychologists and junior teachers with a BCLAD credential who will be
assigned to bilingual classrooms in the 2012-2013 school year.

Prior to determining the FTE positions to be reduced or eliminated, and again

before sending out the layoff notices, the District considered positively assured attrition.

In the 2011-2012 school year, the District hired 29.818 FTE employees to

work in categorically-funded programs. The District had planned to release all temporary
employees, including those in categorically-funded positions prior to the end of the current
school year. All of the contracts of the 29.818 employees end June 15, 2012, which is the
last day of the school year for the 2011/2012 school year. However, in light of the recent
decision in Stockton Teachers Association CTA/NEA v. Stockton Unified School District
(2012) 204 Cal.App.4th 446, the District will retain these temporary employees. The
positions of some of the temporary employees are funded with a combination of general
funds and categorical funds. If the funding sources for a temporary employee’s position are
divided between general fund revenues and categorical funding, the District will release the
employee from the portion paid for with general fund revenues. No temporary teachers will
be retained in the portion of their positions that is paid for with general fund revenues while a
permanent or probationary teacher is laid off.

10.

Temporary teachers were informed of their status in writing prior to their first

day of service and do not have seniority rights. However, the contracts of the temporary

1 Only one of the eight administrators on the layoff list, Tom Lorch, requested a
hearing. Lorch subsequently indicated his intention not to attend the hearing or participate in
the proceedings.

3

employees in categorically-funded programs do not specifically state that the employees are
employed pursuant to Education Code section 44909, or that their contracts will end upon the
expiration of categorical funding.

11.

The District did not issue precautionary layoff notices to temporary employees
who are filling in for teachers on leave, because those temporary employees will be released
at the end of the current school year.

12.

No certificated employee junior to any respondent is being retained to perform

services which any respondent is certificated and competent to render.

13.

The reduction or discontinuance of services is related solely to the general

welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955.2 All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were
satisfied. (Factual Finding 5.)

2.

Respondents contend that pursuant to the Stockton decision, the employees
hired to fill positions in categorically-funded programs must be classified as probationary
employees because their contracts do not state that they are employed pursuant to section
44909, or that their contracts will end upon the expiration of categorical funding. This
argument is unpersuasive for several reasons. First, issues concerning the appropriate
classification of temporary employees who have not received a layoff notice and are not
respondents herein, cannot be determined in this proceeding.3 Moreover, in Stockton, the
court held that if an individual employed in a categorical program is terminated prior to the
expiration of the funding, that employee must be treated as a probationary employee.
However, employees who are terminated upon the expiration of categorical funding can be
treated as temporary employees. In this case, there is no evidence that the temporary
employees will be released prior to the expiration of categorical funding. Finally, as will be
discussed below, the reclassification of the temporary employees would serve to expand their
rights, but would not affect respondents’ rights to move into the positions created by
categorical funding.

3.

The real issue in this case is whether permanent or probationary certificated

employees, who have been noticed for layoff, must be allowed to displace temporary
employees in categorically-funded positions. The District contends that the noticed
employees cannot “bump” into these positions because it is permitted by section 44909 and
existing case law, including the recent Stockton decision, to retain temporary employees in
categorically-funded positions until the funding expires. Respondents argue that the

2 All further statutory citations are to the Education Code.

3 Mandamus is the appropriate remedy for a temporary teacher seeking
reclassification. (Campbell v. Graham-Armstrong (1973) 9 Cal.3d 482, 485.)

4

employees in categorically-funded positions, whether classified as probationary or
temporary, have less seniority than permanent employees noticed for layoff, and that
pursuant to section 44955, the more senior noticed employees cannot be laid off while more
junior employees are retained in the categorically-funded positions. Respondents reason that
by retaining the employees in categorically-funded positions, the temporary employees are
being given rights superior to those of permanent and probationary teachers with more
seniority.

4.

Section 449554 authorizes a permanent or probationary employee to displace a

less senior employee who holds a position that the senior employee is certificated and
competent to perform. However, section 44955 limits those rights “as otherwise provided by
statute.”

5.

Section 44909 authorizes a school district to employ certificated employees to

fill its short range needs. (Haase v. San Diego Community College Dist., supra, 113
Cal.App.3d 913, 917-918; Zalac v. Governing Board of the Ferndale Unified School District,
supra, 98 Cal.App.4th 838.) It gives a school district the flexibility to employ persons
possessing an appropriate credential to perform in projects which are financed outside of the
base revenue limit for the duration of the categorical funding. (Stockton, supra; Haase v.
San Diego Community College Dist., supra, 113 Cal.App.3d 913, 917-918; Zalac v.
Governing Board of the Ferndale Unified School District, supra, 98 Cal.App.4th 838.)

6.

In enacting section 44909, the Legislature provided for a separate employment

structure for certificated employees hired to perform in categorically-funded positions.
Employment in a categorically-funded position does not grant the employee any credit
toward classification as a permanent employee unless certain conditions are met. There is no
evidence those conditions have been met in this case. Since temporary employees have no
seniority rights, and no entitlement to their positions upon expiration of the categorical
funding, they do not have rights superior to those of permanent or probationary employees.

7.

In Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, the court held
that certificated employees could not bump into the children’s center employees’ positions
because the statutory grounds permitting termination of the two types of employees were
different. Similarly, in Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116
Cal.App.3d 831, the court held that because certificated employees who work at the
children’s center may be laid off for lack of work or lack of funds without notice and
hearing, permanent and probationary employees could not bump into those positions because
employment rights in two structures were different. The same reasoning applies here. The
employment rights governing employees hired pursuant to section 44909 are different from

4 Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides in pertinent part:

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while any probationary employee, or any other
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

5

those governing permanent and probationary employees. Respondents cannot displace the
employees hired to fill positions created for the duration of categorical funding because the
employment structures are different. Therefore, the District is not required to permit
permanent or probationary employees to bump into categorically-funded positions.

8.

The services referenced in the PKS Resolution in Factual Finding 4 are the

kind which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and case
law. (See Ed. Code § 44955; Campbell Elem. Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76
Cal.App.3d 796, Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) The decision to
reduce or discontinue the services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but rather a proper
exercise of the District’s discretion.

9.

Cause exists because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of

services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their
services will not be required for the ensuing school year. The cause relates solely to the
welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section
44949.

ORDER

Notice may be given to respondents occupying up to 98.855 full-time equivalent
positions that their services will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year because of the
reduction of particular kinds of services.

DATED: _________________________

_______________________________________
JILL SCHLICHTMANN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

