BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
PASO ROBLES JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SAN LUIS OBISPO
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Layoffs Of:

Stephen W. Arnette and Other
Certificated Employees of the Paso
Robles Joint Unified School District,

Respondents.

Case No. 2012030913

PROPOSED DECISION

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard

this matter on May 2, 2012, in Paso Robles, California.1

Roman J. Muñoz and Chelsea R. Olson, Attorneys at Law, represented Ruben Canales,
Ed.D., Assistant Superintendent (Canales), Paso Robles Joint Unified School District (District).

John F. Sachs, Attorney at Law, represented Respondents Stephen W. Arnette (Arnette),
Jennifer Bedrosian (Bedrosian), Audra Carr (Carr), Shannon Gidcumb (Gidcumb), Jillian
Jaeger (Jaeger), Carame Kroener (Kroener), Cynthia McGuffin (McGuffin), and Kiley Wilson
(Wilson), who are collectively referred to as Respondents.

Respondent Mark Clement (Clement), who is included in collective references to

Respondents, represented himself.

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and has
given Respondents and other certificated employees of the District notice of its intent not to
reemploy them for the 2012-2013 school year. Respondents requested a hearing for a
determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2012-2013 school year.

1 The hearing in this matter was continued from its previously-scheduled date, April 25,
2012, and the deadlines set forth in Education Code sections 44949, subdivision (c), and 44955,
subdivision (c), have been extended in accordance with Education Code section 44949,
subdivision (e).

Oral and documentary evidence, and evidence by oral stipulation on the record, was
received at the hearing. The record was left open for the submission of written closing
argument. The District and Respondents filed initial argument on May 4 and 7, 2012,
respectively, and their submissions have been marked as Exhibits 18 and I. The parties filed
reply arguments on May 9, 2012, which documents have been marked for identification as
Exhibits 19 and J. The matter was submitted for decision on May 9, 2012.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Assistant Superintendent Canales filed the Accusation and First Amended

Accusation in his official capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

a.

3.

On February 28, 2012, the Governing Board of the District (Governing
Board) adopted Resolution number 12-16, reducing or discontinuing the following services for
the 2012-2013 school year:

Service

FTE2 Positions

Grades K-5 Multiple Subjects Instruction
Grades K-5 Multiple Subjects BCLAD Instruction
Grades K-8 Multiple Subjects Alternative Education Instruction
Grades K-8 Multiple Teacher on Special Assignment
Grades K-12 Special Education Mild/Moderate Services
Grades 9-12 Alternative Education Instruction
Grades 9-12 American Sign Language Instruction
Grades 9-12 Math Language Instruction
Grades 9-12 Visual and Performing Arts Instruction
Grades 9-12 Physical Education Instruction
Grades 9-12 English Instruction
Grades 9-12 Agriculture Instruction
Grades 9-12 Social Studies Instruction
Grades 9-12 General Subjects Instruction
Grades K-12 Counselors
Adult Severely Handicap

Total

8.00
1.00
1.20
1.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.50
1.00
0.50
3.70
1.00

28.35

2 Full-time equivalent position.

2

b

On March 13, 2012, the Governing Board adopted Resolution number
12-22, reducing Grades 9-12 Progress Academic Intervention Class services by one FTE
position for the 2012-2013 school year.

4.

Before March 15, 2012, the District provided notice to Respondents that their
services will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year due to the reduction of particular
kinds of services. Respondents thereafter filed timely requests for hearing.

5.

Assistant Superintendent Canales notified the Governing Board that he had
recommended that notice be provided to Respondents that their services will not be required for
the 2012-2013 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

6.

On or about April 16, 2012, Assistant Superintendent Canales issued the
Accusation,
the Notice of Hearing, and other required documents, and served them on
Respondents. On or about April 25, 2012, Assistant Superintendent Canales issued the First
Amended Accusation, the Notice of Hearing, and other required documents, and served them
on Respondents. Respondents thereafter filed Notices of Defense.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

7.

8.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code3 section 44955.

9.

The Governing Board took action to reduce the services set forth in factual
finding number 3 primarily because of the District’s precarious financial situation and
anticipated further declines in State funding. The decision to reduce or discontinue the
particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of
the District's discretion.

10.

The reduction or discontinuance of services set forth in factual finding number 3,
in the context of the financial difficulties and anticipated decline in revenue and the need to
continue to provide services to its students, is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils,
and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by
the Governing Board.

a.

11.

On February 28, 2012, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 12-
19, setting forth the criteria to determine seniority among employees who first rendered paid
service in a probationary position on the same date (tie-breaking criteria). The specific criteria
was listed, not necessarily in order of importance as: credentialing; certificates (BCLAD
[Bilingual Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Development]/CLAD [Crosscultural,

3 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

3

Language/EL [English Learner] Authorization/Bilingual Credential Needs); experience; district
approved training; district approved special education training; competence (has at least one
complete school year actual District teaching experience in the assignment she/he intends to
displace another employee within the last five years as per the Board adopted Resolution No.
#12-3 Competency Standard Criteria); evaluations; NCLB [No Child Left Behind] Highly
Qualified status; and extracurricular activities-service/participation in a contracted stipend
position (i.e., SST Coordinator). No testimony was provided regarding the relative importance
of the criteria for the 2012-2013 school year, and no point system was employed to rank
individuals.

b.

The criteria are reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of

certificated employees.

c.
termination of any Respondent.

The District did not need to apply the criteria to determine the order of

12.

On February 28, 2012, the Governing Board adopted Resolution 12-8, which

contains the following competency criteria.

“WHEREAS, the Governing Board of the Paso Robles Joint Unified School District
anticipates that it will be necessary to reduce the cervices of certain certificated employees
within the District commencing with the 2012-13 school year; and

“WHEREAS, it is necessary for the Governing Board of the Paso Robles Joint Unified
to determine the criteria for the qualification of individual certificated

School District
employees affected by program reduction for layoffs for the 2012-13 school year; and

“WHEREAS, the Paso Robles Joint Unified School District is required to provide

instruction to students who have limited English Language Proficiency; and

“WHEREAS, the Paso Robles Joint Unified School District has been subsequently able
to hire fully credentialed teachers who are less senior than some individuals holding emergency
credentials and authorization; and

“WHEREAS, the Paso Robles Joint Unified School District is required to provide

instruction to students by Highly Qualified Teachers as defined by No Child Left Behind.

“NOW, THEREFORE BE IT HEREBY FOUND, RESOLVED AND ORDERED by

the Paso Robles Joint Unified School District as follows:

“1.

Each of the foregoing recitals is true and correct.

4

“2.

For the purposes of making assignments and reassignments of certificated
employees in order for the District to meet its obligations under Education Code section 44955,
a certificated employee shall be deemed competent to perform certificated services if he/she:

“a.

has a preliminary, clear, professional clear, lifetime, or other full credential for
the subject matter he/she is serving and the subject matter in which he/she intends to displace
another employee, has at least one complete school year actual District teaching experience in
the assignment within the past five school years.

“b.

currently

possesses

a

non-temporary/non-emergency CLAD/BCLAD/EL

Authorization.

“c.

is NCLB compliant in the subject area he/she is serving and in the subject area

he/she intends to displace another employee.

“3.

In making the assignments and reassignments required by Education Code
section 44955, the Superintendent and/or Director for Personnel Services shall use the criteria
set forth above fro determining qualifications and competence.”

13.

The District has a significant number of students who are not proficient in the
English language, and the District wants to ensure that these students are taught by employees
who possess certificates that allow them to properly teach these English learners. In addition it
wants to ensure that all its certificated employees are Highly Qualified within the meaning of
the No Child Left Behind federal law to prevent loss of federal funding.

a.

14.

Respondents Arnette, Clement, and Gidcumb are affected by application
of the competency criteria. They are senior employees in the District, having first rendered
service in a probationary capacity on September 3, 1996, August 31, 1978, and August 26,
1996, respectively. They were all selected for layoff because they do not possess non-
temporary/non-emergency CLAD, BCLAD, or EL Authorizations. Clement’s position is
expected to be reduced by .5 FTE.

b.

Respondent Arnette holds a single subject, English, credential, and
teaches high school English. He holds an emergency CLAD authorization, which expires
September 1, 2012. He is expected to complete a course at the University of Phoenix in June
2012, which will result in a regular, nonemergency EL Authorization issued by the State of
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing.

c.

Respondent Clement holds a clear single subject credential in Life
Sciences, with supplemental authorizations in Agriculture, Biology, Geology, Astronomy,
Anatomy, and Environmental Sciences. He teaches Agriculture, Earth Sciences, and Biology
courses. He has received training and has employed techniques designed to teach students who

5

are not proficient in the English language. He holds an emergency CLAD certification, which is
effective until January 1, 2013. He is expected to complete a course at the University of
Phoenix in June 2012, which will result in a regular, nonemergency EL Authorization.

d.

Respondent Gidcumb holds a single subject, Physical Education,
credential and teaches elementary school physical education. She holds an emergency CLAD
authorization, which expires September 1, 2012. She is also expected to complete the
University of Phoenix program in June 2012, which will result in a regular, nonemergency EL
Authorization.

15. Mark Rose, who has a seniority date of August 25, 1993, and who holds single
subject, Physical Education and Biology, credentials was retained despite having only an
emergency English Learner authorization. He coaches student athletes and teaches weight
conditioning physical education classes.

16.

No certificated employee junior to Respondents Bedrosian, Carr, Jaeger,
Kroener, McGuffin, or Wilson was retained to render a service which any of these Respondents
is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant

to Education Code

sections 44949 and 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 7.

2.

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services
within the meaning of section Education Code section 44955, by reason of factual finding
numbers 3 and 8.

3.

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the District to
reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3,
which cause relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of
factual finding numbers 1 through 10.

4.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.” (Emphasis added.)
“Certificated” is defined by the provisions of the Education Code pertaining to credentials, but
“competent” is not specifically defined. In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994) 160 Cal.App.3d
13, 19, the Court defined the term in a reemployment proceeding under section 44956, a statute
that contains the same “certificated and competent” requirement, in terms of the teachers’ skills
and qualifications, specifically, as “relating to special qualifications for a vacant position, rather

6

than relating to the on-the-job performance of the laid-off permanent employee.” In doing so,
the Court noted that courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing Board
(1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109
Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, and had interpreted the term in a similar manner.

As the Forker court recognized, school districts have the discretion to define
competency, as had been permitted in earlier reemployment cases, King v. Berkeley Unified
School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016 (King) and Martin v. Kentfield School District
(1983) 35 Cal.3d. 294 (Martin). In King, the court upheld a district’s requirement that laid off
teachers have prior teaching experience in the open jobs in which they claimed competency,
namely, mathematics and physical education. In Martin, a district was permitted to require prior
teaching experience in middle school before deeming laid off elementary school teachers
competent to teach in middle school, if such requirement was equally applied to all certificated
employees, not just those on a preferential rehire list.

In Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565 (Duax), a
case arising under the community college reduction in force statute, now section 87743, the
governing board had established a standard of competency that required one year of full-time
teaching in the subject area within the last ten years. After acknowledging the discretion
afforded to school districts, and set forth in King and Martin, the court stated: “While these
decisions stress the discretion reposed in a school board in defining the term ‘competent,’ the
court in Forker . . . added further assistance in stating, ‘[a]s interpreted by the Martin court, the
term ‘competent’ as used in section 44956 relates to specific skills or qualifications required of
the applicant. Decisions prior to Martin have interpreted that term in a similar manner.” (Id. at
p. 9. See also Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal. App.3d 648, 654-655;
Ozsogomonyan, Teacher layoffs in California: An Update (1979) 30 Hastings L.J. 1727, 1749-
1751). Hence, from these authorities we conclude that a board’s definition of competency is
reasonable when it considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.”
The Duax court upheld the governing board’s definition of competence as a reasonable exercise
of its discretion.

The law review article relied upon by the Duax court stated that “Incompetency may be
shown by lack of
recent academic training in the fields.”
(Ozsogomonyan, Teacher layoffs in California: An Update (1979) 30 Hastings L.J. 1727, 1750-
1751).

teaching experience or

Therefore, as the foregoing authorities demonstrate, competence, in the context of
teacher layoff and reinstatement, has been defined in terms of the skills and qualifications of the
certificated employee, particularly those pertaining to training and experience. Part of the
District’s competency rule relates to the skills and qualifications of its certificated employees in
terms of training and experience, and may be used by the District in implementing the layoffs.
The District requires that teachers seeking to bump into a position have at least one complete

7

school year actual District teaching experience in the assignment within the past five school
years. Respondents have not established that this part of the competency rule is unreasonable in
the existing circumstances.

However, the remainder of the District’s competency rule does not relate to the skills
and qualifications of a certificated employee in the same manner as the rule in Duax and the
other cited cases does. Rather than defining skills and qualifications in terms of past training or
experience, the District’s rule relies exclusively on teacher certification or other credential
authorizations. And while such certificate-based qualifications may indeed bear on competency,
section 44955 precludes their use to define competency.

Statutes must be interpreted in such a manner as to ascertain and effectuate the
legislative intent. (Hughes v. Board of Architectural Examiners (1998) 17 Cal.4th 763, 775;
California Teachers Assn. v. Governing Bd. of Rialto Unified School District (1997) 14
Cal.4th 627, 632; People v. Hull (1991) 1 Cal. 4th 266, 271; Steketee v. Lintz, Williams &
Rothberg (1985) 38 Cal.3d 46, 51-52.) The first step in determining legislative intent is to
scrutinize the actual words of the statute, giving them a plain and commonsense meaning.
(Hughes v. Board of Architectural Examiners, supra at p. 775; California Teachers Assn. v.
Governing Bd. of Rialto Unified School District, supra at p. 633; Steketee v. Lintz, Williams
& Rothberg, supra at p. 51.) “Ordinarily, if the statutory language is clear and unambiguous,
there is no need for judicial construction.” (Hughes v. Board of Architectural Examiners,
supra at 775, citing California School Employees Assn. v. Governing Board (1994) 8 Cal. 4th
333, 340.) In addition, each and every word in the statute must be given meaning to
accomplish a result consistent with the legislative purpose. (Hughes v. Board of Architectural
Examiners supra at 775; California Teachers Assn. v. Governing Bd. of Rialto Unified School
District, supra at 634.) “A statute must be construed in the context of the entire statutory
system of which it is a part, in order to achieve harmony among the parts [Citations].” (People
v. Hull, supra at p. 272.) Further, a construction that renders language of the enactment
superfluous must be avoided. (California Teachers Assn. v. Governing BB. of Rialto Unified
School District, supra at pp. 633-34; Shoemaker v. Myer (1990) 52 Cal.3d 1, 22 .)

Sections 44949 and 44955 set forth the process through which certificated employees
may be laid off following reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The
statutes embody a legislative choice for seniority-based layoffs, subject to specific limitations
set forth in the statutes. Section 44955 plainly requires examination of both certification and
competence in reduction in force decisions. The District’s competency rule blurs the distinction
between the two requirements and makes possession of certain credentials the basis to also
establish competency.

There are two problems with such a competency rule. First, the District modifies
“certificated” in a manner not authorized by 44955 or any other statute, in effect imposing a
“super certificated” criteria for more senior employees to meet before they are retained. Second,

8

renders

it
the “competent” requirement partially superfluous, as credentials become
determinative of competency as well as certification. Such additions to, and subtractions from,
statutory the language are inconsistent with established rules of statutory construction and are
contrary to expressed legislative intent.

Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127 (Bledsoe) does not
require a contrary result. In Bledsoe, the court was faced with a competency rule that defined
competency as, “at a minimum, possession of a preliminary, clear, professional clear, lifetime,
or other full credential, or at least one semester actual teaching experience in alternative
education within the last five years.” (Bledsoe, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th 125, at 135.) The court
did not need to address, and did not specifically address, the foregoing issues of statutory
construction. In Bledsoe, unlike here, a certificated employee could establish competence either
in terms of credentials-based or experience-based criteria. Therefore, the disjunctive criteria in
the rule were consistent with the legislative intent, and the district’s rule in that case did not
modify or render superfluous key words of section 44955.

By reason of the foregoing, the District cannot not validly apply the competency criteria

to layoff Respondents Arnette, Clement, or Gidcumb.

5.

Even if the District were able to define competency in terms of certification, it
may not rely on its competency criteria to lay off Respondents Arnette, Clement, or Gidcumb.
As the Supreme Court held in Martin, supra, 35 Cal.3d. 294, the District must apply the same
competency criteria to all employees. However, the District chose not to apply the criteria to
Mark Rose, and provided no persuasive reason for its exception. It appears that Mark Rose was
retained because of his coaching position, but the District presented no evidence to justify the
exception in one area of instruction and not in those areas in which Respondents Arnette,
Clement, or Gidcumb provide services.

6.

Districts are permitted to disregard seniority, and “skip” junior employees, in
accordance with Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), which provides, in pertinent
part: “Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from terminating a
certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the following reasons: (1) The district
demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or to
provide services authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either pupil
personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special
training and experience necessary to teach that course of study or to provide those services,
which others with more seniority do not possess. . . .” However, the District did not establish
that it skipped junior employees because of a specific need for services which the junior
employees possessed and Respondents Arnette, Clement, or Gidcumb did not possess. Rather,
the District concluded that Respondents were not competent
to perform their current
assignments.

9

7.

Respondents Arnette, Clement, and Gidcumb are certificated and competent to
continue to perform their assignments, and cause does not exist to terminate their services for
the 2012-2013 school year, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 16, and legal
conclusion numbers 1 through 6.

8.

Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondents Bedrosian, Carr, Jaeger,
Kroener, McGuffin, and Wilson, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 10, and 16,
and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 3.

ORDER

1.

The Accusation is sustained and the District may notify Respondents Bedrosian,
Carr, Jaeger, Kroener, McGuffin, and Wilson that their services will not be needed during the
2012-2013 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

The Accusation is dismissed against Respondents Arnette, Clement, and

2.
Gidcumb.

DATED:_____________

SAMUEL D. REYES
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

