BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
RIVERSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
RIVERSIDE COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
Proceeding Involving:

OAH No. 2012020509

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
OF THE RIVERSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT WHO RECEIVED
PRELIMINARY LAYOFF NOTICES FOR
THE 2012-2013 SCHOOL YEAR,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of

California, heard this matter in Riverside, California, on April 24, 2012.

Melanie A. Petersen and Kerrie Taylor, Atkinson, Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost,

represented the Riverside Unified School District.

Marianne Reinhold, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented respondents Erin Aceves,

Terrilynn Bresette-Neve, Catherine Breyer, Keren Broderick, Jennifer Cao, Tracie Carroll,
Natalie Davis, David Dillon, Melissa Gill, Danielle Ippolito, Laurie Irvin, Joanna Jimenez,
Kevin LeDuc, Brandi Marsh, Kristina McCann, Kristi McCormack, Justin Partridge, Randi
Potwardski, Christina Ramirez, Sylwia Rusilowicz, Shiva Salehpour, Teri Stamen, Alicia
Vannatter, Sandra Villasenor, and Nathan Walker.

Respondent Cheston Booth represented himself.

The matter was submitted on April 24, 2012.

The Riverside Unified School District

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Riverside Unified School District serves approximately 42,200

Kindergarten through 12th grade students who reside in the City of Riverside and the

1

unincorporated areas of Highgrove and Woodcrest. The District employs approximately
3,700 persons, 2,026 of whom are certificated employees. The District operates and
maintains 30 elementary schools, seven middle schools, five comprehensive high schools, a
continuation high school and one alternative school which includes a virtual school.

The District has a projected budget of approximately $296 million in revenues and

$329 in expenditures for the 2012-2013 school year, resulting in a $33 million shortfall.
About 85 percent of the District’s budget pays for employee salaries and benefits.

2.

The District is governed by an elected five-member Board of Education. Rick
Miller, Ph.D., is the District Superintendent and Chief Executive Officer. Susan Mills is the
Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources. Lou Mason is the Director of Certificated
Personnel and Human Resources.

The Fiscal Crisis

3.

Public schools rely on financing from the State of California. A school district

cannot determine the level of state funding it will receive until the state budget is chaptered,
an event that is supposed to occur each year in late June. Before then, a school district’s
governing board, which has the duty to produce and file a balanced budget with the County
Department of Education, must take steps to ensure that financial ends meet if the worst-case
financial scenario develops.

California’s recent economic problems have had a crippling impact on the Riverside

Unified School District and other public school districts. If the District cannot meet its
financial obligations, County Office of Education has the authority to intervene and take over
the District’s operations.

The District’s Response

4.

In response to the anticipated budgetary shortfall for the 2012-2013 school

year, District administrators reviewed services and staffing. The District embarked upon a
program to trim its budget. The district decided to reduce expenditures for instructional
materials, to decrease classified staff, and to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services
provided by credentialed employees.

5.

In early February 2012, in preparation for a recommendation that particular

kinds of services be reduced or eliminated, the Board adopted criteria relating to the retention
of certificated employees possessing special training or experience in order to retain
employees possessing a Bilingual Cross-Cultural Language and Academic Development
Certificate (BCLAD). The skipping of elementary school teachers holding BCLAD
certification is discussed in greater detail in Factual Finding 11A.

6.

On March 5, 2012, following a thorough review of the District’s budgetary

situation and financial projections for the 2012-2013 school year, District staff recommended

2

to the Board that the Board adopt Resolution No. 2011/2012-42. After deliberation, the
Board adopted that resolution, which provides:

WHEREAS, on February 29, 2012, the Governing Board of the
Riverside Unified School District (District) adopted budget
mitigation measures which, in part, provide the basis for the
reduction or discontinuance in particular kinds of services; and

WHEREAS, on February 6, 2012, pursuant to the provisions of
California Education Code Section 44955(b), the Governing
Board of the District adopted criteria to determine the seniority
rank order for employees whose seniority began on the same
day (commonly known as “tie-breaking criteria”). Such criteria
are required to differentiate between employees based on an
objective expression of the District’s needs should it become
necessary to determine the order of termination for employees
who first rendered paid service as a certificated probationary
employee to the District on the same day; and

WHEREAS, on February 6, 2012, pursuant to the provisions of
California Education Code Section 44955(d), the Governing
Board of the District adopted criteria to retain certificated
employees who possess special training or experience
(commonly referred to as skipping criteria). Such criteria are
required to retain certificated employees who possess special
training or experience, which other certificated employees with
more seniority do not possess, to teach a specific course of
study; and

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that pursuant
to Education Code Sections 44955 and 44949 that the
Governing Board of the District has determined:

That it shall be necessary to reduce or discontinue the

1.
particular kinds of services of the District as itemized in Exhibit
"A", attached hereto, at the close of the current school year.

That it shall be necessary to terminate at the end of the

2.
2011-12 school year, the employment of certain certificated
employees of the District as a result of this reduction or
discontinuance in particular kinds of services.

3.
The Superintendent is directed to send appropriate
notices to all employees whose services shall be terminated by
virtue of this action. Nothing herein shall be deemed to confer

3

any status or rights upon temporary or categorically funded
project certificated employees in addition to those specifically
granted to them by statute.

PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Board of Education this 5th
day of March, 2012 . . . .

Exhibit A to Resolution No. 2011/2012-42 provides:

EXHIBIT A

Services

1.

2.

Elementary Teachers

Secondary Teachers:

Life Science
PE
Social Science
Health
Spanish
French
English
Math
Special Education (Mild-Moderate)

Number of
Full Time Equivalent
Positions

45.4

1.0
2.0
2.0
1.2
1.6
0.6
16.0
3.0
0.8

6.2

79.8

3.

Counselors

Total Full Time Equivalent Reduction

The Particular Kinds of Services

7.

The services identified in Exhibit A were the kinds of services that could be

reduced lawfully under the Education Code. The Governing Board’s enactment of
Resolution No. 2011/2012-42 was neither arbitrary nor capricious; its enactment was well
within the Governing Board’s discretion; no particular kind of service was lowered to a level
below that mandated by state or federal law; the enactment of Resolution No. 2011/2012-42
related solely to the economic crisis and the Governing Board’s duty to balance the budget.

4

The District’s Seniority List

8.

The District maintains a seniority list, an evolving document that is updated as

new certificated employees are hired and as other employees retire, resign, or otherwise
become separated from service. The seniority list is a spreadsheet that is organized from the
District’s most senior certificated employee to the most recently hired certificated employee.
The list contains each employee’s seniority date, the site where the employee most recently
provided services, the employee’s name, assignment, status (tenured, probationary, or
otherwise), the employee’s English Language (EL) certification, the kind(s) of credential(s)
the employee holds, the kind(s) of academic degree(s) the employee holds, and a column in
which tie-breaking criteria are tabulated.1

In December 2011, when it became apparent that a reduction in force might become

necessary, the District forwarded the seniority list to all school sites and directed site
supervisors to distribute the list to certificated employees for review and, if necessary,
correction. Three days were set aside to enable certificated employees to meet with
administrative staff to discuss any concerns. In February 2012, letters concerning the
accuracy of the seniority list were sent to all certificated employees whose employment
status was believed to be at risk as a result of this reduction in force proceeding, with the
request that each employee review the list and verify or update his or her seniority
information; if an employee did not contact District administrative staff and provide updated
information in a timely manner, the staff concluded that the information set forth in the
seniority list was correct.

The Issuance of Preliminary Layoff Notices

9.

Using the updated seniority list, Resolution No. 2011/2012-42, the tie-

breaking criteria, and considering positive attrition, the administrative staff identified those
certificated employees who should receive preliminary layoff notices and those who should
not. Whenever an employee whose particular kind of service was being eliminated by
Resolution No. 2011/2012-42 and who was identified as being in line to receive a
preliminary layoff notice, that employee’s seniority and credentials were carefully examined

1

The Board established criteria to determine the seniority rank order for employees

having the same seniority date under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b).
Under the Board’s criteria, two points are awarded for a Math, Science or Special Education
credential; three points are awarded for holding a BCLAD if it is required for the current
assignment; two points are awarded for holding a BCLAD if it is not required for the current
assignment; one point is awarded for holding a CLAD or equivalent authorization; one point
is awarded for each additional bachelor’s degree an employee holds after the first bachelor’s
degree; one point is awarded for each master’s degree; one point is awarded for each
doctorate; one point is awarded for each preliminary credential the employee holds; and two
points are awarded for each clear or life credential the employee holds. Total points were
added and that figure was placed in the far right column of the seniority list.

5

to determine if he or she had the seniority, credentials, and competence to “bump” a junior
employee and assume the more junior employee’s position.

Preliminary layoff notices were issued to the certificated employees whose
employment the District staff determined was subject to reduction or elimination as a result
of the enactment of Resolution No. 2011/2012-42. The employees, who are respondents in
this proceeding, included: Erin Aceves; Patricia Ascencio; Cheston Booth; Vanessa Bowley;
Terrilynn Bresette-Neve; Catherine Breyer; Keren Broderick; Gregory Cabrera; Jennifer
Cao; Tracie Carroll; Natalie Davis; David Dillon; Jennifer Foster; Alicia Garcia; Melissa
Gill; Amanda Hobbs; Danielle Ippolito; Laurie Irvin; Joanna Jimenez; Kevin LeDuc; Brandi
Marsh; Jayme McCabe; Kristina McCann; Kristi McCormack; Lisamarie Orosco; Justin
Partridge; Elisabeth Perales; Randi Potwardski; Christina Ramirez; Jennifer Riddle; Sylwia
Rusilowicz; Shiva Salehpour; Stefanie Santana; Teri Stamen; Marisol Stokes; Brenda
Valdez; Alicia Vannatter; Susan Vara-Flores; Vanessa Vasquez-Gonzalez; Sandra
Villasenor; Nathan Walker.

The Administrative Hearing

10.

On April 24, 2012, the record in the reduction in force proceeding was opened.

The District rescinded and withdrew the preliminarily layoff notices served on
respondents Stefanie Santana and Vanessa Bowley. There was no objection to the District
doing so.

Jurisdictional documents were introduced; the caption was amended; opening
comments were given by an attorney for the District; a stipulation concerning jurisdictional
matters and several exhibits was received; sworn testimony was taken; documentary
evidence was received; Director Mason testified about the budgetary crisis, the impact of that
crisis on the District’s operations, the layoff process, the seniority list, and the District’s
determination to retain the services of certain highly qualified employees. David Haglund,
the Director of Educational Options Center (EOC), testified about the need to retain the
services of five junior teachers who provide services in the Riverside Virtual School. Alicia
Garcia, David Dillon, Cheston Booth, and Justin Partridge testified about their particular
situations and concerns. Following the taking of evidence, closing comments were given;
the record was closed; and the matter was submitted.

11.

Skipping:

A.

BCLAD/Dual Immersion: Director Mason testified that the District has

a need to retain elementary school teachers who hold BCLAD certification for its dual
immersion program. The District intends that all elementary school teachers who hold a
BCLAD certification will be required use that certification in the 20122-2013 school year.2

2

Teachers holding a BCLAD Certificate are authorized to provide services to English

Learners in Instruction for English language development (ELD), meaning instruction

6

The Board’s resolution did not refer specifically to skipping elementary school
teachers with BCAD certification, but the Education Code does not require that skipping be
contained in a Board resolution in order to be effective.

B.

EOC/Virtual School: Dave Haglund is the Director of Educational

Options Center (EOC), a District campus which currently provides alternatives to traditional
educational programs at several schools on EOC’s campus (Opportunity, Raincross, and
Summit View) as well as the Riverside Virtual School.

The Riverside Virtual School began operations in the 2005-2006 school year,

providing on-line educational services to students enrolled in the 3rd through 12th grades.
There are nine teachers assigned to the Riverside Virtual School who provide services there
and elsewhere on the EOC campus, and 12 teachers who are not on the EOC campus who
provide part-time services at the Riverside Virtual School. Educational services are provided
to 175 full-time students and to 650 part-time students who attend the Riverside Virtual
School.

Younger students attending the Riverside Virtual School experience a blend of
traditional book/paper learning activities and on-line activities. The Riverside Virtual School
provides support to the parents involved in the home schooling of students attending the
school. The elementary school and middle school curriculum are unique and have been
developed by credentialed employees providing services at EOC. The curriculum is “not out
of a can.”

The Riverside Virtual School maintains a public high school that was the first virtual

school accredited by WASC and by the University of California. The high school offers
interactive online classes for students within the District and to students who attend high

designed specifically for EL students to develop their listening, speaking, reading, and
writing skills in English, also known as English as a Second Language (ESL) or Teaching
English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL); in Specially Designed Academic
Instruction Delivered in English (SDAIE), meaning instruction in a subject area, delivered in
English, that is specially designed to provide EL students with access to the curriculum; and
in Content Instruction Delivered in the Primary Language means instruction for EL students
in a subject area delivered in the students’ primary language. Passing rigorous testing is
required to hold BCLAD certification.

The District has a dual immersion program that integrates language minority students

(English Learners) and language majority students (English Speakers) in a classroom to
develop bilingualism and biliteracy in English and another language. Under state law,
parents of English Learners must sign yearly waivers of consent prior to placement of their
child in a two-way immersion program. Additionally, before enrollment in the program,
California requires English Learners (under ten years of age) to be placed in an English
language classroom for 30 calendar days before placement. Teachers providing educational
services in the dual immersion program must hold a BCLAD certification.

7

schools located elsewhere in Southern California through partnership agreements between
the District and the home district of those students. The high school curriculum has been
developed by credentialed employees providing services at EOC. Director Haglund
established that accreditation requires that EOC instructors must possess a teaching
credential in the academic area in which instruction is provided.

Director Haglund established that Wes Kreisel, Justin Partridge, Nathan Walker,
Jerome Hill, and David Dillon are employed at EOC, that each employee provides services at
EOC and the Riverside Virtual School; that each employee has played a major role in the
development of curriculum and the delivery of educational services at the Riverside Virtual
School as a result of his employment; that each employee has specialized training through
the Leading Edge and 3D Game training; and that EOC and the Riverside Virtual School’s
failure to retain each of these credentialed employees would have a devastating effect on the
development of programs and the delivery of instruction.

The Board’s resolution did not refer to skipping EOC teachers who provide services

at the Riverside Virtual School, but the Education Code does not require that skipping be
contained in a Board resolution in order to be effective.

12.

Alicia Garcia testified. Ms. Garcia holds a clear multiple subject teaching

credential. Her first day of paid employment with the District in a probationary position –
her seniority date – occurred on August 22, 2007. She is a tenured employee who received a
preliminary layoff notice.

In 2008, Ms. Garcia received a master’s degree in Education and Instructional
Technology from National University. In order to obtain that degree, Ms. Garcia completed
required coursework, developed on-line curriculum, and practiced teaching on-line courses to
2nd and 4th grade elementary school students.

Ms. Garcia has more seniority than Jerome Hill, who teaches at the Riverside Virtual

School at EOC. Ms. Garcia’s credential enables her to teach the subjects that Mr. Hill
teaches. She also could teach 12th grade Language Arts if she held Board authorization. Ms.
Garcia would happily complete training the Leading Edge and 3d Game training to retain her
employment. Ms. Garcia would like to teach on-line courses and she believes that she has
been trained to do so. She has developed on-line curriculum and provided actual on-line
elementary school instruction to 2nd and 4th grade students to obtain her master’s degree.

Ms. Garcia is an enthusiastic, highly motivated, credentialed employee. Her
testimony was provided in a credible manner. Ms. Garcia did not apply for employment at
EOC in 2009 when applications to work at that site were circulated. Ms. Garcia has not
taught actual on-line courses and she has not been employed at the Riverside Virtual School.

Ms. Garcia seeks to “bump” into the position Mr. Hill would hold if he were skipped.
Unfortunately, Ms. Garcia does not possess the special training and experience necessary to
teach at the Riverside Virtual School, and she cannot bump into Mr. Hill’s position.

8

13.

The Rescission of Five Preliminary Layoff Notices:

During the reduction in force proceeding, the District rescinded and withdrew the
preliminary layoff notices previously issued to Wes Kreisel, Justin Partridge, Nathan Walker,
Jerome Hill, and David Dillon. The District’s decision in this regard was not arbitrary,
capricious, or in bad faith. For each employee, the District, through Director Haglund’s
credible testimony, demonstrated that the District has a specific need for each employee to
teach a specific course or course of study at EOC and the Riverside Virtual School, and that
each employee possesses special training and experience necessary to teach that course or
course of study which no other credentialed employees with more seniority, including Ms.
Garcia, possesses.

The District’s decision to rescind and withdraw the preliminary layoff notices
previously served on Wes Kreisel, Justin Partridge, Nathan Walker, Jerome Hill, and David
Dillon is sustained and upheld.

14.

David Dillon’s Tenured Status: According to the District’s current seniority

list, David Dillon possesses a seniority date of February 2, 2007, which is the date he began
providing staff development services under a five year grant. Mr. Dillon later became
employed as a temporary employee under a temporary contract in the 2009-2010 school year.

Mr. Dillon contends that he is a tenured employee, and that he should not be listed as
a probationary employee on the seniority list, and that his seniority date should relate back to
the date on which he began service under the five year grant in February 2007.

Attorneys for the District believed that Mr. Dillon probably was a tenured employee,

but that his first date of paid probationary service arose out of service under his temporary
employment contract, not service provided under the five year grant, and that Mr. Dillon
became tenured in November 2012.

Mr. Dillon’s tenured status and his seniority date is not relevant to the disposition of
this proceeding in light of the District’s rescission and withdrawal of the preliminary layoff
notice previously served upon him, and the sustaining of the District’s action in that regard.
However, Mr. Dillon raised the issue of his seniority date in this reduction in force
proceeding, thereby preserving the issue for determination.

The evidence concerning Mr. Dillon having acquired tenured status was compelling,
but the evidence concerning his exact seniority date was inconclusive. To resolve this issue,
it is recommended that the District and Mr. Dillon meet and confer to establish his precise
seniority date. If an agreement cannot be reached, then Mr. Dillon shall have the right to
raise the issue of his precise seniority date at any reduction in force proceeding held in the
future. It is not necessary to resolve the issue in this proceeding because Mr. Dillon will not
receive a final layoff notice.

9

15.

Cheston Booth’s Seniority Date: Notice is taken of the Commission on

Teacher Credentialing website, which represents that Mr. Booth obtained a preliminary
single subject teaching credential in Social Sciences on July 15, 2008.

Beginning in 2008, Mr. Booth provided substitute teaching services for the District,
primarily on a daily basis although some of his substitute teaching assignments lasted much
longer. Mr. Booth made a very favorable impression on administrators within the District,
including Director Haglund and Assistant Superintendent Mills. Mr. Booth did not,
however, provide substitute teaching services in one classroom for a sufficiently long enough
period of time to enable him to attain first year probationary status.

Mr. Booth’s first paid day of employment in a probationary capacity occurred on

August 25, 2011. Because of his familiarity with the District’s operations and his previous
substitute teaching experience, Mr. Booth was not required to attend a mandatory orientation
for newly hired employees who had no experience with the District, an orientation for which
the new teaches were paid. In fact, Mr. Booth was not aware of that mandatory orientation;
if Mr. Booth had known about the orientation, had known that he would have been paid for
attending it, and had he known that attending the orientation would have affected his
seniority date, Mr. Booth gladly would have attended it.

Mr. Booth noted that Nicole Scribner holds a single subject teaching credential in

Social Sciences and that she has a seniority date of August 24, 2011, which is one day before
Mr. Booth’s seniority date. Unlike Mr. Booth, Ms. Scribner had absolutely no experience
teaching with the District before she was hired, so she was required to attend a mandatory
orientation on August 24, 2011. In doing so, and because Ms. Scribner was paid for
attending that mandatory training, the District assigned an earlier seniority date for Ms.
Scriber than Mr. Booth’s seniority date. Even so, Ms. Scribner’s employment for the 2012-
2013 school year is subject to termination as a result of this reduction in force proceeding.

Mr. Booth argued that he should hold a seniority date before Ms. Scribner’s by reason

of his substitute teaching experience, and that it was unjust, unfair, and inequitable for the
District to assign to him a more recent seniority date than that assigned to Ms. Scribner. Mr.
Booth was unable to state, however, the seniority date the District should have assigned to
him. He conceded that he did not serve 75 percent of the school days during one school year
in a single substitute position to enable him to attain probationary status under the Education
Code, although he was a substitute teacher in several classes for 75 percent of a school year
before he was hired as a probationary employee.

Unfortunately, the Education Code does not provide a remedy for persons in Mr.

Booth’s situation. Instead, Education Code section 44845 provides that a person is deemed
to have been employed on the date upon which they first rendered paid service in a
probationary position.

16.

Justin Partridge’s Status: Mr. Partridge’s first paid date of probationary service

was August 18, 2010. Mr. Partridge holds a preliminary single subject teaching credential

10

in Science: Biological Sciences (Examination); Foundational-Level General Science
(Examination); Science: Geosciences (Examination); and Foundational-Level Mathematics
(Examination). This credential authorizes Mr. Partridge to teach the subject areas listed in
grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.

Mr. Partridge is one of the five teachers employed at the Riverside Virtual School that
the District proposed to skip; in this reduction in force proceeding, the District rescinded and
withdrew the preliminary layoff notice that was served on Mr. Partridge. Thus, Mr.
Partridge’s employment is not subject to termination in this reduction in force proceeding.

Mr. Partridge observed that another credentialed employee – Lisa Douglas – holds the

same seniority date and possesses a foundational level math credential, but has fewer tie-
breaking points than Mr. Partridge. Ms. Douglas was not served with a preliminary layoff
notice. Mr. Partridge pointed out that he was authorized to teach the classes Ms. Douglas
was teaching and that the District should not have served him with a preliminary layoff
notice because he could have bumped into Ms. Douglas’s position, which was not subject to
the reduction in force proceeding.

Mr. Partridge observed that another credentialed employee – Tony Tadros – has a

November 18, 2010, seniority date, which is after Mr. Partridge’s seniority date, and that Mr.
Tadros also possesses a foundational level math credential. Mr. Tadros was not served with
a preliminary layoff notice. Mr. Partridge pointed out that he was authorized to teach the
classes Mr. Tadros was teaching and that the District should not have served him with a
preliminary layoff notice because he could have bumped into Mr. Tadros’s position, which
was not subject to the reduction in force proceeding.

Mr. Partridge’s observations were acute, but of no moment since his employment

cannot not be eliminated in this reduction in force proceeding because the District has
rescinded and withdrawn the preliminary layoff notice previously served on him. Mr.
Partridge suffered no prejudice.

However, Mr. Partridge raised the issue of his position on the seniority list in relation

to Ms. Douglas in this reduction in force proceeding, thereby preserving the issue for
determination.

The evidence concerning Mr. Partridge holding more status was compelling. To

resolve this issue, it is recommended that the District and Mr. Partridge meet and confer to
establish his seniority status as it relates to Ms. Douglas. Ms. Douglas should be entitled to
notice of and the opportunity to attend that conference. If an agreement cannot be reached,
then Mr. Partridge shall have the right to raise the issue of his placement on the seniority list
as it relates to Ms. Douglas at any reduction in force proceeding held in the future. It is not
necessary to resolve the issue in this proceeding because Mr. Partridge will not receive a
final layoff notice.

11

The Reduction in Force Proceeding

17.

The enactment of Resolution No. 2011/2012-42 was the result of a budgetary

crisis; it was enacted in good faith; enacting the resolution was in the best interest of the
District and its students. The District complied with all jurisdictional requirements. The
District used seniority, credentials, and competence as the basis for “bumping” and retaining
the services of senior, competent, and appropriately credentialed employees to provide
services that are being provided by more junior employees. The tie-breaking criteria were
reasonable and were applied in an evenhanded manner. The District demonstrated good
cause to support the skipping of elementary school teachers holding BCLAD certifications
and the five EOC employees who provided services at the Riverside Virtual School. The
enactment of Resolution No. 2011/2012-42 does not require that the dispute over Mr.
Dillon’s tenured status or seniority date be resolved since Mr. Dillon’s services will be
retained. The enactment of Resolution No. 2011/2012-42 does not require that Mr.
Partridge’s position on the seniority list as it relates to Ms. Douglas be resolved since Mr.
Partridge’s services will be retained. Ms. Garcia is not entitled to occupy the position at the
Riverside Virtual School that Mr. Hill will retain. Mr. Booth did not establish that he held
any seniority date other than August 25, 2011.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Statutory Authority - Reduction in Force Proceedings

1.

Education Code section 44949 provides in part:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee . . . that it has been recommended that the notice be
given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . .

12

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency
therein, except that all of the following shall apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any,
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation
and he or she shall be notified of this five-day period for filing
in the accusation.

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the
Government Code shall be available only if request is made
therefor within 15 days after service of the accusation, and the
notice required by Section 11505 of the Government Code shall
so indicate.

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be
prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds . . .

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage

13

prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the
employee. . . .

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) any
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the
Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) which
occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which
occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be
extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides in part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her
position for causes other than those specified . . . and no
probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position
for cause other than as specified . . .

(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school
year . . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the
district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in
the district, the governing board may terminate the services of
not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at
the close of the school year. Except as otherwise provided by
statute, the services of no permanent employee may be
terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less
seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render . . .

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for

14

determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would
not exist without such a requirement.

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given before
the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and
services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of
the order in which they were employed, as determined by the
board in accordance with the provisions of Sections 44844 and
44845. In the event that a permanent or probationary employee
is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the
ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments
in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any
service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to
render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not
previously taught, and for which he or she does not have a
teaching credential or which is not within the employee’s major
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject
matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of
seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to
teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide services
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that
the certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide
those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the
laws.

15

Jurisdiction

3.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied
as to all respondents.

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

4.

A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service should be
reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the governing board acted unfairly
or improperly simply because it made a decision it was empowered to make. (Rutherford v.
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.) A school board’s decision to reduce or
discontinue a particular kind of service need not be tied in with any statistical computation.
It is within the discretion of a school board to determine the amount by which it will reduce
or discontinue a particular kind of service as long as the school district does not reduce a
service below the level required by law. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144
Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)

Competence

5.

The Education Code leaves to a school board’s discretion the determination of
whether an employee must also be competent to be employed in a vacant position in addition
to possessing seniority. The term “competent” relates to an individual’s specific skills or
qualifications, including academic background, training, credentials, and experience, but it
does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance. (Forker v. Board of Trustees
(1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)

Seniority, Bumping, Skipping

6.

Seniority: Under Education Code section 44845, seniority is determined by

the date a certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”

7.

Education Code section 44846 provides in part: “The governing board shall
have power and it shall be its duty to correct any errors discovered from time to time in its
records showing the order of employment.”

8.

The Statutory Scheme: Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff

statute, provides in subdivision (b), in part:

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while . . . any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is
certificated and competent to render.

16

Essentially this statutory language provides “bumping” rights for senior certificated

and competent employees, and “skipping” authority to retain junior employees who are
certificated and competent to render services which more senior employees are not.

9.

Bumping: The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b),
to determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be
assigned to another position. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th
127, 136-137.)

10.

Skipping: Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to

subdivision (b) where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific
course of study and that a junior certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated employee does not possess.
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at pp. 134-135.) There is nothing in the statute
that requires such special needs be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job
descriptions, or program requirements. (Id., at p. 138.)

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district and
establishing requirements for employment. This discretion encompasses determining the
training and experience necessary for particular positions. Similarly, school districts have
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)

It is significant that the statute and decisional law provide a district with this

authority, and do not mention specifically a district’s governing board.

Credit for Temporary or Substitute Services

11.

Education Code section 44918 provides in part:

(a) Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary
employee, who serves during one school year for at least
75 percent of the number of days the regular schools of
the district were maintained in that school year and has
performed the duties normally required of a certificated
employee of the school district, shall be deemed to have
served a complete school year as a probationary
employee if employed as a probationary employee for
the following school year.
[¶] . . . [¶]

(d) Those employees classified as substitutes, and who
are employed to serve in an on-call status to replace

17

absent regular employees on a day-to-day basis shall not
be entitled to the benefits of this section . . .

12.

Section 44918 does not make reemployment rights dependent upon one’s

formal classification as a “day-to-day” or “long-term” substitute. The statute states only two
classifications, “temporary” employees and “substitute” employees. Employees classified as
“substitute” are excluded from statutory reemployment benefits if they “are employed to
serve in an on-call status to replace absent regular employees on a day-to-day basis.” The
issue is not whether an individual was formally classified as “day-to-day” or “long-term,” but
whether that individual was employed to serve in an on-call status to replace absent regular
employees on a day-to-day basis. (Eureka Teacher’s Assn. v. Board of Education (1988) 202
Cal.App.3d 469, 473.) Further, tacking is restricted by statute to situations in which the
individual serving in a substitute or temporary capacity is “employed as a probationary
employee for the following school year.”

13. With regard to his service as a substitute teacher, Mr. Booth failed to establish

that he served 75 percent of the number of days the regular schools of the District were
maintained in that school year and that he performed the duties normally required of a
certificated employee District over that period of time and that he was employed by the
District as a probationary employee the following school year.

Mr. Booth’s seniority date was determined in accordance with the provisions of the

Education Code.

Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees

14.

As a result of the Governing Board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of

service, cause exists under the Education Code to authorize the District to give final notice to
those respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment will be terminated at
the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed by the District
for the 2012-2013 school year.

Determination

15.

The charges set forth in the Accusation were sustained by a preponderance of

the evidence except as otherwise stated herein. Good cause supported the skipping of certain
certificated employees. The rescission and withdrawal of the preliminary layoff notices
serviced on certain employees was appropriate, based upon objective standards, in the best
interest of the District and the students thereof, and was done in good faith. The Board’s
adoption of Resolution No. 2011/2012-42 was related to the welfare of the District and its
pupils. The District made necessary assignments and reassignments in such a manner that
the most senior credentialed employees were retained to render services that their seniority
and qualifications entitled them to provide.

18

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the Riverside Unified School District

issue final layoff notices to the following certificated employees: Erin Aceves; Patricia
Ascencio; Cheston Booth; Terrilynn Bresette-Neve; Catherine Breyer; Keren Broderick;
Gregory Cabrera; Jennifer Cao; Tracie Carroll; Natalie Davis; Jennifer Foster; Alicia Garcia;
Melissa Gill; Amanda Hobbs; Danielle Ippolito; Laurie Irvin; Joanna Jimenez; Kevin LeDuc;
Brandi Marsh; Jayme McCabe; Kristina McCann; Kristi McCormack; Lisamarie Orosco;
Elisabeth Perales; Randi Potwardski; Christina Ramirez; Jennifer Riddle; Sylwia Rusilowicz;
Shiva Salehpour; Teri Stamen; Marisol Stokes; Brenda Valdez; Alicia Vannatter; Susan
Vara-Flores; Vanessa Vasquez-Gonzalez; Sandra Villasenor

Dated: April 26, 2012

________________________________
JAMES AHLER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

19

