BEFORE THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of
Certain Certificated Employees of the Los
Angeles Unified School District,

OAH No. 2012020830

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Eric Sawyer, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 16-19, April 23-26, April 30-May 3,
May 7-10, May 14, May 17, and June 4, 2012, in Los Angeles, California.

The Los Angeles Unified School District (District) was represented by Marcos F.
Hernandez, and Aram Kouyoumdjian, both Assistant General Counsel with the District.

Respondents Victoria Bareghamyan and Gregory Calvert appeared on the first day of

hearing to represent themselves, and subsequently appeared to testify on the days noted on
the record. Respondent Roger Wilson also appeared on the first day of the hearing, but was
subsequently dismissed as described herein. Respondents Lorcan Kilroy, Carole Sielaff,
David Frankenthal, Darin Gray, Carlos Madrigal, Marcy Drexler, Justin Lauer, and Cynthia
Diaz also represented themselves, and appeared on the days noted on the record to testify.
Respondents Rosana Jeronymo, Arlene Waszczak, Hing Kee Chow, and Laurie Carter
initially appeared on their own behalf to request a continuance of the hearing, but thereafter
did not appear at any time during the hearing.

The Respondents identified in exhibit 402 were represented by Lawrence B. Trygstad,

Esq., and Richard J. Schwab, Esq., of Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad.

After the final day of testimony on May 17, 2012, the matter was continued for oral
argument to June 4, 2012. In the interim, the following parties submitted closing briefs on
May 25, 2012, and some submitted response briefs on or about May 30, 2012, marked as
indicated: the District’s closing and response briefs collectively as exhibit M; the majority of
Respondents’ closing brief as exhibit N; Respondent Gray’s closing and response briefs
collectively as exhibit O; Respondent Bareghamyan’s response brief as exhibit P;
Respondent Sielaff’s closing brief as exhibit Q; Respondent Kilroy’s closing brief as exhibit
R; and other documents submitted by Respondent Kilroy, and described on the record during
oral argument, marked as exhibits S (subject to a sealing order marked as exhibit X), T, U
and W. The ALJ issued an order requesting the parties to discuss certain issues during oral
argument, marked as exhibit V. The record was closed and the matter was submitted for
decision at the close of oral argument on June 4, 2012.

1

The hearing of this matter was continued various times and for reasons described in

more detail in the written orders granting the continuances. Pursuant to Education Code
sections 44949, subdivision (c), and 44955, subdivision (c), the continuances extended the
deadline for submission of the proposed decision such that it is timely issued.

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

3.

4.

Vivian K. Ekchian, the District’s Chief Human Resources Officer, made and

filed the Accusations in her official capacity.

Respondents at all times relevant were certificated District employees.

The District serves approximately 600,000 students and employs

approximately 40,000 certificated employees.

On February 14, 2012, Ms. Ekchian recommended to the District’s Board of

Education (Board) that it authorize the following reductions in force of permanent
certificated employees and that notice be given to a corresponding number of employees that
their services will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year:1

A. To discontinue the Adult and Career Education (ACE) program in its

entirety, no later than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year.

B. To discontinue the Early Education (ECE) program in its entirety, no later

than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year.

C. To reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services of certified, permanent

employees, in various teaching and support services positions, pursuant to Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955, no later than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year.

5.

On February 14, 2012, as reflected in Board Report Number 148-11/12

(Resolution), the Board adopted Ms. Ekchian’s recommendations and directed the District’s
Human Resources (HR) Division to send notices to all affected certificated permanent
employees.

1 It was also recommended to the Board that all certificated administrators,
supervisory employees, and confidential employees be released and/or reassigned due to
reasons including, but not limited to, funding, restructuring, loss of confidence or for cause,
in accordance with Education Code section 44951; and that all ACE and ECE program non-
permanent certificated employees be laid off.

2

6.

On or before March 15, 2012, the individuals who are identified in exhibits

32-57 (with the exceptions noted below), including Respondents, were given written notice
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be
required for the 2012-2013 school year (lay off notice).

7.

A total of 4,296 individuals timely submitted a request for hearing upon

receipt of the written lay off notices, and were thereafter timely served with an Accusation, a
Notice of Defense, and copies of pertinent provisions of the Government and Education
Codes. Those individuals are identified in exhibit 60.

8.

Of the Respondents, 2,726 timely submitted a Notice of Defense, which

contained a request for the hearing that ensued. Those Respondents are identified in exhibit
61. Thirty six other Respondents did not timely submit Notices of Defense, but were excused
from doing so by ruling of the ALJ after they established good cause by declarations. Those
36 Respondents are identified in exhibit 401. Three other Respondents, Victoria
Bareghamyan, Graciela Ortiz and Susan Martinez, were also excused from timely submitting
Notices of Defense by ruling of the ALJ after they established good cause.

9.

The District misidentified the following Respondent science teachers as

performing assignments that are subject to lay off when, in actuality, science teachers are not
being laid off. Therefore, the Accusations against these Respondents are dismissed and they
shall not be laid off: Lynn Aafedt; Tove Aitchison; Nicole Allison; William Gabriel; Jennifer
Horton; Nadezhda Kostritskaya; Petra Krumland; Susan Smith; Haikaz Vardavarian; Roger
Wilson; and James Womack. These Respondents are identified in exhibit 70.

10.

The District inadvertently failed to send lay off notices to the following

Respondents, who are also identified in exhibit 73: John Beilock; Monica Hein; Lisa Jordan;
Shelley Lee; and Heidi Nariman. Pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a),
the Accusations against those individuals shall be dismissed and they shall not be laid off.

11.

The District sent to each employee one lay off notice by regular mail and one

by certified mail, for a total of almost 24,000 pieces of mail. However, the District
discovered after the March 15th lay off notice deadline that the lay off notice sent by
certified mail to Respondent Aide Valenzuela had been returned by the United States Postal
Service (USPS) because it was missing postage. The lay off notice sent to Respondent
Valenzuela by regular mail was not returned to the District. No evidence was presented
indicating that Respondent Valenzuela did not receive her lay off notice.

12.

At or about the time of the March 15th lay off notice deadline, the following

Respondents (identified in exhibit 74) changed their address of record with the District:
Stefanie Barbee; Matthew Burger; Lorraine Bustos; Stephanie Kmiec; Kristy Lee; Anna
Martinez-Mollica; Dalia Rodriguez; Hazel Sanchez; and Alexandria Wagner. The District
did not discover those address changes in time, so the lay off notices issued to these
Respondents were mailed to their former addresses of record with the District. No evidence
was presented indicating that these Respondents did not receive their lay off notices.

3

13.

As to the five Respondents listed in Factual Finding 10, there are no teachers
being retained by the District junior to Heidi Nariman and Shelley Lee in their subject areas.
The most senior Respondents corresponding to the subject areas of the other three
Respondents in question are James Pulliam, Rene Fuentes, and Seanean Shanahan.

Reduction and Elimination of Particular Kinds of Services

14.

The Resolution provides for the reduction or elimination of the following

particular kinds of services:

Particular Kinds of Services (PKS)
Permanent Elementary Teachers

Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Positions
2,645

Permanent Secondary/Single Subject Teachers

871

* Art
* Business Education
* Computer Science
* English
* Foreign Language
Spanish
French

* Health
* Home Economics
* Industrial Arts

Graphic Arts
Auto Mechanics
Drafting
Electronics
Woodworking

* Music
* Physical Education
* Social Studies

* Librarians
* Psychologists
* Psychiatric

Social Workers

* Nurses

95
11
27
263

74
17
67
10

5
3
2
2
5
66
111
113

50
188
49

75

Permanent Support Services Personnel
19
* Elementary Counselors
118
* Secondary Counselors
90
* Pupil Services &

Attendance Counselors

589

========================================
4,105

Total FTE Positions

4

15.

The Resolution also provides for the complete elimination of all positions in

the ACE and ECE programs. The total number of positions being eliminated was not
established.

16.

The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services as

described in Education Code section 44955.

17.

Prior to adoption of the Resolution, the District considered all known

positively assured attrition in determining the number of lay off notices to be served on its
employees. In so doing, the Board considered attrition that is projected to occur through June
30, 2012, based on historical data from prior school years.2 Thus, the District has actually
accounted for attrition that was expected to occur through March 15th.

18.

The decision to eliminate the ACE and ECE programs and to reduce the

above-described particular kinds of services was based on a fiscal solvency problem related
to the current state budget crisis. District staff anticipated a budget deficit in the hundreds of
millions of dollars for the next school year. To help the District create a balanced budget for
next school year, the Board determined that the above-described actions are necessary. The
Board wants to avoid having an unbalanced budget next school year for various reasons,
including that doing so may subject the District to penalties and intervention from the State
of California and the Los Angeles County Office of Education (LACOE), as well as lowering
its credit rating and making it more expensive to borrow money from open markets.

19.

The decision to eliminate the ACE and ECE programs and to reduce the

above-described particular kinds of services will not reduce services below mandated levels.

20.

The Board’s decision to eliminate the ACE and ECE programs and to reduce

the above-described particular kinds of services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was
a proper exercise of its discretion. The reduction and elimination of the above-described
services relates solely to the welfare of the schools in the District and its students.

Eliminating the ACE program

21.

Some Respondents contend that the District will not completely eliminate the

ACE program, but rather will resuscitate it to some extent by providing funding through a
Fiscal Stabilization Plan created by the District and Board. Some Respondents also argue
that the Board decided to eliminate funding for the ACE program before completing
procedural requirements imposed by law. The involved Respondents include David
Frankenthal, Cynthia B. Diaz, and Darin Gray. Some Respondents who work in the ACE
Division also made arguments as to their individual situations, which are discussed below.

2 In a PKS lay off, a governing board need only consider positively assured attrition

that occurred prior to the March 15th lay off notice deadline, not thereafter. (San Jose
Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635.)

5

22.

Some Respondents, primarily Respondent Gray, presented evidence indicating
that the Board and/or District has created a Fiscal Stabilization Plan which could result in the
restoration of money into the ACE budget. According to those scenarios, some money may
be restored into the budgets of the Regional Occupational Center Program (RCOP) and the
Alternative Education and Work Center (AEWC), which are both part of ACE. However,
Respondents did not establish that these proposals have become final. Moreover, the
evidence indicated that the proposed funding restoration is based on the occurrence of future
events, such as a better state funding outlook in the Governor’s May Budget Revision, and
the successful outcome of an arbitration matter between the District and the union
representing the District’s certificated staff. While it appears that the District was successful
in the arbitration matter, it was not established that the Governor’s May Budget Revision was
more favorable in terms of public education funding. In fact, official notice is taken that the
May Budget Revision is bleak. According to the District’s Chief Financial Officer, Megan
Reilly, an unfavorable May Budget Revision could actually make the District’s financial
position more untenable, which would make a funding restoration of ACE more doubtful.
Under these circumstances, Respondents did not establish that the Board anticipated
restoring ACE funding when it passed the Resolution, or that it currently intends to do so.

23.

Respondent Diaz argued that state law (AB 189) requires a public hearing

must take place before categorical funding (including adult education) in Tier 3 is taken for
general fund use. She did not cite the particular provisions in question or show that AB 189
has been violated. In any event, the District has scheduled a public hearing regarding the
elimination of the ACE program in June, and the issue was vigorously discussed when the
Board adopted the Resolution in February 2012.

24.

Respondent Diaz also argues that Education Code section 52540 requires the

District to continue funding adult education for those who request English as a Second
Language courses. However, that provision applies to high school districts, not to unified
school districts such as the District.

25.

David Frankenthal. He is a substitute teacher in the adult school division. He

also proposed other arguments against the Board’s decision to eliminate ACE funding but
was precluded from doing so because the ALJ does not have jurisdiction in this matter to
decide such issues, for the reasons stated on the record during the hearing. As a day-to-day
substitute teacher in the adult school division, who is not a permanent certificated employee,
Respondent Frankenthal failed to establish that he has a seniority or RIF date with the
District, so his proposed testimony concerning his teaching career with the District was not
relevant and therefore precluded for the reasons also discussed on the record. He has not
established cause to be retained next school year.

26.

Cynthia Diaz. She is an assistant principal at an adult school. Her testimony
regarding her return rights to the adult education division should its funding be restored in
the future is beyond the jurisdiction of this proceeding. She has credentials allowing her to
teach at an adult school. Those credentials do not allow her to bump into a K-12 position.

6

27.

Darin Gray. He is a limited part-time employee of the AEWC. He has been
with the District in this capacity for 22 years. He testified that if funding for any portion of
ACE or AEWC will be restored, there would be no cause to lay him off. As discussed above,
it was not established that such is the case. In any event, as a non-permanent employee of the
District, Respondent Gray is not entitled to the protections of the lay off provisions of the
Education Code. (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (a).) He was given a lay off notice as a
precaution in case he attempted to argue he is a permanent certificated employee of the
District. He did not do so. Under these circumstances, no cause was established for him to be
retained next school year.

The Seniority List

28.

The collective bargaining agreement (CBA) between the District and its

certificated staff defines an employee’s seniority date as “the employee’s initial probationary
service date,” which in turn is defined as “the actual beginning of the probationary
assignment and not any date of a substitute or temporary assignment which was later deemed
to be probationary service for purposes of acquiring permanent status.” However, the
District’s permanent employees are laid off based on their “RIF” seniority dates, which the
District defines as the employees’ first date of service under a contract of employment. In an
effort to comply with Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City
School District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, the District determines RIF seniority dates by
giving credit to employees who previously served under “provisional” contracts so that they
receive credit for all time served under contracts of employment.

29.

In developing the Seniority List for lay off of its permanent employees, the

District used RIF seniority dates. The District’s Seniority List contains certificated
employees’ names, employee numbers, RIF seniority dates, current assignments and
locations, credentials and authorizations, and other pertinent information. The Seniority List
was developed using information from the District’s electronic database which contains
official District personnel records. Staff for the HR Division maintains, regularly reviews and
audits the information in the database. For the past few years, the District offered employees
opportunities to review the information contained in the Seniority List and to verify its
accuracy. The District sent rosters to each school site, and the principals and/or supervisors
reviewed the rosters with certificated employees to have them verify or correct the
information and sign the roster. The signed rosters were returned to the HR Division.

30.

31.

Except as noted below, the information on the Seniority List is accurate.

The District acknowledges that Respondents James Alaniz, April Arteaga,

Edna Briseno, and Selene Marin (identified in exhibit 72) have temporary contracts with the
District and were erroneously added to the Seniority List. These Respondents were given lay
off notices and were allowed to challenge their lay off in this matter, however, none of them
did. No cause was established for them to be retained next school year.

7

32.

The District used the Seniority List to determine which employees were to be

laid off and which were eligible to “bump” less senior employees currently assigned in the
various services being reduced. In determining who would be subject to lay off for each kind
of particular service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by
attrition, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.

Tie-Breaking Criterion

33.

The Board’s Resolution also established a tie-breaking criterion to determine
the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same
date, in which case “the order of layoff will be based on District seniority number as
determined by Article XI, Section 6.2 of the [CBA], as determined at the time of hire.”

34.

Pursuant to the CBA, the last five digits of an employee’s seniority number is

computed by a formula involving the last four numbers of his/her Social Security Number.
The lower the resulting number, the greater the person’s seniority.

35.

Although the tie-breaking criterion, i.e., the last five digits of employees’

seniority numbers, was placed on the Seniority List, the tie-breaking criterion was not used in
this matter to resolve ties in seniority amongst certificated personnel. Thus, as among those
employees with the same RIF dates, they were listed in no particular order. The District did
not use the tie-breaking criterion to resolve ties in seniority because it had determined that
doing so was unnecessary, because the determination of who was to be laid off was not
dependent on breaking any ties.3

36.

Due to the size of the District, there are often ties between hundreds of
employees, so the numeric formula is used for efficiency, transparency and certainty.
Employees know their tie-breaker number at their time of hire, and their relative seniority is
fixed so they can anticipate their standing in any lay off proceeding. Given the foregoing, the
tie-breaking criterion, as agreed to in the CBA, was an objective and reasonable exercise of
the Board’s discretion and is based on the needs of the District and its students.

Competency

37.

The Board’s Resolution also established a definition of competency for
purposes of allowing an employee currently assigned in a position subject to lay off to
“bump” a less senior employee holding another position not subject to lay off. For bumping
purposes, an employee is “competent” to render a service if:

3 Appellate courts have not required school districts apply tie-breaking criteria prior to

issuing lay off notices. (Zalac v. Ferndale Unified School District (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th
838, 855.)

8

A.

B.

The employee possesses an appropriate credential for 2012-
2013 assignment, and

The employee has at least one (1) year of full-time-equivalent
experience within the District within the preceding five (5) years
serving in the subject area of the assignment. For purposes of
competency, “one (1) year of full-time-equivalent experience”
shall mean having had an assignment (i) in the subject area, (ii)
for which the employee carried the register, and (iii) in which
the employee served at least 75% of days during the qualifying
school year; or (b) having served in the position of Instructional
Coach in the subject area for a least 75% of days during the
qualifying school year.

C.

The “preceding five (5) years” is calculated backwards, from
June 30, 2012, to the 2007-2008 school year.

38.

The District’s five-year recency requirement is deemed to be reasonable, and
the inclusion of the current school year in the five-year recency requirement is also deemed
to be reasonable. Therefore, the District’s definition of competency in determining bumping
rights (i.e., whether Respondents who received lay off notices may exercise their statutory
right to bump into a position held by a less senior employee not subject to layoff) is upheld.4

39.

Pursuant to its Resolution, the Board determined that it was necessary to retain

the services of certificated employees for the 2012-2013 school year regardless of seniority
(also known as skipping)5 possessing special training and experience as follows:

A.

Certificated employees who hold National Board Certification
(NBC) in the subject matter they will be teaching during the
2012-2013 school year.

Skipping

///

///

4 See Legal Conclusion 4 below.

5 Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), permits a school district to
deviate from the order of seniority in teacher lay offs when “the district demonstrates a
specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that the
employee [who is retained] has special training and experience necessary to teach that course
or course of study . . . which others with more seniority do not possess.”

9

B.

C.

Certificated employees who have served in Dual Immersion
programs during the 2011-2012 school year and who will serve
in such programs during the 2012-2013 school year, as set
forth in the Dual Language Program Resolution adopted on
June 14, 2011.

Certificated employees who have served in an International
Baccalaureate program during the 2011-2012 school year and
who will serve in such a program during the 2012-2013 school
year.

A. National Board Certification

40.

The District’s NBC skip category is invalid. It was not established that NBC is
a specific course or course of study within the District. Moreover, it was not established that
having an NBC is necessary to teaching any course or assignment within the District. As that
skip category is invalid, those Respondents who received Precautionary Notices because they
were subject to the NBC skip category are subject to lay off.

B. Dual Immersion

41.

The District has 44 Dual Immersion (DI) programs among grades K-12.

Students in these programs learn in English and one of three other languages, Mandarin,
Spanish or Korean. The goal is for the students to become bilingual and biliterate, not simply
proficient in one or both languages. The teachers involved in the DI programs must be
bilingual, be able to teach in both languages of their particular DI program, and have a
CLAD credential. The DI teachers have received special training throughout the past school
years, including two day training for new teachers to the program, and support from lead
teachers. Lead teachers receive six to seven days per year of training, and they provide at
least three to four hours per month of training to the other teachers. Teachers in the DI
program are required to teach half of the day collaboratively with a partner teacher, and the
other half on their own. Many of the DI Respondents who have received precautionary lay
off notices are leaders. So much time and training has been invested in these individuals that
if they are laid off, District staff believes significant training would be required for new
teachers to be able to replace them.

42.

No Respondent contested the validity of the DI skip category. In any event, the

District established a specific need for personnel to teach the DI program, that the DI
program is a specific course of study, and that the involved DI teachers have the special
training and experience necessary to teach that course of study which others with more
seniority do not possess.

10

C. International Baccalaureate

43.

The International Baccalaureate Organization (IBO) offers three programs, the

Primary Years Programme (PYP) for elementary schools, the Middle Years Programme
(MYP) for middle schools, and the Diploma Programme (DP) for high schools. Students start
at the first level and are able to progress to the other levels if interested and if they attend
integrated schools that have all three programs. The International Baccalaureate (IB)
program emphasizes international awareness, global studies, and multi-cultural awareness.

44.

To be eligible for IB status, a school’s teaching staff must reach a consensus to
apply and participate in the authorization process, receive District approval for the necessary
funding, and then apply to become approved by the IBO as an “IB world school.” The IBO
application process can take one to three years and cost several thousand dollars. The
application process is also rigorous, culminating in an inspection of the school by the IBO.
Schools involved in the application stage are known as IBO “candidate schools.” In the past,
the District funded the application process for interested schools. Due to the current budget
crisis, new schools are no longer given funds to apply to become IB world schools. There are
nine schools in the District that are at various phases of the IB authorization process. So far
two have become IB world schools. No evidence suggests that any of the other seven schools
are no longer in the IB application process.

45.

To work in an IB school, staff must be willing to engage in efforts and training

beyond what is normally required of certificated staff. The District has invested significant
funds and several days of professional training in the teachers who participate in the IB
program. If a significant portion of an IB school’s certificated personnel is lost, that school’s
IB status and/or ability to achieve authorization could be jeopardized. A teacher cannot
competently participate in an IB program without the significant training and experience
received before so; having a particular credential is not enough. Under these circumstances,
it was established that there exists a specific need for personnel to teach the IB program, that
the IB program is a specific course of study, and that the involved IB teachers have the
special training and experience necessary to teach that course of study which others with
more seniority do not possess.

46.

Respondent Lorcan Kilroy contests the validity of the IB skip. He makes two

arguments against the IB skip. His first argument is that the District should not be able to
consider a school to be in an IB program unless and until it achieves IB world school status
from the IBO. Since the District only has two such schools at this time, and seven other IB
candidate schools in the process of becoming IB world schools, he argues that skipping those
who will teach at the seven schools who have not yet achieved that status is invalid.

11

47.

Respondent Kilroy’s first argument is not persuasive, for these reasons:

A. The administrative hearsay information from the IBO presented by the

parties, when used to corroborate and explain the other admissible evidence regarding the IB
program, indicates that although the IBO requests schools to not claim that they are
authorized to deliver IB programming until they are IB world schools, the IBO still allows
schools in the application process to do so for reasons of funding or similar needs. The fact
that the District is faced with a substantial reduction in force and desires to skip teachers in
the IB program appears to be a reason similar to funding. Thus, it is not convincing that the
IBO would frown on the Board’s inclusion of the IB skip in the Resolution. Moreover, the
intent behind this caveat by the IBO seems to be an attempt to limit the IBO’s liability should
an applicant school ultimately not achieve IB world school status, as opposed to a statement
that the IBO does not consider schools in the application process not to be an IB school.

B. It is clear from the evidence that the Board’s skip decision is aimed not only

at the two IB world schools, but also the seven other candidate schools involved in the IB
program. As established by the persuasive testimony of District employee Arzie Galvez, who
oversees the IB program for the District, the seven schools in the various phases of the IB
authorization process are considered by the District to be IB programs because the teachers at
those schools have already received the requisite training, have become integrated with the
curriculum, and have begun instruction. Moreover, Respondent Kilroy’s interpretation of the
Board’s Resolution concerning the IB skip is not consistent with one of the underlying
reasons for the skip, i.e., not wasting the tens of thousands of dollars already invested in the
IB application process and the requisite training of staff for the seven schools still in the IB
application process.

48.

Respondent Kilroy’s second argument is that the IB skip is invalid because it
places too much discretion in the hands of the District, since the IB does not control or have
objective criteria controlling which personnel are allowed to participate in an IB program.
Respondent Kilroy fears that the IB skip can/will be used by the District to subvert the
seniority process of the Education Code concerning lay offs, giving the District complete
discretion to play favorites by placing junior teachers in IB schools to save them from being
laid off. However, Respondent Kilroy did not establish that an abuse of discretion has
occurred for the IB skip. There is no evidence indicating that any of those subject to the IB
skip have not been teaching at one of the nine schools involved in the IB program, will not
be so assigned next school year, and have not received the special training and experience
necessary to teach that course of study which others with more seniority do not possess.

The Superior Court Judgment in Reed v. State of California

49.

The Board’s Resolution also determined that it was necessary to retain the

services of certain classroom teachers at 45 specified schools for the 2012-2013 school year,
regardless of seniority, “pursuant to judicial orders issued in the matter of Sharail Reed, et al.
v. State of California.” Specifically, the Resolution requires:

12

RIF notices that would have been sent to skipped teachers at [the 45
specified schools] shall be redirected to teachers based on District
seniority order at schools that would have otherwise received less than
the district-wide average (by percentage) of RIF notices, but in no case
shall redirected RIF notices cause a school to exceed the district-wide
average of RIF notices, per Court-approved terms in the Reed case.

50.

This is essentially a skipping decision, although unique in that it was forced

upon the District by order of the Los Angeles Superior Court. In 2010, the District was sued
by a group of students and their families in Reed, et al. v. State of California, et al. (Reed),
Superior Court of the State of California, County of Los Angeles, case number BC 432420.
The plaintiffs in that case argued that the lay off of the certificated staff in three under-served
middle schools would deprive particular students of their constitutional right to a fair
education. Judge William F. Highberger issued a preliminary injunction, enjoining the
District from “budget-based layoffs of classroom teachers” at the three middle schools. The
court ordered that those individuals must be skipped by the District, pursuant to Education
Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(2), and may not be subject to bumping.

51.

After that matter was further litigated, on February 8, 2011, Judge Highberger
issued a Judgment approving the terms of the settlement based on detailed Findings of Fact
and Conclusions of Law. In the Reed Judgment, the court reserved “exclusive and continuing
jurisdiction over the Action, Plaintiffs, the Settlement Class Members, LAUSD, the
Partnership, and [United Teachers of Los Angeles (UTLA)] for purposes of supervising the
implementation, enforcement, construction, and interpretation of the Agreement, the court’s
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and this Judgment.” According to the Reed
Judgment, pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(2), the District may
not impose any budget-based lay offs of classroom teachers at 45 specified schools (Reed
schools). The Reed Judgment was based on findings that the lay off of the certificated staff in
question would deprive particular students of their constitutional right to a fair education. In
its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, the court noted that UTLA (the union
representing the District’s certificated staff) was a party to the case, participated in settlement
negotiations and was given an opportunity to present its arguments and establish why the
settlement should not be approved. UTLA appealed the Reed Judgment and unsuccessfully
sought a stay in the Superior Court and the Court of Appeal. The California Supreme Court
also denied UTLA’s request for review.

52.

In the lay off matter for the District litigated in 2011, the portion of the

District’s lay off Resolution containing the same Reed skip language as the current version
was upheld by the ALJ hearing that matter. A writ filed by a few Respondents in that case
challenging that part of the District’s 2011 lay off decision has been stayed, pending the
appeal of Judge Highberger’s Judgment currently before the Court of Appeal.

13

53.

At a prehearing conference (PHC) in this matter, the ALJ granted the District’s

motion-in-limine regarding this issue. Specifically, in the order following the PHC, the ALJ
ruled that the “parties may not relitigate the issues decided in the case of Reed v. California,
nor may they argue that Respondents not teaching in the Reed schools are subject to the same
treatment as those subject to the judgment in Reed. However, Respondents may challenge the
way in which the Reed judgment has been executed by the District in this lay off proceeding.”

54.

As required by the Reed Judgment, the District must deviate from seniority in
a limited manner in that no classroom teachers at any of the 45 Reed specified schools shall
be included in the 2012 lay off. According to the Reed Judgment, to ensure that the skipping
of the Reed teachers does not negatively affect students at other “vulnerable” schools, the
redirected lay off notices were to be “sent on a seniority basis to teachers at LAUSD schools
that would otherwise receive less than district-wide average [lay off] notices.” Additionally,
the Reed Judgment specified that, although the District was prohibited from imposing any
“budget-based” lay offs of the Reed teachers, the mandated skipping did not apply to either
displacements (i.e. elimination of a teacher’s position at a school site) as a result of district
wide class size increase, declining enrollment or termination.

55.

Lorcan Kilroy. Respondent Kilroy challenges the way in which the District has

executed the Reed skip process, as follows:

A. Respondent Kilroy received a lay off notice redirected from a Reed school

teacher in his subject area of art. He contends the District may have intentionally listed
teachers as being Reed school classroom teachers when in fact they are not, or that certain
junior teachers were moved to a Reed school without legitimate reason at or before the lay
off notice deadline as favoritism and/or to subvert the seniority process established by the
Education Code. Respondent Kilroy cites two specific examples of art teachers junior to him
who are listed in seniority list documents as being Reed protected but whom he believes are
in fact not teaching at Reed schools. Respondent Kilroy argues that this means he is not
subject to lay off, because art teachers junior to him are being retained by the District.

B. The first example is Karla Ortiz, listed in seniority lists as an art teacher at

Huntington Park High School, which is a Reed school. Respondent Kilroy was unable to find
her on that school’s website. Respondent Kilroy concedes that may have simply been a
mistake on the part of the school’s webmaster. In any event, the District established that Ms.
Ortiz has been assigned to that Reed school effective August 29, 2011.

C. The second example is Maria Cortez, who is listed as an art teacher at

Bethune Middle School, which is a Reed school. Respondent Kilroy was unable to find her
on that school’s website, and he was also unable to find her on the California Commission on
Teacher Credentialing (CTC) website as having an art credential. However, the District
established that she actually spells her name “Maria Cortes” and that the District had
inadvertently listed her with the incorrect spelling in its records. The CTC website does show
that Maria Cortes, employed by the District, has an art credential. The District established
that Ms. Cortes has been assigned to Bethune Middle School since December 2010.

14

D. Under these circumstances, Respondent Kilroy failed to establish that the
District has not properly executed the Reed skip process, or that an art teacher junior to him
not currently assigned to a Reed school is being retained.

56.

Sean Garrett. Respondent Garrett is a relatively new teacher to the District,

having started in the 2009-2010 school year as an elementary teacher at the Judith Baca Arts
Academy (JBAA), which is one of the 45 designated Reed schools. By virtue of his low
seniority, he is subject to lay off in his subject area as an elementary teacher. Respondent
Garrett was assigned to teach a fourth grade class at JBAA as of October 3, 2011. Due to that
assignment, he contends that his lay off notice should be redirected to another person
because he has a classroom assignment at a Reed school. However, on April 4, 2011,
Respondent Garrett was placed on paid administrative leave and he was removed from any
teaching assignment. Since then, his salary has been paid from a budget source other than
JBAA. Though he was “reassigned” to a fourth grade classroom at JBAA in October of
2011, he was not actually placed in any teaching assignment. A long term substitute has been
assigned to teach that fourth grade class. As of January 2012, Respondent Garrett has been
directed to remain at home during the workday and report his time to a local District office.
Thus, as of the time that the Board adopted its Resolution, and since then, Respondent
Garrett has not been a classroom teacher at a Reed school and therefore is not exempt from
being laid off.

Bumping Applied to the Teacher Librarians

57.

The parties stipulated that the District will rescind the lay off notices provided

to the following Respondents who are teacher librarians due to the invalidation of the NBC
skip: Rosemarie Bernier; Stacia Salanoa; and Valary White. After the presentation of
evidence was completed, the District advised in its initial closing brief that it has also agreed
to rescind the lay off notice of Respondent Allison Walker for the same reason.

58.

The parties also stipulated that Respondent Blair Carroll has at least one year

experience teaching English within the past five school years and is competent to bump a
more junior English teacher. Respondent Carroll executed the stipulation reflected in exhibit
403 and therefore is not subject to lay off by reason of that stipulation.

59.

A number of Respondents not involved in the above-described stipulations

testified that through their experience as teacher librarians at the District over the past several
years, they have accumulated sufficient experience in other subject matters to either meet the
District’s competency criteria or to be deemed competent to bump more junior teachers.
These Respondents also have subject matter credentials other than their teacher librarian
credentials. These Respondents are Suzanne Osman, Dale Futoran, Kathleen Sheppard,
Adalgisa Grazziani, Janet Larson, Melissa Mukai, Tamara Celi, Mary Byrne, Karen
Gonzalez, Melinda Buterbaugh, Michelle Addison, Sherri Whitham, Laureen Keough,
Seanean Shanahan (but see Factual Finding 13 and Legal Conclusion 2.D.), and Marcy
Drexler (teacher librarian Respondents).

15

60.

The teacher librarian Respondents failed to establish that they meet the

District’s competency criteria and therefore they cannot bump into other subject matters.
This is because they do not have at least one year experience teaching in those areas within
the meaning of the District’s competency criteria, for the reasons explained below.

61. Many of the teacher librarian Respondents have never taught a subject matter
course in their alternate credentials nor have they carried the register for any courses under
their alternate credentials. None of the teacher librarian Respondents has carried the register
for any courses under their alternate credentials in the past five school years.

62.

Secondarily, the teacher librarian Respondents have been required to run their

respective libraries, which accounts for a substantial period of their time each school day.
Thus, their testimony was not persuasive that they have also been engaged in teaching in
other subject matters within the meaning of the District’s competency criteria. For example,
the teacher librarian Respondents are responsible for maintaining collections of thousands of
print volumes, as well as electronic resources, databases, magazines, and reference materials.
Their respective libraries are subject to thousands of visits each year by students. The visiting
students must be supervised to some extent. Teacher librarians are also expected to order
new books, purchase new technology, keep the research media updated, train and supervise
clerical helpers, assist students with selecting materials, and provide professional
development to staff. Finally, teacher librarians are tasked to clean the library, from dusting
shelves to vacuuming.

63.

In addition, teacher librarians spent substantial time teaching information

literacy, through their library practices courses. To teach library practice courses, one needs a
teacher librarian credential, which is separate from the alternate credentials they have. The
California Department of Education has developed Model School Library Standards, which
are rooted in four core principles - accessing information, evaluating information, using
information, and integrating information in all areas of learning. This illustrates that the
library practice courses are separate and distinct from teaching under the alternate credentials
they hold. The library practice courses they teach are an elective course that does not afford
academic credit. Enrollment in these classes is often in the single digits. Students do not
receive regular instruction and are allowed to work on their academic courses. That teaching
experience is not the equivalent of that described in the District’s competency criteria.

64.

The parties stipulated that Respondents Darla Castillo and Janet Larson are

teacher librarians who meet the District’s competency criteria and are competent to teach in
elementary teaching (ELR) and home economics (HEA), respectively. However, these
Respondents do not have seniority allowing them to bump more junior certificated
employees in these other subject areas and are still subject to being laid off.

65.

Respondent Larson contends she is competent in health and social studies.
However, she admitted that she has not held the register for a social studies course since
2006-2007, which pre-dates the five school years that qualify for the District’s competency
criteria. She has not held the register for a health class at all.

16

66.

Respondent Addison claimed competency in English; however, she admitted

that she has not held the register for an English class, outside of summer school, since the
2003-2004 school year. Therefore, she falls outside the five-year competency period. The
summer course that Respondent Addison taught in 2010 was for only six weeks; the one in
2011, only four weeks. Neither course meets the District’s competency requirement that a
teacher provide instruction in the claimed subject for 75 percent of the days during the
qualifying school year.

67.

Therefore, it was not established that the teacher librarian Respondents are

certificated and competent to bump into other positions and consequently they have not
established cause to be retained next school year.

Bumping Applied to the PSA Counselors

68.

The following Respondents currently have positions with the District as pupil

services and attendance (PSA) counselors: Graciela Ortiz, Wendy Arreola Cholico, Abel
Villasenor, Tanya Mercado, Melissa Morris, Susan Martinez, and Rosalinda Moreno (PSA
Counselor Respondents). They contend that they have performed at least 75 percent of one
school year in the past five in the position of a psychiatric social worker (PSW), and
therefore should be allowed to bump into that position next school year.

69.

The District agrees that the PSA Counselor Respondents hold the necessary

credential that would allow them to bump into a PSW assignment next school year, and that
the PSA Counselor Respondents are more senior to one or more PSW employees who are
being retained for the next school year. However, the District does not agree that the PSA
Counselor Respondents have actually served in a PSW assignment, and therefore the District
argues they do not meet the competency criteria for purposes of bumping.

70.

The PSA Counselor Respondents uniformly testified to essentially the same

set of facts. They have all been employed by the District as PSA Counselors since 2006.
During that time, they have only held the title of PSA Counselor. Each PSA Counselor
Respondent testified that he or she has actually performed the duties and functions of a PSW
at least 75 percent of one or more of the past five school years, mostly because they believe
the duties of the two positions substantially overlap. However, none was able to satisfactorily
quantify where the overlap exists, or that they have spent at least 75 percent of their days at
school performing PSW duties.

71.

The PSA Counselor Respondents (except for Rosalinda Moreno) also point to
the fact that they have been assigned to schools where either no PSW has been assigned, or
one has been assigned only one or two days per week. On those days when the PSWs are
absent, the PSA Counselor Respondents were the only mental health professionals available
to respond to problems that arose. However, while there is some level of overlap between the
two positions, many of the duties they described performing are squarely within the job
description of the PSA Counseling position.

17

72.

Each PSA Counselor Respondent is registered as an Associate Clinical Social
Worker (ACSW) with the State Board of Behavioral Sciences (BBS). An ACSW is required
to perform 3,200 hours of clinical therapy in order to be eligible to take the examination for a
Clinical Social Worker license. The PSA Counselor Respondents have either completed
those hours and are eligible to take the examination or have performed between 1,600 to
2,800 hours. The hours of clinical work have been fulfilled while performing their duties at
school. Interestingly, the job descriptions indicate that a PSW must be registered with the
BBS, while a PSA Counselor does not. However, the PSA Counselor Respondents did not
establish that the time they spent in the qualifying therapy was not part of their PSA
Counselor duties.

73.

The PSA Counselor and PSW positions are not as interchangeable as these
Respondents suggest. The CTC requires separate authorizations and credentials for them.
The District distinguishes them by title and job description. The schools where the PSA
Counselor Respondents work hire different individuals to perform these different functions.
As their title implies, PSA Counselors focus on attendance issues and on dropouts. Given
that the two positions are different, PSA Counselors must have served as PSWs during a
qualifying year (within the past five) in order to have bumping rights. None of the PSA
Counselors was able to establish that he or she had served as a PSW. They do not meet the
District’s competency criteria and cannot bump into the PSW positions.

Bumping Applied to an Elementary Counselor

74.

Dr. Steven Targum. Respondent Targum (who has a doctorate in psychology)

received a lay off notice in his position as an elementary counselor. His RIF date is
September 17, 1999. From then through November of 2001, he worked for the District as a
secondary counselor. In November of 2001, he took an assignment at an elementary school
and began providing services as an elementary school counselor. Respondent Targum has
continuously worked as an elementary school counselor since the November 2001.

75.

Respondent Targum argues he should be allowed to bump into a secondary
counseling position by virtue of the Pupil Personnel Services (PPS) credential authorizing
him to provide counseling services in grades K through 12. He also argues he has the
requisite training and experience to perform those duties in light of his past experience as a
secondary counselor, and because of the similarity of duties between his current position as
an elementary counselor and those of a secondary counselor.

76. While his credential may authorize him to perform certain services, that does
not mean that he is performing those services. For example, Respondent Targum has spent
the past ten years working with pre-teens, who present different emotional and academic
issues and needs than do secondary students. Elementary counselors do not perform all of the
same duties as secondary counselors, e.g., master scheduling; tracking graduation credits and
college entrance requirements; and advising students regarding the California High School
Exit Examination (CAHSEE) and the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT). Moreover, key parts
of those particular duties have changed in the past ten years since Respondent Targum last

18

served as a secondary counselor. For example, the CAHSEE only came into existence in the
last ten years; Respondent Targum has never counseled a student regarding the CAHSEE.
The District has modified the way master schedules are set in the past ten years. He has not
prepared a master schedule in over ten years. The SAT format has changed substantially in
the past ten years and Respondent Targum is not sure of the specifics. Both the UC Regents
and the California State University system have changed their college entry requirements in
the past ten years.

77.

Under these circumstances, Respondent Targum did not establish that, as an

elementary counselor, he has one year of full-time-equivalent experience within the District
within the preceding five school years serving in the area of secondary counseling. Despite
his prior experience, Respondent Targum did not establish that he meets the District’s
competency criteria required to bump into a secondary counseling position. Respondent
Targum did not establish cause to be retained next school year.

Bumping Applied to Other Respondents

78.

The parties agree that the Respondents who executed the stipulation referenced

in exhibit 403 are competent to bump into the specified service area/alternate courses and
that they will not remain where they are currently serving but will teach in the new service
area/alternate course for the 2012-2013 school year. The Respondents who executed that
stipulation are identified in Appendix 1, which is attached to this Decision.

79.

The parties stipulated that Respondent Emilia Zarookian (CNS) meets the

District’s competency criteria and is competent to teach in the subject area of LRE. However,
she does not have seniority allowing her to bump more junior certificated employees in the
other subject area and is still subject to being laid off.

80.

Joann McKenna. She received a lay off notice as an elementary school teacher

because she has a life standard elementary credential and she initially taught for the District
in that capacity. She also has an authorization to teach history in secondary schools, and has
actually been teaching history courses at a middle school for the past several years.
Respondent McKenna therefore argues that she can bump into a history assignment next
school year since she would meet the District’s competency criteria. However, Respondent
McKenna was only able to teach those history classes after her principal executed middle
school authorization waivers at the beginning of the last several school years. Waivers are
valid for only one school year. A waiver was necessary because a social science credential is
required to teach history, geography, economics and other social science courses.
Respondent McKenna does not have a social studies credential. Without a middle school
waiver, Respondent McKenna would not have been able to teach those history courses. In
this case, it was not established that Respondent McKenna has the appropriate credential
allowing her to teach history courses next year without the District executing yearly

19

authorizations, which the District is not required to do.6 Respondent McKenna has not
established cause to be retained next school year.

81.

Julie Park. Respondent Park is in the same situation as Respondent McKenna.
She received her lay off notice in the subject area of elementary school teacher because she
has a multiple subject credential. Because she also has a supplemental authorization in
history, she has been allowed to teach history courses in the sixth and seventh grades. She
contends that she should be allowed to bump into a history assignment next school year. She
does not have a social studies credential, so she has only been able to teach the history
courses because her principal executed middle school authorization waivers. Although
Respondent Park may meet the District’s competency criteria in terms of teaching history
courses, she is not appropriately credentialed to teach history next year under the
circumstances, and may not bump into such an assignment.

82.

Jana Fowlks. She received her lay off notice in the subject area of elementary

school teacher, because when she was hired by the District she only had a multiple subject
credential. However, she has taught math courses at a magnet span school for the past several
years. She argues that she should have been properly classified as a math teacher, not an
elementary teacher. Since math teachers are not being laid off this year, she argues she
should be retained next school year. However, Respondent Fowlks does not have a single
subject math credential, and she does not have a supplemental math authorization. She has
been allowed to teach math courses because they have been at an alternative school, and she
has received yearly authorization waivers by the District. She does not have a credential
outside of her multiple subject credential that would allow her to teach single subject math
courses. Under these circumstances, it was established that the lay off notice in the subject
area of elementary school teacher she received was appropriate. She failed to establish that
she is able to bump into a math assignment next school year.

83.

Nancy Reyes. Her RIF date is July 20, 2004. She received a lay off notice in

the subject area of elementary school teacher, because she was hired by the District under her
multiple subject credential. In November of 2011, Respondent Reyes also obtained a single
subject credential in English. For most of the past five school years, she taught English as a
Second Language (ESL) courses. She now is a Title III Access to Core Coach. In order to
teach ESL, one must have a basic credential in any subject area, combined with a CLAD,
BCLAD or similar predecessor credential. Respondent Reyes has a BCLAD. There are one
or more teachers junior to her that the District has retained for the next school year to teach
ESL courses using English credentials at Respondent Reyes’ school. Pursuant to Education

6 School districts have discretion to define positions in the manner which they will be
taught as long as it is done in good faith. (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District
(2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334.) Respondents cite no legal authority requiring the District to
execute such yearly waivers in order to avoid laying off certificated personnel. However,
Education Code sections 44256, subdivision (b), and 44258 indicate that such are
discretionary decisions, in that both the governing school board and the teacher in question
must consent to such a waiver each year.

20

Code section 44955, subdivision (c), school boards are required to make assignments and
reassignments in such manner that employees shall be retained to render service in which
their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. In this case, Respondent Reyes is
credentialed to teach ESL courses, in that she can use either her multiple subject credential or
her single subject English credential to do so, combined with her BCLAD. She also meets
the District’s competency criteria, in that she has well more than one school year of
experience teaching ESL courses within the past five. Her situation is unique, in that a) she
has taught courses using one or both of the credentials she currently possesses, and b) she has
actually taught the subject matter area in which she would like to bump. Under these unique
circumstances, Respondent Reyes established that she can bump into an ESL assignment
next school year, using her English credential. Since Respondent Reyes is credentialed and
competent to perform an assignment (ESL) that the District has retained more junior teachers
to perform next school year, using the same credential Respondent Reyes possesses, she may
not be laid off.

84.

Erik Matsubayashi. He received a lay off notice in the subject area of

elementary school teacher. He has a multiple subject credential, as well as a single subject
credential in foundational science which allows him to teach single period science classes in
grades K-8. For the past few years, he has been assigned to a middle school. He has taught
one period of science and one period of math as part of a “math and science combo” within a
core curriculum. In such an assignment, he shares students with another who teaches English
and history classes. He also teaches elective computer programming classes and a math
intervention class. Respondent Matsubayashi contends that his experience in science, and to
a lesser extent math, should allow him to bump into such assignments next school year. He is
in the same unique position as Respondent Reyes. His one period science class can be taught
using either his multiple subject credential (since the classes are in a core curriculum) or his
single subject foundational science credential. The same is not true of his math class, in that
it was not established that he is credentialed to teach a single period math class with the
credentials he currently possesses. In any event, Respondent Matsubayashi is credentialed to
teach middle school science classes using his single subject foundational science credential.
He meets the District’s competency criteria since he has taught middle school single period
science classes the past five school years. The District is not laying off science teachers next
school year, and is retaining teachers junior to Respondent Matsubayashi to teach such
assignments. Under these circumstances, Respondent Matsubayashi has established that he
can bump into a science assignment, and has established cause to be retained next school
year.

85.

Valerie Davidson. Respondent Davidson received her lay off notice in the

subject area of art, in which she has performed the bulk of her service for the District. She
argued that she should be allowed to bump into an English assignment, because she has a
supplemental English authorization in addition to her art credential. Her prior experience
teaching English classes is limited to Saturday English classes in middle school, and a
summer school English class in a high school. That experience does not meet the District’s
competency criteria requiring teaching in the alternate subject area 75 percent of the days
during the qualifying school year.

21

Rescinded Lay off Notices

86.

During the hearing, the parties stipulated that the District will rescind the lay

off notices provided to Carthec Davidson and Frank Treece because they should not have
received lay off notices.

87.

During the hearing, the parties stipulated that the District will rescind the lay

off notices provided to the following twelve most senior nurse Respondents, who are also
identified in exhibit 95: Mary Ann Topico; Po Yu; Tamunosa Okiwelu; Rosela Hipolito;
Lourdes Gallardo; Treesa Lowther-Sopata; Gina Aguirre; Derek Patrimonio; Corazon
Lazaro; Don Alvarado; Marilou Abrantes; and Susan Fernandez.

The Precautionary Respondents

88.

Precautionary lay off notices were sent to a number of Respondents for various

reasons, including the Reed school situation and the District’s lack of certainty whether its
three skipping categories would be affirmed.

89.

Respondents argue the District exceeded the authority provided by the Board’s

Resolution by “over noticing” the number of certificated individuals far greater than the
number of positions to be reduced and eliminated as specified in the Resolution. Respondents
also argue that the Education Code does not provide for a lay off notice to be provided on a
“precautionary” basis, and therefore such notices issued to the relevant Respondents are
invalid. Respondents’ arguments are unconvincing.

90.

First, Respondents argument that the number of individuals given lay off

notices impermissibly exceeds the number of positions specified in the Resolution does not
contemplate (a) the number of individuals impacted by the complete elimination of the ECE
and ACE programs not specifically referenced in the Resolution, and (b) the number of
individuals impacted by the Reed school situation and the three skipping categories proposed
by the District. Respondents have not quantified the total number of those receiving lay off
notices or reconciled that with the number of positions being reduced or eliminated. Thus,
Respondents point to no facts supporting their argument.

91.

Second, the use of precautionary lay off notices has been validated by

appellate courts reviewing lay off cases. For example, in San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, the court recognized the statutory necessity of giving more
notices than the number of teachers who may actually be laid off. The Allen court observed
that the present statutory timetable is unrealistic, and that although a teacher who is
terminated has preferential rights to reemployment should the district decide fewer
reductions are necessary, “this provides little solace to the understandably upset teacher who
is given a needless preliminary (and perhaps final) notice because the school district cannot
accurately ascertain its financial circumstances for the ensuring school year until the
chaptering of the state budget.” (Id., at pp. 632-633.) In this case, the District does not
presently intend to give final lay off notices to many of the precautionary Respondents unless

22

some of its discretionary decisions are overruled in this matter. No Respondent established
any prejudice caused by the District proceeding in this way.

Respondents Raising Multiple Issues

92.

Carole Sielaff. She is a school psychologist at John Mack Elementary School

who made a number of challenges to her lay off, none of which established cause to retain
her for the next school year:

A. Although she established that her correct RIF date is August 22, 2005, as
opposed to the RIF date assigned by the District of September 1, 2005, she is still junior to
other school psychologists being laid off.

B. She contends that she is credentialed and competent to bump into a position
as a Pupil Services and Attendance (PSA) Counselor. However, she has never been assigned
to that position at the District. She does not meet the District’s competency criteria to bump,
in that she did not establish having at least one year in the past five of experience in that area.

C. She contends the District’s tie-breaking criterion is invalid, but she failed to

present sufficient factual or legal bases to support her argument. In any event, neither her
corrected or previous RIF date places her in a tie with other certificated employees, so the
tie-breaking criterion is not applicable to her.

D. She argues that the District should skip her under the Dual Immersion

category because she is bilingual and performs activities similar to those who work in the
Dual Immersion program. Respondent Sielaff has no prior experience in a Dual Immersion
program and is therefore not eligible to be skipped on that basis.7

E. As a school psychologist currently working in that capacity at one of the 45

designated Reed schools, Respondent Sielaff argues that her position is just as important as
classroom teachers at those schools and that the District should retain her services as it has
for classroom teachers. Since Respondent Sielaff is not a classroom teacher, she is not
eligible to be retained under the Board’s Resolution pertaining to the Reed schools.
Moreover, the ALJ does not have jurisdiction to decide whether the Board should have
decided to skip or retain other types of certificated personnel.

93. Marcy Drexler. She is a teacher librarian at Dodson Middle School. She
argued that teacher librarians should be retained for the same reasons as the classroom
teachers at the Reed schools. However, the ALJ does not have jurisdiction to decide whether

7 Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), provides the exclusive purview of
skipping decisions to school boards, not to teachers, parents or students. Therefore, the ALJ
has no jurisdiction to determine whether a new skip category should be created for this
Respondent or any other.

23

the Board should have decided to skip or retain other types of certificated personnel (see
footnote 7). Respondent Drexler’s RIF date places her junior to other teacher librarians being
laid off. Respondent Drexler has not established cause to be retained next school year.

94.

Carlos Madrigal. He is an assistant principal at Manual Arts Adult School.

When initially hired by the District, Respondent Madrigal taught elementary classes under an
internship contract from 2000 through 2002. In 2003, he applied for and accepted a position
at an adult school within the District. He did not receive his clear multiple subject credential
until 2005, well after he transferred to the adult school. He has remained in the District’s
adult school division since then. He was given a lay off notice because the entire ACE
program is being eliminated. Respondent Madrigal made three challenges to his lay off, none
of which established cause to retain him for the next school year:

A. He contends that it is inequitable for the District to not bump him into an

elementary assignment at a K-12 school simply because he transferred to an adult school. He
argues that when he transferred to the adult school, nobody from the District advised him that
he would not accrue seniority for purposes of the K-12 schools within the District or would
not have any “return” rights. However, Respondent cites no legal authority requiring the
District to have provided him with any such advice. Respondent Madrigal did not necessarily
argue estoppel against the District,8 but to the extent that he did, he failed to establish that the
District made an affirmative statement or took some course of conduct, upon which
Respondent Madrigal relied to his detriment. For example, it was not established that District
personnel made a false or erroneous statement to Respondent Madrigal concerning his
transfer to the adult school division. Moreover, it was his decision to transfer to the adult
school division; Respondent Madrigal did not testify that he was requested by the District to
transfer and then was given incomplete or erroneous information.

B. Respondent Madrigal contends that the District must bump him into an

elementary school classroom assignment, since he has a credential that would allow him to
teach such an assignment. However, as a matter of law, Respondent Madrigal is not entitled
to bump out of an adult school assignment and into an elementary school assignment.9 Even

8 Estoppel may be invoked when a party establishes the following elements: (1) the

party to be estopped must be apprised of the facts; (2) the party to be estopped made a
statement which he/she intended to be acted upon, or must so act that the party asserting the
estoppel had a right to believe it was so intended; (3) the other party must be ignorant of the
true state of facts; and (4) the other party must rely upon the conduct to her injury. (Crumpler
v. Board of Administrators (1973) 32 Cal.App.3d 567, 581.) However, cases applying
estoppel to government entities also involve some sort of misrepresentation, misleading
action or inaccurate information negligently given by the involved agency. (Id., at 580-582.)

9 The Education Code creates two distinct teacher categories: day school (K-12) and

evening school (adult education), and provides that service in one category may not be
counted toward service in the other. (§§ 44929.25 and 44929.26.) As such, service in adult
education does not count towards seniority in K-12. (See Rutherford v. Board of Trustees

24

if he were legally entitled to do so, Respondent Madrigal has not taught in an elementary
assignment in the past five years, so he fails to meet the District’s competency criteria for
purposes of an elementary school assignment.

C. Respondent Madrigal also contends that as an administrator who reached
permanent status in that position, he is entitled to retain a job within the District pursuant to
Education Code section 44897, subdivision (a). Respondent Madrigal did not become a
permanent employee of the District until after he transferred to the adult education division.
Administrators, including certificated administrators, who are employed as administrators at
the time that they acquire permanent status, acquire tenure only as classroom teachers, not as
administrators, and can be reassigned from a position as an administrator to one as a
classroom teacher. (Thompson v. Modesto City High School Dist. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 620.)
While this statute may support an argument that Respondent Madrigal would have been
entitled to an assignment as a classroom teacher in an adult school, if ACE was not being
completely eliminated and his seniority otherwise permitted it, the statute does not allow him
to claim entitlement to a classroom assignment in the K-12 program. He was not entitled to
permanent status as a classroom teacher in the K-12 program since he did not become
permanent in the K-12 program. By operation of Education Code sections 44929.25 and
44929.26, Respondent Madrigal cannot claim permanent status in both programs.

95.

Justin Lauer. He has been the Dean of Students at Madison Middle School for
the past five years. He has a health credential, and he taught health science classes for three
years before standing for election for his current position. Last year he obtained a
supplemental authorization to teach introductory science for grades nine and below. He was
given his lay off notice in the subject area of health science. He has never taught a regular
science class nor carried the register for the same. His testimony is not persuasive that he has
performed at least one school year of service teaching a science class in his work the last five
school years as a dean. Therefore, Respondent Lauer does not meet the District’s
competency criteria and may not bump into a science position. The CBA contains a
provision limiting service as dean to five years unless certain exceptions are met (including
being reelected), in which case a person may return to a classroom assignment. However, the
CBA does not trump the District’s legal authority to lay off certificated employees provided
by the Education Code. Respondent Lauer contended that the District was required to advise
him, when he sought election to the dean position, of the possibility that he may be subject to
a competency criteria in the event of a future lay off. However, Respondent Lauer provided
no legal authority creating such a requirement. In any event, it was not established that the
District foresaw this eventuality five years ago when Respondent Lauer sought to be elected
to the dean position. Respondent Lauer has not established cause to be retained.

(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167; Kamin v. Governing Board (1977) 72 Cal.App.3d 1014.) Thus,
adult school teachers do not have tenure or seniority in regular school and cannot bump into
the regular school program and regular school teachers do not have tenure or seniority in
adult school and cannot bump into the adult school program.

25

96.

Gregory Calvert. His RIF date is October 6, 2006. He taught high school

English classes his first few years with the District. Two years ago he was elected to be the
Dean of Students at Van Nuys High School. He received a lay off notice in the subject area
of English. Respondent Calvert challenges receiving his lay off notice in English, but that is
the only subject area he has actually taught at the District. He has a Level II Education
Specialist Instruction Credential (Mild/Moderate Disabilities) and thus contends he should be
allowed to bump into a special education position next school year. He also has a social
science credential, though it is not clear that he seeks to bump into that subject area.
However, he does not meet the District’s competency criteria for purposes of bumping, in
that he has not taught a special education or social science class at least 75 percent of one
school year in the past five. Respondent Calvert also believes the District should skip
certificated staff with special education credentials because that is a shortage area for the
District, but the ALJ does not have jurisdiction to decide whether the Board should have
decided to skip other types of certificated personnel (see footnote 7 above). Respondent
Calvert did not establish cause to be retained next school year.

Respondents Seeking to Change Their Seniority Dates

A. Stipulations Regarding RIF dates

97.

Joseph Espinoza. The parties stipulated that this Respondent’s correct RIF date

is August, 12, 2002, and that with that amount of seniority he is no longer subject to being
laid off. The accusation against Respondent Espinoza shall be dismissed.

98.

Angela Vitalis. The parties stipulated that this Respondent’s RIF dated stated

on the seniority list was incorrect, and that with her correct RIF date (not stated on the
record), she is no longer subject to being laid off. The accusation against Respondent Vitalis
shall be dismissed.

B. Early Report for Buy Back Days

99.

Seniority is measured from the first date on which an employee renders paid

service in a probationary position.10 Often times, and for various reasons, probationary
teachers report to their school sites before the date specified as the beginning of the school
year in the CBA.

100. There are many factors that can go into determining whether those early report

dates constitute the first date of paid probationary service. Those factors include whether or
not the early report dates are recognized as part of the negotiated school year in a collective
bargaining agreement; whether attending an early report date was mandatory or voluntary;
and whether the employee received regular pay for the early report day, a stipend, or other
form of special payment. The treatment of early report days as part of the negotiated school
year, the fact that attendance is mandated by the district in question, and the receipt of

10 Education Code sections 44845 and 87414.

26

regular pay for such attendance are all facts that tend to demonstrate the early report date is
included in service rendered as a probationary employee. The lack of recognition of early
report days as part of the negotiated school year, voluntary attendance, and special payments
other than regular salary tend to demonstrate the opposite.

101. The consistent application of these factors is important, because otherwise
great mischief can be done to the seniority system. For example, allowing an employee to
randomly establish their own seniority date by simply visiting their classroom before classes
begin would be unfair to other employees who only reported when required. The same can be
said of allowing employees to increase their seniority because they attended training that was
either not mandatory or was subject to extra compensation due to the fact that it occurred
outside of the negotiated school year. An unfair situation may arise when two probationary
teachers have the same start date, but one is required to attend an earlier day of new teacher
orientation but the other is not so required based on his/her prior experience elsewhere as a
teacher. It is indeed an inequitable situation to deem the former more senior to the later
simply because of his or her inexperience. Annualized pay presents a similar problem. A
teacher who receives his or her pay spread out through the year (annualized) can receive a
paycheck on the first of the month, but not commence work until the end of the month. The
date on which a paycheck is issued in that situation does not demonstrate the date on which
paid service actually commences.

102. On the other hand, it is unfair to allow the CBA to dictate an employee’s

seniority when he or she is mandated to begin their contracted services by their immediate
supervisor and is paid regular salary for such service. Thus, it is hard to establish a bright-
line test that can fairly decide any particular situation. Evaluating all of these factors is most
helpful, until either the Legislature or the appellate courts provide more guidance.

103.

In this case, some of the Respondents reported to their school sites before
classes began for the school year for what were known as “buy back” days. Those were
essentially days of training or professional development provided to teachers during off
track, vacation periods or weekends. The buy back days were not part of the school year
negotiated in the CBA and therefore were voluntary. The teachers who attended the buy back
days were paid for their attendance by the District, but the pay stubs submitted by some of
the Respondents in question uniformly show that the buy back day payments were separate
and distinct from their regular salary. For example, the buy back pay was accounted for
separately from regular salary on the pay stubs, had a different code, and different pay rates.

104. Cheryl Fukushima, Christopher Miller, and Luz Quintero. These Respondents

testified that their RIF dates should be deemed earlier than as stated in the District’s
Seniority List because they were required to attend buy back days before the beginning of
their inaugural school years with the District. As discussed above, buy back days were not
part of the negotiated school year pursuant to the CBA. Moreover, it was also not established
that these Respondents’ attendance at the buy back days was mandatory. Although some of
their principals strongly encouraged them to go, it was not established that mandatory
directives were issued. These Respondents also failed to establish that they received regular

27

compensation for their attendance or that a majority of their colleagues also attended the
training (which would suggest that attendance was not mandatory). Therefore, these
Respondents failed to establish a basis for adjusting their seniority dates by virtue of
attending earlier buy back days.

105. Herbert Hernandez. He seeks to adjust his RIF date from September 7, 2007,

to the earlier date of September 4, 2007. Respondent Hernandez testified that he attended
school on September 4th on a buy back day to set up his classroom, and that he began
teaching his classes on September 5th and 6th. However, he failed to present any reliable
documentary corroboration of his testimony. In fact, payroll and timesheet records produced
by the District indicate no formal activity at the school until September 7th. Moreover, his
probationary contract indicates the date of offer was September 7, 2007, and that his service
was to commence on or before October 8, 2007. At the time, Respondent was waiting for a
work permit related to his obtaining legal residence, which did not arrive until September
7th. He was also not cleared to begin service until his fingerprint clearance was obtained,
which was also on September 7th. Schools in California are prohibited from employing
anyone to work with students without a fingerprint clearance to ascertain whether the
applicant has a criminal history precluding employment. (Ed. Code, §§ 44237, 44830.1,
44830.2, 45125, 45125.1.) Under these circumstances, no cause was established to adjust his
seniority date.

106. Veronica Gonzalez. The District’s RIF date for this Respondent is August 28,
2003. Respondent Gonzalez contends her correct RIF date is August 26, 2003. She received
a lay off notice redirected from a teacher at a Reed school, and the RIF cut-off date
applicable to her is August 28, 2003, which happens to be her RIF date. Respondent
Gonzalez testified that on August 26, 2003, she either visited her school site to set up her
classroom (the music room), contact band member/students and perform other duties, or she
attended a mandatory buy back day. She also testified that she was paid for her service on
that date. However, as explained below, Respondent Gonzalez did not establish a basis to
adjust her RIF date, and therefore is subject to being laid off.

A. In support of her position, Respondent Gonzalez submitted a letter from a

District personnel specialist dated August 25, 2003, stating that she had been assigned to her
school site effective August 26, 2003. It was not established when she received that
document, which is material in that the letter is dated the day before her claimed RIF date.

B. Respondent Gonzalez also submitted a District Verification of Seniority

Date form issued to her, which states that her “first day of paid probationary or District intern
contract service [is] 8-26-03.” However, the District presented a single-track school calendar
for the 2003/2004 school year, which showed no official school activity scheduled for
August 26th, but rather that a paid pupil free day was scheduled on August 28th. Respondent
Gonzalez taught at a single-track school that year. The District also presented a letter dated
November 4, 2003, purportedly mailed to Respondent Gonzalez, indicating that the
Verification of Seniority Date form previously sent to her was incorrect, and that her first
date of paid probationary service was August 28, 2003. The District also presented a

28

verification roster signed by Respondent Gonzalez in November of 2011, in which she
certified that her correct “seniority date” is August 28, 2003.

C. Finally, Respondent Gonzalez was equivocal in her initial testimony that
she was required to report for duty on the day in question. When she testified on a second
occasion, she was more direct in her recollection that her attendance was mandatory.
However, when she testified the second time, it was also clear from the evidence that she had
attended a buy back day. As discussed above, buy back days are not part of the school year
pursuant to the CBA and are not mandatory. The payroll records Respondent Gonzalez
presented also tend to indicate that although she was compensated for days predating the first
day of class, she was paid at a rate different than her regular pay as a teacher.

C. Early Reporting for Work

107.

Some of the Respondents contend that they should have earlier RIF dates

because they began to actually perform services as probationary employees and were
compensated for the same before their RIF dates assigned by the District.

108. Anthony Colla. He contends that his RIF date should be adjusted from
September 1, 2006, to a new date of August 22, 2006. He signed his probationary contract on
August 22, 2006. That day he also attended an English Department meeting. He attended
another English Department meeting on August 28, 2006. Although he established that he
received regular pay from the District for his attendance those two days, it was established
that neither of these meetings was mandatory. Moreover, it was not established that any of
these dates were part of the contracted school year pursuant to the CBA. It was not
established that Respondent Colla was paid for rendering service in his probationary capacity
earlier than his RIF date. Cause was not established to adjust his seniority date.

109. Rachel Nguyen. The District’s RIF date for this Respondent is September 1,
2006. She contends her correct RIF date is August 25, 2006, because on that day she began
performing her duties as a counselor and was paid for doing so. However, Respondent
Nguyen failed to establish that her early attendance before classes began was mandated by an
administrator, and she failed to present written corroboration that she was paid for service on
August 25th, or any other day preceding the District’s RIF date. Respondent Nguyen failed
to establish that her RIF date should be adjusted.

D. Various Contract Issues

110. Valerie Davidson. The District’s RIF date for this Respondent is July 6, 2004,
the effective date of a University Intern contract she signed. She contends that her RIF date
should be adjusted to July 1, 2001, which is when she initially served the District through a
Provisional, Pre-Intern contract. However, during the summer of 2003, Respondent Davidson
was without a credential, and was advised that she would have to be a substitute employee
the following school year in light of that situation. She worked for the District as a substitute
during the 2003-2004 school year. After she obtained her credential in June 2004, she was

29

offered and signed an intern contract which accounts for her District assigned RIF date.
Under these circumstances, Respondent Davidson did not establish cause to adjust her RIF
date.

111. Victoria Bareghamyan. She contests the District’s RIF date for her of March

30, 2007. She was initially retained under a temporary contract that was dated December 15,
2006, the date she also began teaching with the District under a valid credential. Her
principal assigned her to cover a class vacated by a teacher who was reassigned. On March
30, 2007, Respondent Bareghamyan was offered and accepted a probationary contract. The
District was permitted to initially retain Respondent Bareghamyan under a temporary
contract pursuant to Education Code section 44920 to fill a mid-year vacancy created by
another teacher’s reassignment. There is no evidence that the temporary contract was offered
to Respondent Bareghamyan by reason of her credential status or to frustrate the purposes of
teacher tenure established by the Education Code. Respondent Bareghamyan is not entitled
to the tacking provision of section 44920 because she did not teach the complete school year
in 2006/2007. Since seniority is based on paid service in a probationary capacity, service
under her temporary contract does not count for purposes of establishing her RIF date.
Therefore, cause was not established to adjust Respondent Bareghamyan’s RIF date. In any
event, the RIF date Respondent Bareghamyan requests would not give her sufficient
seniority to avoid being laid off.

112. Tova Adler. The District’s RIF date for her is January 5, 2004, when she first

began teaching under a probationary contract. Respondent Adler contends her correct RIF
date is July 1, 2003, when she was first paid for teaching under a temporary contract.
Respondent Tovar had a valid credential at that time, and she taught the entire school year.
She has taught full-time for the District since. Although Respondent Adler testified that she
had no knowledge of being a replacement teacher for another, the District was not required to
establish that Respondent was assigned to a particular school site from which any particular
employee was on leave.11 A school district the size of the District can be presumed to have a
constant percentage of teachers on short-term or long-term leaves of absence, and a large
number at that.12 Respondent Adler failed to establish that she was improperly classified as a
temporary teacher.13 She articulated no cause to tack-on her prior temporary employment
experience to her seniority date. Therefore, cause was not established to adjust Respondent
Adler’s RIF date.

11 See Santa Barbara Federation of Teachers v. Santa Barbara High School District

(1977) 76 Cal.App.3d 223, 229-234. In Santa Barbara, the court adopted the school
district’s argument that “the statute requires only that the total number of temporary teachers
not exceed the aggregate of probationary and permanent teachers on leave at any one time.”

12 Santa Barbara Federation of Teachers v. Santa Barbara High School District,

supra, 76 Cal.App.3d 223, 229-234.

13 Santa Barbara Federation of Teachers v. Santa Barbara High School District,

supra, 76 Cal.App.3d 223, 234.

30

113. Angelica Fuentes. She seeks to have her RIF date adjusted from November 4,
2002, to an earlier date of October 2, 2000, when she began serving the District and taught a
second grade class the remainder of the school year. However, in October of 2002, she was
without a credential when her emergency permit expired. Her contract informed her that it
would expire on October 1, 2002. On September 30, 2002, she signed a document indicating
her status changed to being a substitute teacher. After she was issued an appropriate
credential, she was offered and signed an intern contract on November 4, 2002, which is her
RIF date assigned by the District. Under these circumstances, cause was not established to
adjust her seniority date.

114. Ronnie Ford. He seeks to have his RIF date adjusted from January 19, 2007, to

December 1, 2005. He began with the District as a coach in 2002, and then as a substitute in
2005. At the beginning of the 2005-2006 school year, he signed a statement of his
availability as a day-to-day substitute teacher. He again signed the same statement on
January 17, 2006. Sometime in December of 2005, he was given an assignment as a long-
term substitute teacher, which he performed through the end of the school year in June 2006.
Respondent Ford continued the same assignment the following school year, 2006-2007.
When he obtained a provisional intern credential on January 19, 2007, the District offered
him a contract for employment, which accounts for his District assigned RIF date. Although
not entirely clear, he apparently urges that he should be able to tack-on the prior service as a
long-term substitute for purposes of his seniority pursuant to Education Code sections 44918
and 44914.14 Section 44918 is not applicable to the District, since it has an average daily
attendance (ADA) above 400,000 students. Although section 44914 allows tacking of the
sort requested by Respondent Ford, it is permissive; a school district does not have to apply
it. The District has decided not to apply it in this case. Respondent Ford has not established a
basis to adjust his RIF date.

115.

Jana Fowlks. She contests her District assigned RIF date of January 15, 2002,
which is the effective date of her first probationary contract with the District. She contends
her correct RIF date is August 30, 2001, when she began an assignment at a magnet span
school teaching sixth and seventh grade math classes. She began that assignment as a long
term substitute teacher. At that time, she was working toward getting a math supplemental
authorization, which later proved to be unsuccessful. When the District was able to obtain the

14 Both statutes provide that an employee who has served 75 percent or more of a
school year as a substitute or temporary employee is eligible to be deemed to have served
that school year as a probationary employee if they serve the following school year in a
probationary status. However, Education Code section 44918, subdivision (f), indicates that
the statute does not apply to school districts in which the average daily attendance is in
excess of 400,000. Education Code section 44914 is permissive, in that it provides that “the
governing board of the district may count the year of employment as a substitute or as a
substitute and probationary employee as one year of the probationary period which he is
required by law to serve as a condition to being classified as a permanent employee of the
district.” (Emphasis added.)

31

requisite authorization for her to teach math in January of 2002, she was offered her
probationary contract. As explained above regarding Respondent Ford, Education Code
sections 44918 and 44914 do not apply to Respondent Fowlks and thus she is not entitled to
tack-on her first semester of service as a substitute teacher pursuant to those statutes. Section
44920 does not apply because Respondent Fowlkes was not offered a temporary contract for
the first semester of the 2001-2002 school year. Under these circumstances, it was not
established that Respondent Fowlks’ RIF date should be adjusted.

116.

(A) Lorcan Kilroy. This Respondent seeks to have his RIF date adjusted from

January 16, 2003, to a new date of July 1, 2001. Respondent Kilroy was initially employed
by the District as a substitute teacher. He taught in that capacity from 2001 through 2003 at
Van Nuys High School and a few other schools, and taught a variety of different classes.
Respondent Kilroy did not establish that he taught under a temporary contract during this
time period. However, he signed a probationary contract effective January 16, 2003, which is
the RIF date assigned to him by the District.15

(B) Respondent Kilroy argues that Education Code section 44917 allows him
to tack on his prior substitute teaching experience to his probationary service. He cites to the
second paragraph of the statute which provides that a district “may employ . . . in substitute
status any otherwise qualified person who consents to be employed in a position for which
no regular employee is available….” However, the third paragraph of that statute, which is
central to Respondent Kilroy’s argument, states that any person “employed for one complete
school year as a temporary employee shall, if reemployed for the following school year . . .
be classified . . . as a probationary employee and the previous year’s employment as a
temporary employee shall be deemed one year’s employment as a probationary employee for
purposes of acquiring permanent status.” Since these two paragraphs refer to different
classifications, substitute and temporary, Respondent Kilroy’s argument does not naturally
flow that the District’s hiring him as a substitute employee as referenced in the second
paragraph of the statute qualifies him for the tacking relief provided to temporary teachers
provided by the third paragraph of the statute. Respondent Kilroy failed to establish that he
served in a temporary teaching classification or assignment before he achieved probationary
status, and therefore he failed to establish that he fits within the meaning of section 44917.

15 These findings are based on the testimony of Respondent Kilroy and his exhibits
admitted into evidence on May 17, 2012. Subsequently, when the closing briefs were being
submitted by the parties, Respondent Kilroy requested to amend his testimony and offer new
exhibits into the record to support his argument that he should be viewed as a temporary
employee. The request was denied for the reasons stated on the record during the oral
argument of this matter on June 4, 2012.

32

(C) Respondent Kilroy also argues that his service for the District in 2001-

2003, before he was made probationary, fits within the definition of temporary employment
pursuant to Education Code section 44919.16 He argues that by operation of that statute, he
should have been reclassified by the District as being a probationary employee in either
spring or fall of 2002, which would provide him with sufficient seniority to avoid being laid
off. However, as found above, it was established by the evidence that Respondent Kilroy
served as a substitute employee during the period in question. In any event, the evidence did
not establish that Respondent Kilroy was offered a temporary contract or was given an
assignment of the type specified in section 44919. Respondent Kilroy failed to establish
cause to adjust his RIF date.

E. Returning to Service After Resignation

117. Three Respondents testified that their RIF dates should be adjusted due to

circumstances surrounding past resignations from the District.

118. The policy of the District is to permit certificated employees returning to

employment on the same or equivalent salary table within a 39-month period after a
resignation to maintain their permanent status, but not their RIF date. (CBA, Art. XIV, §
15.0.)17 If the employee is rehired at a lower salary table, they are treated as a new hire.
(CBA, Art. XIV, § 15.2.) District policy is to inform inquiring employees of the above.
Employees are typically advised when resigning from the District that there is no guarantee
of future employment.

119. Kristen Black. Respondent Black’s RIF date with the District is July 1, 2005.

She contends her RIF date should be adjusted to an earlier seniority date she held with the
District before resigning. Under the circumstances explained below, Respondent Black’s
seniority date should be adjusted to September 18, 1995, which no longer subjects her to
being laid off, meaning cause has been established to reemploy her next school year.

A. She was first employed by the District effective September 18, 1995. After
teaching five school years, and becoming permanent, she resigned from the District in June
of 2000 for a teaching position at another school district closer to her home.

16 Education Code section 44919 provides, in part, that school districts shall classify

as temporary employees those persons requiring certification qualifications, other than
substitute employees, who are employed to serve from day to day during the first three
school months of any school term to teach temporary classes not to exist after the first three
school months of any school term or to perform any other duties which do not last longer
than the first three school months of any school term. If the classes or duties continue beyond
the first three school months of any school term, the certificated employee, unless a
permanent employee, shall be classified as a probationary employee.

17 It is well settled that even upon returning within 39 months, a previous seniority
date is not restored. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1982) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 641.)

33

B. In 2005, Respondent Black was approached by Hector DuBon, at the time

the District’s Director of School Services for Local District 8. Mr. DuBon asked Respondent
Black to return to the District to serve as a math coach at a low performing school.
Respondent Black was concerned about leaving her then employing school district and losing
her seniority, so she told Mr. DuBon she would only return to the District if her previous
seniority date with the District (September 18, 1995) was restored, and only so long as Mr.
DuBon would put that in writing. Mr. DuBon promised to do so, in part because the math
coach position could only be filled by a teacher with permanent status. In reliance on Mr.
DuBon’s promise to have her previous seniority date with the District restored, Respondent
Black resigned from the other school district and signed a new probationary contract with the
District, effective July 1, 2005. Mr. DuBon issued a letter dated June 28, 2005, in which he
stated that her previous employment status and seniority date with the District “were
reinstated.”

C. Estoppel is available against governmental agencies. It has been said that

“[a] citizen ought to have the right to expect his government to deal fairly with him.”
(Crumpler v. Board of Administrators (1973) 32 Cal.App.3d 567, 579.) It has also been aptly
said that if “men must turn square corners when they deal with the government, it is hard to
see why the government should not be held to a like standard of rectangular rectitude when
dealing with its citizens.” (Id., at 579-580.) In this case, Respondent Black may invoke
equitable estoppel against the District, because all the elements of estoppel have been
established: (1) Mr. DuBon, a high-ranking official of the District, was apprised of the
situation by Respondent Black, and he told Respondent Black that he would check with
District HR personnel before making an assurance regarding the restoration of her seniority
date in writing; (2) Mr. DuBon intended that Respondent Black rely on his conduct and
resign from her then employing school district; (3) Respondent Black had no suspicion that
the District would not follow through on Mr. DuBon’s promise; and (4) Respondent Black
relied on Mr. DuBon to her detriment, in that she resigned from her then employing school
district and lost her 2000 seniority date. (Crumpler, supra, 32 Cal.App.3d at 581.)

D. Although estoppel should be applied against the government “where justice

and right require it,” it cannot be applied against the government where to do so would
effectively nullify a “strong rule of policy, adopted for the benefit of the public….” (City of
Long Beach v. Mansell (1970) 3 Cal.3d 462, 493.) Nor can estoppel be applied where to do
so would enlarge the power of a governmental agency or expand the authority of a public
official. (Longshore v. County of Ventura (1979) 25 Cal.3d 14, 28.)

E. Contrary to the District’s contention, estoppel is not precluded in this case
by virtue of Fleice v. Chular Union Elementary School District (1988) 206 Cal.App.3d 886.
In that case, the court rejected the application of estoppel to a teacher who was given
permanent tenure status even though she had taught at the district less than two years. The
court strictly construed Education Code section 44882 to require a mandatory two-year “test
period” of teaching before a district could make a teacher permanent. This was because the
public policy buttressed by that statute was not teachers’ employment, but rather the proper
education of pupils by teachers who have satisfied the district of their competency. (Id., at

34

879-880, 892.) Applying estoppel was rejected because doing so would not only nullify the
strong public policy of pupils being taught by teachers who passed the two year test period,
but it would also expand the government’s powers beyond legal limits since districts have no
statutory power to grant permanent tenure to teachers with less than two years teaching in a
district. (Id., at 893-895.) The Fleice decision is limited to that particular fact pattern. For
example, in Briney v. Santa Ana High School District (1933) 131 Cal.App. 357, the court did
not hesitate to apply estoppel where a district attempted to renege on earlier promises to
make a certificated teacher permanent after two years of teaching at the district. The court
estopped the district from not following through on those promises and prohibited it from
subjecting that teacher to lay off since she had taught there satisfactorily for two years.

F. In this case, the concern noted in the Fleice case is not apparent.

Respondent Black became a permanent teacher in her initial tenure with the District. She
again became permanent after she returned to the District. She has twice satisfied the two-
year “test period” at the heart of the Fleice case. In fact, Respondent Black has been with the
District almost seven years after she returned in 2005. Thus, allowing Respondent Black to
invoke estoppel will not pose a threat to students or faculty. On the other hand, Education
Code section 44931, which requires school districts to restore permanent status to an
employee who resigns and returns within 39 months, does not appear aimed at the protection
of the public in general or students in particular. Rather, it provides protection to teachers
who resign and return within a moderate time period. The concept of a seniority date for
purposes of lay off cases is to ensure that seniority is honored when a school district makes
lay off decisions and to prevent favoritism. In this case, forcing the District to honor Mr.
DuBon’s promise to Respondent Black simply protects her from being unjustly laid off. It
does not provide the District any power prohibited by the Education Code or nullify a strong
public policy.

120. Christina Thymes. Her District assigned RIF date is August 17, 2005, when
she signed a probationary contract to serve as a school psychologist. However, Respondent
Thymes seeks to adjust her RIF date to August 23, 1997, when she was employed in a
probationary capacity as an elementary school teacher. Under the circumstances explained
below, Respondent Thymes’ seniority date should be adjusted as she requests, which no
longer subjects her to being laid off.

A. From 1997 through December 2002, Respondent Thymes worked as an
elementary school teacher, during which time she became a permanent employee. From
January 2003 through April 2004, she began a series of District approved leaves.

B. At some point during this process, she was training to become a school

psychologist. In April 2004, she was asked to serve as a substitute school psychologist while
she was still on leave, mainly because the District was enduring a hiring freeze and could
only use existing employees to fill positions. She worked for three months as a substitute
school psychologist, from April through June 2004.

35

C. She was not paid for that service and discovered that the District would not
pay her because she worked out of classification, i.e., the position of school psychologist is a
different classification than as an elementary school teacher. She was told by her supervisor
and District HR personnel that she would not be paid for her three months of service unless
she signed a formal resignation of service from the District. She did so in order to get paid.
Only after she resigned was she paid for her three months of service.

D. Respondent Thymes continued to work regularly as a substitute school

psychologist until she was offered a probationary contract to work in that capacity on August
17, 2005, which is her District assigned RIF date.

E. In this case, Respondent Thymes has established all the elements of

estoppel against the District: (1) Because the District needed to hire existing employees
during a hiring freeze, Respondent Thymes was requested to and allowed to work out of
classification as a school psychologist. The District was not only aware of this situation, but
it placed Respondent Thymes in her untenable situation; (2) Respondent Thymes’ supervisor
intended her to work as a substitute school psychologist; (3) Respondent Thymes had no
suspicion that the District would not pay her because she worked out of classification or that
she would be required to resign in order to be paid retroactively; and (4) Respondent Thymes
relied to her detriment on the District’s statement that she could only get paid if she resigned
from the District, in that the District is now taking the position that the resignation has
eliminated her prior 1997 seniority date. (Crumpler, supra, 32 Cal.App.3d at 581.) The
District has not established a valid reason to require Respondent Thymes to formally resign
from service in order to be paid for the three months of service she rendered as a substitute
school psychologist at the request of the District. Thus, the District misrepresented to
Respondent Thymes the necessity of resigning from the District in order to get paid. The
District also put her in a situation of duress, essentially forcing her to resign in order to be
paid for service already rendered.

121.

(A) W. Scott Norton. He contests the District’s RIF date for him of September

16, 2002. He contends his correct RIF date is no later than July 1, 2001, when he began
teaching at Maclay Middle School (Maclay) under a District Intern contract.18 He later
discovered that there would not be a position for him the following school year at Maclay in
the District Intern program, but that he could remain at Maclay in a position under the
University Intern program. On September 15, 2002, he completed and signed a resignation
form, which stated that he was resigning from District service, that he intended to apply for
an assignment as a University Intern, but that “there is no guarantee of future employment.”
Respondent Norton signed a University Intern contract and began teaching on September 16,
2002, which is his District assigned RIF date.

18 He testified that an alternate RIF date could be June 25, 2001, when he began what
he referred to as mandated training for which he received regular pay. However, Respondent
Norton did not establish that the training was mandatory or that he received regular pay for
attending it. The early training does not provide cause to adjust his RIF date.

36

(B) Respondent Norton testified that he did not intend to resign from the
District, but simply wanted to change programs. He also testified that nobody from the
District warned him that he would be viewed as separating from service at the District when
he signed the resignation form. However, Respondent Norton did not establish estoppel,
most notably that he was misled, deceived or given inaccurate information negligently by
District authorities (see footnote 8). Respondent Norton had an opportunity to read and
consider the resignation form before signing it.

(C) Ultimately, Education Code section 44931 and the San Jose Teachers case

are not controlling, because it must be concluded that the resignation was not effective. It is
not effective because it is clear that Respondent Norton did not intend to terminate or end his
employment with the District, and the District did not intend for that either. Indeed, the
District’s intent is signaled by the fact that Respondent went right back to an assignment, and
Respondent kept his probationary status. The parties’ real purpose was to “finagle” a way for
Respondent Norton to obtain a different assignment and/or remain at Maclay.

(D) In such circumstances, a resignation is not effective. (Sherman v. Board of

Trustees (1935) 9 Cal.App. 2d 262, 265-266.) In Sherman, the teacher had worked for the
district for three years. Her employer did not approve of the then-new tenure law, and
persuaded her to resign, promising her continued employment. She resigned, which
resignation was accepted by the district board, and went back to work for another three years
after having applied for reappointment. After her sixth year of service, there was a dispute
over whether or not she was tenured, and the district asserted the resignation as a break in her
contract that barred tenure at that point. The Court of Appeal rejected the board’s position,
holding that:

the purported resignation was ineffectual for the reason that it was not
made with the purpose of terminating [the teacher’s] employment, but
on the contrary was presented with the understanding that it was not to
terminate her service, but was offered for the mere purpose of avoiding
the effect of the tenure law and upon the definite promise that she
would be reemployed. . . . A resignation is in the nature of a notice of
the termination of a contract of employment and is contractual in
nature. It is ineffectual without the intent of the incumbent to sever the
relationship of employer and employee. (9 Cal.App. 3d at 265-266.)

(E) In this case, is it clear that Respondent Norton and the District did not

intend to sever the employer-employee relationship, as evidenced by their conduct and the
testimony of Respondent. Thus, Respondent Norton’s RIF date should be adjusted to July 1,
2001. Since there are employees in his subject area junior to him being retained by the
District, Respondent Norton shall not be laid off.

37

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Jurisdiction

1.

2.

The notice and jurisdictional requirements of Education Code sections 44949

and 44955 were met. (Factual Findings 1-13.)

(A) Of the many certificated individuals involved in this case as potential

parties, it was only established that the District failed (inadvertently) to serve timely lay off
notices on the following five Respondents: John Beilock, Monica Hein, Lisa Jordan, Shelley
Lee, and Heidi Nariman. The Accusations against those individuals will be dismissed. Some
of the five individuals are junior to Respondents who have the same positions.

(B) Respondents argue that all individuals in the subject areas of the five

Respondents in question with greater seniority must be retained. Respondents rely on a literal
interpretation of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), which provides, “the
services of no permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section
while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to
render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.”
This is the so-called “domino theory.”

(C) Application of the domino theory is not supported by relevant legal

authority. For example, it has been suggested that the proper remedy for such a situation is
for a “corresponding number of the most senior employees” who did receive a lay off notice
to have their notices withdrawn. (Alexander v. Delano Joint Union High School District
(1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 576.) Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3),
provides that “non-substantive procedural errors committed by the school district . . . shall
not constitute cause for dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.” This
provision suggests that when a school district, through oversight, fails to notice one
employee, that procedural error should only result in one corresponding respondent having
his/her lay off notice withdrawn, as that employee would be most properly viewed as the one
suffering prejudice. A noted legal scholar on school district lay off cases in California
disapproves of applying the domino theory in cases of good-faith errors by districts.
(Ozsogomonyan, Teacher Layoffs in California: An Update, (1979) 30 Hastings Law Journal
1727, 1754-1759.) Finally, the approach approved by the Alexander court has been generally
accepted by ALJs of the Office of Administrative Hearings in cases of good faith errors by
school districts.

(D) In this case, there is no evidence suggesting that the failure to provide the

five individuals in question with their lay off notices was the result of anything other than
inadvertence, which can be reasonably assumed given the massive number of employees
involved (or potentially so) in this matter. Thus, the appropriate remedy is for the District to
rescind the lay off notices of the five most senior Respondents in the subject areas
corresponding with the five Respondents who did not receive their lay off notices. However,
the District has determined that there are no Respondents in the same subject area junior to

38

two of the five Respondents in question (Nariman and Lee) who will be retained by the
District next year. There is no harm to be remedied as to those two Respondents. Therefore,
only the three most senior Respondents corresponding to the other three Respondents who
did not receive a lay off notice shall have their lay off notices rescinded. The District has
determined that Respondents James Pulliam, Rene Fuentes, and Seanean Shanahan are the
most senior Respondents in the subject areas corresponding with the five Respondents who
did not receive their lay off notices. (Factual Findings 1-13.)

3.

Temporary teachers may be released at the pleasure of the governing school

board. (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (a).) The statutory layoff provisions therefore do not apply
to them. (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (a); Zalac v. Governing Board of the Ferndale Unified
School District (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.) The precautionary Respondents who the District
properly classified as temporary employees are not subject to the protections of Education
Code sections 44949 and 44955. The three Respondents identified in Factual Finding 30 are
also temporary employees. The Accusations against them should be dismissed.

The District’s Competency Criteria

4.

(A) A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to

a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the
senior employee is said to displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.
(Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (c); Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d
469.)

(B) However, a school district has the authority and the discretion to establish

competency criteria that relate to the skills and qualifications of a teacher for purposes of
determining bumping rights. (Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196
Cal.App.3d 555, 563-567.) This discretion is limited by a reasonableness standard, i.e., the
school district’s criteria must be reasonable, rather than fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious.
(Campbell Elementary Teachers Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.) The
reasonableness standard permits “a difference of opinion on the same subject.” (Id.) A school
district’s competency criteria may include a recency requirement. (Duax, supra, 196
Cal.App.3d at 567 [approving a recency requirement of “one year of teaching in the last
ten”].) However, the Duax court opined that a “one in the last two or three (years)” standard
“too narrowly defines competency.” (Id.) There are no other known appellate decisions to
provide further guidance in this area. Therefore, it appears that a recency requirement
somewhere between one-in-three years and one-in-ten is appropriate.

(C) Although past lay off decisions regarding other school districts issued by

the Office of Administrative Hearings are not binding, it is worth noting that the vast
majority of such decisions have upheld criteria from other school districts similar to the
District’s in defining competency for purposes of bumping. (These decisions are cited in the
District’s motion-in-limine regarding this issue.) Finally, the ALJ who decided the District’s
lay off case last year upheld the same competency criteria. While that decision is not res

39

judicata or collateral estoppel on the Respondents in this case, it still would be unseemly for
OAH to uphold the same competency definition one year, but invalidate it the next year.

(D) In this case, the District’s competency criteria of one-in-five years past

experience is deemed to be reasonable. The evidence in this case abundantly established that
the laws, standards, norms, methods, training and technology are constantly evolving on a
yearly pace. Requiring teachers seeking to bump into other subject areas to have one year of
teaching experience in the past five school years appears to be reasonable. Having teachers
with such recent experience is certainly to the benefit of the District’s students. The Board’s
competency criteria is an objective standard, avoiding the often vague and murky questions
of competency that can lead to inconsistent or unfair application, which can often prove to be
a breeding ground of subjective decision-making and favoritism.

Specific Respondents

5.

Pursuant to stipulation between the parties specifically referenced in the
record, the layoff notices issued to the involved Respondents shall be rescinded, if not
already. The Accusations against those individuals shall be dismissed and they shall be
retained for the next school year. (Factual Findings 9, 10, 57, 58, 78 [stipulations pertaining
to exhibit 403], 86 and 87.)

6.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, the Respondents who received
precautionary notices relative to the Reed schools situation, and the Dual Immersion and
International Baccalaureate program skips, shall have their lay off notices rescinded. (Factual
Findings 39-56, 88-91.)

7.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), the following

Respondents established grounds to bump junior employees being retained to teach in
assignments which these Respondents are credentialed and competent to perform: Nancy
Reyes and Erik Matsubayashi. The Accusations against these Respondents shall be dismissed
and they shall be retained for the next school year. (Factual Findings 83-84.)

8.

Pursuant to Education Code sections 44845 and 87414, cause was established

to adjust the RIF dates of the following Respondents to those specified: Joseph Espinoza,
August 12, 2002; Angela Vitalis, date not established; Kirsten Black, September 18, 1995;
Christina Thymes, August 23, 1997; and W. Scott Norton, July 1, 2001. The District shall
dismiss the Accusations against them and they shall be retained for the next school year.
(Factual Findings 97, 98, 119, 120, and 121.)

9.

Pursuant to Education Code sections 44845 and 87414, cause was established
to adjust the RIF date of Respondent Carole Sielaff to August 22, 2005. However, she failed
to establish sufficient seniority to avoid being laid off. The Accusation against her is
sustained and she shall be subject to lay off. (Factual Finding 92.)

40

Overall Conclusions

10.

The services identified in the Board’s Resolution are particular kinds of

services that can be reduced or discontinued pursuant to Education Code section 44955. The
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Services will not be reduced below
mandated levels. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of those particular services
relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and students within the meaning of
Education Code section 44949. (Factual Findings 1-27.)

11.

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due

to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. (Factual Findings 1-27.)

12.

By taking into account the Legal Conclusions above and the resulting orders

below, no junior certificated employee will be retained to perform services that a more senior
employee is certificated and competent to render. (Factual Findings 1-121, Legal Conclusions
1-11.)

ORDER

1.

The Accusations are dismissed against Respondents Lynn Aafedt; Tove

Aitchison; Nicole Allison; William Gabriel; Jennifer Horton; Nadezhda Kostritskaya; Petra
Krumland; Susan Smith; Haikaz Vardavarian; Roger Wilson; and James Womack. These
Respondents shall be retained for the 2012-2013 school year.

2.

The Accusations are dismissed against Respondents John Beilock; Monica

Hein; Lisa Jordan; Shelley Lee; and Heidi Nariman. These Respondents shall be retained for
the 2012-2013 school year. The District has determined that Respondents James Pulliam,
Rene Fuentes, and Seanean Shanahan are the most senior Respondents in the subject areas
corresponding with the five Respondents who did not receive their lay off notices. The
Accusations are dismissed against Respondents James Pulliam, Rene Fuentes, and Seanean
Shanahan, and they shall be retained for the next school year.

3.

The Accusations are dismissed against Respondents Rosemarie Bernier; Stacia
Salanoa; Valary White; Allison Walker; Carthec Davidson; Frank Treece; Mary Ann Topico;
Po Yu; Tamunosa Okiwelu; Rosela Hipolito; Lourdes Gallardo; Treesa Lowther-Sopata;
Gina Aguirre; Derek Patrimonio; Corazon Lazaro; Don Alvarado; Marilou Abrantes; and
Susan Fernandez. These Respondents shall be retained for the 2012-2013 school year.

4.

The Accusations are dismissed against those Respondents who executed the
stipulation contained in exhibit 403 and who are identified in Appendix 1 attached herein.
These Respondents shall be retained for the 2012-2013 school year.

5.

The Accusations are dismissed against Respondents Nancy Reyes and Erik

Matsubayashi. These Respondents shall be retained for the 2012-2013 school year.

41

6.

The precautionary Respondents who received lay off notices because they

were identified as temporary employees are not subject to this lay off proceeding. The
Accusations against them are dismissed.

7.

The District’s RIF dates for the following Respondents shall be adjusted:

Joseph Espinoza, whose correct RIF date is August, 12, 2002; Angela Vitalis, whose correct
RIF date was not established by the evidence, and therefore the District shall determine and
adjust her correct RIF date; Kirsten Black, whose correct RIF date is September 18, 1995;
Christina Thymes, whose correct RIF date is August 23, 1997; and W. Scott Norton, whose
correct RIF date is July 2, 2001. The Accusations against these Respondents shall be
dismissed and they shall be retained next school year.

8.

The District’s RIF date for Respondent Carole Sielaff shall be adjusted to

August 22, 2005, however the Accusation against her is sustained and she shall be given a
final lay off notice.

9.

The Accusations are sustained against the remaining Respondents. Notice shall

be given to those Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2012-2013
school year in inverse order of seniority.

Dated: June 6, 2012

________________________________
ERIC SAWYER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

42

APPENDIX 1: Respondents who executed the stipulation referenced in Exhibit 403

NAME

COMPETENCY

RIF SUB-
JECT
HTH
LIB
CSC
ELR
HTH
HTH
HTH

SBS
ENG
ENG/IAT
MMD
SBS
SBS
SBS

PERSON
ID
789121
770958
750794
789446
956378
770795
771659

733043
772678
789106
809362
593266
713134
760157
770975
773219
703274
639576
575820
790308
985529
789040
780586
663291

800973
794910
920216
804721
760061
926269
587870
788858
800930
728228

AAFEDT, LYNN
ABAD, CONSUELO
ABRAHAM, DARREN
ADAIR, MATTHEW
AGUSTIN, SHULAMITE
AITCHISON, TOVE
ALLISON, NICOLE

ALTOUNIAN, LILIT
AMBROSIO, HEATHER
AQUINO, YOLANDO
ARANAGA, TRAVIS
ARIAS, ALBERTO
ARMSTRONG, CATHLEEN
AXELMAN, ANDREA
BAILEY, BARRETT
BALALA, KIMBERLY
BALYAN, NARINE
BELLO, KAI
BENNETT, LEGDRENA
BERHITOE, GEORGE
BINNS, ALISSA
BLOCK, JASON
BOLLER, RICHELLE
BOTTS, CATARINA

BUNNELL, DAVID
CANDLER, ARTIS
CAPORALE, LOIS
CHONIS, JOYCE
COHEN, ILENE
CONNOR, MICHAEL
CONTRERAS, ELIAS
CORDERO, MARIE
CORDOVA, DARCY
CURIEL, GABRIELA

770696

DE VORE, ADAM

928157
760658
800626
770664

DODGE, JENNIFER
DRAKE, WENDY
DREW, SORAYA
ELLIS, JADE

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46

JMA
ENG
CSC
MAT
IAT
SST
ENG
BEA
SST
MSD
JEN
JEN
MAF
LHD
JEN
SST
MMD

ENG
SST
MSD
SBS
MMD
SBS
IAT
ENG
MMD
JSC

JMA

SIF
MMD
SBS
ENG

CNS
ART
BEA
SST
IAD
ENG
ELR
CSC
LIB
ELR
ELR
ELR
ENG
ELR
ELR
ELR
ELR

ART
HTH
ELR
HTH
ELR
SST
IAD
ELR
ELR
ELR

ELR

ENG
ELR
HTH
LIB

43

645802

FERNANDEZ, BERTHA

ELR

JEN

47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97

780891
703816

FONSECA BAI, PAULA
FRIERSON, ANGELA

706951
706348
970183

GALVEZ, JAVIER
GARCIA, MONIQUE
GARCIA-BERRY, CARLA

746148

GOLDARREH, SUSAN

800648

GONZALEZ, GERARDO

782322
719867
789849
974063
772711
800577
780170
779013
790275
957290

779219
623178
771325

GRIMM, KATHLEEN
GUERRERO, PHILLIP
GULUK ISENSEE, DENISE
GUTHRIE, JACOB
HAGGERMAN, KATHY
HAJDUK, DEBORAH
HARRIS, CINDY
HARTUNIAN, DIANE
HASSON, AARON
HAUSER, ALAN

HENDERSON, ALBERTA
HERNANDEZ, MARIO
HERNANDEZ, RODOLFO

700107

HOLLOWAY, ELIZABETH

702456
770709
778076
780709
782008

HOWE, ELIANA
HUTLOFF, GLEN
JACKSON, KAMILAH
JACOBY, ANDREW
JARVIS, STEPHEN

757063

KENT, STEVEN

759173

KIDWELL, KEISHA

804715
789864
691832
1004292 KRUMLAND, PETRA

KINCAID, SANDELLE
KMIEC, STEPHANIE
KOSKI, REVELEANNE

LIB
CNE

ELR
ELR
HTH

LIB

CSC

ELR
HTH
ELR
PEA
HTH
ELR
CSC
FLF
CSC
SST

ELR
IAG
ELR

LIB

ELR
ENG
LIB
HTH
ELR

BUS

LIB

ELR
ELR
ELR
HTH

44

ENG
CNS

SST
SST
SBS

ELR

MAT

ENG
CNS
JMA
MAT
SST
MMD
MAF
FLS
SST
SBS

MAF
ELR
JMA

ENG

MMD
SST
ENG
PEA
SIF

CSC

HTH

ENG
JEN
SBS
SIF

98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132

133

134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147

781770
778809
780816
804414

KUEBLER, JOLENE
KULENCAVICH, WILLIAM
LAIDLAW, JEFF
LANCASTER, JOANNA

725778

LEMUS, CYNTHIA

782384
957315
232360
809204 MAGYAR, CINDY

LLAMAS, ELIZABETH
LOSA, EDNA
LOUIE, LINDA

283497 MARSHALL, THOMAS
702203 MARTINEZ, MARTHA
707675 MAYE, OLGA
260195 MCKINNON, CYNTHIA
742188 McNEILL, DONALD
771147 McNULTY, ERIN
622673 MEDINILLA, EDGAR
614639 MELENDEZ, SANDRA
773310 MILLER, SALLY
740425 MILLER, STEVEN

762042 MINARD, DIANA
600258 MITCHELL, MICHELE
782076 MOAYERI, LILY

789573 MOSSADAQ, YOUSSEF
800321 MUNOZ, IVETTE
760109

NAVARRO, ANGELICA

664143

729169

718681

NOVOA, ANTONIO
ORTIZ JOHNSON, RE-
BECCA
PADILLA, RODOLFO

957542
788439

PAGAN, ANTHONY
PARK, HYUN

804379
804978

PORTNOFF, SCOTT
POWELL, ERNEST

782029
782808
770879

RAMOS, ANA
RANDICK, ALYSON
RASKIN, BEATRICE

HTH
ELR
ART
ENG

LIB

ELR
CSC
ELR
ELR

IAA
HEA
ELR
ELR
CSC
HTH
CSC
PEA
LIB
LIB

ELR
ELR
LIB

FLF
ELR
ELR

SST

ELR

ELR

CSC
ELR

CSC
ENG

ELR
HTH
ELR

45

FLS
JMA
PEA
MMD

ENG

JMA
MAT/IAT
JMA
SIF

IAT
SBS
JMA
CNS
IAT
SBS
PEA
CSC
ENG
ENG

JEN
CNS
MAT

FLAZ
ENG
ENG

JMA

MMD

SST

IAT
MMD

MAT
SST

MAF
SBS
ENG

148
149
150
151

152

153

154

155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196

956500

RICE, PATRICIA

ENG

SPI

743513

760142

RIVLIN, DANIELLE
RODRIGUEZ, ARGENTI-
NA

641981

586203
788495

772543
696250
781844
925084
795951
542647
746318

729741
700061
799785

771423
805018
767511

ROMERO ARCINIEGA,
ERIKA
ROMERO, ALICIA
RUSH, JOHN

SABBAH, SOPHIE
SALAZAR, JOSE
SAUCEDA, MARIA
SAYERS, PATSY
SCANTLIN, SHAYLEEN
SCHERR, ANNETTE
SHOWRAI, DARA

SMITH, TOBY
SNELL, YOLONDA
SONMEZAY, MEHMET

STERN, SCOTT
SUN, CAROL
SUNG, KYUNG WON

686606
684732

TISCARENO, MARCELA
TOKESHI, STEVE

VARDAVARIAN, HAIKAZ
VASSERMAN, SOFIA
VENGER, GREG
VIZAS, CECILY
VLADOVIC, JOHN

930976
603785
740941
712311
664418
531038 WALD, JANICE
804070 WARKENTINE, ELLEN
622902 WARNER, TERESA
767653 WILSON, LESLIE

804011 WOOD, TAMARIN

789912

YOON, KATHY

JMA

ENG

JMA

CNS
CSC

PEA
IAT
JEN
SBS
SBS
SCB
MAT

PEA
MAF
MAT

JSS
MSD
JMA

MMD
JMA

SIF
JSC
PEA
JEN
MAT
SST
ENG
PEA
MAT/JSC

ENG

JMA

ELR

ELR

CSC

ELR
BEA

HTH
CSC
ELR
HTH
ELR
LIB
ELR

ELR
MUS
BEA

HTH
ELR
ELR

ELR
ELR

HTH
ELR
HTH
ELR
ELR
ENG
ELR
HTH
ELR

LIB

ELR

46

197
198
199
200

201

202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213

214

801868
708155
772635
740525

653629

SOOKIASIANS, SELIN
NAHLE-SALAZAR, RANIA
HIGGINS, PAMELA
LYDON, MELODEE
BELTRAN-MATA, SAN-
DRA

608873 WALKER, ALLISON
CARROLL, BLAIR
712297
RUIZ, MARCO
781877
699037
GOLDEN, CYNTHIA
805040 WROBLESKI, MARY
723288
779025
789369 WEXLER, BARBARA
986527
752209 MLADEN, CHRISTOV
682989 WOLL, JEANETTE
788588

NAKASHIMA, DAN

DAHL, ANTHONY JAMES
LESSEM, JORDAN

JACKSON, FREDERICK B.

780035

COSTIGAN, VALERIE

END OF DOCUMENT

ELR
ELR
HTH
LIB

LIB

LIB
LIB
LIB
ELR
ELR
ELR
BEA
ELR
PEA
ENG
HEA
JEN

ELR

MMD
CNS/PSA
JSC
ELR

ELR

JEN
ENG
SBS
JEN
SBS
MMD
CSC
ENG
APE
SST
JMA
SST

JMA

47

