BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
LOS OLIVOS SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SANTA BARBARA
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Layoffs Of:

Sharla Braquinho and Nancy Watson,

Case No. 2012040037

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard

this matter on May 3, 2012, in Los Olivos, California.1

Danielle G. Eanet, Attorney at Law, represented Marsha Filbin (Filbin), Superintendent

of the Los Olivos School District (District).

Sharla Branquinho (Branquinho) and Nancy Watson (Watson), who are collectively

referred to as Respondents, represented themselves.

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and has
given Respondents and other certificated employees of the District notice of its intent not to
reemploy them for the 2012-2013 school year. Respondents requested a hearing for a
determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2012-2013 school year.

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing and the matter was

submitted for decision.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Superintendent Filbin filed the Accusation in her official capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

1 The hearing in this matter was continued from its previously-scheduled date, April 18,
2012, and the deadlines set forth in Education Code sections 44949, subdivision (c), and 44955,
subdivision (c), have been extended in accordance with Education Code section 44949,
subdivision (e).

a.

3.

On February 13, 2012, the Governing Board of the District (Governing
Board) adopted Resolution number 2011/2012 No. 06, reducing or discontinuing the following
services for the 2012-2013 school year:

Service

FTE2 Positions

Multiple-subject credentialed teachers
Single-subject credentialed Science teachers
Single-subject credentialed Math teachers
Single-subject credentialed Social Studies teachers
Single-subject credentialed English teachers

Total

6.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
2.0

11.5

b.

The Governing Board thereafter recognized that it could not reduce some
of services and still provide all course offerings mandated by the State of California. As a
result, it decided to reduce the services of multiple-subject credentialed teachers by 4.0 FTE
instead of 6.5, those of Science teachers by .5 FTE instead of 1 FTE, those of English teachers
by .5 FTE instead of 2 FTE, and not to reduce the services of Social Studies teachers.

4.

On February 15, 2012, the District provided notice to Respondents that their
services will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year due to the reduction of particular
kinds of services. On February 16, 2012, Respondents timely requested hearings.

5.

Superintendent Filbin notified the Governing Board that she had recommended
that notice be provided to Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2012-
2013 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

6.

On March 28, 2012, Superintendent Filbin issued the Accusation and other
required documents, and thereafter served them on Respondents. Respondents filed timely
Notices of Defense. On or about April 12, 2012, the District issued and served the Notice of
Hearing on Respondents.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

7.

8.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code3 section 44955.

2 Full-time equivalent.

3 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

2

9.

The District has two schools, Los Olivos Elementary (Elementary), a
Kindergarten through Eighth Grade primary school, and the Olive Grove Charter School
(Charter School), a dependent charter school providing instruction in Kindergarten through
Twelve Grades. Instruction at the Elementary takes place in self-contained classrooms in
Grades Kindergarten through Sixth, and in departmentalized classrooms in Grades Seventh and
Eighth. Students at the Charter School conduct their studies at home, with weekly supervision
and support from certificated employees. Students typically meet with teachers for one hour
each week at one of the Charter School’s six satellite locations. The Charter School also
provides weekly classes in core subjects. Approximately 75 percent of Charter School students
are in Grades Ninth through Twelve.

10.

The Governing Board took action to reduce the services set forth in factual
finding number 3 primarily because of the District’s precarious financial situation and
anticipated further declines in State funding. The District projects a funding deficit of $618,670
at the Charter School and $307,338 at the Elementary. The decision to reduce or discontinue
the particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise
of the District's discretion.

11.

The reduction or discontinuance of services set forth in factual finding number 3,
in the context of the financial difficulties and anticipated decline in revenue and the need to
continue to provide services to its students, is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils,
and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by
the Governing Board.

12.

On February 13, 2012, the Governing Board adopted Resolution 2011/2012 No.
07, setting forth the criteria to determine seniority among employees who first rendered paid
service in a probationary position on the same date (tie-breaking criteria). The specific criteria
was listed, in order of importance as: breadth of credentials, Crosscultural, Language, and
Academic Development certification, advanced degrees held, units beyond a Bachelor’s
Degree, teaching experience in any district, and teaching experience in different subjects. The
criteria are reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of certificated employees.
The District did not need to apply the criteria to determine the order of termination of
Respondents.

a.

13.

On February 13, 2012,

the Governing Board adopted Resolution
2011/2012 No. 08, which contains the following competency criteria. “[1] For positions in the
elementary school, must have at least one year full-time classroom teaching experience in a
similar classroom within the last 3 years (not subbing); [¶] 2. For single subject positions in the
charter school, must have at least one year full-time teaching experience in the discipline within
the last 3 years (not subbing); [¶] 3. For all positions, must have [No Child Left Behind]
compliance in the discipline. . . .”

3

b.

Filbin explained that she recommended the competency criteria to the
Governing Board. In her view, experience in the past three years would ensure that the teacher
was sufficiently up-to-date with curriculum changes and that he/she had sufficient recent
experience to handle the assignment.

14.

Respondent Watson has a seniority date of October 9, 2006, and holds a multiple
subject credential. She taught at the Elementary for one year, before moving to the Charter
School approximately five years ago. She has been the lead teacher at the Academy’s Santa
Maria site for approximately three and one-half years. In this position, she receives a stipend
for performing some administrative duties. She also provides instruction to Charter School high
school students.

15.

Respondent Branquinho has a seniority date of November 16, 2007, and holds a
multiple subject credential. She has taught at the Charter School during her entire tenure with
the District. In the current year, she taught four high school classes, Career Preparation, Drivers
Education, Health, and Lifetime Fitness, each for 45 minutes per week. She also supervised the
instruction of five lower grade students, one each in Grades Third, Fourth, Fifth, Seventh, and
Eighth, meeting with them on a weekly basis.

16.

In addition to Respondents, other certificated employees with multiple subject
credentials have taught and continue to teach high school subject matters. Some single subject
teachers have taught and continue to teach at the Elementary.

17.

The District has rescinded layoff notices, and plans to retain, Danielle Felix
(Felix), Melissa Roberts, and Lana Riley, to teach at the Elementary. They have seniority dates
of September 21, 2009, August 22, 2007, and August 23, 2006, respectively. Karolyn Chandler
(Chandler), who has a seniority date of February 11, 2008 and who holds a single subject,
English, credential, has been retained to teach for .5 FTE at the Elementary and for .5 FTE to
teach at the Charter School, including an English class. The District did not establish that
Chandler’s assignment constitutes a single, integrated position that cannot be split.

18.

The District has retained the junior employees set forth in factual finding number
17 over Respondents by application of its competency criteria. Respondents do not possess the
experience required by the District’s competency criteria in order to teach at the Elementary.
They have not taught in an elementary school classroom, on a full-time basis, for at least one
year in the past three. Respondents nevertheless assert that they are certificated and competent
to teach at the Elementary.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant

to Education Code

sections 44949 and 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 7.

4

2.

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services
within the meaning of section Education Code section 44955, by reason of factual finding
numbers 3 and 8.

3.

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the District to
reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3,
which cause relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of
factual finding numbers 1 through 11.

4.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.” (Emphasis added.)
“Certificated” is defined by the provisions of the Education Code pertaining to credentials, but
“competent” is not specifically defined. In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994) 160 Cal.App.3d
13, 19, the Court defined the term in a reemployment proceeding under section 44956, a statute
that contains the same “certificated and competent” requirement, in terms of the teachers’ skills
and qualifications, specifically, as “relating to special qualifications for a vacant position, rather
than relating to the on-the-job performance of the laid-off permanent employee.” In doing so,
the Court noted that courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing Board
(1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109
Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, had interpreted the term in a similar manner.

As the Forker court recognized, school districts have the discretion to define
competency, as had been permitted in earlier reemployment cases, King v. Berkeley Unified
School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016 (King) and Martin v. Kentfield School District
(1983) 35 Cal.3d. 294 (Martin). In King, the court upheld a district’s requirement that laid off
teachers have prior teaching experience in the open jobs in which they claimed competency,
namely, mathematics and physical education. In Martin, a district was permitted to require prior
teaching experience in middle school before deeming laid off elementary school teachers
competent to teach in middle school, if such requirement was equally applied to all certificated
employees, not just those on a preferential rehire list.

In Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565 (Duax), a
case arising under the community college reduction in force statute, now section 87743, the
governing board had established a standard of competency that required one year of full-time
teaching in the subject area within the last ten years. After acknowledging the discretion
afforded to school districts, and set forth in King and Martin, the court stated: “While these
decisions stress the discretion reposed in a school board in defining the term ‘competent,’ the
court in Forker . . . added further assistance in stating, ‘[a]s interpreted by the Martin court, the
term ‘competent’ as used in section 44956 relates to specific skills or qualifications required of
the applicant. Decisions prior to Martin have interpreted that term in a similar manner.’ (Id. at

5

p. 9. See also Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal. App.3d 648, 654-655;
Ozsogomonyan, Teacher layoffs in California: An Update (1979) 30 Hastings L.J. 1727, 1749-
1751.) Hence, from these authorities we conclude that a board’s definition of competency is
reasonable when it considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.”

The Duax court upheld the governing board’s definition of competence as a reasonable
exercise of the governing board’s discretion. In this regard, the court stated: “[T]he mandate is
that the governing board establish a standard of competency that relates to the skills and
qualifications of the teacher. That standard was established by resolution of the governing
board, and since it requires only one year of teaching in the last ten, not one in the last two or
three, we are not persuaded that it too narrowly defines competency. . . .” (Duax, supra, 196
Cal.App.3d at 567.) Unlike the requirement upheld in Duax, the District’s competency criteria
is at the other end of the spectrum, and is one that the court hinted might be too restrictive.

The District seeks to define competency too narrowly, and the criteria cannot stand. One
year in three is too restrictive, and, therefore, not a reasonable measure of an employee’s skills
and qualifications. Not only does the District require experience in the very recent past, but it
requires a full year of such experience as a full-time, as opposed to a substitute or other part-
time, employee. The experience requirement is particularly unreasonable because the District
has not previously imposed such a strict experience criteria, and because multiple subject
teachers, such as Respondents, routinely teach high school subjects and single subject teachers
routinely teach elementary school subjects.

5.

Respondents are certificated and competent to teach at the Elementary. They
both hold multiple subject credentials. They have both taught elementary school subjects,
Respondent Branquinho in the current year. By virtue of their training and experience,
Respondents have established that they possess the skills and qualifications to teach in Grades
Kindergarten to Eighth.

6.

A district may not be compelled to split up a full-time position in order to retain
an employee subject to layoff for a portion of the full-time position. (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena
Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334; Murray v. Sonoma County Office of
Education (1989) 208 Cal.App.3d 456; King v. Berkeley Unified School District (1979) 89
Cal.App.3d 1016.) In Hildebrandt, two senior part-time psychologists sought to bump a full-
time psychologist. The court found that the district had established that it needed a full-time
psychologist to fulfill its obligations to its students. In this case, the District did not establish
that Chandler’s assignment constitutes the type of integrated position the Hildebrandt court
held could not be split. Rather, she holds part-time positions in the Elementary and in the
Charter School, and Respondents may bump into the Elementary assignment.

6

7.

The District has retained two employees junior to both Respondents to teach at
the Elementary, Chandler and Felix, assignments which Respondents are certificated and
competent to perform. Respondents may bump into the available 1.5 FTE positions consistent
with their seniority and their current FTE status. Accordingly, cause does not exist to terminate
their services for the 2012-2013 school year, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 18,
and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 6.

ORDER

The Accusation is dismissed.

DATED:_____________

SAMUEL D. REYES
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

