BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF
SARATOGA UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA, CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Non-Reemployment of
Certain Certificated Employees,

OAH No. 2012040079

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Mary-Margaret Anderson, Office of Administrative

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Saratoga, California, on May 10, 2012.

John R. Yeh, Attorney at Law, Burke, Williams & Sorensen, LLP, represented

complainant Lane Weiss, Superintendent of the Saratoga Union School District.

Peder J. Thoreen and P. Casey Pitts, Attorneys at Law, Altshuler Berzon LLP,

represented all of the respondents whose names are listed on Appendix A, except James
Conn, who was represented by Marilyn Aden, Emeritus Staff, California Teachers
Association.

The record was left open to receive written closing argument. Each party timely
submitted a closing brief, and they were marked for identification as follows: District’s
Post-Hearing Brief, Exhibit 20; James Conn’s Closing Argument, Exhibit L; and
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, Exhibit M.

The record closed on May 15, 2012.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Complainant Lane Weiss served the Accusations in his official capacity as

Superintendent of the Saratoga Union School District (District).

Respondents, who are listed on Appendix A, are certificated employees of the

District. The District rescinded the March 15 notice it issued to Margaret Ebner. The
Accusation against her will be dismissed.

3.

On March 14, 2012, the Governing Board of the District adopted Resolution

No. 393.2/12, entitled “Resolution to Decrease the Number of Certificated Employees Due to
a Reduction in Particular Kinds of Services.” The Board resolved to reduce or discontinue a
variety of particular kinds of services, totaling 8.9 full time equivalent positions, for the
2012-2013 school year, and directed Superintendent Weiss to give notice to the certificated
employees whose positions would be affected.

4.

On March 15, 2012, Superintendent Weiss gave written notice to Respondents
that, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, it was being recommended that
their services would be reduced or eliminated for the 2012-2013 school year. Respondents
filed timely requests for hearing. The District served an Accusation on each Respondent
who requested a hearing. Each Respondent filed a notice of defense. The parties stipulated
that the District has complied with the requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and
44955.

5.

In its resolution, the Board resolved to reduce or discontinue the following

particular kinds of services:

Particular Kinds of Services

Number of Full-Time Equivalencies

Kindergarten to 5th Grade

RMS Electives
(Art, French, Leadership & Spanish)

RMS Vice Principal

Technology
(Teacher on Special Assignment)

Total:

4.9

2.0

1.0

1.0

8.9

6.

The services set forth in the board’s PKS resolution are particular kinds of

services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section
44955. No service is being reduced below a mandated level.

7.

Since the Resolution was passed, the Board rescinded the reductions of 1.0

FTE RMS Vice Principal and 1.0 FTE Technology. Accordingly, the FTE’s currently
proposed for reduction total 6.9.

8.

The reductions are based on the District’s financial situation. A major

consideration in determining the reductions was that the cohort of students moving up the
grades is smaller, with a resulting decrease in class size. In addition, attrition of students is a
factor. And, RMS (Redwood Middle School) students have already been asked to designate
which electives they will choose. Based upon the online enrollment sign-ups for electives, it

2

was determined to reduce Art by .17 FTE; French by .67 FTE; Leadership by 1.0 FTE; and
Spanish by .33 FTE. The total is 1.33 FTE, but the District noticed reductions of up to 2.0
FTE’s for the four combined areas out of an abundance of caution. Considering all of the
circumstances, the reductions are in the interest of the schools and their pupils.

9.

The Board established by separate resolution, criteria for determining the order

of termination among certificated employees who have the same seniority date. The criteria
were applied to certificated employees who share the same seniority date in 2005 and 2006.
The District requested that the tie-breaking criteria be validated herein; however,
Respondents did not raise any issues as regards the criteria or the application of the criteria.

10.

It was established that the District staff properly considered all positively

assured attrition before issuing the March 15 notices. There is no reason to doubt that this
will continue prior to issuing any final notices.

Challenge to PKS Resolution

11.

It is well settled legally, and consistent with good and fair practice, that school

districts should define the services proposed for reduction with as much specificity as
possible. This enables noticed employees to reasonably assess the probability of their
nonretention. The Respondents affected by the proposed reductions to RMS electives
contend that the lack of specificity in the Resolution gave them insufficient notice of the
proposed reductions. This contention IS not supported by legal authority and IS not
persuasive. The Resolution specifically identified the four subject areas to be reduced;
breaking down the 2.0 FTE by percentages of Art, French, Leadership, and Spanish, was not
required.

12.

In addition, four Respondents who teach in the identified RMS elective areas

testified that they engaged in conversations with District employees who advised them of the
possible effects of the layoff on them as individuals. The District was not required to
provide this information, but it is noted that it weakens Respondents’ argument that they did
not receive sufficient information to assist them in planning for the 2012-2013 school year.

13.

Education Code section 44955 permits layoffs based on a reduction in a

“particular kind of service” (PKS) or based upon a decline in “average daily attendance”
(ADA). Respondent contend that, because the District factored in projected reduced
enrollment, the layoff is, in essence, an ADA layoff misidentified as a PKS layoff, and is
therefore invalid. This contention lacks merit. Projected decreases in enrollment provide a
valid basis for a PKS layoff and do not convert it to an ADA layoff, which by its terms is
based upon calculations of reduced average daily attendance.

14.

Respondents further contend that District staff’s involvement in implementing
the RMS reductions usurped the authority of the Board. As found above, however, the Board
sufficiently identified the services to be reduced as four elective subjects to total 2.0 FTE. It

3

was therefore within the permitted scope of staff authority to implement the layoffs
consistently with the Board’s resolution.

Bumping Issues

15.

Education Code section 44258.2 provides:

The holder of a single subject teaching credential or a standard
secondary teaching credential, may, with his or her consent, be
assigned by action of the governing board to teach classes in
grades 5 to 8, inclusive, in a middle school, if he or she has a
minimum of 12 semester units, or six upper division or graduate
units, of coursework at an accredited institution in the subject to
which he or she is assigned.

Teaching assignments under this provision are commonly referred to as board

authorizations. They expire at the conclusion of each school year.

– Eveonne Lockhart

16.

Eveonne Lockhart holds a multiple subject credential and a single subject

physical education credential. She does not have a credential in Health or in Science; she
teaches both Health and Science under a board authorization. This year, Lockhart is
teaching, at RMS, .17 FTE Physical Education, .7 FTE Science and .33 FTE Health. Her
seniority date is August 20, 2007. The subjects taught by Lockhart are not subject to
reduction and the District did not notice her for layoff. District staff testified that she was
also not noticed because no more senior teacher possesses a Health/Science credential.
Therefore, it was reasoned, there was no one who, absent a board authorization, could bump
into her Health position. Also considered was Lockhart’s experience with the health
curriculum. She worked with the school principal to implement the program in the
2009-2010 school year. And her physical education training and experience are additional
qualifications in the general area of health.

17.

It is acknowledged that districts have significant discretion in the assignment

of teachers, but the evidence establishes that there are certificated employees senior to
Lockhart who are competent to teach Health. Lockhart did not teach Health in 2010-2011.
Respondent Lori Chaikin taught Health in that intervening year, also under a board
authorization. And Respondents Elizabeth Belles and Sheridan Kurtz-Fenster credibly
testified that the principal told them that they were eligible to teach health. These facts belie
District’s assertion that Lockhart, who is junior to every Respondent save Holly Michelony,
is properly retained over senior teachers.1

1

In its closing argument, District contends that Lockhart is properly retained under

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), which permits districts to retain less
senior employees if the district “demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a

4

18.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides in part: “The

services of no permanent employee may be terminated . . . while any other employee with
less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated
and competent to render.” Accordingly, the District must identify the most senior teacher
who was prejudiced by Lockhart’s retention, and may not issue a final layoff notice to that
person to the extent of the improper retention.

– Respondent James Conn

19.

Respondent James Conn is the most senior teacher to have received a layoff

notice this year. His seniority date is August 23, 2004. He holds a single subject social
science credential and a board authorization to teach English and Yearbook. This year, Conn
teaches .67 FTE Core and .17 FTE Yearbook. (He also teaches .17 FTE Study Hall/Tutorial,
which has no special requirements.) He has taught under board authorizations for eight
years. Conn is very close to receiving his single subject credential in English. None of the
courses taught by Conn are targeted for reduction. The District represented that he was
noticed solely as a precautionary measure.

20.

Respondent teachers with less seniority then Conn, who hold multiple subject
credentials and have assignments subject to reduction, contend that they are entitled to bump
into Conn’s Core and Yearbook assignments, because he teaches them pursuant to a board
authorization, and not a credential. This contention is rejected. There is no evidence that
Conn will not receive a board authorization for next year. He could also be given a different
assignment that comports with whatever credentials he holds in advance of the 2012-2013
school year. To allow junior teachers to in essence, “bump up” into the position of a senior
teacher in these circumstances would be in contravention of the Education Code requirement
that layoffs must be accomplished in inverse order of seniority. Respondents present no
compelling authority in support of this position. Accordingly, the Accusation against
Respondent Conn will be dismissed.

Other Matters

21.

Respondents contend that “the District bears the burden of proving that it
properly classified as temporary two employees who it seeks to dismiss but who did not
receive layoff notices and thus were not included in these proceedings.” No authority was
presented in support of the theory that jurisdiction exists to decide this issue, and it is

specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee has special training
and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . , which others with more
seniority do not possess.” The reason for this argument is unclear. This procedure,
commonly referred to as “skipping,” only comes into play where the teacher proposed to be
skipped despite his or her lack of seniority is assigned to a course of study targeted for
reduction. As stated above, that is not the case with Lockhart.

5

rejected. Accordingly, this decision does not address the status of the two non-respondent
employees.2

22.

All contentions made by respondents not specifically addressed above are

found to be without merit and are rejected.

23.

Except as stated above, no permanent employee is being terminated while a

permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service
which the permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.

24.

The cause for the reduction in particular kinds of services relates to the welfare

of the schools and the pupils thereof.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections

44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been
provided as required.

2.

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 2, there is no cause pursuant to

Education Code section 44955 to give final notice to Respondent Margaret Ebner.

3.

By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 16 through 18, there is no cause
pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give final notice to the most senior certificated
employee who was prejudiced by the District’s failure to allow the employee to bump into
the .33 FTE position of Eveonne Lockhart.

By reason of the matters set forth in Findings 19 and 20, there is no cause

pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give final notice to Respondent James Conn.

Cause exists because of the reduction of particular kinds of services pursuant

to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to certificated employees occupying 6.9 FTE
positions that their services will be reduced or eliminated for the 2012-2013 school year.
This cause relates solely to welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning
of Education Code section 44949.

4.

5.

2 Mandamus is the appropriate remedy for a temporary teacher seeking
reclassification. (Campbell v. Graham-Armstrong (1973) 9 Cal.3d 482, 485.)

6

ORDER

1.

The Accusation against Respondent Margaret Ebner is dismissed.

2.

The most senior certificated employee who was prejudiced by the District’s
failure to allow the employee to bump into the .33 FTE position of Eveonne Lockhart shall
be retained for a .33 FTE position for the 2012-2013 school year.

The Accusation against Respondent James Conn is dismissed.

Except as set forth above, notice may be given to certificated employees

occupying 6.9 full-time equivalent positions that their services will be reduced or eliminated
for the 2012-2013 school year.

3.

4.

DATED: May 17, 2012

_____________________________
MARY-MARGARET ANDERSON
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

APPENDIX: A

List of Respondents:

Elizabeth Belles
1.
James Conn
2.
Lori Chaykin
3.
Margaret Ebner
4.
Assaf Josh Henig
5.
Susan Jacobs
6.
Sheridan Kurtz-Fenster
7.
Holly Michelony
8.
9.
Christie Nielsen
10. Marcus Puhvel
Debra Willheim
11.

8

