BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
LENNOX SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusations Against:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES,

OAH No. 2012030919

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Daniel Juárez, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings,

heard this matter on April 17 and 30, 2012, in Lennox, California.

Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, and Salvador O. Holguin, Jr., Esq.,

represented the Lennox School District (District).

Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, and Lillian Kae, Esq., represented Respondents listed

Respondent Christy O’Donnell represented herself, but did not appear on either day

in Appendix A.

of hearing.

This matter was scheduled for one day, April 17, 2012. On that same day, after the

presentation of a portion of each party’s case-in-chief, the parties jointly moved for a
continuance to give each side an opportunity to further investigate the facts upon which a
portion of the parties’ cases rested, and allow the parties to meet and confer as to those facts.
The ALJ granted the parties’ motion and set a second day of hearing for April 30, 2012.
Accordingly, and pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (e), the dates
mandated by the Legislature, and set forth in Education Code section 44949, subdivision
(c)(3), were extended by a period of time equal to the continuance.

The parties submitted the matter for decision on April 30, 2012.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdiction

1.
capacity.

Fred Navarro, District Superintendent, filed the Accusations in his official

2.

Respondents are presently certificated employees of the District.

1

3.

On March 13, 2012, the District Governing Board (Governing Board) adopted
Amended Resolution 11-17 to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of certificated services
no later than the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year. The particular kinds of certificated
services total 71.096 full time equivalent (FTE) positions. The Governing Board further
determined that it was necessary because of those reductions or discontinuances to, among
other things, decrease the number of certificated employees at the close of the present school
year by a corresponding number of FTE positions and directed the Superintendent to notify
the appropriate employees to implement the Governing Board’s determination.

4.

By March 15, 2012, and pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and

44955, the Superintendent recommended to the Governing Board that it notify Respondents
that Respondents’ services will not be required for the ensuing school year, and inform
Respondents of the underlying reasons for such notification.

5.

By March 15, 2012, the Governing Board notified Respondents of its

determination to terminate Respondents’ services for the ensuing school year and the
underlying reasons for termination, in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and
44955.

6.

In response to the written notice, each Respondent timely requested a hearing

to determine if there is cause to not reemploy him or her for the 2012-2013 school year.

7(a). Respondent Santa Acuña argued that the District did not properly serve her
with the layoff notice. On March 13, 2012, the District mailed the layoff notice, Amended
Resolution 11-17, a request for hearing form, and pertinent sections of the Education Code to
Respondent Acuña’s address of record with the District, in Lawndale, California. The
District mailed those documents by certified and registered mail. Respondent Acuña
asserted that she has not lived at the Lawndale address for the past three years. Her current
home address is in El Segundo, California. Respondent Acuña explained that she moved to
El Segundo following her divorce and did not inform the District about her change in
address. Respondent Acuña was told about the layoff notice on March 16, 2012, when she
arrived at work. She received copies of the mailed documents thereafter.

7(b). Respondent Acuña’s argument was not well taken. The District’s service was
to Respondent Acuña’s last known address of record. The District could not have known and
did not know of her change of address. As she failed to inform the District of the change, the
District’s service was sufficient. (Educ. Code, § 44949, subd. (d) [“Any notice . . . shall be
deemed sufficient . . . when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the employee.”].) Respondent Acuña
offered no evidence or argument to establish that receiving the mailed documents after
March 15, 2012, prejudiced her in any manner. She participated in the hearing, testifying
twice (once on each day), and was represented by counsel. The District’s service of
Respondent Acuña was not an error on the District’s part; however, even if seen in such a
light, the Legislature mandates that, absent evidence of prejudice, such an error is not cause
for dismissing the Accusation against her. (Educ. Code, § 44949, subd. (c)(3)

2

[“Nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the charges unless the errors are
prejudicial errors.”].)

8.
each Respondent.

The District served the Accusation and other required documents timely on

9.

All jurisdictional requirements were met.

The Governing Board’s Resolution

10.

Amended Resolution 11-17 reduces or discontinues 71.096 FTE positions for

the 2012-2013 school year.

11.

The 71.096 FTE positions are as follows:

Reduce K-5 instructional services
Reduce middle school reading services
Reduce middle school English language arts reading services
Reduce middle school physical education services
Discontinue middle school digital story instructional services
Reduce middle school English language development services
Reduce middle school art instructional services
Reduce MS cored social studies instructional services
Reduce middle school social studies instructional services
Discontinue Weingart E.L.D. intervention specialist services
Discontinue alternative ed. instructional services/outreach coordinator
Discontinue exploratory comic force
Reduce middle school cored science instructional services

57.0 FTE
0.888 FTE
1.718 FTE
2.888 FTE
0.111 FTE
1.167 FTE
0.889 FTE
2.276 FTE
0.66 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
0.111 FTE
1.388 FTE

12.

The 71.096 FTE positions at issue in this matter are particular kinds of

services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section
44955.

13.

The Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds

of services at issue in this matter was due to the anticipated decline in State funding; the
Governing Board’s decision was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise
of its discretion.

14.

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to the
welfare of the District and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of
services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the District, as
determined by the Governing Board.

3

15.

The District identified the certificated employees providing the particular

kinds of services that the Governing Board directed to be reduced or discontinued.

16.

The recommendation that Respondents be terminated from employment was

not related to their performance as teachers.

The District’s Proposed “Skips”

17.

Pursuant to Amended Resolution 11-17, the District determined that it had a
special need for personnel to teach specific courses or courses of study. Those courses or
courses of study included 1) Education Technology Coordinator, 2) Counseling and
Academic Counseling, 3) Dual Language Instruction (DL program), 4) Newcomer Program
Instruction (Newcomer program), and 5) Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA) services.
The District determined that more senior employees must have special training and
experience to displace any more junior employee performing these services. The District
argued that there is a specific need for personnel to teach these courses of study and provide
these services and that no senior employee has the special training and experience necessary
to displace any more junior employee who teaches that course or course of study. The
District intends to “skip” from layoff those employees specially trained and with experience
in these five areas. By “skipping,” the District means to exempt from layoff the employees
teaching these courses of study.

18.

The District has a significant number of Spanish-speaking students. The DL

program has a goal of achieving full bilingualism and biliteracy in English and Spanish. The
DL program accepts English learners at all levels of English proficiency and native English
speakers. The DL program is housed solely within one elementary school. Parents are asked
to commit to keeping their child in the program throughout the child’s elementary school
years.

19.

The DL program uses two teachers to teach one class; one teacher teaches in

English and the other, in Spanish. Instruction is 50 percent in English and 50 percent in
Spanish, with the teachers alternating each day. That is, one day is in English, and the next
day is in Spanish. The teachers must learn a specific pedagogy to teach in this manner
because the program must move the curriculum on the same pace as the English-only course.
Where one teacher leaves off the instruction in one language, the other teacher must continue
the instruction the next day in the other language. The DL program is currently available to
grades kindergarten through fourth. The District intends to expand the program to the fifth
grade next year.

20.

Training for the DL program includes learning the research base for

implementing such a program and specific instructional strategies to change from English to
Spanish and vice versa, while continuing a particular lesson plan. DL teachers must be
trained before beginning classroom instruction and then receive on-going professional
development courses during the school year.

4

21.

According to a District DL program job announcement, the qualifications

required of a DL program teacher include: 1) possession of a valid teaching credential, 2)
possession of a bilingual, cross-cultural, language, and academic development (BCLAD)
certificate, 3) at least three years prior successful bilingual teaching experience, 4) academic
proficiency in Spanish literacy, and 5) being flexible, creative, innovative, and willing to
grow with the program.

22.

The District has a significant number of middle school students that speak
almost no English. The Newcomer program, also known as the “language academy,” is
meant for middle school students (grades six through eight) who are learning English. That
is, for English learners who are less reasonably fluent in English and have been in U.S.
schools for two or fewer years. These students are supported in learning content with
instruction in Spanish or with SDAIE (specially designed academic instruction in English)
strategies for students with other primary languages. The Newcomer program focuses on the
rapid acquisition of English. Skipping the Newcomer program teachers impacts only two
teachers: Minerva Rios, and Claudia Sachs; they are not respondents in this matter. The
training for this program is individualized and executed distinctly from that of the DL
program. No other teachers have received the Newcomer program training. There was no
evidence to establish that any Respondent was capable of teaching within the Newcomer
program.

23. Within the last five years, the District has redesigned the particular courses of

study taught by the teachers on special assignments (TOSA). The District has a specific need
for the services offered by the current TOSA teachers. The assignments are individualized to
the District’s needs, including professional development, particularly because the District
continues to be designated as a low performing school in California. The District asserted
that no Respondents could perform the current TOSA duties. Respondents provided no
evidence to contest that assertion, with the exception of Respondent Alejandra Cordova.
(See Factual Finding 36.)

Respondent’s Generalized Arguments Regarding the Proposed DL Program Skip

24.

Respondents submitted a compilation of written arguments focused solely on

the DL program. Some Respondents believe the District should not be able to skip any
employees, and thus the District should not deviate from the order of seniority in laying off
employees. Other Respondents argued that the District should be able to deviate from the
order of seniority and skip the DL teachers.

25.

The arguments against deviating from seniority included that the DL program

is not a service requiring specialized training or experience; any senior Respondent with a
multiple subject credential should be allowed to bump into a DL service assignment.
Second, Respondents argued that the current DL teachers did not possess all of the DL
training before they were hired, and since the District’s DL training is not State certified, the
District has not and cannot establish that its training for DL teachers is specialized or that the
DL’s experience is unique from other K-5 instructional assignments in the District.

5

Respondents alternatively argued that even if the DL program is a service requiring
specialized training and experience, the District should not deviate from implementing the
layoff in order of seniority. These arguments were unpersuasive. Respondents thirdly
argued that in order to be credentialed for the DL program, a more senior Respondent must
be one who not only possesses a multiple subject credential but also a BCLAD certificate.
This argument was persuasive. Pursuant to its own requirements, the District requires all DL
program teachers to have a BCLAD certificate. (See Factual Finding 21.) Those
Respondents currently in the DL program who do not possess a BCLAD certificate are not,
by the District’s own requirements, qualified to participate in the DL program and may not
be skipped (exempt from layoff). (See Factual Findings 21, 35, and Legal Conclusion 7.)

26.

The arguments in favor of deviating from seniority included that the DL

program is a service requiring specialized training and experience. Respondents further
argued that the DL teachers competitively applied for the job and were willing to accept the
strict requirements of the position, including coordinating lessons for one group of students
with another teacher, completing new DL teacher training before providing instruction,
continuing mandatory professional development in DL transference strategies for both
English and Spanish languages, and attending all DL transference and professional
development training. Respondents also argued that the fact that some transitional bilingual
education (TBE) teachers attended some or portions of the transference training with DL
teachers did not make those teachers fully trained to provide DL instructional services. They
asserted that the proposed skipping of DL teachers is not arbitrary.

27.

Respondents made no specific argument or evidence to contest the District’s

skipping of the Newcomer program, or the TOSA services (with the exception of one
unsuccessful, generalized argument against the TOSA skip by Respondent Alejandra
Cordova. (See Factual Finding 36.)

Respondents’ Testimony

28.

Elisa Lopez and Maria Rodriguez testified. The District served Lopez and

Rodriguez with notices of layoff as precautionary respondents in this proceeding. Lopez and
Rodriguez are District teachers who teach within the DL program. They each applied to
teach within the DL program and attended all of the required DL trainings. Both Lopez and
Rodriguez asserted that the DL program has a distinct teaching design from a general
bilingual teaching program, particularly because each DL teacher must maintain constant
communication with his or her teaching partner to ensure curriculum progress. They each
believe it is appropriate to skip the DL program teachers.

29.

Respondent Leticia Corona has a seniority date of September 1, 1999 (no. 202
on the seniority list), and teaches kindergarten, structured English immersion (SEI). She has
a BCLAD certificate. The District originally hired Respondent Corona within the DL
program, but she opted out of the program to remain a kindergarten teacher. She has not
attended all of the DL trainings. Had she known that the District intended to skip the DL
teachers for the ensuing school year, Respondent Corona would have stayed within the DL

6

program. Respondent Corona believes she is as qualified as the District’s DL teachers and
should not be laid off.

30.

Respondent Shannon Alvarado has a seniority date of July 1, 1997 (no. 154 on

the seniority list), and teaches first and second grade, SEI. Respondent Alvarado asserted
that she worked as a TOSA previously. She asserted that she has experience as a literacy
parent coordinator/literacy coach and English language development coach, and is qualified
to teach English learners. She has a BCLAD certificate. She believes she is a highly
qualified teacher that should not be laid off.

31.

Respondent Efrain Pinedo has a seniority date of July 1, 1997 (no. 159 on the
seniority list), and teaches a seventh grade honors class. He strongly opposes his layoff. He
asserted that he could teach in the DL and Newcomer programs because he believes he
currently does what the DL teachers do. Respondent Pinedo has a BCLAD certificate that
allows him to teach academic Spanish and English. He has not taken the DL program
trainings. Respondent Pinedo asserted that he is an outstanding teacher and should not be
laid off.

32.

Respondent Dyana Martin has a seniority date of July 1, 1998 (no. 172 on the

seniority list), and teaches fourth grade. She has a BCLAD certificate and a supplemental
authorization Spanish credential. She teaches bilingually and believes she could teach within
the DL program. She has not taken the DL program trainings. Respondent Martin argued
that she should not be laid off.

33.

Respondent Ann Chaffey has a seniority date of July 1, 1998 (no. 173 on the

seniority list), and teaches fourth grade. She does not have a BCLAD certificate, but she
does have a bilingual certificate of competence (BCC). Respondent Chaffey asserted that
she is certified to teach at-risk first graders in English and Spanish. In 2001, she was a
literacy coach. She conceded that she opted not to teach within the DL program and has not
taken all of the DL program trainings. Respondent Chaffey argued that she should not be
laid off.

34.

Respondent Santa Acuña is number 189 on the seniority list and teaches fifth

grade. The seniority list notes Respondent Acuña’s seniority date as July 1, 1999, but she
asserted at hearing that her seniority date should be June 1, 1998. Pursuant to the arguments
of both counsel at hearing, neither seniority date would effect Respondent Acuña’s layoff.
The ALJ made no finding regarding Respondent Acuña’s seniority date. Respondent Acuña
does not believe the DL program is a “strong enough” program for the District to skip. She
concedes that when the District sought DL teachers, she chose not to participate in it.
Respondent Acuña also asserted that there are three DL teachers without BCLAD
certificates: Anell Montano, Melissa Arias, and Lisa Barba. None of these three individuals
are respondents in this matter. Respondent Acuña has a BCLAD certificate and asserted that
she is not currently interested in participating in the DL program. She nonetheless contested
her layoff.

7

35.

According to the District’s seniority list, there are five teachers currently with

a DL teaching assignment who do not possess BCLAD certificates. Those five teachers,
with their seniority numbers in parentheses, are: Vivian Poe (no. 30), Melissa Arias (no.
197), Luisa Barba (no. 206), Anell Montano (no. 286), and Alejandra Betancourt (no. 332).
The District provided reasoning as to why one unidentified District employee did not possess
a BCLAD certificate but was within the DL program. That reasoning was unpersuasive.
The District provided no argument or evidence establishing why the other four teachers were
within the DL program but did not possess BCLAD certificates. Of these five teachers, only
Alejandra Betancourt is a respondent in this matter. The evidence did not establish why the
District identified Respondent Betancourt as a respondent in this action while she serves
within the DL program. Nonetheless, as she does not possess a BCLAD certificate, she, like
the other four teachers noted in this Factual Finding, is not eligible for the DL program on
that basis.

36.

Respondent Alejandra Cordova has a seniority date of July 1, 1999 (no. 190 on

the seniority list), and teaches kindergarten, TBE. Respondent Cordova contests the TOSA
skipping criteria. She believes there are TOSAs with seniority dates that are junior to her.
Respondent Cordova asserted that she was a TOSA in the 2006-2007 school year. She
believes she is still competent to be a TOSA currently and that she should be kept over any
TOSA who is junior to her. Regarding the DL skipping, she also believes it is unfair that, in
her case, her principal had originally asked her to attend the DL program training, but
halfway through the training, she was told she could no longer attend, due to budget cuts.
She has a BCLAD certificate. Respondent Cordova contests her layoff. There was
insufficient evidence establishing that Respondent Cordova is currently qualified to be a
TOSA.

37.

Respondent Gloria Medrano has a seniority date of July 1, 1998 (no. 175 on

the seniority list), and teaches kindergarten, TBE. She has a BCLAD certificate and clarified
that she is a kindergarten “ELD” interventionist. She teaches reading and writing in English
and Spanish. Respondent Medrano argued that the District should not only skip the DL
program, but also skip other similar programs. She described the DL program skip as
“favoritism” on the part of the District. Respondent Medrano asserted that she attended the
DL trainings and should not be laid off. The evidence established that Respondent Medrano
did not attend all of the required DL trainings.

38.

Respondent Alberto Paredes has a seniority date of July 5, 2000 (no. 212 on

the seniority list), and teaches as a TOSA, as the alternative school teacher outreach
coordinator. The District resolved to terminate this particular position. (See Factual Finding
11.) Respondent Paredes asserted that his current assignment is similar to the DL program,
although he conceded that it does not contain a continuous lesson plan, like the DL program.
Respondent Paredes believes that with the DL trainings, he would be competent to be a DL
teacher. He has a BCLAD certificate. He seeks “fairness” within the layoff process and
contests his layoff.

8

39.

Respondent Christian Mendoza has a seniority date of June 28, 2000 (no. 223

on the seniority date), and teaches fifth grade. He believes skipping the DL program is
arbitrary and in doing so, the District is violating his rights under the 14th Amendment of the
United States Constitution. Respondent Mendoza explained that there are five District
teachers who are within the DL program (slated to be skipped) but those five teachers have
only cross cultural language and academic development certificates (CLADs), not BCLAD
certificates, as the DL program requires. (See Factual Finding 35.) Therefore, reasoned
Respondent Mendoza, if the District skips these CLAD teachers, the District treats other
CLAD teachers inequitably. Respondent Mendoza has a CLAD certificate and would apply
for the DL program if allowed. He believes he should not be laid off.

40.

Respondent Susana Martin has a seniority date of August 12, 2004 (no. 277 on

the seniority list), and teaches fifth grade. She team teaches with Respondent Christian
Mendoza. Respondent Martin has a BCLAD certificate and asserted that the District did not
offer her the opportunity to participate in the DL program. There was insufficient evidence
to establish her assertion. She contests her layoff.

41.

Respondent Ruben Garcia is number 264 on the seniority list and contested his

seniority date of August 11, 2003. He teaches first grade within the DL program.
Respondent Garcia’s asserted seniority date would not affect the order of layoff and would
only affect his rehire rights. This proceeding has no jurisdiction to rule as to Respondents’
rehire rights, and thus, the ALJ did not allow Respondent Garcia to testify as to this issue.

42.

Respondent Rosa Hernandez is number 261 on the seniority list and teaches
first grade. The District’s seniority list identifies Respondent Hernandez’s seniority date as
July 5, 2003, but she asserted that her seniority date should be June 30, 2000. For the same
reasons, as set forth in Factual Finding 41, regarding Respondent Garcia, the ALJ did not
allow Respondent Hernandez to testify as to her disputed seniority date. Separately,
Respondent Hernandez asserted that, while she believes the District’s intention to skip the
DL teachers is unfair, she also believes she is qualified to teach within the DL program. She
admits that she has not taken the DL program trainings. She nonetheless contests her layoff.

43. With the exception of the BCLAD issue noted within Factual Finding 25,
Respondents’ arguments, as laid out in Factual Findings 24-26 and 28-42, were inadequate to
establish the assertions therein. None of the Respondents who asserted that they were
qualified to teach within the DL program had completed the required training. The evidence
established that the training was necessary to teach within that program and that it is
appropriate for, and within the discretion of, the District to skip the DL program teachers.

44.

The evidence offered by the District, and the lack of evidence and argument by

Respondents as to the Newcomer program and TOSA services, was adequate to allow the
District to skip the employees within those courses of study.

9

The District’s Proposed Skip of the Education Technology Coordinator and the Counseling
and Academic Counseling Services

45.

The District offered no evidence to establish any specific need to provide the

service or course of study taught by the employee(s) within the designations of education
technology coordinator and the counseling and academic counseling services. Notably,
Respondents made no specific argument as to these two categories; nor did Respondents
highlight the absence of evidence. It is the District, however, that bears the burden of proof
in this proceeding, and it failed to set forth any reasoning to support its skipping of these two
services or courses of study. The District did not meet is burden as to the proposed skipping
of these two designations (education technology coordinator and the counseling and
academic counseling services).

The District’s Rescinding of Particular Respondents’ Notices of Layoff

46.

At hearing, the District rescinded the layoff notices of Respondents Louis

Arevalo, Maria Carrillo, Lisa Celaya, Rebecca Lee, Richard Lopez, and Yvonne Rodriguez.

Other Findings

47.

Implementing the Order post, no certificated employee junior to any
Respondent was retained to render a service that any Respondent is certificated and
competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

3.

The District bears the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence.

The parties met all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code

section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are
made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

4.

The services identified in Amended Resolution 11-17 are particular kinds of
services that the Governing Board can reduce or discontinue under Education Code section
44955. The Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was
not arbitrary or capricious; it was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction
or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils
within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

10

5.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1) provides that a school

district “may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority” when
the school district “demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or
course of study . . . and that the certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course.”

6.

The District provided sufficient evidence of the need for personnel to teach the

DL program, the Newcomer program, and TOSA services. There was sufficient evidence
that the teachers currently teaching those courses of study have the special training and
experience necessary to teach within these courses of study. There was no evidence that any
Respondent has the specific training or experience to teach in the DL program, Newcomer
program, or TOSA services.

7.

As the District requires its DL program teachers to possess a BCLAD

certificate to teach within the DL program, and the five teachers identified in Factual Finding
35 do not possess a BCLAD certificate, those five teachers are not properly qualified to teach
within the DL program. However, four of the five teachers did not receive layoff notices
(Respondent Betancourt did receive a notice). The District must consider these five teachers’
lack of proper qualifications. To remedy this, the District should dismiss a corresponding
number of Accusations against Respondents, corresponding to the four individuals
(excepting Respondent Betancourt as the fifth teacher) that do not meet the DL requirements
and whom the District failed to serve with layoff notices. Such an act would be an
appropriate cure, and such a cure has been recognized by the courts. (See Alexander v.
Board of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 576-577.)

8.

The District provided no evidence of the need for personnel to serve or teach
within the designations of education technology coordinator and counseling and academic
counseling services. Despite Respondents’ lack of argument or evidence as to these two
services or courses of study, with no evidence to support the proposed exemption from
layoff, the District failed to establish a need to skip the employee(s) who serve within the
categories of education technology coordinator and counseling and academic counseling
services. Those two proposed skips are invalid.

9.

The District’s rescinding of the notices of layoff for the employees noted in

Factual Finding 46 is appropriate.

10.

All remaining arguments by Respondents not already discussed were

unpersuasive.

11.

Implementing the Order post, the District properly identified the certificated

employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Governing Board directed to be
reduced or discontinued.

11

12.

The District established cause to not reemploy Respondents for the 2012-2013
school year; it further established cause to skip the layoff of those employees serving within
the DL program, the Newcomer program, and TOSA services.

13.

Implementing the Order post, no junior certificated employee is scheduled to
be retained to perform services that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to
render.

14.

Cause exists to sustain the District’s action to reduce or discontinue the full-
time equivalent positions set forth in Amended Resolution 11-17 for the 2012-2013 school
year, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, as set forth in Factual Findings
1-47, and Legal Conclusions 1-13.

15.

Cause exists to skip the layoff of those employees serving within the DL
program, the Newcomer program, and TOSA services, for the 2012-2013 school year,
pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), as set forth in Factual
Findings 17-27, 35, 43, 44, 47, and Legal Conclusions 1-7, and 11-13.

16.

Cause does not exist to skip the layoff of those employees serving within the
designations of education technology coordinator and counseling and academic counseling
services, pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), as set forth in
Factual Findings 1-17, 45, 47, and Legal Conclusions 1-5, 8, and 11-13.

ORDER

1.

The particular kinds of services that the Governing Board of the Lennox

School District directed to be reduced or discontinue are sustained.

2.

With the exception of Respondents Louis Arevalo, Maria Carrillo, Lisa
Celaya, Rebecca Lee, Richard Lopez, and Yvonne Rodriguez, notice shall be given to
Respondents in Appendix A that their services will be terminated at the close of the 2011-
2012 school year.

3.

The Lennox School District shall “skip,” that is, exempt from layoff, those

employees who serve within the DL program, Newcomer program, and TOSA services. This
Order and Order 2 notwithstanding, the Lennox School District shall identify the four most
senior Respondents who are competent and qualified to teach within the DL program and
shall not issue a final layoff notice to those four most senior Respondents.

12

4.

The Lennox School District’s proposed “skip,” that is, exemption from layoff
of those employees who serve within the designations of education technology coordinator
and counseling and academic counseling services is denied.

Dated: May 16, 2012

____________________________
DANIEL JUAREZ
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

13

Santa Acuña
1.
Lourdes Aizpuru-Bartlett
2.
Glenda Alvarado
3.
Rudy Alvarado
4.
Shannon Alvarado
5.
Oswaldo Angel
6.
Arcelia Arenas
7.
Marcela Avila
8.
Rosalinda Barajas
9.
Gladys Barbieri
10.
Claudia Barroso
11.
Alejandra Betancourt
12.
Allison Buitenveld
13.
Alejandra Carrera
14.
Ann Chaffey
15.
Rosaisela Chavez
16.
Alejandra Cordova
17.
Leticia Corona
18.
Rosie Cruz
19.
Delmira Felix
20.
21.
Claudia Flores
22. Monica Flores
23.
24.
25. Mario Franco
Norma Garcia
26.
Leticia German-Mendoza
27.
Jessica Gomez
28.
29.
Nuria Gomez
30. Maria Guerrero
Emilia Gutierrez
31.
Guadalupe Gutierrez
32.
Issa Hernandez
33.
Rosa Hernandez
34.
35.
Veronica Hernandez
36. M. Elsa Herrera
37. Maria A. Jimenez

Armando Franco
Elizabeth Franco

Appendix A
OAH Case No. 2012030919
Respondents

Lety Kalmikov
Erica Kilgore
Guadalupe Laguna
Rebecca Lee
Dyana Martin
Salvador Martin
Susana Martin
Gloria Medrano
Christian Mendoza
Rodney Michael
Patricia Munoz
Norma Nuanez
Christy O’Donnell

38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51. Maritza Ohannesian
52. Maria Oropeza
Nancy Orozco
53.
54. Maria Ortiz
55.
Alberto Paredes
56.
Efrain Pinedo
57.
Tamara Premsrirath
58.
Clarissa Quintero
59.
Jesus Rius
60.
Gerardo Rivas
61.
Irma Rodriguez
62.
Ricardo Rodriguez
63.
Yvonne Rodriguez
Roberta Salas
64.
65. Martha Sirolli
66.
67.
68.
69.

Angelica Trujillo
Isbell Vila
Ryan Williams
Gabriela Zaragosa

14

