BEFORE THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
ANAHEIM UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

OAH Case No. 2012030990

In the Matter of the Accusation
Against:

Certain Probationary and Permanent
Certificated Employees and Temporary
Contract and Categorical Certificated
Employees of the Anaheim Union High
School District,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Vincent Nafarrete, Administrative Law Judge, Office of

Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 23, 2012, in Anaheim.

The Anaheim Union High School District was represented by Jack M. Sleeth, Jr., and

Jeanne Blumenfeld, Attorneys at Law, of the law firm of Stutz, Artiano, Shinoff and Holtz.

Respondents Anita Buers, Justin Buz'Zard, Melanie Evans, Kerri Fenton, Yolanda
Flores-Smith, Michael Franks, Toni Godfrey, Laura Gonzalez, Heather Gruenthal, Jack Gupton,
Linda Hodgin, Phillip Hohensee, Marilyn Konowal, Kathie Maier, Richard Martin, Erin
McCowan, Kathryn Pavel, Suzanne Rahn, Joey Russell, and Lisa Tomeo were represented by
Kent Morizawa, Attorney at Law, of the law firm of Reich, Adell, and Cvitan. Mónica Mora,
Teacher Advocate, West Orange County United Teachers, was also present.

Respondents Camille Albrecht and Debra Seufert were present during the hearing and

represented themselves. Respondents Janae Nafziger and Terri Vu were not present or
represented at the hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence having been received and arguments heard, the
Administrative Law Judge submitted this matter for decision on April 23, 2012, and finds as
follows:

//
//
//

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Administrative Law Judge takes official notice that, on April 9, 2012, the

Accusation was made and filed by Russell Lee-Sung in his official capacity as the Assistant
Superintendent for Human Resources (Assistant Superintendent) of the Anaheim Union High
School District, State of California (District).

2.

Respondents, and each of them, are probationary or permanent certificated

employees or temporary certificated employees of the District who are employed as teachers,
counselors, and librarians.

3.

The District is a high school district in Orange County comprised of eight

comprehensive high schools, eight junior highs schools, adult and continuation schools, and
a special education program. The District serves and educates over 30,000 pupils from the
sixth through twelfth grade.

4.

Because of the continuing downturn in economic conditions at the state and

national levels, the anticipated reduction in State and categorical funding due, in part, to the
possible shortfall in State revenues and the Governor’s Tax Initiative, and concomitant
effects thereof upon the revenues and finances of the District, the Assistant Superintendent
has determined that the District must reduce expenditures to maintain a balanced budget and
its reserve and to pay expenses. The Assistant Superintendent further determined that the
District’s budget must be curtailed by $24 million for the 2012-2013 school year. On March
13, 2012, the Assistant Superintendent recommended to the Board of Trustees of the District
(Governing Board) that particular kinds of services be reduced or discontinued no later than
the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year.

5.

(A) On March 13, 2012, in Resolution No. 2011/12-HR-07, and pursuant to
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 and upon the recommendation of the Assistant
Superintendent, the Governing Board resolved that it was in the best interests of the District
and its students to reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds of services no later than the
beginning of the 2012-2013 school year and to decrease the number of certificated
employees equal in number to the positions affected in the reduction or discontinuance of
particular kinds of services. The Governing Board determined that it was necessary to
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services even after having considered all positively
assured attrition due to resignations, retirements, and other permanent vacancies in reducing
services.

(B) On March 13, 2012, in adopting Resolution Number 2011/12-HR-07, the

Governing Board resolved to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services in
management, counseling, library services, supplemental instructional support, and staffing in
particular subject areas and programs to achieve more appropriate staffing ratios, by 51.00
full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.
a recent court decision regarding temporary certificated employees paid with categorical
funds, it is necessary to provide preliminary notices to 61 temporary certificated employees,

In addition, the Governing Board resolved that, due to

2

“who may be affected by the reductions as stated in this resolution,” that their services will
not be needed for the ensuing school year. The decrease in probationary and permanent
certificated employees is in addition to the release of the 61 temporary certificated
employees.

(C) On March 13, 2012, the Governing Board directed the Superintendent or

her designated representative to send appropriate notices to all certificated employees whose
positions will be affected by this reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services that
their services will not be required for the next school year.

6.

On or about March 14, 2012, pursuant to Resolution Number 2011/12-HR-07

and the provisions of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the Assistant
Superintendent, as the designee of the Superintendent, gave written preliminary notices to
probationary and permanent certificated employees that their services may not be required
for the ensuing 2012-2013 school year because the Governing Board had determined to
reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds of services due to “fiscal realities of the
shortfall of state funding” and had resolved that it was necessary to layoff certificated
employees under Education Code section 44955. The notices informed probationary and
permanent certificated employees of their right to request a hearing to determine whether
there is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing school year and included copies of
the Governing Board’s resolution and Education Code sections 44955 and 44949, and a
Request for Hearing Form.

7.

On or about March 14, 2012, pursuant to Resolution Number 2011/12-HR-07

and the provisions of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, the Assistant
Superintendent also gave written preliminary notices to temporary contract and categorical
certificated employees that the Governing Board had determined that their services may not
be required for the ensuing 2012-2013 school year. The notices informed the temporary
contract and categorical certificated employees that some temporary positions will be
eliminated due to the projected elimination or reduction of categorical or temporary funding
or due to teachers returning from leaves. The notices also stated that the Governing Board
had determined to reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds of services for the ensuing
school year and that a recent court case had caused uncertainty about the continued
employment of temporary certificated employees who are paid by categorical funds. The
notices informed temporary contract and categorical certificated employees of their right to
request a hearing to determine whether is cause for not reemploying them for the ensuing
school year and included copies of the Governing Board’s resolution and Education Code
sections 44949, 44951, and 44955, and a Request for Hearing Form.

8.

The District obtained the signatures of probationary and permanent certificated

employees and temporary contract and categorical certificated employees on
Acknowledgements of Receipt to demonstrate that they received the preliminary notices by
March 15, 2012. The District gave preliminary notices to 25 probationary and permanent
certificated employees and 61 temporary contract and categorical certificated employees.

3

9.

The District’s preliminary notice of layoff dated March 14, 2012, was

sufficient under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 in providing written notice to
probationary and permanent certificated employees and temporary contract and categorical
certificated employees that their services will not be required for the ensuing school year.
No claims or complaints were raised at the hearing by any certificated employee or
respondent that the preliminary notice was deficient in any respect.

10.

On or about April 9, 2012, the Assistant Superintendent timely served those
permanent and probationary certificated employees and temporary contract and categorical
certificated employees who had requested a hearing, with an Accusation, Statement to
Respondent, copies of pertinent sections of the Government Code and Education Code, a
blank Notice of Defense form, and Notice of Hearing. Respondents are those certificated
employees who filed Notices of Defenses, acknowledging their receipt of the Accusation,
requesting a hearing to determine if there is cause not to employ them for the ensuing school
year, and objecting to the Accusation. All prehearing and jurisdictional requirements have
been met by the parties.

11.

On March 13, 2012, in Resolution Number 2011/12-HR-07, and pursuant to
Education Code section 44955, the Governing Board of the District adopted a tie-breaking
resolution that stated, “as between employees who first rendered paid service on the same
date, the order of termination shall be based solely on the basis of the need of the District and
the students thereof.” In fact, the tie-breaking criteria for determining the relative seniority
of certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date are set forth in the
collective bargaining agreement between the District and its teachers.

12.

On March 13, 2012, pursuant to Resolution Number 2011/12-HR-07, the

Governing Board resolved and took action to reduce or discontinue certain particular kinds
of services or programs offered by the District for the 2012-2013 school years in the
following FTE positions:

Services
Management Positions
Counselors
Librarians
Supplemental Instructional Support
Classroom Teachers

FTE
4.00
1.00
8.00
24.00
14.00

The reduction or discontinuance of the particular kinds of services set forth hereinabove
constitute a total of 51.00 FTE.

13.

The services set forth in Finding 12 above are particular kinds of services

performed by certificated employees of the District which may be reduced or discontinued
within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. The determination of the Governing
Board to reduce or discontinue these services is within its sound discretion and not arbitrary
or capricious. The reduction or discontinuance of these particular kinds of services is related

4

to the welfare of the District and its pupils and is necessary in order for the District to
maintain a balanced budget. Following the reduction or discontinuance of these particular
kinds of services, the District will still be able to provide mandated and essential services.

14.

(A) Citing the case of San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d

627, counsel for certain respondents argued that the District’s reduction of classroom
teachers by 14 FTE and supplemental instructional support by 24 FTE did not constitute
reductions in particular kinds of services within the meaning of Education Code section
44955, subdivision (b). The District considers supplemental instructional support to be
temporary teachers in categorically funded positions or programs. Counsel’s argument is not
persuasive.

(B) A school district facing an anticipated unbalanced budget and financial

problems may reduce the number of probationary and permanent employees for such
economic reasons but only as authorized by Education Code section 44955. (Zalac v.
Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 853-854;
Gassman v. Governing Board (1976) 18 Cal.3d 137, 147) A school district may reduce
services within the meaning of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by
determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all
by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered services shall be
reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils
involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) As long
as there is a change in the method of teaching or in the particular kind of service in teaching
a subject, a particular kind of service provided in excess of any statutorily mandated
minimum can be reduced or eliminated pursuant to section 44955. (Campbell Elementary
Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 811-812.) A school district’s
decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not be fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious.
(Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at 807-808.)

(C) In the San Jose Teachers case, the court considered the issue whether

classroom teaching in elementary schools was a particular kind of service that can be
reduced. Unlike in secondary schools where specific, identifiable subjects such as math or
science are taught by designated credentialed teachers at particular hours or periods, the court
found that instruction in elementary school is given in several subjects by the same teacher in
the same classroom throughout the school day. Because elementary schools are limited to
identifying a service simply as classroom teaching, the court found that classroom teaching at
the elementary level must be recognized as a particular kind of service subject to reduction as
long as statutory minimum levels are maintained. The San Jose Teachers court, however,
did not hold that classroom teaching in secondary schools is not a particular kind of service
subject to reduction or discontinuance, or that a school district is precluded from designating
classroom teaching in secondary schools as a particular kind of service, under Education
Code section 44955, subdivision (b). Accordingly, classroom teaching and supplemental
instructional support in the circumstances of this matter are considered particular kinds of
services that may be subjected to reduction or discontinuance under section 44955.

5

15.

(A) The District prepared and/or updated a certificated seniority list, which

identifies in inverse order certificated employees by their names, seniority rankings by first
dates of first paid service, job information (status, school site, department, and FTE position),
and credentials and authorizations.
separate list of temporary contract and categorically employees in order of the dates of their
temporary contracts. The District also prepared a certificated seniority list by departments.

In addition, the certificated seniority list includes a

(B) The Assistant Superintendent calculated and prepared, but not necessarily

in this order, charts of necessary staffing ratio changes at two alternative education sites
(Exh. 7) and for physical education sections at two high schools (Exh. 8); projections of
necessary reductions in certificated staff due to reduced categorical funding for the next
school year (Exh. 4); a list of Temporary Teachers for the current school year with the
reasons, funding source, and dates of their temporary employment (Exh. 6); a chart of the
categorical funded and job share positions for the current school year (Exh. 5); and
projections of necessary certificated positions for core classes at the three sites that will
receive categorical funding from the Quality Education Investment Act (QEIA) for 2012-
2013 (Exh. 9).

(C) Before and after the Governing Board adopted Resolution Number

2011/12-HR-07 ordering the reduction of particular kinds of services, the Assistant
Superintendent determined how positions had to reduced or eliminated due to staffing ratio
changes and reductions in categorical funding, the subject matter assignment of the District’s
62 temporary certificated employees in categorically funded positions or programs, and the
number of probationary or permanent employees who are planning to share jobs, retire, and
take or return from leaves (Exh. 2 and 3). The Assistant Superintendent then determined it
was necessary to serve preliminary notices upon all of the 62 temporary certificated
employees in categorical programs and to 15 probationary and permanent certificated
employees, including those probationary and permanent certificated employees who were
determined to be eligible to be reassigned to different positions in accordance with their
certifications.

(D) The Assistant Superintendent reviewed the subject areas or departments
which are subject to reduction, including English, math, science, social science, music, art,
business, industrial foreign language, physical education, health, and special education, and
determined how many of the least senior temporary certificated employees in each subject
area must be laid off or released from their contracts After taking into account the release of
temporary contract and categorically certificated employees, the Assistant Superintendent
identified the least senior probationary or permanent certificated employees assigned to the
subject areas being reduced. The Assistant Superintendent reviewed the seniority,
credentials, and subject areas of service of these probationary and certificated employees,
including librarians, and then determined whether they hold credentials and authorizations in
other areas of service or teaching and were entitled to bump other less senior probationary
and permanent certificated employees and should be reassigned to other subject areas. The
Assistant Superintendent determined and prepared a Displacement Chart (Exh. 15), showing
the bumping, reassignments, and layoffs of certificated employees according to subject areas.

6

The District demonstrated that it properly identified for layoff the certificated employees
providing the particular kinds of services that the Governing Board directed to be reduced or
discontinued and its determinations were not arbitrary or capricious.

16.

Further, the District has obviated the need to reduce or discontinue all of the
particular kinds of services described in Finding 12 above and to terminate the employment
of all respondents given preliminary notice and Accusations by taking into account the
personnel changes and attrition due to retirements and resignations of individual certificated
employees within the District. The District will continue to reasonably determine and
account for what will be positively assured attrition among its certificated staff for the
ensuing 2012-20123 school year and reduce by corresponding number the number of
certificated employees whose employment must be terminated due to the present reduction or
discontinuance of particular kinds of services.

Withdrawals of Accusations

17.

(A) During the hearing, the District withdrew the Accusations and, in effect,
rescinded the preliminary notices issued to the following respondents who are probationary
or permanent certificated employees: Keri Fenton (982), Yolanda Flores-Smith (1243), and
Laura Gonzalez (1226).1 In addition, the District withdrew the Accusations and, in effect,
rescinded the preliminary notices, issued to the follow respondents who are temporary
certificated employees: Camille Albrecht, Beverly Berekian, Toni Godfrey, Jack Gupton,
Janae Nafziger, and Lisa Tomeo. These respondents cannot be given a final layoff notice
and will be employed with the District in the next school year.

(B) According to the Displacement Chart (Exh. 15), the District was planning

to reassign Mirko Lopez (1246), Spanish teacher, to a position in math due to the possible
bumping of a Spanish teacher by a librarian with the seniority and credentials to move back
into the classroom and teach Spanish. However, while he has authorizations to teach
biology, geosciences, and social science, Lopez does not have a credential or authorization to
teach math. It was not established whether the District still plans to reassign Lopez but it is
assumed with the withdrawal of the Accusation against Flores-Smith, a fellow Spanish
teacher with the same seniority date, that Lopez is likewise not subject to being laid off.

//
//
//

1 The number in parentheses following the name of each respondent or certificated

probationary or permanent employee corresponds to his or her rank or place on the Seniority
List relative to other certificated employees. There is no number following the name of a
temporary certificated employee.

7

18.

Respondent Debra Seufert is a temporary certificated employee who teaches

music and/or vocal music at Walker Junior High School. She holds a life single subject
credential in music and a clear single subject credential in English. Seufert was given a
preliminary notice and remains subject to layoff pursuant to the reduction of the particular
kind of service in music. One position in music must be reduced or eliminated due to the
expiration of categorical funding under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
Respondent Seufert may be given a final notice and laid off from her temporary employment.

Music

Librarians

19.

Respondents Anita Buers (84), Justin Buz´Zard (259), Heather Gruenthal

(163), Linda Hodgin (18), Marilyn Konowal (378), Kathie Maier (99), and Suzanne Rahn
(956) are librarians who received preliminary notices that their services will not be required
for the ensuing school year due to the reduction of the particular kind of service of librarians
by 8.0 FTE.
In addition, permanent certificated employee Deanna Guzman (485) received a
preliminary notice but apparently did not file a request for hearing or Notice of Defense.

20.

(A) In addition to a teacher librarian services credential, Guzman holds a clear

single subject credential in Spanish. The Assistant Superintendent has determined that
Guzman is certificated and competent and has the seniority to bump or displace a less senior
certificated classroom teacher in Spanish.

(B) In addition to a library media teacher services credential, respondent Maier

holds a clear single subject credential in physical education. The Assistant Superintendent
has determined that Maier is certificated and competent and has the seniority to bump or
displace a less senior certificated classroom teacher in physical education.

(C) In addition to a library media services credential, respondent Hodgin holds

a credential or authorizations in special education to act as a resource specialist and to teach
pupils who are severely handicapped, learning handicapped, and mentally retarded. The
Assistant Superintendent has determined that Hodgin is certificated and competent and has
the seniority to bump or displace a less senior certificated classroom teacher in special
education.

(D) In addition to a standard librarian credential, respondent Konowal holds a

life secondary credential in history. The Assistant Superintendent has determined that
Konowal is certificated and competent and has the seniority to bump or displace a less senior
certificated classroom teacher in social science.

(E) In addition to a library media teacher services credential, respondent Rahn

holds a clear single subject credential in English. The Assistant Superintendent has

8

determined that Rahn is certificated and competent and has the seniority to bump or displace
a less senior certificated classroom teacher in English.

(F) In addition to a clear library media credential, respondent Gruenthal holds

a clear single subject credential in English. The Assistant Superintendent has determined
that Gruenthal is certificated and competent and has the seniority to bump or displace a less
senior certificated classroom teacher in English.

(G) In addition to a clear library media teacher credential, respondent Buz'Zard

holds a clear single subject credential in English. The Assistant Superintendent has
determined that Buz'Zard is certificated and competent and has the seniority to bump or
displace a less senior certificated classroom teacher in English.

(H) In addition to a library media services credential, respondent Buers holds a

clear single subject credential in English. The Assistant Superintendent has determined that
Buers is certificated and competent and has the seniority to bump or displace a less senior
certificated classroom teacher in English.

21.

Based on their credentials, competencies, and seniority dates, the District thus
plans to reassign certificated employee Guzman and respondents Maier, Hodgin, Konowal,
Rahn, Gruenthal, Buz´Zard, and Buers from their librarian positions to the classroom for the
ensuing school year and does not plan to lay them off. The District gave what may be
viewed as precautionary preliminary notices to these librarians because each of them will
lose a librarian’s stipend once he or she is reassigned to the classroom. The District may
reassign these respondents to the classroom, allow them to bump less senior certificated
employees, and terminate their librarian stipends. The District may reassign them back to
their librarian positions in the order of seniority in the event that funding is received so that it
is not necessary to reduce the particular kind of service of librarians by 8.0 FTE.
Respondents Maier, Hodgin, Konowal, Rahn, Gruenthal, Buz’Zard, and Buers may not
receive a final layoff notice.

22.

Respondent Buers decries the reduction of teacher librarians within the
District, emphasizing that librarians play an important role in improving the academic
performance of schools and pupils by promoting literacy, providing curriculum support, and
integrating information and technology literacy. Buers points out that the reduction of
librarians will leave the District with only one librarian for its 18 schools and 33,000 pupils
and that this ratio is far below the state recommended librarian-student ratio. The District
does not disagree and will return the librarians to the librarian positions if it receives
sufficient funding to do so. Education Code section 18120 does permit a school district to
appoint or employ librarians to staff its librarians but does not require a school district to
employ certificated librarians to provide required library services. (Campbell Elementary
Teachers Assn. Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 811.)

9

23.

Respondent Phillip Hohensee (1220) is a permanent certificated employee and

English teacher at Cypress High School. He holds a clear single subject credential in
English. Hohensee was served with a preliminary notice and remains subject to layoff due to
the reduction of particular kinds of services. The Assistant Superintendent has determined
that 17.5 FTE positions in English must be reduced. Eight temporary certificated employees
and two permanent employees, Hohensee and Roberta Dieter (1237), who both teach
English, remain subject to layoff. Hohensee has more seniority with the District than Dieter
or any other permanent employee. Here, an undetermined English teacher has retired or
given notice of his or her retirement at the end of the current school year. Due to what
appears to be positively assured attrition, the District would need then to layoff only one
permanent certificated employee in English and should be able to retain Hohensee. The
District, however, has thus far declined to withdraw the preliminary notice and Accusation
issued to respondent Hohensee. A school district need not consider positively assured
attrition occurring between the date of the preliminary notice and the final notice in
determining the number of certificated employees to be terminated by reason of a reduction
or discontinuance of a particular kind of service. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen, supra,
144 Cal.App.3d at 634-636.)
extent to which it deems a reduction of services necessary and proper and such decision is
made at the time of the final notice. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen, supra, 144
Cal.App.3d at 636.

It is within a school district’s discretion to determine the

24.

(A) Respondent Richard Martin is a temporary certificated employee who
teaches science at Loara High School. He holds preliminary single subject credentials in
biological science, geosciences, social science, and English.

(B) Respondent Martin started teaching for the District as a long-term

substitute in the spring semester of the 2010-2011 school year. On August 5, 2011, the
Assistant Superintendent approved the personnel request or requisition to employ Martin as a
long-term substitute teacher of earth science at Loara High School beginning on August 25,
2011, and ending on a date to be determined. The reason for the personnel request and
approval thereof was that the District needed a long-term substitute to replace certificated
teacher John Jawor who was on leave. As such, Martin began teaching at Loara High
School as a long-term substitute at the beginning of the fall semester of the 2011-2012 school
year.

(C) On or about November 4, 2011, the Human Resources office asked Martin

to come into the office to sign an Offer of Temporary Certificated Employment. On
November 7, 2011, Martin signed the temporary contract, which stated that his services as a
temporary teacher were to begin on October 31, 2011. Martin has continued teaching

English

Science

10

biology or earth science at Loara High School. On March 14, 2012, he was given a
preliminary notice that his services were not needed for the next school year.

(D) Under these circumstances, the evidence supports the conclusion that

respondent Martin is a probationary employee for the current 2011-2012 school year under
Education Code section 44916 because he was not notified of his employment status or
salary on his first date of paid service with the District under Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma
County Union High School District (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911. Nevertheless, even as a
probationary employee, Martin is the least senior probationary certificated teacher in science
or English in the District. Since he was a given a preliminary notice, respondent Martin may
be terminated pursuant to the current reduction of particular kinds of services.

Special Education

25.

The Assistant Superintendent determined that the District must reduce services

in special education by 6.0 FTE or positions since the change of staffing ratio requires a
reduction of 4.0 FTE and two more senior permanent certificated employees, librarian Linda
Hodgin (18) and an administrator, have the appropriate credentials and seniority to bump into
special education and displace less senior certificated employees. The District gave
preliminary notices to respondent Kathryn Pavel, respondent Joey Russell (1253), respondent
Erin McCowan (1247), and permanent employee Jennifer Mele (1236), and continues to seek
their layoff.

26.

(A) Respondent Kathryn Pavel is a temporary certificated employee and

special education teacher in the mild and moderate program at Magnolia High School. She
holds a Level II special education credential in mild and moderate disabilities and autism.
On March 14, 2012, Pavel was served with a preliminary notice that her services were not
needed for the ensuing school year and she is subject to release from her temporary contract
pursuant to the reduction of the particular kind of services in special education.

(B) On August 10, 2011, respondent Pavel signed her Offer of Temporary
Certificated Employment. She was hired as a leave replacement under Education Code
section 44920 for permanent certificated employee Robert Frasco (665), a physical education
teacher, and began teaching as a temporary certificated employee. Frasco was teaching in
the special education program but then had an undetermined problem in obtaining his special
education credential or authorization. He was placed in a position at the District office that
has not required him to use his physical education credential or to teach special education.

(C) In this proceeding, counsel for certain respondents argued that respondent
Pavel should be classified as a probationary employee under Education Code section 44916
because she was not hired as a temporary certificated employee for a teacher on leave under
Education Code section 44920. Counsel’s argument has merit.
Stockton Teachers Ass’n CTA/NEA v. Stockton Unified School Dist. (2012) 204 Cal.App.4th
446, the Court of Appeal, Third District, stated that the Education Code specifically

In the recent case of

11

authorizes a temporary classification for certificated employees in only a few instances,
including Education Code section 44920. The classification of a certificated employee as a
temporary employee is narrowly defined by the Legislature and must be strictly construed.
(Zalac v. Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 843.)
A person who has been determined to be qualified to teach may be classified as a temporary
employee only if the person occupies a position defined by law as temporary. (Bakersfield
Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260,
1277.) Even if an employee agrees in writing to be hired as a temporary employee, such
writing or contract is not determinative of his or her classification as a temporary employee
unless the classification is authorized by statute. (Stockton Teachers Ass’n CTA/NEA v.
Stockton Unified School Dist, Ibid. As a general rule, probationary status is the default
classification when the Education Code does not specify another classification. (California
Teachers Ass’n v. Vallejo City Unified School Dist. (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135, 146; Ed.
Code, § 44915.)

(D) Under Education Code section 44920, a school district may employ any
person holding the appropriate certification documentation as a teacher for a full year, but
not less than one semester, to replace a certificated employee who has been granted leave for
the semester or year or is experiencing a long-term illness. The school district may then
classify such replacement leave teacher as a temporary employee. Here, respondent Pavel
was hired to replace certificated employee Frasch who was purportedly on a leave of
absence. However, the evidence showed that Frasch is not, in fact, on a leave of absence.
Accordingly, Pavel cannot be classified as a temporary employee under section 44920 and
must be classified as a probationary employee.

(E) Even as a probationary employee, however, respondent Pavel remains

along with respondents Russell (1253) and McCowan (1247), and permanent employee Mele
(1236) among the least senior probationary or permanent certificated teachers in special
education. Respondents Pavel, Russell, and McCowan and permanent employee Mele were
all served with preliminary notices and may be terminated pursuant to the current reduction
of particular kinds of services.2

Temporary Categorical Employees

27.

(A) Respondents Melanie Evans, Toni Godfrey, Lisa Tomeo, Richard Martin,

and Beverly Berekian are temporary certificated employees whose teaching positions are
funded by the Quality Education Investment Act (QEIA), a state categorical funding program
administered by the California Department of Education (CDE) which is not necessarily
required by federal or statute statutes. QEIA provides funding to school districts for
allocation to specific low performing schools as established by the schools’ low rankings in

2 No claim or evidence was presented regarding probationary certificated employee
Lauren Klatzker (1245), who is a special education teacher and holds a preliminary special
education credential in the area of mild and moderate disabilities.

12

the Academic Performance Index. Funding under QEIA supports activities to improve
academic instruction and pupils’ academic performance. QEIA is not a categorical funding
program that is set to expire at the end of the current 2012-2013 school year and, in fact, will
continue to operate and provide funds to eligible school districts through the 2014-2015
school year.

(B) For the 2011-2012 school year, the District received $9.8 million in QEIA
funds, which included carryover funds from the prior school year. For the 2012-2013 school
year, the District anticipates receiving approximately $6.1 million in QEIA funds, which
together with the carryover of funds will amount to $8.1 million, or $1.7 million less than the
current school year. The QEIA funds are allocated to three District schools: Anaheim High
School, South Junior High School, and Sycamore Junior High School. The District is
required to use the QEIA funding to help these schools exceed growth in test scores, reduce
teacher to pupil ratios, and increase the number of highly qualified teachers through activities
including professional development. For these three schools, the District is required to file
reports with the CDE to show compliance with these goals.

(C) Respondents Evans and Berekian teach math and science, respectively, at
Magnolia High School and funding for their positions comes from QEIA funds allocated to
Anaheim High School. Respondents Martin and Tomeo teach science at Loara High School
and funding for their positions comes from QEIA funds allocated to Anaheim High School.
Respondent Godfrey teaches social science at Lexington Junior High School and funding for
her position comes from QEIA funds allocated to Sycamore Junior High School.

28.

(A) In this proceeding, respondents Evans, Berekian, Martin, Tomeo, and

Godfrey, and each of them, received preliminary notices that their temporary contract
services will not be needed for the next school year. Their counsel argued that, because they
are being terminated from their QEIA categorically funded positions before the expiration of
said categorical program, these respondents should be treated as probationary employees,
rather than temporary employees, and receive seniority accruals, pursuant to the recent case
of Stockton Teachers Ass’n CTA/NEA v. Stockton Unified School Dist. (2012) 204
Cal.App.4th 446. In the Stockton case, the Court of Appeal held that, before a school district
can terminate an employee hired to perform services for a contract or categorically funded
project as a temporary employee under Education Code section 44909, the school district
must (1) show the employee was hired to perform services under a contract with public or
private agencies or categorically funded projects which are not required by federal or state
statutes: (2) identify the particular contract or project for which services were performed; (3)
show that the particular contract or project expired; and (4) show that the employee was
hired for the term of the contract or project.
elements under Education Code section 44909, the employee must be treated as a
probationary employee.

If the school district does not prove these four

(B) Here, respondents Berekian, Godfrey, and Tomeo are not being terminated

from their temporary teaching positions, for the District has offered to re-employ them for
the next school year and withdrawn the Accusations against them, as set forth in Finding

13

17(A) above. As such, it is not necessary to determine if respondents Berekian, Godfrey, and
Tomeo are temporary or probationary certificated employees under the Stockton case.
Respondent Martin has already been found to be a probationary employee due to the late
signing of his contract under the Kavanaugh case but he is still subject to layoff, as set forth
in Finding 24(A) – (D) above.

(C) The District also plans to terminate respondent Evans pursuant to the

reduction of particular kinds of services in classroom teaching in math. On July 25, 2011,
Evans signed an Offer of Temporary Employment which states that she was “elected to serve
as a temporary teacher pursuant to Education Code Sections 44919, 44920 or 44921.”
However, it was not established that Evans was hired as a temporary teacher to teach
temporary classes not to last more than three months or to supervise athletic activities under
section 44919, to be a replacement for a teacher on a leave of absence under section 44920,
or as a temporary teacher for the first semester of this school year due to expected decrease
in student enrollment under section 44921. As stated in the Stockton case, a written
agreement to be hired as a temporary employee is not determinative unless the classification
is authorized by statute. (Stockton Teachers Ass’n CTA/NEA v. Stockton Unified School
Dist., supra, 204 Cal.App.4th 446.) Based on the Reasons for Temporary Contracts (Exh. 6),
the evidence shows that Evans was hired as a categorical employee for the QEIA program
presumably under Education Code section 44909. However, because she is being terminated
before the expiration of the QEIA project, which does not expire until the 2014-2015 school
year, Evans cannot be found to be a temporary employee of a categorically funded project
under section 44909 and must be treated as a probationary employee under the Stockton case.
As a probationary employee who is certificated and competent to teach math, Evans is
nevertheless the most junior of math teachers in the District and remains subject to layoff due
to the reduction of particular kinds of services. Respondent Evans may receive a final layoff
notice.

29.

Any claims and contentions made by the parties at the hearing or in written
argument for which there are no specific findings in this Proposed Decision were deemed
unproven or were considered irrelevant or surplussage.

Pursuant to the foregoing findings of fact, the Administrative Law Judge makes the

following determination of issues:

1.

Jurisdiction exists for the subject proceedings pursuant to Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955, based on Findings 1 – 29 above. All notices, accusations, and

* * * * * * *

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

14

other related papers and reports required by these Education Code sections have been
provided in timely manner and, as such, the parties have complied with the statutory
requirements.

2.

Cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to reduce

or discontinue by 51.00 full-time equivalent positions the concomitant number of certificated
employees of the District due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of
services, based on Findings 1 – 29 above. With respect to those respondents whose
employment has been found to be terminable by the District and any other certificated
employees who received notices but did not request a hearing, if any, the causes set forth in
the Accusations relate solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils within the
meaning of Education Code section 44949.

3.

Cause does not exist pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to
terminate the employment of the following respondents and/or certificated employees: Keri
Fenton (982), Yolanda Flores-Smith (1243), Laura Gonzalez (1226), Camille Albrecht,
Beverly Berekian, Toni Godfrey, Jack Gupton, Janae Nafziger, Lisa Tomeo, Anita Buers
(84), Justin Buz´Zard (259), Heather Gruenthal (163), Linda Hodgin (18), Marilyn Konowal
(378), Kathie Maier (99), and Suzanne Rahn (956), based on Findings 17(A) and 19 – 21
above.

4.

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the District
to serve upon the remaining respondents, notices that their services will not be required for
the ensuing 2012-2013 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular
kinds of services, as long as those respondents to be served were identified in the
Displacement Chart or other exhibits, documents, testimonial evidence presented during the
hearing as being the subjects of a final layoff notice.

5.

Based on Findings 1 – 29 above, except as provided in this Proposed Decision

and/or due to determinations by the District in reasonable exercise of its discretion, there is
no certificated probationary or permanent employee or temporary contract or categorical
certificated employee with less seniority than any one of respondents who is being retained
by the District for the 2012-2013 school year to render services which any one of
respondents is certificated and competent to render.

//
//
//

* * * * * * *

15

WHEREFORE, the Administrative Law Judge makes the following Order:

ORDER

1.

The Accusation issued against respondents or certificated employees named or

identified in Findings 17(A) and 19 – 21 above must be dismissed, based on Conclusion of
Law 3 above. These respondents or certificated employees may not be given final layoff
notices that their services will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year.

2.

The Accusation issued against all of the remaining respondents is sustained,
based on Conclusions of Law 1, 2, 4, and 5 above. The District may give notice to these
respondents, and each of them, in inverse order of seniority that their services will not be
required for the ensuing 2012-2013 school year because of the present reduction or
discontinuance of particular kinds of services pursuant to Education Code section 44955.

3.

Before giving notice to respondents, the District shall further determine and

take into account any additional positively assured attrition among certificated employees in
deciding how many respondents should be terminated before the ensuing 2012-2013 school
year.

4.

The District may give notice to any respondents that their services will not be

required for the ensuing 2012-2013 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of
particular kinds of services as long as those respondents were previously identified as being
subject to service of a final layoff notice, based on Conclusions of Law 4 above.

Dated: May 4, 2012

Vincent Nafarrete
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

16

