BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
RIALTO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY
CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
Proceeding Involving:

OAH No. 2012030422

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
OF THE RIALTO UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT WHO RECEIVED
PRELIMINARY LAYOFF NOTICES FOR
THE 2012-2013 SCHOOL YEAR,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of

California, heard this matter in Etiwanda, California, on April 17, 2012.

John W. Dietrich and Paul Z. McGlocklin, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo,

represented the Rialto Unified School District.

Carlos R. Perez, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented the respondents appearing at the

reduction in force proceeding identified in Exhibit B.

The matter was submitted on April 17, 2012.

The Rialto Unified School District

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Rialto Unified School District is located in Rialto, between the cities of

Fontana and San Bernardino. It comprises 59.5 square miles and serves approximately
26,000 Kindergarten through 12th Grade students living in the communities of Rialto,
Colton, Fontana, San Bernardino, and Lytle Creek. The District maintains 19 elementary
schools, five middle schools, three comprehensive high schools, and an adult continuation

1

school. Approximately 28 percent of the students are English Language Learners. About 85
percent of the student body is eligible to participate in the hot lunch program.

The District employs approximately 2,500 persons, about 1,215 of whom are
certificated employees who provide direct services and supports to students. The District has
a projected budget of approximately $212 million for the 2012-2013 school year.

2.

The District is governed by an elected five-member Board of Education.

Harold L. Cebrun, Sr., Ph.D. is the District Superintendent and the Board’s Chief Executive
Officer. Felix J. Avila is an Assistant Superintendent of Schools, Personnel Services.
Rhonda D. Kramer is a Senior Director of Personnel Services.

The Fiscal Crisis

3.

Public schools primarily rely on financing from the State of California. A

school district cannot determine the level of state funding it will receive until the state budget
is chaptered, an event that is supposed to occur each year in late June. Before then, a school
district’s governing board, which has the duty to produce a balanced budget and to file that
budget with the County Department of Education, must take steps to ensure that financial
ends will meet if the worst-case financial scenario develops.

California’s recent economic problems have had a crippling impact on the Rialto
Unified School District and other public school districts. If the District cannot meet its
financial obligations, the San Bernardino County Office of Education might intervene and
take over the District’s operations.
With regard to the budget for the 2012-13 school year, District administrators believe that the
District may receive $370 less per student in average daily attendance funding than the
District currently receives, and there will be other certain cutbacks in funding. The
anticipated maximum reductions in District funding could result in a $12 million shortfall for
the 2012-2013 school year.

The District’s Response

4.

In response to the anticipated budgetary shortfall for the 2012-2013 school

year, District administrators reviewed services and staffing. The District embarked upon a
program to trim its budget through the use of furlough days for credentialed and
administrative staff, the reduction of 39 classified employees, the reduction of eight certified
administrators, the implementation of early retirement incentives, moving to a four day a
week, 10 hour a day summer school schedule, and the reduction of particular kinds of
credentialed services. Assistant Superintendent Avila and District staff recommended to
Superintendent Cebrun that 89 full time equivalent certificated positions be reduced or
eliminated.

On February 22, 2012, Superintendent Cebrun recommended to the Governing Board

that it adopt Resolution No. 11-12-52, authorizing the reduction or elimination of 89 full-
time equivalent K-12 teaching and support positions for the 2012-2013 school year and that

2

the services of a corresponding number of certificated employees be terminated at the end of
the 2011-2012 school year.

5.

On February 22, 2012, following Superintendent Cebrun’s staffing

recommendations, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 11-12-52. It provides:

WHEREAS, the Board of Education of the Rialto Unified
School District has determined that due to financial conditions it
is in the best interests of the District and the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof that the particular kinds of
services set forth herein must be reduced or discontinued; and

WHEREAS, it is the opinion of the Board that because of the
aforementioned reason, it is in the best interest of the District
that the number of regular certificated employees of the District
must be reduced; and

WHEREAS, this Board does not desire to reduce the services of
regular certificated employees based upon reduction of average
daily attendance during the past two years; and

WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a significant
population of English language learners with specialized
educational needs, a specific and compelling need exists to
employ and retain certificated employees who have
authorization to teach English Learner (“EL”) students, as
determined by the California Commission on Teacher
Credentialing, and the special training and experience that
comes therewith; and

WHEREAS, State law mandates that each failure to staff a
classroom containing one or more EL students with a
certificated employee possessing an appropriate EL
authorization is a “misassignment” subject to sanction by the
County Superintendent of Schools; and

WHEREAS, compliance with the provisions of the No Child
Left Behind Act, the Williams Settlement, and Education Code
section 44253.1, require that EL students be served by
certificated employees with appropriate EL authorizations and
who are No Child Left Behind compliant in the subject area they
are teaching; and

WHEREAS, the needs of the District and the students thereof
should not and cannot be adequately served by concentrating EL

3

students in particular classrooms in such a manner as to lessen
the need for certificated employees with EL authorizations.

WHEREAS, Education Code section 44955(d) authorizes this
Board to deviate from terminating certificated employees in
order of seniority for the above reasons, if necessary; and

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of
Education of the Rialto Unified School District as follows:

A. That the particular kinds of services set forth below shall be
reduced or eliminated commencing in the 2012-2013 school
year:

Administrative Interns
Elementary Autism Teacher
Elementary Music Specialists
Elementary Resource Specialists
Elementary Teachers
High School Business Teacher
High School Counselors
High School English Teachers
High School Health Teacher
High School Math Teachers
High School P. E. Teachers
High School Social Science Teachers
High School Spanish Teachers
Language Development Strategists
Middle School 6th Grade Teachers
Middle School English Teachers
Middle School Social Science Teachers
School Nurse
Technology Coach

2
1
3
2
20
1
3
4
1
3
2
4
1
17
10
5
5
4
1

F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS

89

F.T.E.

B. That due to the reduction or elimination of particular kinds
of services, a corresponding number of certificated employees
of the District shall be terminated pursuant to Education Code
section 44955.

C. That the reduction of certificated staff be achieved by the
termination of regular employees and not by terminating
temporary or substitute employees.

4

D. That “competency” as described in Education Code sections
44955(b), 44956, and 44957, for the purposes of bumping and
rehire rights, shall necessarily include possession of a valid EL
authorization and being No Child Left Behind Compliant in the
subject area.

E. That, as between certificated employees with the same
seniority date, the order of termination shall be determined
solely by Board-adopted criteria.

F. That the District Superintendent or designee is directed to
initiate layoff procedures and give appropriate notice pursuant
to Education Code sections 44955 and 44949.

PASSED AND ADOPTED this 22nd day of February, 2012, in
the County of San Bernardino, California.

The Particular Kinds of Services

6.

The kinds of services identified in Resolution No. 11-12-52 were services that

could be reduced lawfully under the Education Code. The Governing Board’s adoption of
Resolution No. 11-12-52 was neither arbitrary nor capricious; its adoption was well within
the Governing Board’s discretion. No particular kind of service was lowered to a level
below that mandated by state or federal law. Resolution No. 11-12-52 related solely to the
economic crisis and the Governing Board’s duty to balance the budget.

Delegation of Authority and Notice to Board

7.

Each respondent in the reduction in force proceeding is a certificated

employee of the District.

On March 9, 2010, Superintendent Cebrun granted non-exclusive authority to

Assistant Superintendent Avila to administer the reduction in force proceeding.

On March 9, 2010, the Board was given notice that respondents’ services would not

be required for the 2012-2013 school year.

The District’s Seniority List

8.

The District maintains a seniority list, a constantly evolving document that is

updated as new certificated employees are hired and as other employees retire, resign, or
otherwise become separated from service with the District. The seniority list is a spreadsheet
that is organized from the District’s most senior certificated employee to the most recently
hired certificated employee. The list contains each employee’s seniority number, name,
status (tenured, probationary, intern), a tie-breaking value for employees who provided

5

service on the same first day, a seniority date (the employee’s first date of paid probationary
service with the District), the school site where current services are being provided, the
employee’s current assignment, and the employee’s credentials on file with the District.

9.

In January 2012, when it became apparent that a reduction in force might

become necessary, the District circulated a seniority list to all certificated employees with a
request that each employee review that list and verify or update his or her seniority
information; if an employee did not return the list to District administrative staff in a timely
manner, the staff concluded that the information set forth in the seniority list was correct.

The Issuance of Preliminary Layoff Notices

10.

Using the updated seniority list, Resolution No. 11-12-52, and the tie-breaking

criteria, Assistant Superintendent Avila, Senior Director Kramer, and other staff members
began the painstaking process of identifying those certificated employees who should receive
preliminary layoff notices and those who should not. Four staff members spent three full
days engaged in this tedious process.

Whenever an employee providing a particular kind of service eliminated by Resolution No.
11-12-52 was tentatively identified as being in line to receive a preliminary layoff notice,
that employee’s seniority and credentials were carefully examined to determine if that
employee had the seniority, credentials, and competence to “bump” a junior employee and
assume the more junior employee’s position.

Preliminary layoff notices were issued to the 89 certificated employees whose employment
the District staff identified as being subject to reduction or elimination as a result of
Resolution No. 11-12-52.

The Administrative Hearing

11.

On April 17, 2012, the record in the reduction in force proceeding was opened.
Jurisdictional documents were introduced. The caption was amended. An opening statement
was presented on the District’s behalf. Opening statements were not provided on behalf of
respondents and were waived. Sworn testimony was taken; documentary evidence was
received; Assistant Superintendent Villa testified about the budgetary crisis and the layoff
process; Senior Director Kramer testified about the seniority list and the District’s efforts to
ensure that the most senior employees were retained to provide services for which they were
credentialed and competent; a written stipulation to jurisdictional facts was filed; closing
comments were given; the record was closed; and the matter was submitted.

12.

During the process to determine which employees were subject to Resolution

No. 11-12-52, administrative staff improperly failed to determine that employee Temika
Morris (employee no. 1987) had the seniority, credentials, and competency to bump
employee Vincent Ressa (employee rank 1137), and that Ms. Morris was improperly issued a
preliminary layoff notice and that her services should have been retained.

6

13.

The position currently held by Shannon Miller, a Middle School

Administrator, was being eliminated and that Ms. Miller was subject to reassignment to a
classroom teaching position. Although Ms. Miller is not part of this reduction in force
proceeding, it appears that Ms. Miller lacks the seniority to bump into a classroom teaching
position if, in fact, her administrative position is eliminated, and that her services will not be
retained for the 2012-2013 school year.

14. Mindy Montry (employee no. 1050) currently holds the position of Activities
Director at Rialto High School; while other certificated employees are more senior than Ms.
Montry and hold a credential that would enable them to serve in the position of Activities
Director, the job description for Activities Director has certain experience requirements that
only Ms. Montry possesses that enables her to retain that position over more senior
employees.

15.

Jorge Alvarez (employee no. 1045) is a tenured 10th grade social studies

teacher at Carter High School who possesses a seniority date of August 24, 2006. He holds a
single subject teaching credential in social studies, a GATE certification, and a master’s
degree. Mr. Alvarez received a preliminary layoff notice as a result of being bumped by
Omar Herrera (employee no. 1032), a tenured middle school teacher at Rialto Middle School
who also possesses a seniority date of August 24, 2006. Mr. Herrera possesses a multiple
subject teaching credential with subject matter authorization in Introduction to Social
Studies, which authorizes him to teach 9th grade curriculum to students enrolled in the 9th to
12th grades. After appropriate application of the tie-breaking criteria, the District determined
Mr. Herrera possessed the seniority, credential, and competence to teach at the high school
level and to bump into Mr. Alvarez’s position, even though Mr. Herrera will not be assigned
to teach the classes Mr. Alvarez now teaches. A preponderance of the evidence supports the
District’s reassignment and the issuing of a preliminary layoff notice to Mr. Alvarez who,
undoubtedly, is an excellent educator.

The Reduction in Force Proceeding

16.

The enactment of Resolution No. 11-12-52 was the result of a budgetary crisis,

not a decline in attendance; it was enacted in good faith; it was in the best interest of the
District and its students. The District complied with all jurisdictional requirements. The
District used seniority, credentials, and competence as the basis for “bumping” junior
employees, and the District retained the services of senior, competent, and appropriately
credentialed employees to provide services currently being provided by more junior
employees. The District’s tie-breaking criteria were applied in an appropriate and
evenhanded manner, and the application of those criteria was in the best interest of the
District and its students. The District’s retention of Ms. Montry as Activities Director
involved “skipping” and was appropriate under the circumstances based on her unique
experience that no senior employee possessed.

7

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Statutory Authority - Reduction in Force Proceedings

1.

Education Code section 44949 provides in part:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee . . . that it has been recommended that the notice be
given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . .

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency
therein, except that all of the following shall apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any,
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation
and he or she shall be notified of this five-day period for filing
in the accusation.

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the
Government Code shall be available only if request is made
therefor within 15 days after service of the accusation, and the
notice required by Section 11505 of the Government Code shall
so indicate.

8

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be
prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds . . .

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the
employee. . . .

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) any
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the
Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) which
occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which
occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be
extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides in part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her
position for causes other than those specified . . . and no
probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position
for cause other than as specified . . .

(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school

9

year . . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the
district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in
the district, the governing board may terminate the services of
not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at
the close of the school year. Except as otherwise provided by
statute, the services of no permanent employee may be
terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less
seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render . . .

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would
not exist without such a requirement.

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given before
the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and
services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of
the order in which they were employed, as determined by the
board in accordance with the provisions of Sections 44844 and
44845. In the event that a permanent or probationary employee
is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the
ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments
in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any
service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to
render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not
previously taught, and for which he or she does not have a

10

teaching credential or which is not within the employee’s major
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject
matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of
seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to
teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide services
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that
the certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide
those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the
laws.

Jurisdiction

3.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied
as to all respondents.

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

4.

A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service should be
reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the governing board acted unfairly
or improperly simply because it made a decision it was empowered to make. (Rutherford v.
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.) A school board’s decision to reduce or
discontinue a particular kind of service need not be tied in with any statistical computation.
It is within the discretion of a school board to determine the amount by which it will reduce
or discontinue a particular kind of service as long as the school district does not reduce a
service below the level required by law. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144
Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)

Competence

5.

The Education Code leaves to a school board’s discretion the determination of
whether an employee must also be competent to be employed in a vacant position in addition
to possessing seniority. The term “competent” relates to an individual’s specific skills or
qualifications, including academic background, training, credentials, and experience, but it

11

does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance. (Forker v. Board of Trustees
(1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)

6.

In this matter, the Board determined that competence included an

authorization to teach English Learner (“EL”) students, as determined by the California
Commission on Teacher Credentialing, and the special training and experience that comes
therewith; and compliance with the provisions of the No Child Left Behind Act. These are
valid criteria to determine “competence.”

Seniority, Bumping, Skipping

7.

Seniority: Under Education Code section 44845, seniority is determined by

the date a certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”

8.

Education Code section 44846 provides in part: “The governing board shall
have power and it shall be its duty to correct any errors discovered from time to time in its
records showing the order of employment.”

9.

The Statutory Scheme: Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff

statute, provides in subdivision (b), in part:

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while . . . . any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is
certificated and competent to render.

Essentially this statutory language provides “bumping” rights for senior certificated

and competent employees, and “skipping” authority to retain junior employees who are
certificated and competent to render services which more senior employees are not.

10.

Bumping: The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b),
to determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be
assigned to another position. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th
127, 136-137.)

11.

Skipping: Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to

subdivision (b) where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific
course of study and that a junior certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated employee does not possess.
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at pp. 134-135.) There is nothing in the statute
that requires such special needs be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job
descriptions, or program requirements. (Id., at p. 138.)

12

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district and
establishing requirements for employment. This discretion encompasses determining the
training and experience necessary for particular positions. Similarly, school districts have
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)

Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees

12.

As a result of the Governing Board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of
service, cause exists under the Education Code for the District to give final notice to those
respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment will be terminated at the
close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed by the district for
the 2012-2013 school year.

Determination

13.

The charges set forth in the Accusation were sustained by the preponderance
of the evidence except as otherwise stated herein. The adoption of Resolution No. 11-12-52
was related to the welfare of the District and its pupils. The District made necessary
assignments and reassignments in such a manner that the most senior credentialed employees
were retained to render services that their seniority and qualifications entitled them to
provide.

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the Rialto Unified School District

issue final layoff notices to the following certificated employees: Julia Agnew; Miriam
Aguirre, Claudia Alas; Jorge Alvarez; Jonathan Armel; Lance Atkinson; Carole Baca; Joseph
Baca, Jr.; Jennifer Bailey; Dorothy Baisie; Alisa Barbosa; Diana Barrera, Anne Burelle;
Tishri Campa; Edward Campbell II; Theodore Caruthers III; Laura Cervantes; Stefanie
Chamberlain; Sandra Choven; Caroline Collins; Raul Contreras; Billie Cox, Gregory Dalton,
Evelia De La Torre; Rita Duran; Ilene Estrada; Gina Felkins; Eugene Florence IV; Elizabeth
Folden; Ryan George; Anabel Granados; Francisco Guzman; Elizabeth Hague; Kristal
Henriquez-Pulido; Erina Higa; Karen Holguin, Holly Hunter; Enice James; Horacho
Jimmerson; Montcolm Joham; Anthony Jones; Shaun Karpow; Cynthia Klein; Ronnie
Kovich; DeShawna Lang; Elizabeth Lemaster; Abina Lewis; Valerie Linton; Sara Logan;
Elizabeth Lopez; Samuel Lopez; Diana Lynch; Kyle MacKenzie; Domingo Mandi, Jr.;
Melanie Manson-Tonkinson; Jessie Masteller; David McMillan; Laura McMullen; Sara
Mehrmand; Autumn Mena-Khellafi; Michael Montano; Doreen Morales; Barry Noreen;
Alejandro Olmos; William Patterson II; Suzanne Piepenhagen-Sanchez; Francesca Pierce;

13

Maureen Powers; Karla Realegeno; Teresa Robinson; Eric Rodriguez; Julie Ruffin; Wendy
Shewmake; Debra Sigala; Suzette Stitt; Kristy Streff; Ericka Talton; Michael Toomey;
Morokot Um; Aldo Velasco; Amy Watkins, Kimberly Watson; Leona Whitley; Gilliam
Williams; Neveen Zaki; and Margarita Zeledon.

Dated: April 18, 2012

___________________________
JAMES AHLER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

14

