BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
FONTANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

RESPONDENTS LISTED IN
EXHIBIT “A”

OAH No. 2013030897

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Fontana, California, on April 23, 2013.

Mark W. Thompson, Esq. and Brooke E. Jimenez, Esq, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya,

Ruud & Romo, represented Mark W. McLaughlin, the Fontana Unified School District’s
Director of Certificated Human Resources.

Marianne Reinhold, Esq., Reich, Adell & Civitan, represented Respondents listed in

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Respondents Maria Caceres and Nicole

Exhibit “A”.

White.

The matter was submitted on April 23, 2013.

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION

The Board of Education of Fontana Unified School District determined to reduce or

discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers for budgetary reasons. The
decision was not related to the competency and dedication of the employees whose services
are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.

District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process involving

review of credentials, seniority, competence, and experience. A tie-breaking procedure
authorized by the Education Code was utilized. The selection process was in accordance
with the requirements of the Education Code.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” (Respondents) are certificated employees

of the Fontana Unified School District (District).

Mark M. McLaughlin (McLaughlin), the District’s Director of Certificated

Human Resources (Director), notified the District’s Governing Board (Board) of his
recommendation that the District reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services for the
2013-2014 school year.

3.

On March 6, 2013, the Board adopted Resolution No. 13-04 reducing or

eliminating particular kinds of services (general) for the ensuing school year, establishing
“competency” criteria, and establishing criteria for resolving ties among certificated
employees with the same date of first paid probationary service. The Board directed the
Superintendent or designated representative to send notices to all employees possibly
affected by the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.

Resolution No. 13.04 states, in pertinent part:

Middle School Core (Multiple Subject)

High School English

High School Foreign Language: Spanish

High School Mathematics

High School Science: Biological

High School Science: Earth/Geoscience

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS

13.00

7.00

2.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

F.T.E.

F.T.E.

F.T.E.

F.T.E.

F.T.E.

F.T.E.

F.T.E
.

The proposed reductions totaled 13.00 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.

4.

On March 6, 2013, the Board adopted Resolution No. 13-05 reducing or

eliminating particular kinds of services (categorical) for the ensuing school year, establishing
“competency” criteria, and establishing criteria for resolving ties among certificated
employees with the same date of first paid probationary service. The Board directed the
Superintendent or designated representative to send notices to all employees possibly
affected by the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.

Resolution No. 13.05 states, in pertinent part:

Elementary EL Intervention

1.50 F.T.E.

2

Elementary Instructional Support

Elementary Outreach Consultant

Middle School Instructional Support

High School Assistant Principal (SIG)

High School Community Liaison – Activities (SIG)

1.00 F.T.E.

High School Community Liaison – Intervention
(SIG)

High School Instructional Support – Intervention
(Rapid Credit Recovery)

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS

25.75 F.T.E

16.00 F.T.E.

2.00 F.T.E.

2.25 F.T.E.

1.00 F.T.E.

1.00 F.T.E.

1.00 F.T.E.

.

The proposed reductions totaled 25.75 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.

5.

On March 6, 2013, the Board adopted Resolution No. 13-06 reducing or

eliminating particular kinds of services (early education) for the ensuing school year,
establishing “competency” criteria, and establishing criteria for resolving ties among
certificated employees with the same date of first paid probationary service. The Board
directed the Superintendent or designated representative to send notices to all employees
possibly affected by the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.

Resolution No. 13.06 states, in pertinent part:

Early Reading First Bilingual Intervention
Specialist

Early Reading First Intervention Specialist

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS

1.00

F.T.E.

1.00

2.00

F.T.E.

F.T.E
.

The proposed reductions totaled 2.00 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.

6.

The Board established “competency” criteria in Resolution 13-04 (General),

which states:

[¶] . . . [¶]

Whereas the Board has determined that a specific and compelling need exists
to employ and retain certificated employees for middle school core algebra positions
who possess the necessary special training and experience to best serve middle school

3

students, evidenced by possession of Highly Qualified (“HQ”) status in mathematics
under No Child Left behind Act (“NCLB”); and

Whereas Education Code section 44955(d) authorizes this Board to deviate

from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for the above reason, if
necessary.

THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Governing Board of the Fontana

Unified School District as follows:

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

D.

That “competency” as described in Education Code section 44955(b), 44956
and 44957 for the purposes of bumping and reemployment shall necessarily
include (1) HQ status under NCLB, (2) to bump a holder of a single subject
credential in a departmentalized secondary assignment, an equivalent single
subject credential, (3) to bump a middle school core math teacher holding HQ
status in math, equivalent HQ status in math, and (4) to bump into a specialty
position including but not limited to librarian, ASB advisor, or AVID, at least
one (1) year of prior experience in the assignment within the past five (5)
years, and (5) to bump into a teacher on assignment or consulting
teacher/support provider position, possession of equivalent training,
experience and qualifications necessary to perform the duties of the position.

E.

That bumping shall only be allowed in cases where the senior employee
possesses all credentials necessary to assume the whole assignment of the
junior employee.

The foregoing paragraphs “D” and “E” are included in Board Resolutions 13.05 and

13.06.

The Board established the “competency” criteria for purposes of bumping or
displacing more junior employees with senior employees who were competent and
credentialed to hold the position held by the junior employees. There is no evidence that the
competency criteria were arbitrary or capricious or otherwise invalid.

7.

On March 6, 2013, the Board adopted Resolution No. 13-14 “Resolution to

Establish Criteria for Resolving Seniority Ties in a Certificated Layoff” which included clear
instructions for implementation of the criteria. The order of termination was based on the
needs of the District and its students.

8.

On March 12, 2013, the Director served permanent and probationary

certificated Respondents with “Notice of Recommendation that Services Will Not Be

4

Required”, a copy of Board Resolution Nos. 13-04, 13-05, 13-06 and 13-14, the reasons for
the Board’s action, an Accusation, a blank “Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense”
form and relevant sections of the California Education Code and California Government
Code. In addition, the Director advised Respondents of the right to hearing, that a Request
for Hearing was required to be delivered to “the Board of Education” no later than March 27,
2013, and that the failure to request a hearing would constitute waiver of the right to hearing.

9.

Each Respondent submitted a timely Request for Hearing and Notice of

Defense to determine if there was cause for not re-employing him or her for the ensuing
school year.

10.

The District served each Respondent with a Notice of Hearing setting the

hearing for April 23, 2013, in accordance with Government Code section 11509.

11.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied.

12.

The Director was responsible for implementing the technical aspects of the
layoff. The District developed a seniority list for probationary and permanent certificated
staff that included, among other matters, the name of the certificated employee, status,
seniority date, assignment, credentials and relevant notes (such as application of tie-breaker
criteria).

13.

The Director used the seniority list to develop a proposed order of layoff to

determine the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being
reduced. Then the District determined whether an employee was qualified to be “skipped”.
Then, the District determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another
area that would entitle them to “bump” other junior employees. In determining who would
be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions
and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority. Then, the
District checked the credentials of affected individuals and whether they could “bump” other
employees.

14.

The District considered all positively assured attrition in determining the

actual number of final layoff notices that needed to be delivered to its certificated employees.

15.

Erica Perea (Perea) argued that she should be treated as a Respondent despite

the fact that she did not file a timely Request for Hearing. The District objected.

Along with other employees identified for layoff, Perea received notice that she was
required to return her Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense form on or before March
27, 2013. She did not return the form until March 28, 2013. She offered no reasonable
explanation for filing an untimely Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense.

The District’s objection is sustained. Perea shall not be treated as a Respondent in

this matter.

5

16.

Prior to hearing, the District rescinded the layoff notices that had been issued
to the following certificated employees: Jennifer Belikoff, Artie Casas, Monica Diaz, Maria
Garces, Deserea Hernandez, Holly Hicke, Friedhelm Lambertson, Deborah Pagliero, Gloria
Rodriguez, Gloria Salas and Jaime Soria.

17.

During the hearing, the District rescinded the layoff notices that had been

issued to the following certificated employees: Renee Bristel, Rebekah Cherniss, Amanda
Sullenger.

18.

Respondent Amy Dupas (Respondent Dupas)1 challenged the issuance of a

layoff notice to her. She argued that she is eligible to bump more junior employees who are
being retained to perform services for which she is certificated and competent to perform in
that she has served as an ASB advisor in the middle school for one year.

Respondent Dupas, is a permanent teacher, has a seniority date of February 16, 2012,
and holds a Multiple Subject teaching credential. Respondent Dupas received a layoff notice
because she is among the most junior employees teaching Math/Science Core and is not HQ
in Math. However, Respondent Dupas asserts that she is certificated and competent to bump
Jesse Cerda (Cerda)2 and Ariana Mota (Mota)3, more junior employees who have been
retained to provide services as ASB Director in a high school.

The District’s “competency” criterion for purposes of “bumping” does not distinguish

between an ASB Advisor in the middle school and an ASB Advisor in the high school.
McLaughlin testified that no particular credential is required to serve in this position; the
District’s concern is that the teacher must have the skills to deal with the financial aspects of
the position. The terms ASB Advisor and ASB Director are interchangeable in this District.
There is a job description for ASB Director in the high school but not ASB Advisor in the
middle school. The duties of the positions are substantially similar.

However, the Director testified that the positions are completely different. The

position at the middle school level involves one period of the teacher’s workday; the
supplemental payment is .5% of the teacher’s salary, and the teacher works with middle
school students; the high school ASB Director is a full time position, and the supplemental
pay is .16% of the teacher’s salary, and the teacher works with high school students.

1

2

3

On the District’s seniority list, Amy Dupas is identified as reference number 3104.

On the District’s seniority list, Jesse Cerda’s seniority date is September 12, 2007; his

status is probationary II, and he is listed as reference number 3110.

On the District’s seniority list, Ariana Mota’s seniority date is January 23, 2012; her

status is probationary I, and she is listed as reference number 3196.

6

Considering the facts in the foregoing paragraphs, Respondent Dupas is not
competent to “bump” Cerda or Mota. Respondent Dupas does not possess “at least one (1)
year of prior experience in the assignment within the past five (5) years . . .” The District
properly issued a layoff notice to Dupas.

19.

Respondent Clarice Riggio-Ocampo (Respondent Riggio-Ocampo)4

challenged the issuance of a layoff notice to her. Her status is probationary I; her seniority
date is August 2, 2012; she holds a Multiple Subject credential. She is on a 75 percent
contract and is assigned as an Instructional Support teacher. Respondent Riggio-Ocampo
received a layoff notice because the Board has reduced the particular kind of service she
provides, and she is among the most junior teachers assigned to provide this service.

Respondent Riggio-Ocampo testified that the school to which she is assigned will

have instructional support teachers. As such, she argued that she should be retained to
provide the service at her school. The statutory and case law is clear that the District is
required to retain the most senior teacher who is credentialed and competent to provide the
service in the District. Respondent Riggio-Ocampo offered no evidence to establish that her
seniority, credential and competency permit her to displace more senior employees with the
same credential and competence. The District properly issued the layoff notice to
Respondent Riggio-Ocampo.

20.

The services that the Board proposed to reduce were “particular kinds of

services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section
44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of services was
not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.

21.

The Board’s reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services related

to the welfare of the District and its pupils. The reduction or discontinuance of particular
kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the
District as determined by the Board.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to

On the District’s seniority list, Clarice M. Riggio-Ocampo is identified as reference

4

number 3234.

7

deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3.

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the Fontana
Unified School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services. The cause for
the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to the welfare
of the schools and the pupils thereof.

4.

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a
continuing position that he/she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position. (Lacy vs.
Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 469.)

5.

6.

No employee with less seniority than any Respondent is being retained to

perform a service that any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.

All arguments not addressed herein are not supported by the evidence and/or

the law and therefore rejected.

ORDER

1.

The Accusation served on Respondents Jennifer Belikoff, Renee Bristell, Artie

Casas, Rebekah Cherniss, Monica Diaz, Maria Garces, Deserea Hernandez, Holly Hicke,
Friedhelm Lambertson, Deborah Pagliero, Elaina Rodriguez, Gloria Salas, Jaime Soria, and
Amanda Sullenger is dismissed.

2.

Except as provided in the foregoing paragraph, the Accusation served on

Respondents listed on Exhibit “A” is sustained. Notice shall be given to these Respondents
before May 15, 2013 that their services will not be required for the 2013-2014 school year.

3.

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: May 1, 2013

_______________________________________
VALLERA J. JOHNSON
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

8

