BEFORE THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
LONG BEACH COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In The Matter Of The Accusation Against:

OAH No. 2013030375

Dale W. Carlson, Juliana Edlund, Robert J.
Gibson, Larry Gustafson, Charles
Guitierrez, John K. Louie, Christopher
Oshita, Maximino Pena, Daniel D. Perkins,
Rodolfo R. Sanchez, Peter Sparks, Danny S.
Tan, Kenneth Tsuji, and Gabor I. Vass,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Amy C. Yerkey, State of California, Office of

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 24, 2013, in Long Beach, California.

Warren S. Kinsler, of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Rudd & Romo, represented the

Long Beach Community College District (District).

Jean Shin, Staff Attorney, California Teacher’s Association, represented Dale W.
Carlson, Juliana Edlund, Robert J. Gibson, Larry Gustafson, Charles Guitierrez, John K.
Louie, Christopher Oshita, Maximino Pena, Daniel D. Perkins, Rodolfo R. Sanchez, Peter
Sparks, Danny S. Tan, Kenneth Tsuji, and Gabor I. Vass (Respondents).

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and has
given Respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2013-2014 school year.
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not
reemploying them for the 2013-2014 school year.

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing and the matter was

submitted for decision.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Complainant, Eloy Ortiz Oakley, filed the Accusation while acting in his

official capacity as the District Superintendent-President.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

On February 26, 2013, the District Board of Trustees adopted Resolution number

022613A, reducing or discontinuing the following services for the 2013-2014 school year:

Service

Full-Time-Equivalent Positions

Air Conditioning, Refrigeration and Heating Instructional Services
Auto Body Technology Instructional Services
Automotive Technology Instructional Services
Aviation Maintenance Instructional Services
Carpentry Instructional Services
Commercial Music Instructional Service
Diesel Mechanics Instructional Services
Interior Design Instructional Services
Photography Instructional Services
Real Estate Instructional Services
Welding Instructional Services

Total

1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
2.0
1.0
2.0

19.0

4.

By March 15, 2013, Respondents received notice that their services will not be
required for the 2013-2014 school year due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular
kinds of services.

5.

Respondents timely requested hearings. The District issued and served an
accusation, notice of hearing and other documents required to be served. Respondent thereafter
filed notices of defense to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the 2013-
2014 school year.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 88743.1

1.

2.

3.

6.

7.

1 All further references are to the Education Code.

2

8.

The Board of Trustees took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth
in factual finding number 3 primarily because the District is uncertain about its budget for the
2013-2014 school year, and it has been operating at a deficit for the past four years. The
decision to reduce the particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather
a proper exercise of the District's discretion.

9.

The reduction of services set forth in factual finding number 3 is related to the
welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of
certificated employees as determined by the Board of Trustees.

10.

Rose Del Gaudio (Del Gaudio), the District’s Executive Vice President of
Human Resources, testified at the hearing. She explained that that each District faculty
member is assigned one or more faculty service areas (“FSA”) in which s/he is certified to
teach. Certification can be obtained either by meeting the required academic standards or by
demonstrating other skills and experiences that would qualify an individual to teach a
particular subject. The determination of an individual’s eligibility to be certified in a
particular FSA is initially made by the District’s Human Resources Department at the time a
faculty member is first hired. Thereafter, a faculty member may apply to the Equivalency
Committee for further FSA certifications. The burden to establish additional competencies is
on the applicant. Significantly, any dispute arising from an allegation that a faculty member
has been improperly denied an FSA must be procedurally addressed as a grievance. As
established through Del Gaudio’s testimony, none of the Respondents had been granted
claimed certifications and they had not exhausted the grievance procedures with regard to
additional FSAs.

11.

Respondents Daniel Perkins, Gabor Vass, Rodolfo R. Sanchez, Maximino
Pena and Kenneth Tsuji testified at the hearing. Each set forth information they believed
would qualify them for additional FSAs, which might permit them to “bump” into other
teaching positions. None of the Respondents exhausted the grievance procedures regarding
FSA designations and therefore did not establish they were certificated and competent to
bump into the positions in question.

12.

No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to render a

service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code

section 87740 and 87743, by reason of factual findings 1 through 6.

2.

Education Code section 87743.3 provides: “Each faculty member shall qualify
for one or more faculty service areas at the time of initial employment. A faculty member
shall be eligible for qualification in any faculty service area in which the faculty member has
to Section 87356 and district competency
met both minimum qualifications pursuant

3

standards. After initial employment, a faculty member may apply to the district to add
faculty service areas for which the faculty member qualifies. The application shall be
received by the district on or before February 15 in order to be considered in any proceeding
pursuant to Section 87743 during the academic year in which the application is received.
Any dispute arising from an allegation that a faculty member has been improperly denied a
faculty service area shall be classified and procedurally addressed as a grievance.”

3.

Article XVI of the Agreement between the Long Beach Community College
District and Community College Association – Long Beach City College (“collective
bargaining agreement” or “contract”) provides:

“A. Faculty Service Areas

1. Pursuant to the provisions of Education code Section 87743.3, there shall
be one faculty service area to be known as the Long Beach Community
College Faculty Service Area.

2. Faculty means those full-time probationary or tenured employees who are
employed in positions that are not designated as supervisory or management
. . . and for which minimum qualifications for hire have been specified in the
regulations the Board of Governors adopted . . . .

3. Competency Standards

All faculty who meet the requirements of 3.a. and any one of the
conditions listed under 3.b. shall be considered competent in a specific
discipline.

a.
Meet the minimum qualifications as adopted by the Board of
Governors and as described [by statute]. Equivalency granted at the
time of initial employment in the District shall meet the minimum
qualifications for the faculty member in the discipline for which it was
granted.

and

b.

Any one of the following:

(1). Possess a valid credential authorizing service in the
discipline through either a major or minor, or

(2). Previous approval by the Board of Trustees to teach in a
discipline in which the Board of Trustees has deemed the
faculty member to have either a major or minor, or

4

(3). Prior college teaching experience in a course that
is
identical to, or that shares most of the major elements with, any
course taught in the discipline in the Long Beach Community
College District, or

(4). Possess a Bachelor’s degree or higher showing a major or
minor in the discipline, or

(5). Possess the equivalent of a minor, which shall be a
minimum of twenty-four (24) semester units in the discipline
with a minimum of twelve (12) upper division or graduate level
units, or

(6). For disciplines in which a Master’s degree is not available
or generally expected, possess a degree plus appropriate
experience plus any required certificate or license as specified in
the Board of Governor’s Discipline list for the discipline or the
equivalent.

4.
For purposes of determining competency under XVI.A.3.b.(3) a Course
Equivalency Committee shall be formed when proof of previous college
teaching experience in a discipline has been provided to the District. The
Course Equivalency Committee shall determine whether this experience is
identical to, or shares most of the major elements with, a course taught in the
discipline at Long Beach City College.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.

Both the statutes and the collective bargaining agreement are quite clear; to be
considered competent to teach in a discipline, a faculty member must possess a FSA in the
discipline. Because none of the Respondents possess additional FSAs in areas where they
may be eligible to bump, they are not competent to teach in those areas, at least for the
purposes of a reduction in force proceeding.

5. Respondents seek to establish their competency at

the hearing, essentially
requesting that the Administrative Law Judge award them certifications in the instant
proceeding. There is a well established legal precedent that a person may not apply to the
courts for relief unless he has first exhausted his administrative remedies.2
In this case,
Respondents chose not to proceed with the administrative process for obtaining the FSA to
which they claims entitlement; therefore, they are not entitled to relief in this proceeding
from the consequences of that failure. Respondents’ arguments to the contrary lack merit
and is not supported by legal authority.

2

The general rule is “where an administrative remedy is provided by statute, relief

must be sought from the administrative body and that remedy exhausted before the courts
will act.” Abelleira v. District Court of Appeal (1941) 17 Cal.2d 280, 292.

5

6.

Cause exists under sections 88743 for the District to reduce or discontinue the
particular kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause relates solely to
the welfare of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through
9.

7.

No junior academic faculty is being retained to perform services that

Respondents are qualified and competent to render.

8.

Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondents Dale W. Carlson, Juliana
Edlund, Robert J. Gibson, Larry Gustafson, Charles Guitierrez, John K. Louie, Christopher
Oshita, Maximino Pena, Daniel D. Perkins, Rodolfo R. Sanchez, Peter Sparks, Danny S. Tan,
Kenneth Tsuji, and Gabor I. Vass, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 12, and legal
conclusion numbers 1 through 7.

ORDER

The Accusation is sustained and the District may notify Respondents Dale W. Carlson,
Juliana Edlund, Robert J. Gibson, Larry Gustafson, Charles Guitierrez, John K. Louie,
Christopher Oshita, Maximino Pena, Daniel D. Perkins, Rodolfo R. Sanchez, Peter Sparks,
Danny S. Tan, Kenneth Tsuji, and Gabor I. Vass that their services will not be needed during
the 2013-2014 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

DATED: May 3, 2013

________________________________
AMY C. YERKEY
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

