BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
DENAIR UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED
EMPLOYEES OF THE DENAIR
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,

Respondents.

Case No. 2013031033

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 18, 2013, in Denair, California.

Attorney Chesley D. Quaide of the law firm Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud &
Romo represented the Denair Unified School District (District). Carol Hammond, Associate
Superintendent of Elementary Curriculum, and Jody Jorge, Administrative Assistant to the
Superintendent, also appeared on behalf of the District.

Attorney Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, of the Law Offices of Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, represented
respondents Halla (Inga) Bernard, Marlene Dhallin, William Douglas, Cathy George, Patricia
Gullen, Diana Hulbert, Korene (Gypsy) Keene Stark,1 Joshua Lindsey, Sean Pham, Maria
Rickard, Justin Riggs, Cristina Rojas, Robert (James) Wagner, Rachel Watts, Curtis Wooten,
and Keli Youkhana.

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for

decision on April 18, 2013.

Procedural Matters

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

On February 14, 2013, at a regular meeting, the governing board of the District

determined that it was in the best interests of the District and the welfare of the schools and

1 Ms. Keene Stark is identified on the District’s seniority list as “Korene Keene.”

pupils thereof to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services and therefore necessary to
reduce or eliminate certificated services affecting the employment of 7.24 full-time
equivalent (FTE) positions. The governing board adopted Resolution No. 021413-R12
providing for the reduction or elimination of the following particular kinds of services:

FTE
.14
FTE
.14
FTE
1.14
FTE
.14
FTE
.14
FTE
.14
FTE
.14
FTE
.28
FTE
.14
FTE
.14
FTE
.14
FTE
.14
FTE
.14
FTE
.28
FTE
1.0
FTE
.50
FTE
.50
2.0
FTE
Total: 7.24 FTE

Band Teacher
High School Web Design
High School Math
High School Sheltered English
High School Photography
High School Computer Literature
High School World History
High School Spanish
High School English
High School Science/Biology
High School Ag Biology
High School Physical Education
Ag Mechanics
High School ELD Teacher
High School English/Drama Teacher
Kindergarten Teacher
K-8 ELD Teacher
K-8 Teachers

2.

In determining the extent by which to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of
services, the governing board considered all positively assured attrition up to and including
the date of the resolution. The total number of positions to be reduced or eliminated under
the resolution is 7.24 FTE certificated positions. The governing board determined that the
services of a corresponding number of certificated employees shall be reduced or eliminated
at the end of the 2012/2013 school year.

3.

In addition to identifying the particular kinds of services the governing board
intends to reduce or eliminate, Resolution No. 021413-R12 provided the governing board’s
definition of “competency” for purposes of determining whether any certificated employee
selected to receive a preliminary layoff notice is “certificated and competent” to perform the
service rendered by a certificated employee with less seniority who was not selected to
receive such notice. The Resolution said:

That “competency” for the purpose of Education Code section
44955 shall be determined upon current possession of a
preliminary or clear credential for the subject matter or grade
level and the certificated employee having taught the class to
which they will be assigned at the beginning of the 2013-2014
school year at least one (1) semester in the past ten (10) years.

2

4.

On March 14, 2013, former Superintendent Edward E. Parraz gave notice to

the District’s governing board of his recommendation that the following certificated
employees be given notice of his recommendation that each of their services be reduced or
eliminated for the 2013/2014 school year, as well as the reason for such recommendation:2

Standard Layoff Notices:

Monica Gonzalez
Diana Hulbert
Joshua Lindsey
Cristina Rojas
Rachel Watts
Keli Youkhana

Reduction Notices:

Halla (Inga) Bernard
Marlene Dhallin
William Douglas
Cathy George
Patricia Guillen
Korene (Gypsy) Keene Stark
Sean Pham
Maria Rickard
Justin Riggs
Robert (James) Wagner
Donna Williams
Curtis Wooten

Reassignment Notices:

.28 FTE
.50 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

.14 FTE
.14 FTE
.14 FTE
.14 FTE
.86 FTE
.14 FTE
.14 FTE
.14 FTE
.42 FTE
.14 FTE
.42 FTE
.42 FTE

Craig Cumberland

.28 FTE

5.

Each respondent is a permanent or probationary teacher of the District. On

March 15, 2013, the District served each respondent with written notice that Superintendent
Parraz recommended that notice be given to each of them pursuant to Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955 that each of their services be reduced or eliminated for the
2013/2014 school year. Each written notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation
and noted that the District’s governing board had passed Resolution No. 021413-R12
reducing or eliminating 7.24 FTE positions. Each respondent timely requested, in writing, a

2 Superintendent Parraz recommended that the District “over-notice” his

recommendation, i.e., send notice to certificated employees holding 8.3 FTE positions even
though Resolution No. 021413-R12 authorized the reduction or elimination of only 7.24 FTE
positions.

3

hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing school
year.

6.

On April 8, 2013, Carol Hammond, Associate Superintendent of Elementary

Curriculum, made and filed the Accusation in this matter solely in her official capacity. The
Accusation and all required documents were timely served on the respondents. Each
respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation. All prehearing jurisdictional
requirements were satisfied.

Rescission of Preliminary Layoff Notices

7.

On April 17, 2013, Associate Superintendent Hammond sent letters to Messrs.
Wagner and Wooten notifying them that their preliminary layoff notices were rescinded and
their respective “1.0 FTE assignments with the District will continue for the 2013-2014
school year.”

The District’s Need to Reduce or Eliminate Certain Particular Kinds of Services

8.

According to Associate Superintendent Hammond, the District has had a

“negative budget” since the beginning of the 2012/2013 school year and is at risk of being
“taken over” by the State of California. She further explained that in November 2012, she
sat down with Superintendent Parraz and Deputy Superintendent/Chief Business Officer
Judy Sylvester to begin planning the District’s budget for the 2013/2014 school year. Since
no reduction in the District’s costs were “on the table” (i.e., salary reductions or reductions in
employee benefits), the three of them began looking at ways to cut the District’s costs.
Based on projected student enrollment for the 2013/2014 school year, it was decided that the
District could not continue to offer all the classes it is offering during the current school year
and still remain fiscally solvent. But instead of completely eliminating programs, the
decision was made to keep all existing programs and reduce the number of times certain
classes were offered. They also decided to consolidate courses that were not full, i.e.,
consolidate two classes of Algebra with 10 students each into one class with 20 students.

9.

After deciding which services to reduce or eliminate, Superintendent Parraz

and Associate Superintendent Hammonds reviewed the District’s seniority list, which is
discussed in more detail below, to make an initial determination about which teachers would
receive a preliminary layoff notice. After making that initial determination, they worked
with the District’s attorney to determine which of those identified, if any, could “bump” into
any position currently held by a teacher with less seniority.

The District’s Seniority List

10.

The District maintains a seniority list for all teachers. The seniority list

contains the following information for each teacher: name, date of hire, type of credential,
the FTE designation for current assignment, current site assignment, and current teaching
assignment. All respondents hold full-time positions with the District during the current

4

2012/2013 school year, except Ms. Hulbert. She holds a part-time .50 FTE teaching
position.

Challenges to the Preliminary Layoff Notices Issued

Positively Assured Attrition

11.

“Attrition” consists of “[r]esignations, mandatory retirements, deaths, etc.”
(Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 653.) “‘Positively
assured attrition’ is attrition which has actually occurred and is to be distinguished from
‘potential attrition’ which may be anticipated but is still unknown.” (San Jose Teachers
Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635.)

12.

The governing board considered all positively assured attrition it was aware of

as of the date it adopted Resolution No. 021413-R12 – February 14, 2013. Associate
Superintendent Hammond stated there was none. However, shortly before the hearing –
Associate Superintendent Hammond estimated the end of March 2013 – the District was
informed that a teacher holding a multiple subject credential would be retiring at the end of
the 2012/2013 school year. Respondents argued that such attrition should be considered in
determining the number of final layoff notices the governing board ultimately decides to
issue. For the reasons discussed in Legal Conclusion 8, respondents’ argument is not
persuasive.

Competency Criteria

13.

As discussed in Factual Finding 3, the governing board adopted “competency”

criteria for determining respondents’ “bumping” rights. Respondents challenged part of
those criteria as being too narrow. As discussed in Legal Conclusion 7, governing boards
have broad discretion to define “competency” for purposes of determining a teacher’s
bumping rights. But such discretion is not unfettered, and is subject to review for
arbitrariness and capriciousness. According to the District’s definition of “competency, a
teacher is deemed “competent,” in part, if he or she has “taught the class to which they will
be assigned at the beginning of the 2013-2014 school year at least one (1) semester in the
past ten (10) years.”

According to Associate Superintendent Hammond, the District’s “master” schedule

has not been finalized for the 2013/2014 school year, and it is unknown what specific
course(s) any particular teacher will be teaching next year. But the absence of such
information does not render the District’s competency criteria too narrow because a
“bumping” analysis requires the determination of whether an “[e]mployee with less seniority
… is [being] retained to render a service which [the more senior employee] is certificated
and competent to render.” (Ed. Code. § 4955, subd. (b).) In other words, the analysis is
whether the teacher noticed for layoff is certificated and competent to perform the service
that the junior teacher is currently performing because that is the “service” for which the
latter will be retained to perform if not bumped. The relevancy of the District not knowing

5

what specific course(s) any teacher will be teaching next year pertains to the definition of the
“service” the teacher is currently performing. And since it is unknown what course(s) that
teacher will be teaching next year, “service” is broadly defined as any course(s) authorized
by the credential under which he or she is currently teaching. Therefore, the District’s
“competency” criteria is interpreted as requiring the teacher seeking to bump another to have
taught any course authorized by the credential the two of them hold in common (because the
first prong of the District’s criteria is that both hold the same credential) for at least one
semester within the last 10 years. Such definition of “competency” relates to the skills and
qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff and is therefore reasonable and valid,
except as discussed in Factual Findings 22 and 29. (See, e.g., Duax v. Kern Community
College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555 [concluding that the requirement of having
taught class within the last 10 years is related to the skills and qualifications of the teacher
threatened with layoff].)

Marlene Dhallin

14. Ms. Dhallin is ranked ninth on the District’s seniority list. She holds a
standard secondary credential in home economics and history, as well as a language
development specialist authorization. Her teaching assignment for the 2012/2013 school
year is at Denair High School, where she teaches World History.

15.

Associate Superintendent Hammond explained that based on the projected

student enrollment for the 2013/2014 school year, the decision was made that one less class
period of World History can be offered and the District will still be in compliance with
Education Code section 51225.3, subdivision (a)(1)(D), which requires all high school
students to take a course in World History in order to earn a high school diploma. Therefore,
Ms. Dhallin was given a preliminary layoff notice based on the governing board’s decision to
reduce High School World History by the equivalent of a .14 FTE position, which amounts
to one class period.

16.

Associate Superintendent Hammond agreed that Darrin Allen, who also

currently teaches World History at Denair High School, has less seniority than Ms. Dhallin –
he is number “18” on the seniority list. She explained, however, that Mr. Allen is not going
to teach World History next year. Instead, he is being retained to teach classes authorized by
his Vocational Education credential. Therefore, Mr. Allen did not receive a preliminary
layoff notice. Such explanation was credible. While Associate Superintendent Hammond
said the District does not know what specific courses any particular teacher will be teaching
next year; she also explained that based on projected student enrollment, as well as the
requirements for state mandated services, the District knows the types and numbers of
courses it will offer next year. Her entire testimony is interpreted to mean that while it is
currently unknown who will be teaching World History next year; the District knows that it
will offer the course, it has an estimate of the number of periods the course will be offered,
and Mr. Allen will not be teaching the course at all while Ms. Dhallin will be teaching one
less period of it. Associate Superintendent Hammond also said that Ms. Dhallin will be the

6

first teacher offered any additional period of World History added if next year’s actual
enrollment turns out to be greater than anticipated.

17.

The evidence discussed above demonstrates that the District made an initial

determination that Ms. Dhallin was not entitled to “bump” Mr. Allen because he is not being
retained to teach World History, and she is not certificated and competent to teach any
courses authorized by his Vocational Education credential – the services for which he is
being retained to perform. Ms. Dhallin did not satisfy her burden of establishing otherwise.
Nor did she identify any other teacher with less seniority who is being retained to perform
services that she is certificated and competent to perform. Therefore, cause exists for
reducing Ms. Dhallin’s teaching position by the equivalent of a .14 FTE position for the
2013/2014 school year, and the District’s governing board has a legal basis for issuing her a
final layoff notice in that regard.

Patricia Guillen

18. Ms. Guillen is identified as number “53” on the District’s seniority list. She

holds a multiple subject credential, as well as a BCLAD authorization. Her teaching
assignment during the current 2012/2013 school year includes teaching English learners in
kindergarten at Denair Elementary School and all grade levels at Denair Middle School.
According to Associate Superintendent Hammond, which Ms. Guillen did not dispute, Ms.
Guillen has taught for the District only on a “pull in basis,” a method of teaching special
education students whereby the special education teacher “pulls” the students out of their
assigned classrooms for extra assistance. An alternative method of teaching special
education students is to “push in” to those students’ assigned classroom(s) and provide the
extra assistance as the classroom teacher is teaching the entire class. The former method is
often used when there are multiple special education students in the same grade level, who
need assistance in the same subject areas, and are being taught those subject areas at the
same time during the day. Since the special education teacher cannot be in multiple
classrooms at the same time, the students are “pulled” from their classrooms and brought to
her.

19.

The testimony explaining why Ms. Guillen received a preliminary layoff

notice was vague, confusing, and unclear. Associate Superintendent Hammond explained
that Ms. Guillen received notice because Superintendent Parraz had recommended that her
position be reduced by .86 FTE. Part of that reduction, according to Associate
Superintendent Hammond, is based on the governing board’s decision to reduce High School
Spanish by .28 FTE. Maria Olivas and Ana Kilgallen were identified as the two most junior
Spanish teachers. But since they share the same date of first paid service as a probationary
employee with the District, the tie-breaking criteria was applied, and Ms. Olivas prevailed
because she has a Master’s degree. Therefore, Ms. Kilgallen was designated for layoff. But
when the seniority list was reviewed to determine if Ms. Kilgallen could “bump” into any
positions held by more junior teachers, Associate Superintendent Hammond determined that
Ms. Kilgallen is certificated and competent to “bump” into Ms. Guillen’s position teaching

7

English learners. Therefore, Ms. Guillen received a preliminary notice based, in part, on the
.28 FTE reduction to High School Spanish.

20.

Associate Superintendent Hammond said Ms. Guillen was designated for
layoff also based on the governing board’s decision to reduce a K-8 ELD Teacher by .50
FTE and High School Sheltered English by .14 FTE. But Ms. Guillen does not teach High
School Sheltered English (she teaches at the elementary and middle schools), and it was not
clearly explained why she received notice based on the reduction of that service.
Furthermore, the sum of all the reduction in services for which Associate Superintendent
Hammond testified Ms. Guillen received notice is .92 FTE (.28 FTE High School Spanish +
.50 FTE K-8 ELD Teacher + .14 FTE High School Sheltered English), but she was noticed
for only a .86 FTE reduction. One possible explanation for this discrepancy was that the
District “over-noticed” for the .28 FTE reduction to High School Spanish – an explanation
offered by the District, but not clearly articulated.

21.

Ultimately, the absence of clarity in the evidence is of no import because the
District improperly concluded that Ms. Guillen is not certificated and competent to perform
any service for which a junior teacher is being retained to perform. As previously discussed,
she holds a multiple subject credential, and she identified at least three other teachers who
hold the same credential, have less seniority, and are being retained to performed services
which she is certificated and competent to perform: Susanna Jones, who is number “65” on
the seniority list and currently teaches second grade at Denair Academic Avenues; Amanda
Naranjo, who is number “66” on the seniority list and also currently teaches second grade at
Denair Academic Avenues; and Stacy Criswell, who is number “70” on the seniority list and
currently teaches fifth grade at Denair Elementary School.3

3 California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80003, describes the scope of a

multiple subject credential as follows:

The Multiple Subject Teaching Credential authorizes the holder
to provide the services described below in grades twelve and
below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily
for adults.

(a) Teach all subjects in a self-contained class;

(b) Teach in a team teaching setting or regroup students across
classrooms as authorized in Education Code Section 44258.15.
For the purpose of this section, team teaching is defined as two
teachers of the same grade level exchanging students for the
purpose of instruction in specific subjects. Regrouping of
students is the practice of two or more teachers combining
students across classes for specific instructional purposes;

8

22.

Associate Superintendent Hammond explained that Ms. Guillen does not

satisfy the District’s “competency” criteria for bumping into an elementary teaching position
because she has not taught in a classroom where she has had her own roster of students
assigned to her for at least one semester within the last 10 years, instead having taught
strictly on a “pull out” basis. But competency criteria must relate to the skills and
qualifications necessary to teach in order to be reasonable and valid. (Duax v. Kern
Community College District, supra, 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.) The District offered no
rational explanation why it is necessary for a teacher who holds a multiple subject credential
and is assigned to a self-contained classroom to have previously taught in a self-contained
classroom with her own class roster, especially given the broad range of teaching experience
held by Ms. Guillen in her current “pull out” teaching assignment. The competency criteria
as applied to Ms. Guillen do not relate to her skills and qualifications as a teacher, and are
invalid. She may “bump” into the position held by the least senior teacher who is teaching
under a multiple subject credential during the current school year. Therefore, no cause exists
for not reemploying Ms. Guillen during the 2013/2014 school year, and there is no legal
basis for the District’s governing board to issue her a final layoff notice.

Rachel Watts

23. Ms. Watts is identified as number “78” on the District’s seniority list. She

holds a multiple subject credential and a CLAD authorization. She currently teaches
Language Arts and History to seventh graders at Denair Middle School.

24.

Associate Superintendent Hammond said Ms. Watts received a preliminary
layoff notice based on the governing board’s decision to reduce K-8 Teachers by 2.0 FTE.
Associate Superintendent Hammond analyzed whether Ms. Watts could “bump” into Allison
Loftin’s (number “83” on the District’s seniority list) position teaching at Denair Middle
School or Stephanie De Muro’s (number “88” on the seniority list) position teaching fifth
grade at Denair Academic Avenues. She concluded that Ms. Watts cannot “bump” Ms.
Loftin because Ms. Loftin’s current teaching assignment includes teaching general education
students (based on her preliminary multiple subject credential), while concurrently teaching
special education students (based on her preliminary special education credential) on a “push
in” basis. With regard to Ms. De Muro’s teaching position, Associate Superintendent
Hammond concluded that Ms. Watts cannot “bump” into that position because Ms. De Muro
teaches a combination of general education (based on her intern multiple subject credential)

(c) Teach core classes to students in grades five through eight
pursuant to Education Code Section 44258.1. Core classes
consist of teaching two or more subjects to the same group of
students; and

(d) Teach any of the core subjects he or she is teaching to a
single group of students in the same grade level as the core
classes for less than fifty percent of his or her work day.

9

and special education (based on her intern special education credential) students each day
until 1:00 p.m. and then special education students exclusively after that.

25. Ms. Watts admitted she does not have a special education credential, but
explained that she applied for the fifth grade teaching position at Denair Academic Avenues
for which Ms. De Muro was ultimately hired. That position was as a fifth grade teacher
teaching general education students, and only required a multiple subject credential.
Therefore, Ms. Watts argued that Ms. De Muro’s assignment teaching fifth grade at Denair
Academic Avenues only requires a multiple subject credential, at least until 1:00 p.m. each
day, and she is certificated and competent to perform that assignment.

26.

But even if Ms. Watts is certificated and competent to teach Ms. De Muro’s

assignment teaching fifth grade general education students in the morning, she does not hold
the proper credential to teach Ms. De Muro’s special education students in the afternoon.
And the court in Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th
334, held the following with regard to a senior teacher’s ability to force a district to divide a
full-time teaching position into multiple positions to avoid being laid off:

We thus agree with the court in Murray4 that appellants do “not
have the right to force the [district] to divide the full-time
position to accommodate [their] desire for a part-time position”
(citation), and we conclude that this is true with respect to the
application of [Education] section 44955 as well as section
44956.

(Id., at p. 346.)

Therefore, Ms. Watts did not establish that she is certificated and competent to
perform the services for which a junior teacher is being retained to perform, and cause exists
for not reemploying her during the 2013/2014 school year. The District’s governing board
has a legal basis for issuing Ms. Watts a final layoff notice.

William Douglas

27. Mr. Douglas is number “82” on the District’s seniority list. He holds a single

subject credential in Agriculture and a CLAD authorization. He currently teaches
Agriculture classes at Denair High School. He has previously taught Introductory and
Advanced Agriculture Mechanics, Small Engine and Farm Mechanics, Farm Management,
and Horticulture/Floriculture.

28.

Associate Superintendent Hammond explained that Mr. Douglas currently

teaches Agriculture Mechanics, a service that the governing board has identified for
reduction by the equivalent of a .14 FTE position. She considered allowing Mr. Douglas to

4 Murray v. Sonoma County Office of Education (1989) 208 Cal.App.3d 456.

10

“bump” into Korene (Gypsy) Keene Stark’s (number”86” on the seniority list) position
teaching Agriculture Biology, but concluded he could not. Associate Superintendent
Hammond explained that her decision was based on the fact that either Mr. Douglas’
teaching credential does not allow him to teach Agriculture Biology or he has not taught
Agriculture Biology for at least one semester within the past 10 years, she could not recall
which. Either way, she concluded he is not certificated and competent to teach Agriculture
Biology.

29.

Associate Superintendent Hammond’s conclusion that Mr. Douglas is not

certificated and competent to teach Agriculture Biology is mistaken. He holds the identical
teaching credential as Ms. Keene Stark, and that credential allows them to teach
“[a]gricultural management, agricultural mechanics, agricultural science, animal science,
forestry, horticulture, landscaping, and plant science” (Cal. Code of Regs., tit. 5, § 80005,
subd. (a)(1)), or, as Mr. Douglas testified, “anything with ‘Agriculture’ in front of it.” The
District offered no rational explanation why Mr. Williams’ experience teaching other
Agriculture classes does not make him qualified to teach Agriculture Biology. The District’s
competency criteria as applied to him are invalid, and he may “bump” into Ms. Keene
Stark’s position teaching Agriculture Biology, or any other Agriculture class she teaches
during the 2013/2014 school year. Therefore, no cause exists for not reemploying Mr.
Douglas during the 2013/2014 school year, and there is no legal basis for the District’s
governing board to issue her a final layoff notice.

Halla (Inga) Bernard

30. Ms. Bernard is number “80” on the District seniority list, and holds a multiple
subject credential, with a supplemental math authorization, and a CLAD authorization. She
currently teaches Pre-Algebra, Math Rewind, and Geometry to seventh graders at Denair
Middle School. While Ms. Bernard attended the hearing, she did not testify about any
grounds for challenging her preliminary layoff notice. Nonetheless, evidence was presented
regarding her notice, which is discussed below.

31.

Associate Superintendent Hammond explained that the governing board’s

decision to reduce High School Math by the equivalent of 1.14 FTE positions was carried out
by “non-reelecting” Christina Rojas (number “84” on the seniority list) to her current
position teaching Algebra Essentials, Algebra, and CAHSEE Algebra at Denair High School
and consolidating two course offerings of the same type of math class into one. Ms. Bernard
received a preliminary layoff notice based on the consolidation of those two classes – a .14
FTE reduction. But Associate Superintendent Hammond’s explanation why Ms. Bernard
was selected to have her services reduced is contrary to law. She explained that Ms. Bernard
teaches solely at Denair Middle School,5 the governing board’s decision was to reduce math

5 Associate Superintendent Hammond contradicted herself. First, she testified that

Ms. Bernard teaches only at Denair Middle School. When questioned further, however, she
said Ms. Bernard may be teaching one class at Denair High School because at one time Ms.
Bernard was “shared” by Denair Middle School and Denair High School. Finally, Associate

11

at the high school level, and the governing board has not proposed reducing or eliminating
any of the middle school math courses Ms. Bernard teaches. In other words, Ms. Bernard
received noticed based on the reduction of a service she does not provide.

32.

Associate Superintendent Hammond provided testimony about Jamie Pecot,

who is number “54” on the seniority list and currently teaches Geometry at Denair High
School. She explained that Ms. Pecot took a voluntary reduction to a .71 FTE position for
the current school year for personal reasons. However, Ms. Pecot has contractual rights to
return to a full-time position at the beginning of the 2013/2014 school year. But a final
decision whether she will exercise that right has not been made.

33.

The relevance of such testimony was not entirely clear. One potential

interpretation is that Ms. Pecot is the high school math teacher whose two math courses were
consolidated based on the governing board’s decision to reduce High School Math, and she
was allowed to “bump” into Ms. Bernard’s position teaching seventh grade math. But
Associate Superintendent Hammond’s inability to clearly articulate that as the basis for Ms.
Bernard’s notice, as well as her testimony that Ms. Pecot “can” bump into Ms. Bernard’s
position but the final determination of whether she will has not been made, is more
compelling evidence that Ms. Bernard has not been bumped by Ms. Pecot. Therefore, no
cause exists for not reemploying Ms. Bernard during the 2013/2014 school year, and there is
no legal basis for the District’s governing board to issue her a final layoff notice.

34.

After due consideration and adjustments made for the matters noted above, no
permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service
for which a respondent is certificated and competent to perform.

35.

The reduction or elimination of the particular kinds of services set forth in
Resolution No. 02141312-R12 are related to the welfare of the schools and the students
thereof within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. The governing
board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these services is neither arbitrary nor capricious,
but rather a proper exercise of its discretion.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The appellate court in San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen, supra, 144

Cal.App.3d 627, said the following about the manner in which California’s public school are
funded in California:

Superintendent Hammond stated that she could not say whether Ms. Bernard currently
teaches “100 percent” at Denair Middle School. No other witnesses testified about Ms.
Bernard’s current teaching assignment. Associate Superintendent Hammond’s initial
testimony, which is bolstered by the District’s seniority list, is persuasive evidence of Ms.
Bernard’s current assignment.

12

Faced with significant difficulties since the passage of
Proposition 13, school districts are placed in the uncomfortable
position of having to terminate teachers before knowing what
the district’s financial circumstances will be for the ensuing
school year. This cannot be ascertained until the state budget
has been chaptered and the district knows what state funding it
will receive.

Thus, the present process requires preliminary notices to be sent
by March 15 to all certificated employees who may be
terminated and requires the final notice to be given by May 15,
even though the school board does not know until the state
budget is chaptered late in June exactly what state funding will
be available t the district for the ensuing school year. Clearly,
the present statutory timetable is unrealistic; however, any
changes in that timetable are the responsibility of the
Legislature. Although a teacher who is terminated has
preferential rights to reemployment under sections 44957 and
87745, this provides little solace to the understandably upset
teacher who is given a needless preliminary (and perhaps final)
notice because the school district cannot accurately ascertain its
financial circumstances for the ensuing school year until the
chaptering of the state budget.

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee, or in the case of a district which has no superintendent
by the clerk or secretary of the governing board, that it has been
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and
stating the reasons therefor.

Until the employee has requested a hearing as provided in
subdivision (b) or has waived his or her right to a hearing, the
notice and the reasons therefor shall be confidential and shall
not be divulged by any person, except as may be necessary in
the performance of duties. However, the violation of this

13

(Id., at pp. 632-633.)

2.

The process for laying off certificated employees the appellate court referred
to is codified in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. The former statute provides the
following with regard to a school district’s jurisdiction to lay off certificated employees:

requirement of confidentiality, in and of itself, shall not in any
manner be construed as affecting the validity of any hearing
conducted pursuant to this section.

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing. The
notice provided for in subdivision (a) shall advise the employee
of the provisions of this subdivision.

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency
therein, except that all of the following shall apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any,
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation
and he or she shall be notified of this five-day period for filing
in the accusation.

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the
Government Code shall be available only if request is made
therefor within 15 days after service of the accusation, and the
notice required by Section 11505 of the Government Code shall
so indicate.

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be
prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed

14

decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds.

The board may adopt from time to time such rules and
procedures not inconsistent with provisions of this section as
may be necessary to effectuate this section.

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the
employee.

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) any
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the
Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) which
occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which
occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be
extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.

(Ed. Code, § 44949.)

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth above,

and no respondent argued otherwise. (Factual Findings 1, 2, and 4 through 6.)

3.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides the following with

regard to a school district’s authority to lay off certificated employees:

Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all
of the schools of a district for the first six months in which
school is in session shall have declined below the corresponding
period of either of the previous two school years, whenever the
governing board determines that attendance in a district will
decline in the following year as a result of the termination of an
interdistrict tuition agreement as defined in Section 46304,
whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or

15

discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school
year, or whenever the amendment of state law requires the
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary
by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding
percentage of the certificated employees of the district,
permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school
year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while any probationary employee, or any other
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

In computing a decline in average daily attendance for purposes
of this section for a newly formed or reorganized school district,
each school of the district shall be deemed to have been a school
of the newly formed or reorganized district for both of the two
previous school years.

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would
not exist without such a requirement.

4.

When a district’s governing board decides to reduce or eliminate particular

kinds of services and a corresponding number of certificated employees, the general rule is
that the order of layoffs must be determined by seniority. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b)
[“[E]xcept as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee may be
terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or any
other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render.”]; Davis v. Gray (1938) 29 Cal.App.2d

16

403, 406.) This general rule is applied equally to probationary certificated employees.
(Krausen v. Solano County Junior College District (1974) 42 Cal.App.3d 394, 402.)

5.

After a district’s governing board decides to reduce or eliminate services, the

district’s first step is to identify those certificated employees providing the particular services
to be reduced or eliminated. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) The district has a mandatory
duty to make an initial determination whether those certificated employees who are
performing the services to be reduced or eliminated are certificated and competent to
perform the services of any certificated employee with less seniority who is being retained.
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District, supra, 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 340.) But
once the district makes the initial determination that such employee has no “bumping rights,”
the burden shifts to the certificated employee asserting the right to bump the junior employee
that the former is certificated and competent to perform the service for which the latter is
being retained. (Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 656.)

6.

In determining a certificated employee’s right to “bump” a more junior

employee, the test is whether the former is “certificated and competent” to perform the
service being performed by the latter. (Ed. Code § 44955, subd. (b).) For purposes of this
analysis, the term “certificated” refers to whether the senior employee holds the necessary
credential or authorization to teach. (Ed. Code, § 4406.) For example, a senior teacher who
is credentialed only to teach fashion merchandising is not “credentialed,” and therefore not
entitled to bump, junior teachers who teach decorative arts and related technologies,
cosmetology and barbering, or marketing and distribution. (See, e.g., Duax v. Kern
Community College District, supra, 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 569.)

“Competent,” on the other hand, refers to the senior teacher’s skills and

qualifications. (Duax v. Kern Community College District, supra, 196 Cal.App.3d at p. 565.)
And districts have broad discretion in defining “competency.” (Ibid.) However, such
discretion is not unfettered, and is subject to review for arbitrariness or capriciousness. (Fair
v. Fountain Valley School District (1979) 90 Cal.App.3d 180, 187 [“A writ of mandate will
also lie to correct an abuse of the discretion vested in a court, official or board, though it will
not lie to control the exercise of the discretion reposed in those bodies. (Citations.) In such a
case the party seeking the writ must make some showing that the body invested with
discretion has acted arbitrarily, capriciously, fraudulently, or with-out due regard for his
rights and that the action was prejudicial to him. (Citations.)”])

The District’s “competency” criteria, as described in Factual Finding 3, are

reasonable and valid, except as discussed in Factual Findings 22 and 29.

7.

A district “[n]eed not consider positively assured attrition occurring between

the date of the preliminary notice and the final notice in determining the number of
certificated employees to be terminated by reason of a reduction or discontinuation of a
particular kind of service.” (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d
627, 630.)

17

8.

The services identified in Resolution No. 021413-R12 are particular kinds of

services that may reduced or eliminated under Education Code section 44955. The
governing board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither
arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. (See, e.g., San Jose
Teachers Association v. Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at p. 638-639 [“Section 44955 does
not prohibit consideration of financial difficulties as the motivation for terminations and, in
fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section
44955 is the only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate a reduction.”])
Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the
District’s schools and their pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

9.

The preliminary layoff notices issued to Messrs. Wagner and Wooten have

been rescinded by the District, and there is no legal basis for the District’s governing board
to issue either of them a final layoff notice. (Factual Finding 7.)

10.

Cause exists for reducing Marlene Dhallin’s teaching position by the

equivalent of a .14 FTE position for the 2013/2014 school year, and the District’s governing
board has a legal basis for issuing her a final layoff notice in that regard. (Factual Finding
17.)

11.

No cause exists for not reemploying Patricia Guillen during the 2013/2014

school year, and there is no legal basis for the District’s governing board to issue her a final
layoff notice. (Factual Finding 22.)

12.

Cause exists for not reemploying Rachel Watts during the 2013/2014 school

year, and the District’s governing board has a legal basis for issuing her a final layoff notice.
(Factual Finding 26.)

13.

No cause exists for not reemploying William Douglas during the 2013/2014

school year, and there is no legal basis for the District’s governing board to issue him a final
layoff notice. (Factual Finding 29.)

14.

No cause exists for not reemploying Halla (Inga) Bernard during the

2013/2014 school year, and there is no legal basis for the District’s governing board to issue
her a final layoff notice. (Factual Finding 33.)

15.

Except for those teachers discussed in Legal Conclusions 9, 11, 13, and 14,

individually and collectively, the District correctly identified the teachers providing the
particular kinds of services that the governing board directed be reduced or discontinued in
Resolution No. 0214013-R12.

16.

After the adjustments discussed in Legal Conclusions 9, 11, 13, and 14,

individually and collectively, no permanent or probationary teacher with less seniority is
being retained to render a service for which any respondent is certificated and competent to
perform.

18

17.

Except for the respondents identified in Legal Conclusions 9 , 11, 13, and 14,

individually and collectively, cause exists to give notice to respondents that their services
will be reduced or will not be required for the 2013/2014 school year because of the
reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.

18.
and are rejected.

All arguments of the parties not specifically addressed herein were considered

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.

2.

Cause exists for the Denair Unified School District to reduce or eliminate 7.24

full-time equivalent certificated positions at the end of the 2012-2013 school year.

As set forth in Legal Conclusions 9, 11, 13, and 14, individually and

collectively, the Denair Unified District shall rescind the preliminary layoff notices issued to
respondents Halla (Inga) Bernard, William Douglas, Patricia Guillen, Robert (James)
Wagner, and Curtis Wooten.

3.

Other than as set forth in Recommendation No. 2, notice may be given to
respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2013-2014
school year. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: May 3, 2013

____________________________
COREN D. WONG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

19

