BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
STOCKTON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED
EMPLOYEES OF THE STOCKTON
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,

Respondents.

Case No. 2013030372

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong (ALJ), Office of

Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, on April 22, 2013, in Stockton,
California.

Attorneys Diana D. Halpenny and Meghan Covert Russell of the law firm of Kronick,
Moskovitz, Tiedemann & Girard represented the Stockton Unified School District (District).
Craig R. Wells, Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, also appeared on behalf of
the District.

Attorney Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, of the Law Offices of Ernest H., Tuttle, IV, represented

respondents Lori S. Biser, Tammy Michelle Earnest, Jillian Renee Glende, Nicolette Marie
Gonzaba, Heather A. Griffin, Joleen M. Higginbotham, Cuong Nguyen, Maria L. Pacheco-
Renteria, Stephanie Anne Sanchez, and Victor S. Torres, members of the Stockton Pupil
Personnel Association (collectively, SPPA respondents). Neither Mr. Tuttle nor any of his
clients appeared at hearing.

Attorney Thomas J. Driscoll, Jr., of the law firm Driscoll & Associates represented

respondents Gustavo Arzac, Julie Backster, Maria L. Beggs, Barry D. Benigno, Crystal
Earnhart Brown, Alan Toribio Calpito, Vanrith Chhang, Jan Norton, Sandra Ozornio-
Caballero, Kevin A. Romero, Robert S. Schonwald, and Larry Jerome Watson, members of
the Stockton Teachers’ Association (collectively, STA respondents). Mr. Driscoll appeared
at hearing on behalf of each of his clients, none of whom attended the hearing.

Attorney Heidi Primack Talbot of the Talbot Law Group represented respondents

Louie R. Campos, Marlesse R. Cavazos, and Yanik E. Ruley, members of the United

Stockton Administrators (collectively, USA respondents). Neither Ms. Talbot nor any of her
clients appeared at hearing.1

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for

decision on April 22, 2013.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

On February 26, 2013, at a regular meeting, the governing board of the District

determined that it was in the best interests of the District and the welfare of the schools and
pupils thereof to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services and therefore necessary to
reduce or eliminate certificated services affecting the employment of 95.20 full-time
equivalent (FTE) positions. The governing board adopted Resolution No. 12-38 providing
for the reduction or elimination of the particular kinds of services that are more specifically
described in Exhibit A to this decision.

2.

In determining the extent by which to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of
services, the governing board considered all positively assured attrition up to and including
the date of the resolution. The total number of positions to be reduced or eliminated under
the resolution is 95.20 FTE certificated positions. The governing board determined that the
services of a corresponding number of certificated employees shall be terminated at the end
of the 2012/2013 school year.

3.

The governing board also adopted Resolution No. 12-35 for purposes of

making assignments and reassignments of certificated employees into and/or within teaching
positions in the District pursuant to Education Code section 44955. The governing board
determined that a certificated employee is deemed “competent and qualified to perform the
certificated teaching service if: (a) he or she holds a “BCLAD, CLAD, SB 2042, AB 1059,
SB 395; and [sic] (b) his or her credential authorizing the service to be provided is a regular
credential, and not a provisional credential as defined by Education Code section 44911; [sic]
(c) he or she has a single subject credential authorizing the full spectrum of courses within
that subject area or has a credential authorizing the teaching of foundational-level courses in
grades 9-12.”

4.

The governing board also adopted Resolution No. 12-34, which specified the

following tie-breaking criteria for determining the relative seniority of two or more
certificated employees who share the same first date of paid service as a probationary
employee with the District:

1 In light of the stipulations and motion to dismiss discussed below, Mr. Tuttle and

Ms. Talbot received permission prior to hearing to not attend the hearing but be available by
telephone if they were needed.

2

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Individuals with National Board Certification will be
given preference. If these factors are identical then;

Individuals with BCLAD certificate will be given
preference. If these factors are identical then;

Individuals who are deemed “highly qualified” under the
No Child Left Behind Act in the proposed assignment
will be given preference. If these factors are identical
then;

[For teaching assignments only] Individuals with CLAD,
SB 2042, AB 1059, SB 395, SDAIE or an equivalent
training and certificate will be given preference. If these
factors are identical then;

Individuals who currently hold a regular credential, not a
provisional credential as defined by Education Code
section 44911, which authorizes the service to be
provided will be given preference. If these factors are
identical then;

Individuals who hold multiple (2 or more) single subject
credentials will receive preference as follows:

a.

b.

Those who hold the most single subject
credentials will be given preference from most to
least.

For individuals who hold the same number of
single subject credentials, preference will be
given first to those who hold:

1.

2.

3.

mathematics credentials, then

science credentials, then

English credentials

If these factors are identical then;

7.

Individuals who hold subject matter authorizations as
determined by the Commission on Teacher Credentialing
will receive preference as follows:

3

a.

b.

Those who hold the most subject matter
authorizations will be given preference from most
to least.

For individuals who hold the same number of
subject matter authorizations, preference will be
given first to those who hold;

1.

2.

3.

mathematics authorization, then

science authorization, then

English authorization

If these factors are identical then;

8.

A lottery shall be conducted among those remaining, and
layoff shall be from the lowest number to the highest
number from the lottery.

5.

Each respondent is a permanent or probationary certificated employee of the

District. On March 14, 2013, the District served each respondent with written notice that the
superintendent recommended that notice be given to each of them pursuant to Education
Code sections 44949 and 44955 that each of their services would be reduced or would not be
required for the 2013/2014 school year. Each written notice set forth the reasons for the
recommendation and noted that the District’s governing board had passed Resolution No. 12-
38 reducing or eliminating the certificated staff by 95.20 FTE positions. Each respondent
timely requested, in writing, a hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying him
or her for the ensuing school year.

6.

On March 15, 2013, Craig R. Wells, Assistant Superintendent of Human

Resources for the District, provided the governing board respondents’ names and identified
them as the certificated employees who received notice that their services would be reduced
or not required for the next school year.

7.

On April 4, 2013, Assistant Superintendent Wells made and filed the

Accusation in this matter solely in his official capacity. The Accusation and all required
documents were timely served on the respondents. Each respondent timely filed a Notice of
Defense to the Accusation. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied.

8.

Prior to hearing, the District entered into separate stipulations with the SPPA

respondents, the STA respondents, and the USA respondents. Included within each
stipulation was the parties’ agreement that all procedural and jurisdictional requirements
specified in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 have been met. The SPPA
respondents withdrew their joint Notice of Defense.

4

9.

At hearing, the District moved to dismiss the following respondents and

rescind each of their layoff notices in light of the parties’ stipulations: Julie Backster, Maria
L. Beggs, Crystal Earhart Brown, Louis R. Campos, Marlesse R. Cavazos, Kevin A. Romero,
Stephanie Anne Sanchez, and Yankik E. Ruley. No opposition to the motion was filed. The
motion is granted.

10.

This matter proceeded to hearing as to the following respondents only:

Gustavo Arzac, Barry D. Benigno, Lori S. Biser, Alan Toribio Calpito, Vanrith Chhang,
Tammy Michelle Earnest, Jillian Reneee Glende, Nicolette Marie Gonzaba, Heather A.
Griffin, Joleen M. Higginbotham, Cuong Nguyen, Jan Norton, Sandra Ozornio-Caballero,
Maria L. Pacheco-Renteria, Robert S. Schonwald, Victor S. Torres, and Larry Jerome
Watson, none of whom appeared or offered any evidence at hearing.

The District’s Seniority List

11.

The District maintains a seniority list for all certificated employees. The
seniority list contains the following information for each certificated employee: name,
seniority date, name of employee bargaining unit, description of current position, employee
status (i.e., permanent, probationary, or temporary), type of credential, credential subject, and
whether the employee is authorized to teach English Learners. The District also maintains
seniority lists for each employee bargaining unit (i.e., Stockton Teachers Association,
Stockton Pupil Personnel Association, and United Stockton Administrators), as well as
management employees who are not represented by an employee bargaining unit (e.g.,
superintendent of schools, assistant superintendent of curriculum and instruction, etc.).

12.

After rescission of the preliminary layoff notices issued to respondents Julie
Backster, Maria L. Beggs, Crystal Earhart Brown, Louis R. Campos, Marlesse R. Cavazos,
Kevin A. Romero, Stephanie Anne Sanchez, and Yankik E. Ruley; no permanent or
probationary certificated employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service for
which any respondent is certificated and competent to perform.

13.

The reduction or elimination of the particular kinds of services set forth in

Resolution No. 12-38 are related to the welfare of the schools and the students thereof within
the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. The governing board’s decision
to reduce or discontinue these services is neither arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper
exercise of its discretion.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides the following with

regard to a school district’s authority to lay off certificated employees.

Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all
of the schools of a district for the first six months in which

5

school is in session shall have declined below the corresponding
period of either of the previous two school years, whenever the
governing board determines that attendance in a district will
decline in the following year as a result of the termination of an
interdistrict tuition agreement as defined in Section 46304,
whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school
year, or whenever the amendment of state law requires the
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary
by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding
percentage of the certificated employees of the district,
permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school
year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while any probationary employee, or any other
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

In computing a decline in average daily attendance for purposes
of this section for a newly formed or reorganized school district,
each school of the district shall be deemed to have been a school
of the newly formed or reorganized district for both of the two
previous school years.

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would
not exist without such a requirement.

6

2.

Education Code section 44949 provides the following with regard to a school

district’s jurisdiction to layoff certificated employees:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee, or in the case of a district which has no superintendent
by the clerk or secretary of the governing board, that it has been
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and
stating the reasons therefor.

Until the employee has requested a hearing as provided in
subdivision (b) or has waived his or her right to a hearing, the
notice and the reasons therefor shall be confidential and shall
not be divulged by any person, except as may be necessary in
the performance of duties. However, the violation of this
requirement of confidentiality, in and of itself, shall not in any
manner be construed as affecting the validity of any hearing
conducted pursuant to this section.

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing. The
notice provided for in subdivision (a) shall advise the employee
of the provisions of this subdivision.

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency
therein, except that all of the following shall apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any,
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation
and he or she shall be notified of this five-day period for filing
in the accusation.

7

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the
Government Code shall be available only if request is made
therefor within 15 days after service of the accusation, and the
notice required by Section 11505 of the Government Code shall
so indicate.

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be
prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds.

The board may adopt from time to time such rules and
procedures not inconsistent with provisions of this section as
may be necessary to effectuate this section.

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the
employee.

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) any
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the
Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) which
occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which
occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be
extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.

8

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth above,

and no respondent argued otherwise. (Factual Findings 1, 2, 5 through 7 and 10.)

3.

The services identified in Resolution No. 12-38 are particular kinds of services
that may reduced or eliminated under Education Code section 44955. The governing board’s
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious,
and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and their pupils within the
meaning of Education Code section 44949.

4.

Pursuant to the parties’ stipulations discussed in Factual Finding 9, the District

shall rescind the preliminary layoff notices issued to respondents Julie Backster, Maria L.
Beggs, Crystal Earhart Brown, Louis R. Campos, Marlesse R. Cavazos, Kevin A. Romero,
Stephanie Anne Sanchez, and Yankik E. Ruley. The parties’ stipulation constitutes a judicial
admission. (See, Gonzales v. Pacific Greyhound Lines (1950) 34 Cal.2d 749, 754-758.) “A
judicial admission is a party’s unequivocal concession of the truth of the matter, and removes
the matter as an issue in the case.” (Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Corp. (2006) 140 Cal.App.4th
34, 48.)

5.

Except for those certificated employees whose preliminary layoff notices are

to be rescinded as discussed in Legal Conclusion 4, the District correctly identified the
certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that the governing board
directed be reduced or discontinued in Resolution No. 12-38.

6.

After the adjustments discussed in Legal Conclusion 4, no permanent or

probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service for which any
respondent is certificated and competent to perform.

7.

Except for those certificated employees whose preliminary layoff notices are

to be rescinded as discussed in Legal Conclusion 4, cause exists to give notice to respondents
that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2013/2014 school year
because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.

Cause exists for the Stockton Unified School District to reduce or eliminate

95.20 full-time equivalent certificated positions at the end of the 2012-2013 school year.

2.

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 4, the Stockton Unified District shall rescind
the preliminary layoff notices issued to respondents Julie Backster, Maria L. Beggs, Crystal
Earhart Brown, Louis R. Campos, Marlesse R. Cavazos, Kevin A. Romero, Stephanie Anne
Sanchez, and Yankik E. Ruley.

9

3.

Other than as set forth in Recommendations No. 2, notice may be given to
respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2013-2014
school year. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: April 23, 2013

____________________________
COREN D. WONG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

