BEFORE THE
KINGS COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
KINGS COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION
KINGS COUNTY, CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against :

LUPE ARAUJO,

Respondent.

OAH No. 2013030850

PROPOSED DECISION

Karl S. Engeman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings,

State of California, heard this matter in Hanford, California, on April 30, 2013.

Dwaine L. Chambers, Attorney at Law, School Law Consultants, represented the

Kings County Superintendent Tim Bowers.

Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, Tuttle & McCloskey, represented respondent

Lupe Araujo.

The parties entered into a stipulation that the hearing in this matter would commence
on April 1, 2013, for jurisdictional purposes only and would reconvene on April 30, 2013, to
be completed. As part of the stipulation, respondent waived her right to have the hearing
completed on or before May 7, 2013, to receive a copy of the Proposed Decision on or before
May 7, 2013, and to receive the Superintendent’s final notice that her services would not be
required in the ensuing school year on or before May 15, 2013. Following the receipt of
evidence on April 30, 2013, the parties were afforded the opportunity to submit written
closing argument. On May 13, 2013, Mr. Chambers filed his post-hearing brief which was
marked exhibit 14, and made a part of the record. Thereafter, the Office of Administrative
Hearings staff contacted Mr. Richtel to determine if he was going to file a post-hearing brief
and he responded that he would not. The matter was submitted on May 13, 2013.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Barbara Zaino, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, Kings County

Office of Education, Kings County, California (KCOE), filed the Accusation in her official
capacity.

1

4.

5.

2.

On February 15, 2013, and later amended on March 4, 2013, the KCOE

Superintendent Board adopted Orders Number 021513 and 030413, respectively, that
reduced and/or discontinued particular kinds of certificated services (PKS) no later than the
beginning of the 2013-2014 school year.

3.

Prior to March 15, 2013, respondent was given notice by personal service that

it had been recommended that notice be given her, in accordance with Education Code
sections 44949 and 449551, that her services would not be required for the ensuing 2013-
2014 school year and stating the reasons therefor.

A Request for Hearing was timely filed by respondent to determine if there is

cause for not reemploying her for the ensuing school year.

Respondent is a certificated permanent employee of KCOE, and she teaches at

the alternative Kings Community School. The Superintendent’s February 15, 2013 Order
reducing services included the elimination of three full time equivalent (FTE) certificated
teachers at Kings Community School and one FTE certificated teacher at J.C. Montgomery
school, a “boot camp” school affiliated with the Kings County juvenile probation
department. The total number of reductions was 10.0 FTE, although the resolution recited
9.2 FTE reductions. The reductions were ordered because of an anticipated drop in average
daily attendance and the likely return of facilities loaned to KCOE by the Kings County
juvenile probation department which will result in a loss of classrooms. Respondent is the
second least senior alternative education teacher with a date of hire of July 1, 2002. The
least senior alternative education teacher is Tracy Brown, and Mr. Brown has a date of hire
of August 14, 2013. He was also given a preliminary notice of the Superintendent’s intent
not to reemploy him for the ensuing school year.

6.

The amended KCOE Superintendent’s Order adopted on March 4, 2013,
change the reduction of services to two FTE certificated teachers at Kings Community
School, along with the one alternative education position at J.C. Montgomery. The amended
Order added: “4. Reassign One (1) Full-Time Equivalency (F.T.E.) Certificated Teacher,
Kings Community School.”2 During her testimony, Assistant Superintendent Zaino
identified the teacher to be reassigned as Tracy Brown. Thus, Mr. Brown’s preliminary
notice may be regarded as “precautionary.”

7.

The reassignment of Mr. Brown is to a newly created position for school year

2013-2014. For approximately one year, KCOE has considered the establishment of an e-
learning program using a combination of conventional classroom instruction and teacher-

1 All future references to statutory sections are to the Education Code unless

otherwise specified.

2 As explained below, the reassignment is not a reduction or elimination of an
alternative education teaching position, but the change in reductions of such services from
four to three did not affect the rights of respondent.

2

student electronic interface. This concept is to provide a “last resort” opportunity for
continuation school students who have been expelled from the regular high school and are at
high risk for dropping out of the educational program altogether. KCOE administrators were
impressed with the success enjoyed by the San Diego County Office of Education with such
a program and visited them to learn best practices in the area. Based on the recommendation
of the San Diego Office of Education, KCOE determined to enroll two alternative education
teachers in the six to eight weeks long Leading Edge certification program: Online &
Blended Teacher. Sometime in late 2012, alternative education teachers Tracy Brown and
Joseph Sansinena were asked to volunteer and they did so. Mr. Sansinena is senior to
respondent and Mr. Brown. At the time of the administrative hearing, Mr. Brown had
reportedly completed all of the course work and was waiting for his final grades before
receiving his certification.

8.

The blending e-learning class contemplated by KCOE is, according to

Assistant Superintendent Barnhart who spearheaded the research into the effort and drafted
the course description, a completely different method of teaching. The teacher’s classroom
will have expanded broadband capability and added informational technology support. The
teacher will use the electronic format to try and generate self-initiative and motivation among
the 10 to 20 students enrolled in the pilot program class. The curriculum will depart from
standard text books and standards that are used even in the independent study programs now
overseen by the Kings Community School teachers.

9.

Assistant Superintendent Barnhart’s job description for the class entitled

“Teacher, Alternative Schools Physical Education and E-Learning Programs,” includes as
required qualifications the expected expertise in dealing with high-risk students, but also
familiarity with national and international (iNAOL) standards for online teaching. The skills
requirements include the ability to effectively maintain an e-learning environment,
implement and deliver high quality online and computer-based curriculum and blended
learning instructional models to support student needs, the creation and facilitation of a
Learning Management System, and evaluation of student success using online or blending
formats. Experience in e-learning at the high school level is “highly desirable.” The
certification requirements include “Certification in eLearning as an online and blended
teacher.” The job description was created without consideration of any future reduction of
services and before KCOE learned that the probation department was likely to demand the
return of classroom facilities.

10.

The Superintendent contends that respondent, while properly certificated, is
not “competent” to bump into the newly created position to be occupied by Tracy Brown.
The Superintendent has not established any criteria to define “competence” as the word is
used in section 44955, subdivision (b). Assistant Superintendents Zaino and Barnhart both
testified that respondent, while properly credentialed to teach an alternative education high
school course, including physical education, is not competent to teach the newly created
eLearning course. Ms. Zaino’s opinion was, however, greatly influenced by her concerns
about respondent’s performance as a teacher in her current assignment and she candidly
acknowledged her difficulty in objectively assessing respondent’s ability to teach the newly

3

created course. Ms. Barnhart focused on the need to have someone specially trained in this
novel format, based on her research and discussions with the San Diego Office of Education
about their implementation of the program. She emphasized the very different method of
teaching this format entails and the need to have a teacher who understands and meets
accepted standards established by the educational community. Mr. Brown has such training
and respondent does not.

11.

Respondent asserted that she is competent to bump into the newly created
position to be occupied by junior teacher Tracy Brown. She was unaware of the course
offered to Mr. Brown and Mr. Sansinena until the administrative hearing. She would consent
to teach the class in the alternative education program. Respondent has considerable
experience in eLearning. She was the first KCOE teacher to use a Smart Board (interactive
white board). She has used Testmoz for the creation of examinations and grading. She is
familiar with and has used School Notes 2.0, Weebly (a class website creation tool), I-Boss,
Dropbox (that can facilitate student collaboration on documents), Quick Topic (for questions
posed to students and answered by them), Chat, and video teleconferencing.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under sections 44949 and 44955. All notices

and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.

The Superintendent’s legal theories in this matter have evolved over time. The

Superintendent began with the assertion that as the e-learning position does not now exist, it
should not be considered in the context of respondent’s right to bump. As the evidence made
clear that the Superintendent intends the class to be part of the curriculum in the ensuing
school year and Tracy Brown is the teacher to be reassigned to the class, the Superintendent
focused on respondent’s perceived lack of competence to bump junior teacher Mr. Brown.3
Later, in the hearing, both sides addressed whether the newly created position is a unique
course requiring special skills that Mr. Brown possesses and respondent does not which
would permit Mr. Brown to be “skipped.” Both counsel addressed the latter two contentions
in their closing oral arguments and counsel for the Superintendent addressed them again in
his post hearing written brief.

3.

Section 44955 reads, in pertinent part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her
position for causes other than those specified in Sections 44907
and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, and no

3 It should also be noted that the Administrative Law Judge informed the parties that
he intended to allow respondent to assert her bumping rights, because to wait until the actual
creation of the class would deprive respondent of her right to timely raise her right to occupy
the position in the ensuing school year as contemplated by the statutory layoff process.

4

probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position
for cause other than as specified in Sections 44948 to 44949,
inclusive.

(b) Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in
all of the schools of a district for the first six months in which
school is in session shall have declined below the corresponding
period of either of the previous two school years, whenever the
governing board determines that attendance in a district will
decline in the following year as a result of the termination of an
interdistrict tuition agreement as defined in Section 46304,
whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school
year, or whenever the amendment of state law requires the
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the
governing board of the district it shall have become necessary
by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding
percentage of the certificated employees of the district,
permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school
year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while any probationary employee, or any other
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

In computing a decline in average daily attendance for purposes of this
section for a newly formed or reorganized school district, each school
of the district shall be deemed to have been a school of the newly
formed or reorganized district for both of the two previous school
years.

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district
on the same date, the governing board shall determine the order of
termination solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students
thereof. Upon the request of any employee whose order of termination
is so determined, the governing board shall furnish in writing no later
than five days prior to the commencement of the hearing held in
accordance with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria
used in determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other employees in
the group. This requirement that the governing board provide, on
request, a written statement of reasons for determining the order of

5

termination shall not be interpreted to give affected employees any
legal right or interest that would not exist without such a requirement.

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given before the
15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and services
of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in
which they were employed, as determined by the board in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 44844 and 44845. In the event that a
permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices and a
right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be
deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in
such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service
which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.
However, prior to assigning or reassigning any certificated employee
to teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught, and for
which he or she does not have a teaching credential or which is not
within the employee's major area of postsecondary study or the
equivalent thereof, the governing board shall require the employee to
pass a subject matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate
from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for
either of the following reasons:

(1)
The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach
a specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized
by a services credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel
services or health for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee
has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or
course of study or to provide those services, which others with more
seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.

(Emphasis added)

4.

Respondent asserts that she is properly certificated and competent to bump

junior employee Tracy Brown who will otherwise occupy the e-learning position. There is
no dispute that respondent is properly credentialed to do so. The issue is her competence to
render the services required for the new course. The term “competent” relates to specific
skills or qualifications, not prior on-the-job performance of the laid-off permanent employee.
(Forker v. Board of Trustees of Whittier Union High School Dist. (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13,

6

19.) In Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, the California Supreme Court
considered the “certificated and competent” standard. The Court stated that such
determinations involve discretionary decisions which are within the “special competence” of
the school districts. ( Id. at p. 299.) Insofar as skills and qualifications are concerned,
respondent has been teaching the same type of high risk students who will fill the newly
created class for more than a decade and currently teaches in the same continuation high
school where the class will likely be offered. Respondent is accustomed to dealing with
independent study students and the coordination of in-class instruction or monitoring with a
student’s work at home. She pioneered the use of smart boards in KCOE classrooms and
uses a variety of e-learning software programs with her students. There remains the
question, however, whether she possesses the skills or qualifications to teach in the blended
e-learning environment contemplated by Superintendent. No such class currently exists in
KCOE, so skills and qualifications must have been acquired elsewhere as a teacher in a
comparable class or as a result of formal instruction of the type undertaken by Tracy Brown.
The Superintendent’s staff researched the e-learning programs available, reviewed national
and international standards for such programs and consulted with at least one other
California county office of education to learn about actual experience with such programs
and recommended best practices. In summary, Superintendent’s determination that the
newly created class requires very specialized skills and qualifications that respondent does
not possess was a reasonable exercise of his discretion.

5.

Superintendent established that there is a specific need to provide a “last

resort” e-learning course in an effort to keep high risk students in school. The course
requires special training and experience as explained in Legal Conclusion 4. Superintendent
further established that Tracy Brown has acquired such special training and experience as
evidenced by his completion of the internationally recognized Leading Edge certification
program for an “Online & Blended Teacher.” Respondent, while familiar with many e-
learning software programs, has not acquired the special training and experience necessary to
teach the course. Superintendent has thus fulfilled each of the required elements for
appropriate skipping of a junior certificated employee in accordance with subdivision (d)(1)
of Section 44955. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2009) 170 Cal. App.4th 127,
138.)

6.

Superintendent has established that respondent is not competent to bump

Tracy Brown from his reassigned position as instructor in the new e-learning class at Kings
Community School. Superintendent has also demonstrated a specific need for personnel to
teach the new e-learning course and that Tracy Brown has special training and experience
necessary to teach the course, which respondent does not possess.

//

//

7

ORDER

1.

The Accusation against respondent is sustained and District may issue a final

termination notice to respondent for the particular kind of services identified and the one
FTE.

2.

Respondent Lupe Araujo shall receive final notice that she will be laid off 1.0

FTE (Certificated Teacher at Kings Community School).

Dated: May 23, 2013

_____________________________
KARL S. ENGEMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

8

