BEFORE THE
RIVERSIDE COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Employment Status of
Certain Employees of the Riverside County
Office of Education,

OAH No. 2013040215

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of

California, heard this matter in Riverside, California on April 29, 2013.

William A. Diedrich, Atkinson, Anderson, Loya, Rudd & Romo, represented the

Riverside County Office of Education.

Carols Perez, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented all respondents who were present at

the reduction in force proceeding.

No respondent represented himself or herself.

The matter was submitted on April 29, 2013.

The Riverside County Office of Education

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Riverside County Office of Education (RCOE) is comprised of three

components: the County Superintendent of Schools, who is elected to serve a four year term;
seven elected members of the County Board of Education, each of whom serve four year
terms; and approximately 1,525 employees, 525 of whom are certificated and employed
directly by the County Superintendent of Schools.1 RCOE provides educational services and
supports to meet the needs of students who do not or cannot receive services directly from

1

A county superintendent of schools directly employs certificated employees
under Education Code section 1293. This is not the case with local school districts, where
certificated employees are employed by the district.

1

the 23 local school districts within Riverside County and a portion of Imperial County (e.g.,
services provided to pregnant teens, juveniles residing in correctional facilities, or students
with profound disabilities).

Kenneth M. Young (Superintendent Young) is RCOE’s Superintendent of Schools.

Paul C. Jessup (Deputy Superintendent Jessup) is the Deputy Superintendent of Schools.
Steven Hovey (Mr. Hovey) is the District’s Chief Personnel Officer. Maribel Escobar (Ms.
Escobar) is RCOE’s Director of Classified Personnel. Tracey Vackar (Ms. Vackar) is the
Project Coordinator for the District’s Career Technical Education Unit.

RCOE’s Budget Concerns

2.

Based upon budgetary concerns related to California’s fiscal crisis and

RCOE’s loss of grant funding, Mr. Hovey recommended to Superintendent Young on March
11, 2013, that Superintendent Young authorize the reduction and/or elimination of particular
kinds of Career Technical Education (CTE) services for the 2013-2014 school year and that
he given certain CTE employees notice that their services would not be required for the
2013-2014 school year.

3.

On March 11, 2013, Deputy Superintendent Jessup, on behalf of

Superintendent Young, signed the following resolution:

REDUCTION OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF
CERTIFICATED SERVICES
RESOLUTION NO.: 13-13

WHEREAS, the Superintendent of Schools of Riverside
County has determined that it is in the best interests of
the County Office and the welfare of the schools and the
pupils thereof that the particular kinds of services set
forth herein must be reduced or discontinued due to
financial conditions; and

WHEREAS, it is the opinion of the Superintendent that
because of the aforementioned reason, the number of
certificated employees of the Riverside County
Superintendent of Schools must be reduced; and

WHEREAS, the Superintendent does not desire to
reduce the services of regular certificated employees
based upon reduction of average daily attendance during
the past two years.

2

Full Time
Equivalent (FTE)
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the
Superintendent of Schools for Riverside County as
follows:

That the particular kinds of services set forth

A.
below shall be reduced or eliminated commencing in the
2013-14 school year:

Career Technical Education (CTE) Services as follows:

Instructor, Culinary Arts

Instructor, Dental Assisting
Instructor, EKG/Allied Health/Medical Asst.
Instructor, First Responder
Instructor, Law Enforcement Occupations
Instructor, Law Enforcement/Forensic/Security Guard/Correctional
Rehab
Instructor, Medical Assisting-Clinical, Medical Assisting-Admin
Instructor, Medical Assisting/Terminology/Core
Instructor, Medical Front Office
Instructor, Medical Occupations
Instructor, Office Occupations/Word Processing
Instructor, Plant & Soil/Horticulture/Intro to Conservation
Instructor, Sports Therapy & Fitness
Total CTE

Alternative Education (Alt-Ed) Services as follows:

Instructor, Law Enforcement Occupations
Instructor, Office Occupations
Teacher/Correctional Ed - Drivers Education
Teacher/Correctional Ed - Work Experience
Total Alt Ed.

0.5

1
1
1
1.375

1
1
0.225
0.625
0.625
1
1
0.5
10.85

FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE
FTE

FTE
0.957
FTE
0.957
0.957
FTE
0.4875 FTE
3.4125 FTE
14.2625 FTE

Total Certificated Employees:

B.
That due to the reduction or elimination of
particular kinds of services, the corresponding number of
certificated employees of the Riverside County
Superintendent of Schools shall be terminated pursuant
to Education Code section 44955

3

C.
That the reduction of certificated staff be
achieved by the termination of regular employees and
not by terminating temporary and substitute employees.

D.
That, for Alternative Education teachers (not
instructors), “competency” as described in Education
Code section 44955(b) for the purposes of bumping shall
necessarily include (1) possession of a valid credential in
the relevant subject matter area, (2) possession of both a
special education credential and a single subject or
multiple subject credential to bump into a Specialized
Academic Instruction position, (3) “highly qualified”
status under the No Child Left Behind Act (if required by
the position), (4) an appropriate EL authorization (if
required by the position), and (5) a completed security
clearance (if required by the position).

That, for Career Technical Education and
E.
Alternative Education Instructors (not teachers),
“competency” as described in Education Code section
44955(b) for the purposes of bumping shall necessarily
include possession of a valid credential in the relevant
Career Technical Education Industry Sector, and the
necessary experience as required by the job description.

That, as between certificated employees with the

F.
same seniority date, the order of termination shall be
determined solely by criteria adopted by the
Superintendent.

That the Superintendent’s designee is directed to

G.
initiate layoff procedures and give appropriate notice
pursuant to Education Code sections 44955 and 44949.

PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Superintendent of
Schools of Riverside County on March 11, 2013.

Respondent Employees

4.

The individuals identified as respondents in the Accusation are RCOE

certificated employees who currently provide educational services in their capacities as
either Alternative Education teachers or as Career Technical Education and Alternative
Education instructors.

4

5.

The decision to reduce and eliminate particular kinds of services was the direct

result of California’s fiscal crisis and RCOE’s loss of grant funding. It was not based on a
decline in enrollment. The particular kinds of services identified in Resolution No. 13-13
were services that Superintendent Young was authorized to reduce and discontinue. No
particular kind of service was reduced or eliminated to a level below that required by state or
federal law. The resolution to reduce and eliminate certain services was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, and making the decision to do so was a matter squarely within Superintendent
Young’s sound discretion.

6.

Superintendent Young authorized Mr. Hovey to act on his behalf with regard

to the reduction in force proceeding that was required under Resolution No. 13-13.

The Reduction in Force and the Issuing of Preliminary Layoff Notices

7.

Using Resolution No. 13-13, an updated seniority list and documentation

maintained by the District’s Career Technical Education Unit that related to the particular
kinds of services that were being eliminated and employee experience, Mr. Hovey, Ms.
Escobar and Ms. Vackar identified the employees who were subject to Resolution No. 13-13,
determined whether any of the employees whose positions were being eliminated had bumping
rights, and caused preliminary layoff notices to be issued to and served upon the most junior
employees holding the positions that were subject to reduction and elimination. Before issuing
the preliminary layoff notices, Mr. Hovey, Ms. Escobar and Ms. Vackar considered all known
positive attrition as a result of resignations, retirements and other causes.

Jurisdictional Matters

8.

On and before March 15, 2012, RCOE served upon respondents Antonio

Alcocer, Bobbie Arterberry III, Yolanda Candelaria, Kathy Cathcart, Jennifer Dimaggio,
Valarie Ellis-McCurry, William Ennis, Kathleen Fate, Barbara Fragoso, Lakesha Harris,
David Heard, Nancee Hoertz, Eric Huber, Erika Salem, Christine Sanchez, Judy Silva, Lori
Suntree, Barbara Tuyen and others written notice of the recommendation made to
Superintendent Young that their services would not be required for the 2012-2013 school
year, together with other required jurisdictional documents. Each respondent who timely
requested a hearing was served thereafter with a notice of hearing. No employee who was
providing alternative education services requested a hearing. All jurisdictional requirements
were met.

9.

On April 29, 2013, the record in the administrative hearing was opened.

Attorney William A. Diedrich appeared on behalf of the district. Attorney Carlos Perez
appeared on behalf of all respondents who were present at the hearing. He and the
respondents were assisted by Elisa Gusdal, a CTA representative, and Michael Bochicchio,
President of the RCOE Teachers Association. A stipulation concerning certain jurisdictional
documents was reached. Sworn testimony was given and documentary evidence was
received. Brief closing arguments were given, after which the record was closed and the
matter was submitted.

5

The Seniority List and Bump Analysis

10.

RCOE maintains two seniority lists, one for Alternative Education instructors

and one for Career Technical Education-Regional Occupational Program (CTE-ROP)
instructors. Because no Alternative Education instructor requested a hearing, it was not
necessary to obtain evidence regarding the Alternative Education seniority list. The CTE-
ROP seniority list is a continuously evolving list that sets forth each employee’s seniority
number, seniority date (first date of contract service with RCOE), position/title, amount of
service expressed in terms of a full time equivalent (FTE), status code, registered credential,
CTE industry sector/subject, EL authorization, educational level, and layoff notes.

11.

RCOE sent letters to all employees regarding its seniority lists. RCOE

requested that each employee review the information and provide RCOE with any
corrections or additional information. The information provided to Director Escobar was
verified and was included in RCOE’s seniority lists.

12.

RCOE staff updated the CTE-ROP master seniority list to produce the “bump
analysis” that was used in this layoff proceeding. The bump analysis utilized Resolution No.
13-13 to identify the particular kinds of services that were being reduced or discontinued, the
seniority dates of the persons providing those services, the names of the persons providing
those services, the amount of services being reduced, and whether the persons who were
subject to being displaced under Resolution No. 13-13 possessed the seniority and
competence to displace (bump) a more junior employee.2 The process that was used to
create the bump analysis complied with the economic layoff statutes found in the Education
Code, which generally require the retention of senior certificated employees over more junior
employees and the retention of permanent employees over probationary employees and
others with less seniority. There was no “skipping” of any junior employees.

13.

During this reduction in force proceeding, RCOE dismissed the Accusation

filed against Nancee Hoertz. There was no objection. The dismissal of the Accusation was in
good faith and was appropriate.

14. Ms. Vackar provided expert testimony in the area of what credentials and

experience was required to hold CTE-ROP employment. She used this expertise to discuss
why some employees were permitted to bump and why other employees did not possess the
credential and competence to bump despite being employed by RCOE for a longer period of
time than an employee whose service was being retained. Ms. Vackar’s testimony on these
matters was not refuted, and there was no evidence to the contrary.

2

Resolution 13-13, subdivision E, provided that for Career Technical Education
Instructors (not teachers), “competency” necessarily included possession of a valid credential
in the relevant Career Technical Education Industry Sector and the necessary experience as
required by the job description.

6

Ultimate Conclusions Regarding RCOE’s Reduction in Force

15.

The termination of respondents’ positions as a result of Superintendent

Young’s decision to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of services was unrelated to the
quality of the professional services provided by these fine instructors. The length of service
provided by most of these instructors bespeaks of their value to RCOE.

16.

Superintendent Young resolved to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of

services being provided by RCOE certificated employees for legitimate reasons. His
decision was unrelated to the competency or dedication of the employees whose services
were proposed to be reduced and discontinued. Superintendent Young’s determination was
lawful, reasonable, and ultimately in the best interest of RCOE and its students.

RCOE’s administrative staff initiated and followed a systematic procedure to identify

those employees who were directly affected by Resolution No. 13-13. A very careful
evaluation was made to determine what education and experience was required to maintain
employment and each employee’s seniority date, status, credentials and experience in
making determinations about what bumping rights, if any, an employee had. RCOE did not
retain any junior credentialed employee to provide services which a more senior employee
was certificated and competent to render. RCOE properly and in good faith applied relevant
provisions of the Education Code in this reduction in force proceeding.

RCOE made assignments and reassignments in such a manner that respondents in this

proceeding were retained to render services which their seniority and qualifications entitled
them to render, albeit not on a full time basis.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Statutory Authority

1.

Education Code section 44949 provides in part:

No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services
will not be required for the ensuing year . . . . the
governing board and the employee shall be given written
notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee . . . . that it has been recommended that the
notice be given to the employee, and stating the reasons
therefor . . . .

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if
there is cause for not reemploying him or her for the
ensuing year . . . . If an employee fails to request a

7

hearing on or before the date specified, his or her failure
to do so shall constitute his or her waiver of his or her
right to a hearing . . . .

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee,
the proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with . . . . the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an
agency therein, except that all of the following shall
apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense,
if any, within five days after service upon him or her of
the accusation and he or she shall be notified of this five-
day period for filing in the accusation.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative
law judge who shall prepare a proposed decision,
containing findings of fact and a determination as to
whether the charges sustained by the evidence are related
to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. The
proposed decision shall be prepared for the governing
board and shall contain a determination as to the
sufficiency of the cause and a recommendation as to
disposition. However, the governing board shall make
the final determination as to the sufficiency of the cause
and disposition. None of the findings, recommendations,
or determinations contained in the proposed decision
prepared by the administrative law judge shall be binding
on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing
board of the school district shall not constitute cause for
dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial
errors. Copies of the proposed decision shall be
submitted to the governing board and to the employee on
or before May 7 of the year in which the proceeding is
commenced . . . .

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides in part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or
her position for causes other than those specified in
Sections 44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947,

8

inclusive, and no probationary employee shall be
deprived of his or her position for cause other than as
specified in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive.

(b) Whenever . . . . a particular kind of service is to be
reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of
the following school year . . . and when in the opinion of
the governing board of the district it shall have become
necessary . . . . to decrease the number of permanent
employees in the district, the governing board may
terminate the services of not more than a corresponding
percentage of the certificated employees of the district,
permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the
school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the
services of no permanent employee may be terminated
under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less
seniority, is retained to render a service which said
permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

As between employees who first rendered paid service to
the district on the same date, the governing board shall
determine the order of termination solely on the basis of
needs of the district and the students thereof . . . .

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given
before the 15th of May . . . . and services of such
employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order
in which they were employed, as determined by the
board in accordance with the provisions of Sections
44844 and 44845. In the event that a permanent or
probationary employee is not given the notices and a
right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or
she shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school
year.

The governing board shall make assignments and
reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be
retained to render any service which their seniority and
qualifications entitle them to render. However, prior to

9

assigning or reassigning any certificated employee to
teach a subject which he or she has not previously taught,
and for which he or she does not have a teaching
credential or which is not within the employee’s major
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the
governing board shall require the employee to pass a
subject matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district
may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in
order of seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for
personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or
to provide services authorized by a services credential
with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated
employee has special training and experience necessary
to teach that course or course of study or to provide those
services, which others with more seniority do not
possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving
compliance with constitutional requirements related to
equal protection of the laws.

Any county superintendent of schools may employ
persons possessing an appropriate credential as
certificated employees in programs and projects to
perform services conducted under contract with public or
private agencies, or other categorically funded projects
of indeterminate duration. The terms and conditions
under which such persons are employed shall be
mutually agreed upon by the employee and the county
superintendent and such agreement shall be reduced to
writing. Service pursuant to this section shall not be
included in computing the service required as a
prerequisite to attainment of, or eligibility to,
classification as a permanent employee unless (1) such
person has served pursuant to this section for at least 75
percent of the number of days the regular schools of
county superintendent by which he is employed are
maintained, and (2) such person is subsequently

10

3.

Education Code section 1294.5 provides:

employed as a probationary employee in a position
requiring certification qualifications. Such persons may
be employed for periods which are less than a full school
year and may be terminated at the expiration of the
contract or specially funded project without regard to
other requirements of this code respecting the
termination of probationary or permanent employees.

This section shall not be construed to apply to any
regularly credentialed employee who has been employed
in the regular educational programs of the county
superintendent of schools as a probationary employee
before being subsequently assigned to any one of these
programs.

Jurisdiction

4.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and
44955. All notices and other jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were
satisfied as to all respondent employees identified herein.

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

5.

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not tied in

with any statistical computation. It is within the governing authority’s discretion to
determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be reduced or discontinued
as long as the district does not reduce a service below the level required by law. (San Jose
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.) A school district has wide
discretion in setting its budget and a layoff decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or
so palpably unreasonable and arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of
law. (California Sch. Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d
318, 322.)

Competence

6.

The Education Code leaves to the governing authority the discretion to

determine whether in addition to possessing seniority an employee is also “certificated and
competent” to be employed in a vacant position. The term “competent” in this regard relates
to an individual’s specific skills or qualifications including academic background, training,
credentials, and experience, but does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance.
(Forker v. Board of Trustees (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.) In addition to seniority the
only limitation in placing a teacher in a vacant position is that the teacher that is selected be
“certificated and competent” to render the service required by the vacant position. Among
employees who meet this threshold limitation, there is no room in the statutory scheme for
comparative evaluation. (Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299.) An

11

employee holding a special credential or needed skill, if such credentials or competence are
not shared by a more senior employee, may be retained though it results in termination of a
senior employee. (Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.)

Seniority and Bumping

7.

Seniority: Under Education Code section 44845, seniority is determined by

the date a certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”

8.

Education Code section 44846 provides in part: “The governing board shall
have power and it shall be its duty to correct any errors discovered from time to time in its
records showing the order of employment.”

9.

The Statutory Scheme: Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff

statute, provides in subdivision (b), in part:

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of
no permanent employee may be terminated under the
provisions of this section while . . . . any other employee
with less seniority, is retained to render a service which
said permanent employee is certificated and competent to
render.

Documents Filed after March 15, 2012

10.

Documents filed after March 15 cannot be used by an employee to assert
bumping rights. The practical reason for this rule is that layoff notices must be given by
March 15 to effect a reduction in teaching staff for the ensuing school year. If an employee
were allowed to present a certificate after March 15 to retain employment, the employer
would by that date be precluded from serving a layoff notice to a more junior teacher. This
circumstance would result in the employer being forced to retain an extra teacher when the
entire purpose of the layoff procedure is to allow the reduction of staff positions because
there are fewer services being offered. (Duax v. Kern Community College Dist. (1987) 196
Cal.App.3d 555, 567-568.)

Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees

11.

As a result of Superintendent Young’s lawful decision to reduce or discontinue

particular kinds of service being provided by certain certificated employees, cause exists
under the Education Code to give notice to respondents who are identified hereafter that their
employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services
will not be needed by the district for the 2013-2014 school year.

12

Determination

12.

The charges set forth in the accusation were sustained by a preponderance of

the evidence and related to the welfare of RCOE and the students thereof. RCOE’s staff
made assignments and reassignments under Resolution 13-13 in such a manner that RCOE
employees were retained to render services which their seniority, credential and competence
entitled them to render. No RCOE employee with less seniority than any respondent will be
retained to render a service which any respondent is certificated, competent and qualified to
render.

Superintendent Young’s decision to reduce and discontinue particular kinds of

services was totally unrelated to the competence of the instructors whose employment is
subject to this economic layoff proceeding.

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that Superintendent Young give notice to Antonio Alcocer, Bobbie

Arterberry III, Yolanda Candelaria, Kathy Cathcart, Jennifer Dimaggio, Valarie Ellis-
McCurry, William Ennis, Kathleen Fate, Barbara Fragoso, Lakesha Harris, David Heard,
Eric Huber, Erika Salem, Christine Sanchez, Judy Silva, Lori Suntree, and Barbara Tuyen
that their services will not be required for the 2012-2013 school year.

DATED: May 1, 2013

________________________________
JAMES AHLER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

13

