BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
PLACER HILLS UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF PLACER
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In The Matter of the Reduction In Force of:

OAH No. 2013031030

Joyce Abbott
Dominic Brissey
Elizabeth Katsura
Jean Kelley
Jill Kirkland
Jennifer Lynn
Maureen Preston Ginty
Jon Oates
Jeff Riswold

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Dian M. Vorters, State of

California, Office of Administrative Hearings, on April 19, 2013, in Meadow Vista,
California.

Heather M. Edwards, Attorney at Law,1 represented the Placer Hills Union School

District (District). Also present was Fred Adam, Superintendent for the District.2

Andrea Price, Attorney at Law,3 represented all respondents. Also present was Mary

Ann Luckinbill, representative of the California Teacher’s Association.

1 Heather M. Edwards, Attorney at Law, Girard & Edwards, 5714 Folsom Boulevard,

Suite 218, Sacramento, California 95819.

2 Placer Hills Union School District, 16801 Placer Hills Road, Meadow Vista,

California 95722.

3 Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp Curtis & Price, 1331 Garden Highway,

Suite 300, Sacramento, California 95833-9773.

1

1.

2.

a.

b.

c.
d.

4.

Evidence was received and the case was submitted for decision.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Fred Adam is the Superintendent of the District. The actions of Mr. Adam and

the District Governing Board were taken in their official capacities.

On or before March 7, 2013, the Mr. Adams determined that funding for the

2013-2014 school year would be reduced, thereby necessitating the reduction or elimination
of particular kinds of services (PKS). On March 7, 2013, the Superintendent recommended
to the Board that certain PKS be reduced or eliminated. The Superintendent’s
recommendation to eliminate and reduce teaching services was made solely for the welfare
of students.

3.

On March 7, 2013, the Board adopted Resolution No. 9:12-13 (PKS

Resolution) which identified the particular kinds of certificated services of the District that
“shall be reduced or discontinued” before the start of the 2013-2014 school year. The PKS
resolution directed the Superintendent to send appropriate notice to all employees affected by
the Board action. The PKS comprised 15.26 full-time equivalent (FTE) probationary and
permanent employee positions, as follows:

The equivalent of five and six-tenths (5.6) FTE Kindergarten through 5th
grade multiple subject teaching services positions.
The equivalent of six and sixty-six hundredths (6.66) FTE single subject
teaching services positions (2.0 music, 2.66 physical education, 1.0 art, 1.0
mathematics).
The equivalent of two (2.0) FTE special education teaching positions.
The equivalent of one (1.0) FTE administrative services (special education
coordinator/psychologist).

On March 8, 2013, the Superintendent and his designee, Principal Steve

Schaumleffel, personally served on the affected certificated employees, notice that their
services would not be required for the ensuing 2013-2014 school year (Layoff Notice). The
Layoff Notice stated that the Superintendent had recommended to the Board that notice be
given to respondents pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. The Layoff
Notice included a copy of the PKS resolution and advised that the Board had passed the PKS
resolution in order to reduce certificated staff.

5.

Nine certificated employees who were served with a Layoff Notice timely

requested a hearing to determine if there was cause for not re-employing or reducing their
services for the ensuing school year. (Ed. Code, §44949, subd. (b).)

2

6.

On April 2, 2013, the Superintendent made and filed an Accusation against

each respondent. Respondents, through counsel, timely filed Notices of Defense to the
Accusation. (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (c)(1).)

7.

Before hearing, the District and respondents entered into a written Stipulation

that Layoff Notices issued to Jeffrey Riswold, Jonathan Oates, and Jean Kelley are rescinded.
All three employees are credentialed and competent to teach in a position based on seniority.

Layoff Determinations

8.

Mr. Adam testified at hearing about the process he used to identify teachers

affected by the PKS Resolution. Mr. Adam used a seniority list which was created from
personnel files maintained by the District. To verify the accuracy of the information, the
District mailed all certificated staff a letter in December 2012, asking them to verify data in
their personnel file. The information included their hire dates, credentials, education, and
certifications.

9.

Joyce Abbott. Ms. Abbott has a hire date of August 22, 2002. She was

identified on the basis of the PKS reduction of 5.6 FTE in Multiple Subject (M/S) classroom
teachers in Kindergarten through fifth grade. Ms. Abbott holds a professional clear M/S
credential with a Cross-cultural, Language and Academic Development (CLAD) certificate
and currently teaches second grade. No less senior employee is being retained who is
competent to render this service.

10.

Elizabeth Katsura. Ms. Katsura has a hire date of August 22, 2002. She was

identified on the basis of the PKS reduction in M/S classroom teachers in Kindergarten
through fifth grade. Ms. Katsura holds a professional clear M/S credential with a CLAD
certificate and currently teaches fifth grade. No less senior employee is being retained who
is competent to render this service.

11.

Jill Kirkland. Ms. Kirkland has a hire date of August 18, 2006. She was
identified on the basis of the PKS reduction in M/S classroom teachers in Kindergarten
through fifth grade. Ms. Kirkland holds a professional clear M/S credential with CLAD
certificate, and currently teaches fourth grade. No less senior employee is being retained
who is competent to render this service.

12.

Jennifer Lynn. Ms. Lynn has a hire date of August 18, 2004. She was

identified on the basis of the PKS reduction in M/S classroom teachers in Kindergarten
through fifth grade. Ms. Kirkland holds a professional clear M/S credential with a Specially
Designed Academic Instruction in English (SDAIE) certificate, and currently teaches fourth
grade. No less senior employee is being retained who is competent to render this service.

3

Skipping in Physical Education Instruction

13.

A school district may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in

order of seniority for either of the following reasons:

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a
1)
specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a
services credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to
provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.

(2)
For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.

(Gov. Code, § 44955, subd. (d).) The District determined to layoff a more senior teacher in
order to fulfill an identified need for a male teacher to supervise the boys locker room before
and after gym class. Respondent Marueen Ginty challenges the District’s decision to skip
over a less senior male teacher thereby displacing her in PE instruction. She argued that the
action amounts to “gender discrimination.” 4

14.

Dominic Brissey. Mr. Brissey has a hire date of January 16, 2007. He was
identified on the basis of the PKS reduction of 2.66 FTE in Single Subject (S/S) Physical
Education (PE) instruction. Mr. Brissey holds a professional clear S/S credential in PE with
a CLAD certificate. He is qualified to teach Kindergarten through 12th grade physical
education. His Bachelor’s Degree is in Kinesiology and Physical Education. Mr. Brissey
currently teaches PE full-time (1.0 FTE), at Weimar Hills Charter School, grades six, seven,
and eight, co-ed instruction. Mr. Brissey is less senior than Maureen Ginty who has a hire
date of November 18, 1996, and is qualified and competent to teach PE. (see Factual
Finding 16.) The District determined to skip Mr. Brissey on the basis of his gender, for co-
ed PE middle-school instruction. As such, two more senior female teachers, Ms. Ginty and
Nancy Arnold (hire date August 25, 1994), were laid off and re-assigned. The District did
serve Mr. Brissey with a precautionary layoff notice.

4 Gender based discrimination in employment is prohibited. Government Code

section12940, subdivision (a), states in relevant part: “It is an unlawful employment
practice, unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification, …: (a) For an employer,
because of the race, religious creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical disability,
mental disability, medical condition, genetic information, marital status, sex, gender, gender
identity, gender expression, age, or sexual orientation of any person, to refuse to hire or
employ the person or to refuse to select the person for a training program leading to
employment, or to bar or to discharge the person from employment or from a training
program leading to employment, or to discriminate against the person in compensation or in
terms, conditions, or privileges of employment.”

4

15.

Nancy Arnold. Ms. Arnold has a hire date of August 25, 1994. She was

identified on the basis of the PKS reduction in S/S PE instruction. Ms. Arnold holds a clear
S/S PE credential with SDAIE certificate. Ms. Arnold currently teaches PE and Health, full-
time at Weimar Hills School, grades four and five. A less senior employee, Mr. Brissey, is
being retained who is competent to render PE instruction. As a result of the District skipping
Mr. Brissey, Ms. Arnold will replace Ms. Ginty for .66 FTE, at Sierra Hills, PE instruction.

16. Maureen Preston Ginty. Ms. Ginty has a hire date of November 18, 1996.

She was identified on the basis of the PKS reduction in S/S PE instruction. Ms. Ginty holds
the following credentials: Clear Standard Elementary Education-Life, S/S English, SDAIE
certificate, and Specialist Credential in Special Education with AB2913. Ms. Ginty currently
teaches PE part-time (.66 FTE), at Sierra Hills School, grades one through three, co-ed
instruction. A less senior employee, Mr. Brissey, is being retained who is competent to
render PE instruction. As a result of the District skipping Mr. Brissey, Ms. Ginty will bump
into a .66 Title I Reading Specialist position at Sierra Hills.

17.

Superintendent Adam testified about the District’s decision to skip over Mr.

Brissey on the basis of his gender and the District’s need to retain a male teacher, regardless
of seniority. The District determined that adolescent middle-school boys require locker room
supervision during dress time, which occurs in the five minutes before and after PE
instruction. Seventh graders are required for the first time to change clothes in a group
setting where teasing and commenting can lead to “significant issues.” Female gym students
at Weimar Hills are supervised by a female teacher, Janet Russell. Ms. Russell has a hire
date of August 28, 1986 and holds a clear M/S credential with SDAIE certificate, and a S/S
credential in PE. She is more senior than Ms. Ginty by more than 10 years.

Mr. Adams stated that the District considered alternatives to retaining a junior gym

teacher. He met with the special education coordinator, business manager, and school
principals to consider options that were financially feasible to implement. There are very
few male teachers in the District. Most of them are single subject teachers who the District
was reluctant to take prep-time away from in order to assign them to a locker room. The
District also considered assigning a male administrator to the locker room; however, the male
principal’s work schedule could not be reworked to avail him to supervise the boys’ gym on
a daily basis. Other classified staff included only female aides on the Weimar campus so
there was no pool of male employees to pull from. Finally, the District is financially unable
to hire a male aide for the specific purpose of supervising the boys’ locker room. Mr. Adam
shared that the Board initially sought to reduce the District’s budget by $1 million and the
PKS plan only accomplished $900,000 in spending reductions for the 2013-14 school year.
Hence, hiring additional staff is out of the question.

18. Mr. Brissey testified as to his experience supervising adolescent boys in the

locker room. He has been teaching at Weimar Hills School since January 16, 2007. He
teaches PE full-time at 1.0 FTE. His day includes six gym periods, two for each of grades
six, seven, and eight. Students in seventh and eight grades are required to change before and
after gym; so four periods require locker room supervision. Mr. Brissey sits in an office that

5

has a window through which he can see into the locker room. He has been present at one
fight and harassment occurring twice a year. He believes his presence discourages the boys
from misbehaving. Mr. Brissey explained that though the students do not shower, privacy
and modesty are still important concerns. Dressing in gym clothes allows for ease of
movement and proper hygiene as hormones are changing and students may be sensitive to
body odor present in sweaty clothing.

19. Ms. Ginty testified that the District’s actions amount to unlawful gender

discrimination. She asserted that she is qualified and able to perform competently in the
position. She believes the District has determined to retain a junior teacher without
articulating a legitimate “specific need” for Mr. Brissey to teach gym class. She pointed out
that the job description for gym teachers is the same as for all other teachers, and gender-
based supervision is not articulated as an essential function. The Classroom Teacher Job
Description states, in relevant part that the “[b]asic functions include, but are not limited
to…Supervise students in out-of-classroom activities during the assigned working day.”
Ms. Ginty suggested that they could stop requiring boys to dress into and out of gym clothes.
Finally, Ms. Ginty argued that though she is a part-time teacher at Sierra Hills and Mr.
Brissey is a full-time teacher at Weimar Hills, she should be allowed to replace Mr. Brissey
at Weimar Hills for .66 FTE. It is noted that the District has offered Ms. Ginty a .66 FTE
teaching position at Sierra Hills as a Title I Reading Specialist.

20.

Creation of a Part-Time Position Not Required. A school district has

discretion to define a position as full-time and define a “service” in terms of the hours
required to perform it. (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172
Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) “[S]o long as the determination is reasonable and made in good faith,
neither section 49455 nor any other provision of the Education Code precludes a school
district from defining a position, or a ‘service,’ as full time.” (Id. at p. 344.) As such, the
District cannot be compelled to create a partial position in order to reassign Ms. Ginty to 0.66
FTE PE instruction and assign the remainder to another credentialed employee.

21.

BFOQ Analysis. As stated in Donovan v. Poway Unified School District,

“[S]chools are unlike the adult workplace and ... children may regularly interact in a manner
that would be unacceptable among adults. Indeed, at least early on, students are still learning
how to interact appropriately with their peers. It is thus understandable that, in the school
setting, students often engage in insults, banter, teasing, shoving, pushing, and gender-
specific conduct that is upsetting to the students subjected to it.” (Donovan v. Poway Unified
School Dist. (2008) 167 Cal.App.4th 567, 602.) The courts have provided school officials
with flexibility to respond to harassment without being “second guessed,” as long as their
response is not “clearly unreasonable” under the circumstances. (Ibid.) In the context of
student-on-student harassment, the school may be held liable where the behavior is severe,
pervasive, and objectively offensive such as to deny victims equal access to education.
(Ibid.)

6

22.

In employment discrimination cases on the basis of gender, personal privacy

considerations may justify a BFOQ where:

The job requires an employee to observe other individuals in a state of

(1)
nudity or to conduct body searches, and

It would be offensive to prevailing social standards to have an

(2)
individual of the opposite sex present, and

It is detrimental to the mental or physical welfare of individuals being

(3)
observed or searched to have an individual of the opposite sex present.

(Cal. Code of Regs., tit. 2, § 7290.8, subd. (b).) The employer must normally assign job
duties and make other reasonable accommodation so as to minimize the number of jobs for
which sex is a BFOQ. (Cal. Code of Regs., tit. 2, § 7290.8, subd. (c).)

23. When an employer neither explores the possibility of providing reasonable
accommodation nor provides a feasible accommodation which will serve both the privacy
concern and the interest of equal employment opportunity, the employer may have violated
the Act.5 (DFEH V. San Luis Obispo Coastal Unified School District (1998) Case No. E95-
96 L-0725-00, at p. 14.)6 In San Luis, the school district evaluated a variety of rescheduling
scenarios, none resulting in adequate supervision of the boys. This included an evaluation of
other physical education teachers available to supervise, the availability of non-core teachers,
the use of male student aides, community volunteers and supervision by a campus police
officer. The Commission found in San Luis that the school district “met its burden of
showing that reasonable accommodation was unavailable.” (Id. at p. 16.)

The District has the burden of demonstrating that reasonable accommodation was

unavailable. “Even if an employer can demonstrate that certain jobs require members of one
sex, the employer must also ‘bear the burden of proving that because of the nature of the
operation of the business they could not rearrange job responsibilities …’ in order to reduce
the BFOQ necessity.” (Bohemian Club v. Fair Employment and Housing Commission,
(1986) 187 Cal.App.3d 1, 19.)

24.

The dress requirement is important for proper hygiene, ease of movement, and

self-esteem throughout the rest of the school day. Privacy considerations support a finding
that same gender supervision of the classroom is a legitimate need at the middle school level.
The District has met its burden of demonstrating that reasonable accommodation was

5 Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA); see Government Code section 12900 et

seq.

6 Decisions of the Fair Employment and Housing Commission are entitled to great

respect. (Auburn Woods I Homeowners Ass’n v. Fair Employment and Housing Commission
(2004) 121 Cal.App.4th 1578, 1591.)

7

unavailable. The District evaluated options to retaining a less senior male PE teacher and
was not able to identify feasible options, either logistically or financially. The District has
met its burden of demonstrating a need to skip Mr. Brissey for 1.0 middle-school PE
instruction. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).)

25.

Except as provided by statute, no other permanent or probationary certificated
employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service which respondent and other
noticed teachers are certificated and competent to render. As between employees who first
rendered paid service to the District on the same date, the order of termination will be based
solely on the needs of the District and the students thereof. The District was not required to
apply tie-break criteria as part of the layoff process.

26.

The District’s reductions of PKS and certificated employees relate solely to

the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955. The decision to reduce or discontinue these services is neither
arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of discretion of the District.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Applicable Laws

44949 and 44955 were met.

1.

2.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections

The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next school

year is an appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955. As stated in San
Jose Teachers Assn v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of particular
kinds of services on the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that section,
and, “in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff,
section 44955 is the only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that
reduction.” The District must be solvent to provide educational services and cost savings are
necessary to resolve its financial crisis. The Superintendent’s decision to reduce particular
kinds of services was a proper exercise of his discretion.

3.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

4.

The Layoff Notices sent to respondents indicated the statutory basis for the

reduction of services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due process.
(San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara Federation

8

of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The description of services to
be reduced, both in the Board Resolution and in the Layoff Notices, adequately described
particular kinds of services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.)

5.

Education Code section 44955 provides that when certificated employees face

layoffs due to reduction or elimination of PKS, the District has an affirmative obligation to
reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions held by junior teachers,
if the senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to occupy such positions. The
intent of the Legislation is clearly to prevent school districts from laying off senior teachers
while retaining junior teachers. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c) provides in
pertinent part:

Services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of
the order in which they were employed... The governing board
shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that
employees shall be retained to render any service which their
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render…

6.

The District appropriately considered all positively assured attrition which

occurred during the computation period prior to submitting the PKS Resolution to the Board
for its approval. As set forth in Factual Finding 7, the District rescinded notices of layoff to
three certificated employees before hearing.

7.

As set forth in Factual Findings 21 through 24, the District skipped middle

school physical education teacher Dominic Brissey solely on the basis of his gender and the
perceived need to have a male physical education teacher available to supervise the boys’
locker room at the beginning and at the end of each period. A district is allowed to skip an
employee after “demonstrating a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or
course of study...” (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).) The District met its burden of
demonstrating such need.

8.

The District appropriately applied bumping rules and allowed bumping based
upon the more senior employee holding a credential or authorization to teach the assignment
of the less senior teacher.

9.

The services identified in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of services
that can be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. Cause exists for
the reduction of the particular kinds of services and for the reduction of full-time equivalent
certificated positions at the end of the 2013-2014 school year pursuant to Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates
solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.
Therefore, cause exists to give respondents notice that their services will be reduced or will
not be required for the ensuing 2013-2014 school year.

9

RECOMMENDATION

Cause exists for the reduction of 15.26 full-time equivalent certificated positions at

the end of the 2012-2013 school year. Notice shall be given to respondents that their
services will be reduced or will not be required for the ensuing 2013-2014 school year,
because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services. Notice shall be
given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: April 26, 2013

____________________________
DIAN M. VORTERS
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

