BEFORE
THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
SAN BERNARDINO CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Proposed Reduction in
Force Proceeding Involving:

OAH No. 2013030854

Certificated Employees of the San
Bernardino City Unified School District
Who Received Preliminary Layoff Notices
for the 2013-2014 School Year,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of

California, heard this matter in San Bernardino, California, on April 18, 2013.

Todd M. Robbins and David E. Robinette, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Rudd & Romo,

represented the San Bernardino Unified City School District.

Carlos R. Perez and Angela Serranzana, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, and Joseph Colton,

CTA Attorney Emeritus, represented all respondents who appeared.

No respondent represented himself or herself.

The matter was submitted on April 18, 2013.

The San Bernardino City School District

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The San Bernardino City Unified School District (the District) serves the

educational needs of the community within the City of San Bernardino and a portion of the
City of Highland. The District provides traditional educational services and instruction to
students from preschool through 12th grades, along with various alternative and adult
education programs. The District operates and maintains six comprehensive high schools, 10

1

middle schools, 45 elementary schools, three special education schools, one adult school, and
three alternative programs. Ten schools within the District offer a Dual Immersion program
in which students receive instruction and practice in the core curriculum in English and
Spanish. The District provides Career Technical Education and Regional Occupational
Program (ROP) courses that prepares students for: (1) entry-level employment, (2) higher-
level skills due to new and changing technologies, and/or (3) enrollment in more advanced
training programs consistent with local employment demands.

The District currently has an enrollment of approximately 50,000 students, making it

the eighth largest school district in California. Enrollment is relatively stable.

The District employs about 2,700 certificated employees. The salaries and benefits of

these and other District employees comprise about 85 percent of the District’s annual
expenditures. The District maintains a balanced budget and does not project a shortfall for
the 2013-2014 school year. However, a federal school improvement program that provided
$19 million in annual funding, a great deal of which was used to fund salaries, terminates at
the end of this year, which resulted in the need for an elimination or reduction in particular
kinds of services being provided by the District.

2.

The District is governed by an elected seven member Board of Education.

Dale Marsden, Ed.D. is the Board’s Chief Executive Officer and the Superintendent of
Schools. Harold J. Vollkommer, Ed.D. is the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources.

The Fiscal Crisis

3.

Public schools rely on financing from the State of California. A school district

cannot determine the level of state funding it will receive from the State of California until
the state budget is chaptered, an event that is supposed to occur each year in late June.
Before then, a school district’s governing board, which has the duty to produce and file a
balanced budget with the County Office of Education, must take steps to ensure that financial
ends meet if the worst-case financial scenario develops.

California’s economic problems have had a crippling impact on the San Bernardino
City Unified School District and on most other public school districts. If the District cannot
meet its financial obligations, the San Bernardino County Office of Education has the
authority to intervene and take over the District’s operations.

The District’s Response

4.

In response to the economic crisis, District administrators reviewed

expenditures, programs, services and staffing. The District embarked upon a program to
reduce its budget. The District reduced expenditures for supplies, conferences and
administrative and staff positions. The District reluctantly concluded that it was also
necessary to further trim expenditures by reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services
that were being provided by credentialed employees.

2

5.

On March 5, 2013, following a review of the budgetary situation and financial

projections for the 2013-2014 school year, Superintendent Marsden recommended to the
Board of Education that preliminary notices be given to a number of certificated employees
to advise them that their services would not be required in the 2013-2014 school year and to
give the reason for that recommendation.

6.

On March 5, 2013, the Board adopted the following resolution:

the Board of Education of

WHEREAS,
the San
Bernardino City Unified School District has determined
that it is in the best interests of the District and the
welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof that the
particular kinds of services set forth herein must be
reduced or discontinued due to financial conditions; and

WHEREAS, it is the opinion of the Board that because
of the aforementioned reason, the number of certificated
employees of the District must be reduced; and

this

WHEREAS,
certificated
reduction of
employees is not based upon reduction of average daily
attendance during the past two years; and

regular

WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a
significant population of English language learners with
specialized educational needs, a specific and compelling
need exists to employ and retain certificated employees
who have formal (not emergency) authorization to teach
English Learner (“EL”) students, as determined by the
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, and
the special training and experience that comes therewith;
and

WHEREAS, State law mandates that each failure to staff
a classroom containing one or more EL students with a
certificated employee possessing an appropriate EL
authorization is “misassignment” subject to sanction by
the County Superintendent of Schools; and

WHEREAS, compliance with the provisions of the No
Child Left Behind Act
the Williams
Settlement, and Education Code section 44253.1 require
that students be served by certificated employees with
appropriate EL authorizations; and

(“NCLB”),

3

WHEREAS, the needs of the District and the students
thereof should not and cannot be adequately served by
concentrating EL students in particular classrooms in
such a manner as to lessen the need for certificated
employees with EL authorizations; and

WHEREAS, EL authorizations are not
school counselors, nurses, psychologists; and

required for

Education Code

44955(d)
WHEREAS,
authorizes this Board to deviate from terminating a
certificated employee in order of seniority for the above
reasons, if necessary.

section

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Board
of Education of the San Bernardino City Unified School
District as follows:

A.
That the particular kinds of services set forth
below be reduced or eliminated commencing in the
2013-2014 school year:

Elementary (Trans. Kindergarten – 6) Teaching
Services
High School Counselor Services
High School Math Teaching Services
High School English Teaching Services
High School Social Studies Teaching Services
High School Physical Science Teaching Services
High School Biology Teaching Services
High School Chemistry Teaching Services
High School Physical Education Teaching Services
High School Spanish Teaching Services
High School Construction/Trades Building Teaching
Services
Secondary Music Teaching Services
Middle School Math Teaching Services
Middle School English Teaching Services
Middle School Social Studies Teaching Services
Middle School Science Teaching Services
Middle School Spanish Teaching Services
Middle School Physical Education Teaching Services
Total Certificated Positions

4

98

6
10
17
6
1
4
2
2
1
1

1
3
5
3
2
1
3
166

F.T.E.

F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.

F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.
F.T.E.

B.
That due to the reduction or elimination of
particular kinds of services, the corresponding number of
certificated employees of the District shall be terminated
pursuant to Education Code section 44955.

That the reduction of certificated staff be
C.
achieved by the termination of regular employees and
not by terminating temporary and substitute employees.

That “competency” as described in Education

D.
Code section 44955(b) for the purposes of bumping shall
necessarily include: (1) possession of a valid credential
in the relevant subject matter area; (2) for bumping a
holder of a Single Subject credential in a
departmentalized course in grades 7-12, an equivalent
Single Subject credential authorizing service in all grades
7-12; (3) “highly qualified” status under the No Child
Left Behind Act in the area to be assigned (if required by
the position); and (4) an appropriate (not emergency) EL
authorization (if required by the position).

That, as between certificated employees, with the

E.
same seniority date, the order of termination shall be
determined solely by Board-adopted criteria.

That the District Superintendent or designee is

F.
directed to initiate layoff procedures and give appropriate
notice pursuant to Education Code sections 44955 and
44949.

The Particular Kinds of Services

7.

The services identified in this resolution were the kinds of services that could

be reduced under the Education Code.

The Board’s passing of the resolution was neither arbitrary nor capricious. Its
enactment was well within the Board’s discretion; no particular kind of service was lowered
to a level below that mandated by state or federal law and the enactment of the resolution
related solely to the economic situation and the Board’s duty to balance the budget. It was,
to that extent, in the best interest of the District and the students thereof.

The District’s Seniority List

8.

The District maintains a seniority list, a constantly evolving document that is
updated as new certificated employees are hired and as other certificated employees retire,

5

resign or otherwise become separated from District service. The District’s seniority list is a
spreadsheet that is organized from the District’s most senior certificated employee to the
most recently hired certificated employee. The list contains each employee’s seniority
number, name, seniority date, tie-breaking number when appropriate, contract status
(tenured, probationary, or intern), position, subject matter taught, type(s) of credential,
credential status, and the date of the credential’s expiration.

9.

In December 2012, the District’s staff began a laborious review of the

seniority list to make certain it was correct. A copy of the list was sent to the San Bernardino
Teachers Association with a request that the list be provided to all members for review.
During the course of the review, it was discovered that the seniority list provided an original
seniority date for several employees who had resigned from employment with the District
and thereafter returned to employment following their resignation, rather than setting forth a
new seniority date based on the date of their return to employment. The seniority list was
amended to provide these employees with a seniority date consistent with their most recent
date of hire, as required under Education Code section 44848. The employment status of
those employees whose seniority date were changed as a result of the discovery of this error
is not affected in this reduction in force proceeding. Whenever any error was discovered and
whenever any new information came to light that affected the seniority list, the seniority list
was revised. The updated seniority list was used thereafter to determine who should and
should not receive a preliminary layoff notice.

Tie-Breaking Criteria

10.
resolution:

On March 5, 2013, the Board also adopted the following tie-breaking

WHEREAS, Education Code section 44955, subsection
(b), related to certificated layoffs, provides in relevant
part, “[a]s between employees who first rendered paid
service to the district on the same date, the governing
board shall determine the order of termination solely on
the basis of need of the district and the students thereof;”

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that based
upon the needs of the District and the students thereof, in
the event of a certificated layoff the following criteria
shall be applied in order based on information on file as
of February 1, one step at a time until the tie is broken, to
resolve ties in seniority between certificated employees:

Highly Qualified Status under NCLB in area of

1.
assignment.

6

Total number of Clear, Preliminary, and Intern

2.
credentials.

Possession of a Clear Single Subject credential in

3.
the following areas, in order of priority:

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

A.

B.

A.

B.

a.
b.
c.
d.

Special Education
Math
Science
Social Science
English
Other

Special Education
Math
Science
Social Science
English
Other

Possession of a Preliminary Single Subject

4.
credential in the following areas, in order of priority:

5.
Possession of Clear Credentials and EL
certification in the following order of priority:

BCLAD

CLAD/SB 395 or equivalent

Persons with Preliminary Credentials and EL

6.
certification in the following order of priority:

BCLAD

CLAD/SB 395 or equivalent

7.
Possession of Clear Credential and a
supplemental authorization to teach in the following
areas, in order of priority:

Math
Science
Social Science
English

7

e.

Other

8.
Possession of a Preliminary Credential and a
supplemental authorization to teach in the following
areas, in order of priority:

Math
Science
Social Science
English
Other

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

a.
b.
c.
d.

Credential status in area of assignment, in order

9.
of priority:

Clear, Life, Standard Secondary, etc.
Preliminary
Intern
Provisional, STC, other

Total number of supplementary authorizations in

10.
different subject areas.

11.
Number of years of credentialed teaching
experience prior to employment with District, as
indicated by initial salary schedule placement.

Possession of a Masters Degree, earliest date

12.
prevails.

Total number of post-secondary credits on file

13.
with the District by February 1.

14.
If ties cannot be broken by using the above
criteria then order of seniority shall be determined by a
random drawing among employees in the individual tie.

The Issuance of Preliminary Layoff Notices/Jurisdictional Documents

11.

Using the updated seniority list, the aforementioned resolution related to the

termination or reduction of particular kinds of services, the tie-breaking resolution, and
considering all positive attrition, the District’s administrative staff identified those employees
who should receive preliminary layoff notices and those who should not. Whenever an
employee providing a particular kind of service that was being eliminated or reduced was
identified as being in line to receive a preliminary layoff notice due to a lack of seniority, that

8

employee’s seniority and credentials were carefully examined to determine whether that
employee had the seniority and credentials to “bump” a junior employee and assume the
position that was being held by the more junior employee.

Bumping

12.

The District prepared a “bump analysis” and a tie-breaker matrix to confirm

that an employee believed to be subject to receipt of a preliminary layoff notice as a result of
the elimination or reduction of the particular kind of service that employee was providing
could not bump a more junior employee. If the employee held the seniority, credential and
competency to bump into a position being held by another, that employee “bumped” the
more junior employee. Thereafter, the more junior employee’s seniority, credential and
competency were evaluated to determine if that employee could, in the same fashion,
“bump” into a position that was being held by an employee who was even less senior.

Service of Preliminary Layoff Notices and Notices of Hearing

13.

The District timely served preliminary layoff notices on 161 certificated

employees and precautionary layoff notices on seven other certificated employees, each of
whom was served with an Accusation, Statement to Respondent, blank Notice of Defense
forms, and relevant sections of the Education Code and Government Code.

Thereafter, the District timely served all respondents with a Notice of Hearing, setting

the hearing in the reduction in force proceeding for April 18, 2013, to commence at 9:00
a.m., at the San Bernardino High School auditorium in San Bernardino, California.

The Administrative Hearing

14.

On April 18, 2013, the record in the reduction in force proceeding was opened.

Jurisdictional documents were introduced; the caption was amended to delete any

reference to an accusation; opening comments were waived; a written stipulation concerning
jurisdictional and evidentiary matters was received and marked as ALJ 1; a stipulation regarding
the receipt of the District’s exhibits was received; sworn testimony related to the District’s
operations and the reduction in force proceeding was given by Assistant Superintendent
Vollkommer; and documentary evidence was provided. Among other matters, Dr. Vollkommer
testified that the District made an error by failing to serve one probationary employee with a
preliminary layoff notice due to District staff’s mistaken belief that the employee would receive
a notice of non-election, an event that did not occur. To correct this mistake and preserve the
right of the most senior employee impacted by this mistake to retain employment, the District
rescinded and withdrew the preliminarily layoff notices served upon Mary Bell Van Der Noord
and others be dismissed, to which there was no objection. The rescission of these notices was
based on each individual’s right to employment based upon that employee’s seniority,
credentials and competence as defined in the resolution. These employees were not included in
the final layoff list that is set forth in the recommendation that follows. Following the taking of

9

evidence, closing comments were given; the record was closed; and the matter was submitted.

The Reduction in Force Proceeding

15.

The Board of Education’s enactment of the resolution related to the

termination or reduction of particular kinds of services was the result of a budgetary
situation; it was enacted in good faith; the tie-breaking criteria were reasonable and were
applied in an evenhanded manner; and enacting the resolution was in the best interest of the
District and its students based on all the circumstances. The District used seniority and
credentials as the basis for “bumping” and retaining the services of the most senior,
appropriately credentialed employees. No junior employee was retained to provide services
that a more senior, competent employee could provide. The District complied with all
jurisdictional requirements.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Statutory Authority - Reduction in Force Proceedings

1.

Education Code section 44949 provides in part:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee . . . that it has been recommended that the notice be
given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.

[¶] . . . [¶]

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . .

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the

10

governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency
therein, except that all of the following shall apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any,
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation
and he or she shall be notified of this five-day period for filing
in the accusation.

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the
Government Code shall be available only if request is made
therefor within 15 days after service of the accusation, and the
notice required by Section 11505 of the Government Code shall
so indicate.

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be
prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds . . .

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the
employee. . . .

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) any
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the
Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) which

11

occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which
occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be
extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides in part:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her
position for causes other than those specified . . . and no
probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position
for cause other than as specified . . .

(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school
year . . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the
district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in
the district, the governing board may terminate the services of
not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at
the close of the school year. Except as otherwise provided by
statute, the services of no permanent employee may be
terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less
seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render . . .

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any
employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would
not exist without such a requirement.

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given before
the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and

12

services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of
the order in which they were employed, as determined by the
board in accordance with the provisions of Sections 44844 and
44845. In the event that a permanent or probationary employee
is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the
ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments
in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any
service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to
render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not
previously taught, and for which he or she does not have a
teaching credential or which is not within the employee’s major
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject
matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of
seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to
teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide services
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that
the certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide
those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the
laws.

Jurisdiction

3.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied
as to all respondents.

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

4.

A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service should be
reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the governing board acted unfairly

13

or improperly simply because it made a decision it was empowered to make. (Rutherford v.
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.) A school board’s decision to reduce or
discontinue a particular kind of service need not be tied in with any statistical computation.
It is within the discretion of a school board to determine the amount by which it will reduce
or discontinue a particular kind of service as long as the school district does not reduce a
service below the level required by law. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144
Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)

5.

A preliminary notice that provides designations of categories of services that

are to be reduced or eliminated but does not identify the specific positions subject to the
notice is sufficient if it specifies the statutory grounds. The failure to identify specific
positions subject to reduction or elimination is not fatal. Since the March 15 notice is only
the initial step in the termination process, it is not required that it specify the precise number
of teachers to be terminated or the specific positions to be eliminated. The specific positions
(San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen, supra, at p. 632.)
to be eliminated need not be identified.

Seniority, Bumping, Skipping

6.

Seniority: Under Education Code section 44845, seniority is determined by

the date a certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”

7.

Education Code section 44846 provides in part: “The governing board shall
have power and it shall be its duty to correct any errors discovered from time to time in its
records showing the order of employment.”

8.

The Statutory Scheme: Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff

statute, provides in subdivision (b), in part:

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while . . . any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is
certificated and competent to render.

Essentially this statutory language provides “bumping” rights for senior certificated

and competent employees, and “skipping” authority to retain junior employees who are
certificated and competent to render services which more senior employees are not.

9.

Bumping: The district has an obligation under Section 44955, subdivision (b),

to determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be
assigned to another position. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th
127, 136-137.)

14

Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees

10.

As a result of the Board of Education’s lawful elimination and reduction of

particular kinds of service, cause exists under the Education Code to authorize the District to
give final notice to those respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment will
be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed
by the District for the 2013-2014 school year.

Determination

11.

The charges that were alleged in this layoff proceeding were sustained by a

preponderance of the evidence. The District’s rescission and withdrawal of the preliminary
layoff notices served on several employees who were entitled to retain their employment
status as a result of their seniority, credentials and competence under the applicable
resolutions was ratified. The Board of Education’s enactment of the resolutions applicable in
this reduction in force proceeding was related to the welfare of the District and its pupils as a
result of budgetary circumstances. The District made necessary assignments and
reassignments in such a manner that the most senior credentialed employees were retained to
render services that their seniority and qualifications entitled them to provide.

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the Board of Trustees of the San Bernardino City Unified

School District issue final layoff notices to the following certificated employees:

Melissa Abbot; Marisela Alas-Negri; Maribel Alba; Esmeralda Alcantar; Clarissa
Amaya; Elizabeth Angulo; Valerie Applegate; Sarahi Arreguin-Fuentes; Francisco
Banchon; Jennie Barranco; Orlando Luis Beltran; Joyella Jane Beuler; Sarah E. Beyer;
Clinton Black; Kristina Blacksher; Tamara V. Bonn; Andrea Bothum; Liliana Brito;
Eboni Brown; Veronica C. Camargo; Kimberly Leanne Campbell; Victoria Carlstrom;
Amber Carney; Wendi Carson; Heidy F. Cartwright; Belinda Casanova; Rob J. Clobes;
Janett Corral Cabral; Michael Corse; Sharon M. Cowley; Joelle Imauni Crockett;
Anthony Sean Davis, Jr.; Cassandra Dean; Kristen M. Dean; Quinton D. Doswell III;
Stephanie Downing; Desiree M. Dragna; Kent A. Drinkwater; Sonia D’Souza; Elaine
Duag; Andrea DuMoulin; Samuel Duran; Diana Enciso; Angel Escalante Butterfield;
Francisco Escobedo; Robyn Esparza; Irena A. Esqueda; Malissa Esquibel; Stephanie
Estrada; Frank Fabela III; Magda A. Gadsby; Diana Garcia; Helen Garcia; Daisy Glass;
Erika Gonzalez; Melody Gonzalez; Stephanie Gonzalez; Laura Gordon; David Guy;
Yosan Hailemariam; Debra L. Hamilton; JoAnne C. Hammer; Norma Hernandez-Duarte;
Neil R. Hicken; Talena Hill Jackson; Brian L. Hoehn; Ashley Holeman; Jamie Hose;
Marisela Huerta; Precious Ighodaro; Maria Jimenez-Garcia; Jennifer Jones; Ileana Juarez;
Sheena Kane; Kyle Klimenko; Erica Zepeda Korzonek; Gregory Kuld; Nicole D. Ladson;
Cindy Lieu; Tina Lingenfelter; Yvette Yamille Lopez; Amanda Lower; Kimberly L.
Ludwig; Julia Macias; Vergine Makhmudyan; Sandra Mancha; Stefanie Marin; Renita

15

Marshall; Marrina R. Martin; Oliver Martinez; Oana Matei; Marisol Meaca; Cynthia S.
Medina; Suyapa Melendez; Nancy Lisella Mena; Katie Moneta; Daniel Montejano;
Viridiana Mora; Denise Moreno; Kimberly Muller; Thomas St. Francis Muller; Judy
Nava; Charles James Neighbours; Thai Phi Nguyen; Nicole R. Ocasio; Diana V. Olivo;
Paulette Ortega; Meghan Palazewski; Candace N. Parks; Janet Parrish; Clynton H.
Parsons; Sarah Perez; Kristina Pinedo; Allison Plebani; Julie A. Quintana; Yeraldin
Quintero Lopez; Chelsea P. Ramirez; Melissa Yong Ramirez; Nancy V. Reyes;
Cassandra Ries; Erika Rios; Stephanie Patrice Robinson; Beatriz Rodriguez; Kimberly
Rodriguez; Sonia Rodriguez; Ana Ruvalcaba; Phillip Anthony San Angelo; Sandra
Sassaman; Jeremy Sauer; Brice Scott; Diana L. Serna; Chelse Serrano; Aimee Slowinski;
Kelsey Smith; Trudy L. Smith; Vanee Smith; Jessica M. Solis; Marcus B. Soward;
Valerie A. Spencer; Sarah M. Stottlemeyer; Kristin N. Terrazas; NeChe Thompson;
Oscar Torres; Rachel Torres; Cecilia Torres-Escobedo; Linda Tran; Mariana Trujillo;
Laura Vega; Sara Veronick; Maria Villalobos; Vanessa Villegas; Kelly Walters; Nyesha
Danielle Williams; Kindra Wilson; Jennifer Lynn Yates; and Liset Zavala.

Dated: April 23, 2013

________________________________
JAMES AHLER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

16

