In the Matter of the Accusation Against

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE
WILSONA SCHOOL DISTRICT,

OAH No. 2013030938

BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
WILSONA SCHOOL DISTRICT

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter came on regularly for hearing on April 25, 2013, in Lake Los Angeles,
California, before H. Stuart Waxman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California.

James B. Furnow, Attorney at Law, represented the Wilsona School District

(District).

Paul Scott, Regional Inserv Staff, Political Organizer Region III/IV of the California

Teachers Association represented Respondents, Maria Aguilar, Tracie Banner, Lorrie
Bauder, Pat McGuire, Darcell Nilsson, Marcia Saldana, Anne Stanley, and Raymond
Strasser-King (Respondents).

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and has

given Respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2013-2014 school year.
Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not
reemploying them for the 2013-2014 school year.

Oral and documentary evidence was presented at the hearing, and the matter was

submitted for decision on the hearing date.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.
capacity.

Superintendent Teresa A. Grey (Grey) filed the Accusation in her official

2.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

1

3.

On February 21, 2013, the Governing Board of the District (Governing Board)

adopted Resolution Number 2012-13-10, reducing or discontinuing the following services
for the 2013-2014 school year:

Classroom Instructors, Grades K-8
Resource Specialist Program, Special Education Teachers
Instructional Coaches
Intervention Teachers

Service

Total

FTE1 Reduction

5.33
0.83
2.00
2.00

10.16

4.

Superintendent Grey thereafter provided written notice to the Governing

Board and to Respondents that she recommended the termination of Respondents’ services
for the 2013-2014 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

5.

On March 6 and 7, 2013, the District provided notice to Respondents that their
services will not be required for the 2013-2014 school year due to the reduction of particular
kinds of services. Respondents thereafter filed timely requests for hearing.

6.

On or about March 26, 2013, the District filed and served the Accusation and

other required documents on Respondents. Respondents thereafter filed timely notices of
defense, seeking a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the
2013-2014 school year.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

The services set forth in Factual Finding Number 3 are particular kinds of

services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code
section 44955.2

9.

The District seeks to reduce projected spending due to the uncertainty

associated with State funding and potential reductions in such funds. The Governing Board’s
decision to reduce or discontinue the services set forth in Factual Finding Number 3 is not
arbitrary or capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the District’s discretion in light of
such potential loss of revenue.

7.

8.

///

1 Full-time equivalent position.

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

2

10.

The reduction of services set forth in Factual Finding Number 3, in the context

of potential revenue losses and the need to provide services if such losses materialize, is
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease
the number of certificated employees as determined by the Governing Board.

11.

On February 21, 2013, the Governing Board adopted Resolution 2012-13-09,
setting forth its tie-breaking criteria for employees with the same seniority date. In pertinent
part, the Resolution provides:

WHEREAS, as among employees who first rendered paid service to the
District on the same date, the law requires the Governing Board to determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of the needs of the District and its
students; and

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that the specific criteria used in
determining this need shall be as follows, but not necessarily listed in the order
of importance:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

CLAD – 1 point
BCLAD – 1 point
Clear Special Education Credential – 1 point
Clear Multiple Subject Credential/Life Credential – 1 point
Clear Single Subject Credential – 1 point per credential
Supplemental Authorizations – 1 point per authorization
National Board Certification – 1 point
Masters Degree – 1 point each
Doctorate Degree – 1 point each

12.

Respondents Lorrie Bauder (Bauder) and Darcell Nilsson (Nilsson) share the
same first date of paid service with the District. Respondent Nilsson holds a Crosscultural,
Language and Academic Development (CLAD) certificate. Respondent Bauder holds a
Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English (SDAIE) certificate.

13. The District applied its tie-breaking criteria to Respondents Bauder and Nilsson.
Because the CLAD and the SDAIE certificates authorize Bauder and Nilsson to perform the
same functions with/for English learners, each teacher was awarded one tie-breaking point
for her respective certificate, even though SDAIE was not specifically listed as a tie-breaking
criterion in Resolution Number 2012-13-09. The application of the tie-breaking criteria, with
one point awarded to Bauder for her SDAIE, resulted in a tie. Had Bauder not been awarded
the point for SDAIE, Nilsson would have been deemed the more senior employee by one
point.

///

3

14.

Thereafter, the District conducted a lottery to break the tie. Playing cards were

drawn by or on behalf of Bauder and Nilsson.3 The teacher drawing the highest card was
deemed to have the greater seniority. Bauder drew the higher card and was awarded the
greater seniority. She was therefore retained for the 2013-2014 school year.

15.

The tie-breaking criteria were improperly considered. Code section 44955,

subdivision (b) states in relevant part:

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine the
order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the district and
the students thereof. Upon the request of any employee whose order
of termination is so determined, the governing board shall furnish in
writing no later than five days prior to the commencement of the
hearing held in accordance with Section 44949, a statement of the
specific criteria used in determining the order of termination and
the application of the criteria in ranking each employee relative to
the other employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to give
affected employees any legal right or interest that would not exist
without such a requirement.
(Emphasis added.)

16.

Section 44955, subdivision (b) mandates a district to furnish the “specific

criteria” it intends to use in the event of a tie in seniority. The District had the opportunity to
include SDAIE in its tie-breaking criteria but chose against it. Although the CLAD and
SDAIE authorizations are functionally equivalent, each must be set forth in the resolution in
order to be considered as a tie-breaking criterion. To hold otherwise would permit other,
more disparate criteria to be added to tie-breaking resolutions after the fact, an act that would
violate the statute and lead to uncertainty in breaking ties between certificated employees
with the same first date of paid service. In this case, had the tie-breaking criteria been
correctly applied, Nilsson would have been retained as the more senior employee, and the
need for the lottery would have been obviated.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and

44955, by reason of Factual Finding Numbers 1 through 7.

///

3 Respondent Nilsson was unable to attend the lottery due to an injury. A card was

drawn on Nilsson’s behalf by a District employee.

4

2.

The services listed in Factual Finding Number 3 are determined to be

particular kinds of services within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of Factual
Finding Numbers 3 and 8.

3.

Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the reduction of the

particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding Number 3, which cause relates solely
to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils, by reason of Factual Finding Number 1
through 10.

4.

The number of certificated employees to be given final layoff notice depends

on the service reductions. As Section 44955, subdivision (b), states, “[w]henever a particular
kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following
school year . . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall become
necessary to decrease the number of permanent employees of the district, the governing
board may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the
certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the
school year. . . .” (Emphasis added.)

5.

With the exception of Respondent, Darcell Nilsson, cause exists to terminate
the services provided by Respondents, by reason of Factual Finding Numbers 1 through 16
and Legal Conclusion Numbers 1 through 4.

6.

Cause does not exist to terminate the services provided by Respondent, Darcell

Nilsson, by reason of Factual Finding Numbers 1 through 16.

ORDER

1.

The Accusation is sustained as to all Respondents except Darcell Nilsson, and
the District may notify all Respondents except Darcell Nilsson, that their services will not be
needed during the 2013-2014 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

2.

The Accusation is dismissed as to Respondent Darcell Nilsson. The District

shall retain Darcell Nilsson for the 2013-2014 school year.

Dated: ______________________

____________________________
H. STUART WAXMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

