BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
EASTSIDE UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Layoffs Of:

Edwige Beleno
Employees,

and Other Certificated

Case No. 2013030790

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Samuel D. Reyes, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard

this matter on April 17, 2013, in Lancaster, California.

Salvador O. Holguin, Jr., Attorney at Law, represented Dr. Mark E. Marshall

(Marshall), Superintendent of the Eastside Union School District (District).

Lillian Kae, Attorney at Law, represented Edwige Beleno (Beleno), Ann Chapman
(Chapman), Krystal Day (Day), Kathryn Devine (Devine), Ramon Flores (Flores), Dianna
Garcia (Garcia), Floreen Guluarte-Silva (Guluarte-Silva), Carrie McBryant (McBryant), Cheryl
Meek (Meek), Debra Morga (Morga), Jessica Mountz (Mountz), Lorena Quiros (Quiros),
Tammy Riddle (Riddle), Claudia Roediger (Roediger), Jeanette Sandoval (Sandoval), Julia
Saravia (Saravia), Arlene Thomas (Thomas), and Jessica Winchell (Winchell), who are
collectively referred to as Respondents.

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and has
given Respondents and other certificated employees of the District notice of its intent not to
reemploy them for the 2013-2014 school year. Respondents requested a hearing for a
determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2013-2014 school year.

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing. The record was left open
for the submission of closing briefs. On April 23, 2013, the District submitted a closing brief,
which has been marked for identification as Exhibit 15. The matter was submitted for decision
on April 23, 2013.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.
2.

Superintendent Marshall filed the Accusation in his official capacity.
Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

3.

On March 11, 2013, the Governing Board of the District (Governing Board)
adopted Resolution number 12-13-16, reducing or discontinuing the following services for the
2013-2014 school year:

Service

FTE1 Positions

Reduction of TK through 6th Grade Instructional Services
Discontinue Middle School 7/8 Intervention Instructional Services
Discontinue Middle School Technology Support Services
Discontinue Industrial and Technology Education Instructional Services

23.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

26.0

Total

8.

9.

4.

On March 11, 2013, Superintendent Marshall notified the Governing Board that
he had recommended that notice be provided to Respondents that their services will not be
required for the 2013-2014 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

5.

On March 13, 2013, the District provided notice to Respondents that their
services will not be required for the 2013-2014 school year due to the reduction of particular
kinds of services. Respondents thereafter timely requested hearings.

6.

On March 22, 2013, Superintendent Marshall issued the Accusation and other
required documents, including the Notice of Hearing, and served them on Respondents on the
same date.

7.

Respondents filed timely Notices of Defense. While Respondents Chapman,
Meek, Quiros, Riddle, Roediger, Sandoval, and Saravia filed Notices of Defense before the
Accusation had been served, the District accepted the early filings as valid.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code2 section 44955.

1 Full-time equivalent.

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

2

10.

The Governing Board took action to reduce the services set forth in factual
finding number 3 primarily because of uncertainty about future funding. The decision to reduce
or discontinue the particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a
proper exercise of the District's discretion.

11.

The reduction or discontinuance of services set forth in factual finding number 3,
in the context of the financial uncertainty and potential decline in revenue and the need to
continue to provide services to its students, is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils,
and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by
the Governing Board.

12.

On February 12, 2013, the Governing Board adopted Resolution 12-13-15,
setting forth the criteria to determine seniority among employees who first rendered paid
service in a probationary position on the same date (tie-breaking criteria). The following criteria
were listed, in order of priority: credential status in the area of the current assignment;
possession of a clear or preliminary authorization to teach English Language Learners; breadth
of clear and preliminary credentials and authorizations, permitting assignment in the widest
range of teaching assignments; possession of specified credentials and subject matter
authorizations, in order of priority; number of years of certificated employee experience in the
District; academic degrees from an accredited institution of higher education; number of total
semester units at an accredited institution of higher education after earning a Bachelor’s
Degree. Subcriteria were listed in order of priority in five of the seven criteria. If ties remained
after the foregoing criteria were applied, then seniority would be determined by the drawing of
lots. The criteria are reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of certificated
employees. The District used the criteria to determine the order of termination of Respondents,
and the application of the criteria was not challenged by any Respondent.

13.

Resolution 12-13-16 contained the following paragraph: “WHEREAS, in order
for an employee serving in a position identified for reduction or discontinuance to be eligible
for reassignment to a position held by an employee with less seniority, the senior employee
must be both credentialed and competent to render the service currently being performed by the
junior employee pursuant to Education Code Section[s] 44955, 44956, and 44957. For purposes
of implementing this Resolution, a more senior employee is defined as competent for
reassignment into a position currently held by a more junior employee, if he or she currently
possesses a clear, preliminary credential,
including supplementary or subject matter
authorizations, or the equivalent standard or general credentials, have authorization to teach
English Learner (“EL”) students as determined by the California Commission on Teacher
Credentialing and be able to perform such services without Board authorization, in the
subject(s), grade level, or service area to which the employee will be assigned at the beginning

3

14.

of the 2013-2014 school year. In addition, the following criteria shall apply to the Alternative
Education Academy Instructional Services: the more senior employee must have at least one
year experience in the specific service area within the preceding five (5) years.” (Exh. 1, at p.2.)
The District wishes to retain Thomas York (York), an employee junior to
Respondents Beleno (who has a seniority date of September 23, 2008), Guluarte-Silva
(December 8, 2008), and Mountz (August 4, 2011), to teach at the Alternative Education
Academy (Academy). York holds a clear multiple subject credential, as do Respondents
Beleno, Guluarte-Silva, and Mountz. York was hired at the start of the 2010-2011 school year
as a substitute teacher. On December 5, 2011, his first day of paid service in a professional
capacity, he was hired to teach at the Academy, a position that had been posted for certificated
employees to apply.

15.

The Academy is a self-contained classroom for students in grades sixth through
eighth who have been expelled from regular classrooms. These are highly volatile students with
a history of discipline. Some also have a history of emotional problems, violence, family
problems, or substance abuse. The Academy teaching position has been a difficult position to
staff.

a.

16.

York has training and experience in dealing with the difficult students
who attend the Academy. He worked as a corrections officer in a youth center, and received
training in how to handle potentially aggressive students. York did not teach alternative
education before his employment with the District, and the District has not provided him with
special training.

b.

Respondents Beleno, Guluarte-Silva, and Mountz are willing to teach at
the Academy. They each testified that they are competent to teach the assignment. All have had
to deal with difficult students in their classrooms and have other experience dealing with
challenging behaviors. Respondent Beleno served in the military for nine years, where he
mentored at-risk youth. Respondent Guluarte-Silva worked as a social worker for seven years
and was exposed to at-risk youth. Respondent Mountz taught special education students in
Florida for three years in the early 2000s, students who presented emotional and behavioral
challenges.

17.

The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to any Respondent to

render a service which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and

44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 8.

4

2.

The services listed in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services

within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 and 9.

3.

Cause exists under sections 44949 and 44955 for the District to reduce or
discontinue the particular kinds of services set forth in factual finding number 3, which cause
relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils, by reason of factual finding
numbers 1 through 11.

4.

Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: “[t]he services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.” (Emphasis added.)
“Certificated” is defined by the provisions of the Education Code pertaining to credentials, but
“competent” is not specifically defined. In Forker v. Board of Trustees (1994) 160 Cal.App.3d
13, 19, the court defined the term in a reemployment proceeding under section 44956, a statute
that contains the same “certificated and competent” requirement, in terms of the teachers’ skills
and qualifications, specifically, as “relating to special qualifications for a vacant position, rather
than relating to the on-the-job performance of the laid-off permanent employee.” In doing so,
the Court noted that courts in reduction in force cases, namely Brough v. Governing Board
(1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 714-15, and Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109
Cal.App.3d 648, 654-55, had interpreted the term in a similar manner.

As the Forker court recognized, school districts have the discretion to define
competency, as had been permitted in earlier reemployment cases, King v. Berkeley Unified
School District (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016 (King) and Martin v. Kentfield School District
(1983) 35 Cal.3d. 294 (Martin). In King, the court upheld a district’s requirement that laid off
teachers have prior teaching experience in the open jobs in which they claimed competency,
namely, mathematics and physical education. In Martin, a district was permitted to require prior
teaching experience in middle school before deeming laid off elementary school teachers
competent to teach in middle school, if such requirement was equally applied to all certificated
employees, not just those on a preferential rehire list.

In Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565 (Duax), a
case arising under the community college reduction in force statute, now section 87743, the
governing board had established a standard of competency that required one year of full-time
teaching in the subject area within the last ten years. After acknowledging the discretion
afforded to school districts, and set forth in King and Martin, the court stated: “While these
decisions stress the discretion reposed in a school board in defining the term ‘competent,’ the
court in Forker . . . added further assistance in stating, ‘[a]s interpreted by the Martin court, the
term ‘competent’ as used in section 44956 relates to specific skills or qualifications required of

5

the applicant. Decisions prior to Martin have interpreted that term in a similar manner.’ (Id. at
p. 9. See also Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal. App.3d 648, 654-655;
Ozsogomonyan, Teacher layoffs in California: An Update (1979) 30 Hastings L.J. 1727, 1749-
1751.) Hence, from these authorities we conclude that a board’s definition of competency is
reasonable when it considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.”
The Duax court upheld the governing board’s definition of competence as a reasonable
exercise of the governing board’s discretion. In this regard, the court stated: “[T]he mandate is
that the governing board establish a standard of competency that relates to the skills and
qualifications of the teacher. That standard was established by resolution of the governing
board, and since it requires only one year of teaching in the last ten, not one in the last two or
three, we are not persuaded that it too narrowly defines competency. . . .” (Duax, supra, 196
Cal.App.3d at 567.)
In Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127
(Bledsoe), the court upheld a rule that defined competency as having at least one semester
actual teaching experience in alternative education within the last five years.

As in Duax and Bledsoe, the District’s competency criteria does not define competency
too narrowly. The rule relates to the skills and qualifications of the teacher, and is similar to that
upheld in Bledsoe. Respondents Beleno, Guluarte-Silva, and Mountz do not meet the District’s
definition of competency to teach at the Academy, as they have never taught alternative
education. Therefore, these Respondents are not competent to displace, or “bump,” York.

5.

Even if Respondents Beleno, Guluarte-Silva, and Mountz are deemed
certificated and competent to teach at the Academy, the District established grounds to retain
the more junior York. Districts are permitted to disregard seniority, or “skip” junior employees,
in accordance with section 44955, subdivision (d): “Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school
district may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of
the following reasons: (1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a
specific course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services credential
with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course of study
or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess. . . .”

In Bledsoe, a district was able to skip two junior employees because of the district’s
demonstrated need for teachers with experience in instruction in a community day school. The
junior teachers possessed special training and experience that enabled them to meet the
district’s specialized needs for alternative education. They had taken courses in many subjects
that covered areas of instruction, had training in areas related to working with difficult students,
and had actual experience in dealing with the community day school students.

In this case, the District has established that it has a need to provide alternative
education at the Academy, just as the district in Bledsoe did. As in Bledsoe, the District has a

6

specific need for personnel to meet the special needs of Academy students. These are students
who have been expelled from regular classrooms because of one or more problems that
interfere with their ability to learn. They need a combination of extra attention and discipline.
The District has also established that York has special training and experience to provide the
services which the more senior Respondents do not possess. Unlike Respondents Beleno,
Guluarte-Silva, and Mountz, York has received training, albeit outside the District, in dealing
with behavior challenges. He worked in an analogous setting while a correctional officer. He
also possesses about one and one-half years of actual experience dealing with the specific
students at issue. Accordingly, the District properly skipped York for layoff.

6.

Cause exists to terminate the services provided by Respondents Beleno,
Chapman, Day, Devine, Flores, Garcia, Guluarte-Silva, McBryant, Meek, Morga, Mountz,
Quiros, Riddle, Roediger, Sandoval, Saravia, Thomas, and Winchell for the 2013-2014 school
year, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 17 and legal conclusion numbers 1
through 5.

ORDER

The Accusation is sustained and the District may notify Respondents Beleno, Chapman,
Day, Devine, Flores, Garcia, Guluarte-Silva, McBryant, Meek, Morga, Mountz, Quiros, Riddle,
Roediger, Sandoval, Saravia, Thomas, and Winchell that their services will not be needed
during the 2013-2014 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services.

DATED:_____________

SAMUEL D. REYES
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

