BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
RIALTO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY
CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
Proceeding Involving:

OAH No. 2013040058

Certain Certificated Employees of the Rialto
Unified School District Who Received
Preliminary Layoff Notices for the 2013-
2014 School Year,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

James Ahler, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of

California, heard this reduction in force proceeding in Rancho Cucamonga, California, on
April 25, 2013.

Paul Z. McGlocklin and John W. Dietrich, of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud &

Romo, represented the Rialto Unified School District.

Joshua M. Baskin, of Skipper, Singer & Associates, represented all respondents
appearing at the reduction in force proceeding. Michael Kress, CTA Representative, assisted
Mr. Baskin.

No respondent represented himself or herself.

The matter was submitted on April 25, 2012.

The Rialto Unified School District

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Rialto Unified School District is located in the City of Rialto, between the

cities of Fontana and San Bernardino. The District encompasses approximately 59 square
miles and serves about 26,000 Kindergarten through 12th Grade students living in the
communities of Rialto, Colton, Fontana, San Bernardino, and Lytle Creek. The District

1

currently maintains 19 elementary schools, five middle schools, three comprehensive high
schools, and an adult education program. Approximately 26 percent of the students are
English Language Learners. About 87 percent of the student body is eligible to participate in
the hot lunch program.

The District employs approximately 2,400 persons, about 1,160 of whom are
certificated employees who provide direct services and supports to students. The District has
a projected budget of approximately $216 million for the 2013-2014 school year. About 92
percent of the District’s budget funds employee salaries and benefits.

2.

The District is governed by an at large elected five-member Board of

Education. Harold L. Cebrun, Sr., Ph.D. is the District Superintendent and the Board’s Chief
Executive Officer. Felix J. Avila is an Associate Superintendent of Schools, Personnel
Services. Rhonda D. Kramer is a Senior Director of Personnel Services.

The Fiscal Crisis

3.

Public schools primarily rely on financing from the State of California. A

school district cannot determine the level of funding it will receive until the state budget is
chaptered, an event that is supposed to occur each year in late June. Before then, a school
district’s governing board, which has the duty to produce and file a balanced budget with the
County Department of Education, must take steps to ensure that financial ends meet if the
worst-case financial scenario develops. By law, a school district must maintain a reserve for
economic uncertainty that is equal to three percent of the district’s expenditures.

California’s recent economic problems have had a crippling impact on the Rialto
Unified School District and other public school districts. If the District cannot meet its
financial obligations, the San Bernardino County Office of Education possesses the authority
to intervene and take over the District’s operations.

4.

With regard to the budget for the 2013-2014 school year, District
administrators project a $10.2 million shortfall. The amount of the projected deficit could be
reduced with additional funding from the State of California.

The District’s Response

5.

In response to the anticipated budgetary shortfall for the 2013-2014 school

year, District administrators once again reviewed services and staffing. The Board and the
District implemented plans to trim the budget. The Board passed a resolution designed to
reduce class size staffing. The Board passed a resolution to eliminate the adult education
program. The District reassigned administrators. Cost containment in the areas of health and
welfare is being pursued. In addition, on the recommendation of Superintendent Cebrun, the
Board passed a resolution to eliminate 32.73 full time equivalent certificated positions,
including those employees assigned to the adult education program.

2

On February 27, 2013, Superintendent Cebrun recommended to the Governing Board

that it adopt a resolution authorizing the reduction or elimination of certificated staff in
accordance with provisions of the Education Code. More specifically, Superintendent
Cebrun recommended the elimination of 32.73 full time equivalent positions for the 2013-
2014 school year, specifying in his recommendation the positions that should be reduced or
eliminated and the amount of the reductions.

6.

On February 27, 2013, following Superintendent Cebrun’s staffing

recommendation, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 12-13-44. It provides:

BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE
RIALTO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

REDUCTION OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES

RESOLUTION NO. 12-13-44

WHEREAS, the Board of Education of the Rialto Unified

School District has determined that due to financial conditions it is in
the best interests of the District and the welfare of the schools and the
pupils thereof that the particular kinds of services set forth herein
must be reduced or discontinued; and

WHEREAS, it is the opinion of the Board that because of the
aforementioned reason, it is in the best interest of the District that the
number of regular certificated employees of the District must be
reduced; and

WHEREAS, this Board does not desire to reduce the services

of regular certificated employees based upon reduction of average
daily attendance during the past two years; and

WHEREAS, this Board has determined that due to a
significant population of English language learners with specialized
educational needs, a specific and compelling need exists to employ
and retain certificated employees who have authorization to teach
English Learner (“EL”) students, as determined by the California
Commission on Teacher Credentialing, and the special training and
experience that comes therewith; and

WHEREAS, State law mandates that each failure to staff a
classroom containing one or more EL students with a certificated
employee possessing an appropriate EL authorization is a
“misassignment” subject to sanction by the County Superintendent of
Schools; and

3

WHEREAS, compliance with the provisions of the No Child

Left Behind Act, the Williams Settlement, and Education Code
section 44253.1, require that EL students be served by certificated
employees with appropriate EL authorizations and who are No Child
Left Behind compliant in the subject area they are teaching; and

WHEREAS, the needs of the District and the students thereof

should not and cannot be adequately served by concentrating EL
students in particular classrooms in such a manner as to lessen the
need for certificated employees with EL authorizations.

WHEREAS, Education Code section 44955(d) authorizes this
Board to deviate from terminating certificated employees in order of
seniority for the above reasons, if necessary; and

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of

Education of the Rialto Unified School District as follows:

A.
That the particular kinds of services set forth below shall be
reduced or eliminated commencing in the 2013-2014 school year:

Adult Education Beginning ESL Teacher

1.13 F.T.E.

4 F.T.E.

.17 F.T.E.

.80 F.T.E.

.40 F.T.E.

.74 F.T.E.

.47 F.T.E.

.13 F.T.E.

.17 F.T.E.

.20 F.T.E.

.20 F.T.E.

.30 F.T.E.

1 F.T.E.

Administrative Interns

Adult Education Advanced Beginning ESL
Teacher

Adult Education Diploma Subject Teacher

Adult Education English Teacher

Adult Education GED Test Prep Teacher

Adult Education Intermediate ESL Teacher

Adult Education Math Teacher

Adult Education Pharmacy Clerk Teacher

Adult Education Science Teacher

Adult Education Social Science Teacher

Adult Education Word Processing Teacher

Elementary Communicative Handicapped
Teacher

4

Elementary Multi-Handicapped Teacher

1 F.T.E.

Elementary Resource Specialists

Elementary VAPA Teacher

High School Biology Teacher

High School CNC Machining Teacher

High School Earth Science Teacher

High School Intervention Counselor

High School Intro to Technology Teacher

High School Math Teachers

High School Spanish Teacher

Middle School Math Teachers

Middle School PE Teacher

Middle School Science Teacher

Middle School Social Science Teacher

School Nurse

Teacher on Special Assignment

3 F.T.E.

1 F.T.E.

1 F.T.E.

.68 F.T.E.

1 F.T.E.

1 F.T.E.

.34 F.T.E.

3 F.T.E.

1 F.T.E.

2 F.T.E.

1 F.T.E.

1 F.T.E.

1 F.T.E.

3 F.T.E.

2 F.T.E.

.

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS

32.73 F.T.E

That due to the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of

B.
services, a corresponding number of certificated employees of the
District shall be terminated pursuant to Education Code section 44955.

C.
That the reduction of certificated staff be achieved by the
termination of regular employees and not by terminating temporary or
substitute employees.

D.
That “competency” as described in Education Code sections
44955(b), 44956, and 44957, for the purposes of bumping and rehire
rights, shall necessarily include possession of a valid EL authorization
and being No Child Left Behind Compliant in the subject area.

E.
That, as between certificated employees with the same
seniority date, the order of termination shall be determined solely by
Board-adopted criteria.

5

F.
That the District Superintendent or designee is directed to
initiate layoff procedures and give appropriate notice pursuant to
Education Code sections 44955 and 44949.

PASSED AND ADOPTED this 27th day of February, 2013, in the
County of San Bernardino, California.

The Particular Kinds of Services

7.

The kinds of services identified in Resolution No. 12-13-44 were services that
could be lawfully reduced or eliminated under the Education Code. The Governing Board’s
adoption of Resolution No. 12-13-44 was neither arbitrary nor capricious; its adoption was
well within the Governing Board’s discretion. No particular kind of service was lowered to a
level below that mandated by state or federal law. The enactment of Resolution No. 12-13-
44 related solely to the economic crisis and the Governing Board’s duty to balance the
budget; to that extent, enactment of Resolution No. 12-13-44 was in the best interest of the
District and the students thereof.

8.

Each respondent in this reduction in force proceeding is a certificated

employee of the District.

Delegation of Authority and Notice to Board

9.

On February 27, 2013 Superintendent Cebrun granted non-exclusive authority

to Associate Superintendent Avila to direct the reduction in force proceeding.

10.

On March 14, 2013, Superintendent Cebrun gave notice to the Board of his

recommendation that certain employees be given notice that their services would not be
required for the upcoming 2013-2014 school year.

Notice to the Board

The District’s Seniority List

11.

The District maintains a seniority list, a constantly evolving document that is

updated as new certificated employees are hired and as other employees retire, resign, or
otherwise become separated from service with the District. The seniority list is a spreadsheet
that is organized from the District’s most senior certificated employee to the most recently
hired certificated employee. The list contains each employee’s seniority number, name,
status (tenured or probationary), a tie-breaking value for employees who provided service on
the same first day, a seniority date (the employee’s first date of paid probationary service
with the District), the school site where current services are being provided, the employee’s
current assignment, and the employee’s credentials on file with the District.

6

12.

In early February 2013, when it became apparent that a reduction in force

might become necessary, the District circulated a seniority list to all certificated employees
with a request that each employee review that list and verify or update his or her seniority
information within the next few weeks; if an employee did not return the list to District
administrative staff in a timely manner, the staff concluded that the information set forth in
the seniority list was correct.

The Issuance of Preliminary Layoff Notices

13.

Using the updated seniority list, Resolution No. 12-13-44, and the tie-breaking

criteria, Senior Director Kramer and other staff members identified those certificated
employees who should receive preliminary layoff notices and those who should not.

Whenever an employee providing a particular kind of service that was being
eliminated or reduced under Resolution No. 12-13-44 was tentatively identified as being in
line to receive a preliminary layoff notice, that employee’s seniority and credentials were
carefully examined to determine whether that employee had the seniority, credentials and
competence to “bump” a junior employee and assume the more junior employee’s position.

14.

Preliminary layoff notices and other jurisdictional documents were served on

the 27 certificated employees who did not provide services in the adult education program
whose employment the District staff determined was subject to reduction or elimination as a
result of Resolution No. 12-13-44, three certificated employees who did not provide services
in the adult education program whose employment might be subject to reduction or
elimination as a result of Resolution 12-13-44 were served with precautionary layoff notices
and other required jurisdictional documents, and the nine employees who provided service
within the adult education program were served with layoff notice and other jurisdictional
documents. Service was accomplished by mailing a preliminary layoff notice and other
jurisdictional documents to the employee’s last address on file.1

Requests for Hearing

15.

Eighteen certificated employees timely filed a request for a hearing; one

certificated employee filed a request for a hearing that was not timely2; and 29 employees,
including all of the employees involved in the adult education program, did not request a
hearing.

1

2

Certificated employees of the District were and are required to maintain a

current mailing address with the District.

The District served that employee with notices of hearing, and the District did

not object to that employee participating in this layoff proceeding.

7

The Administrative Hearing

16.

On April 25, 2013, the record in this reduction in force proceeding was

opened. Jurisdictional documents were introduced. The caption was amended. A stipulation
regarding jurisdictional and evidentiary matters was provided. An opening statement was
presented on the District’s behalf. Sworn testimony was taken and documentary evidence
was received. Associate Superintendent Villa testified about the budgetary crisis and the
layoff process. Senior Director Kramer testified about the seniority list and the District’s
efforts to ensure that the most senior employees were retained to provide services for which
they were credentialed and competent. Closing comments were given; the record was
closed; and the matter was submitted.

17.

No respondent testified that his or her seniority date was improper, or that he

or she should have bumping rights, or that the District’s retention of any certificated
employee was improper.

The Reduction in Force Proceeding

18.

The enactment of Resolution No. 12-13-44 was the result of a budgetary crisis,

not a decline in attendance. Resolution No. 12-13-55 was enacted in good faith, and to the
extent it related to the budget crisis, its passage and content was in the best interest of the
District and its students. The District complied with all jurisdictional requirements. The
District used seniority, credentials and competence as the basis for “bumping” junior
employees and retaining the services of senior, competent, and appropriately credentialed
employees to provide services currently being provided by more junior employees. The
District’s tie-breaking criteria were applied in an appropriate and evenhanded manner; the
application of those criteria was in the best interest of the District and its students.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Statutory Authority - Reduction in Force Proceedings

1.

Education Code section 44949 provides in part:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her
designee . . . that it has been recommended that the notice be
given to the employee, and stating the reasons therefor.

[¶] . . . [¶]

8

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing . . .

(c) In the event a hearing is requested by the employee, the
proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in
accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the
governing board shall have all the power granted to an agency
therein, except that all of the following shall apply:

(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of defense, if any,
within five days after service upon him or her of the accusation
and he or she shall be notified of this five-day period for filing
in the accusation.

(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the
Government Code shall be available only if request is made
therefor within 15 days after service of the accusation, and the
notice required by Section 11505 of the Government Code shall
so indicate.

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof. The proposed decision shall be
prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and

9

2.

Education Code section 44955 provides in part:

to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds . . .

(d) Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the
employee. . . .

(e) If after request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) any
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the
Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) which
occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 which
occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be
extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her
position for causes other than those specified . . . and no
probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position
for cause other than as specified . . .

(b) Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school
year . . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the
district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of these
conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in
the district, the governing board may terminate the services of
not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated
employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at
the close of the school year. Except as otherwise provided by
statute, the services of no permanent employee may be
terminated under the provisions of this section while any
probationary employee, or any other employee with less
seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render . . .

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the
district on the same date, the governing board shall determine
the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the
district and the students thereof. Upon the request of any

10

employee whose order of termination is so determined, the
governing board shall furnish in writing no later than five days
prior to the commencement of the hearing held in accordance
with Section 44949, a statement of the specific criteria used in
determining the order of termination and the application of the
criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group. This requirement that the governing
board provide, on request, a written statement of reasons for
determining the order of termination shall not be interpreted to
give affected employees any legal right or interest that would
not exist without such a requirement.

(c) Notice of such termination of services shall be given before
the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949, and
services of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of
the order in which they were employed, as determined by the
board in accordance with the provisions of Sections 44844 and
44845. In the event that a permanent or probationary employee
is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for
in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed for the
ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments
in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any
service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to
render. However, prior to assigning or reassigning any
certificated employee to teach a subject which he or she has not
previously taught, and for which he or she does not have a
teaching credential or which is not within the employee’s major
area of postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the
governing board shall require the employee to pass a subject
matter competency test in the appropriate subject.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of
seniority for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to
teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide services
authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that
the certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide
those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.

11

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the
laws.

Jurisdiction

3.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied
as to all respondents.

The Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

4.

A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service should be
reduced or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the governing board acted unfairly
or improperly simply because it made a decision it was empowered to make. (Rutherford v.
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.) A school board’s decision to reduce or
discontinue a particular kind of service need not be tied in with any statistical computation.
It is within the discretion of a school board to determine the amount by which it will reduce
or discontinue a particular kind of service as long as the school district does not reduce a
service below the level required by law. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144
Cal.App.3d 627, 635-636.)

Competence

5.

The Education Code leaves to a school board’s discretion the determination of
whether an employee must also be competent to be employed in a vacant position in addition
to possessing seniority. The term “competent” relates to an individual’s specific skills or
qualifications, including academic background, training, credentials, and experience, but it
does not include evidence related to on-the-job performance. (Forker v. Board of Trustees
(1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 13, 18-19.)

6.

In this matter, the Board determined that competence included an

authorization to teach English Learner (“EL”) students, as determined by the California
Commission on Teacher Credentialing, and the special training and experience that comes
therewith; and compliance with the provisions of the No Child Left Behind Act in the subject
matter being taught. These are valid and objective criteria to determine “competence.”

Seniority, Bumping, Skipping

7.

Seniority: Under Education Code section 44845, seniority is determined by

the date a certificated employee “first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”

8.

Education Code section 44846 provides in part: “The governing board shall
have power and it shall be its duty to correct any errors discovered from time to time in its
records showing the order of employment.”

12

9.

The Statutory Scheme: Education Code section 44955, the economic layoff

statute, provides in subdivision (b), in part:

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of
this section while . . . . any other employee with less seniority, is
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is
certificated and competent to render.

Essentially this statutory language provides “bumping” rights for senior certificated

and competent employees, and “skipping” authority to retain junior employees who are
certificated and competent to render services which more senior employees are not.

10.

Bumping: The district has an obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b),
to determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated in an
economic layoff possesses the seniority and qualifications which would entitle him/her to be
assigned to another position. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th
127, 136-137.)

11.

Skipping: Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to

subdivision (b) where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific
course of study and that a junior certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated employee does not possess.
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., supra, at pp. 134-135.) There is nothing in the statute
that requires such special needs be evidenced by formal, written policies, course or job
descriptions, or program requirements. (Id., at p. 138.)

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the district and
establishing requirements for employment. This discretion encompasses determining the
training and experience necessary for particular positions. Similarly, school districts have
the discretion to determine particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a
service continues to be performed or provided in a different manner by the district.
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)

Cause Exists to Give Notice to Certain Employees

12.

As a result of the Governing Board’s lawful reduction of particular kinds of
service, cause exists under the Education Code for the District to give final notice to those
respondents who are identified hereafter that their employment will be terminated at the
close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed by the district for
the 2013-2014 school year.

13

Determination

13.

The charges alleged were sustained by the preponderance of the evidence. The
adoption of Resolution No. 12-13-44 was related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.
The District made necessary assignments and reassignments in such a manner that the most
senior credentialed employees will be retained to render services that his or her seniority and
qualifications entitle them to provide.

RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the Rialto Unified School District

issue final layoff notices to the following certificated employees:

Atkinson, Lance
Atkinson, Ronald
Baisie, Dorothy
Bashaw, Gail
Buchanan, Patricia
Burelle, Anne
Castillo, Albert
Chovan, Sandra
Colby-Campbell, Kathryn
De La Torre, Evelia
De La Torre, Jorge
Estrada, Ilene
Fazio, Vincent
Florence IV, Eugene
Freeman, Melissa
Gillespie, Nancy
Henriquez-Pulido, Kristal
Hunt, Michelle
John, Zelma
Jones, Anthony
Lara, Gustavo
Lewis, Abina
Linton, Valerie
Logan, Sarah
Lopez, Samuel

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26. McMillan, David
27. McParland, Vanessa
28.
29.
30.
31.

Norton Jr., Clyde
Peoples, Carmen
Perez, Janette
Robles-Wallace, Mary

14

Sanchez, Arthur
Savage, Rhonda
Stubblefield, Jeneen
Talton, Ericka
Tofflemire, Shelley
Ventura, Evette

32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38. Wohlgemuth, Judy
Zeledon, Margarita
39.

Dated: April 26, 2013

______________________________
JAMES AHLER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

15

