BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
FOR THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION
BEAR VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
Proceedings Concerning:

OAH No. 2013040190

16 Certificated Employees,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Roy W. Hewitt, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Big Bear Lake, California on April
23, 2013.

David E. Robinett, Esq. of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo

represented the Bear Valley Unified School District (the District).

All of the respondents who were present for the hearing were represented by

Carlos R. Perez, Esq. of Reich, Adell & Cvitan.

The matter was submitted on April 23, 2013.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Tim Larson, Director of Personnel/Educational Services for the

District, made and filed the Accusation dated March 12, 2013, while acting in his
official capacity. Director Larson signed the Accusation on behalf of Kurt Madden,
the Superintendent of the District pursuant to the Superintendent’s written delegation
of authority.

2.

Respondents are certificated District employees.

1

3.

On March 6, 2013, the Board of Trustees (Board) adopted Resolution
No. 12-13-015 (the Resolution), determining that it would be necessary to reduce or
discontinue particular kinds of services at the end of the current school year. The
Board determined that the particular kinds of services that must be reduced for the
2013-2014 school year were the following full time equivalent (FTE) positions:

Particular Kind of Service (PKS)

Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)

Continuation High School Principal Services

High School Math Teaching Services

High School Computer Based Accounting Teaching Services

High School Social Studies Teaching Services

High School Spanish Teaching Services

High School “On Your Own” Teaching Services

Middle School Science Teaching Services

Middle School Math Teaching Services

Middle School Physical Education Teaching Services

Elementary (K-6) Classroom Teaching Services

Total FTE’s

1.0

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.2

6.0

9.2

The services listed above are particular kinds of services, which may be
reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.

4.

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services listed in
Finding 3, above, is neither arbitrary nor capricious; rather, it is due to substantial
deficits in the operating budget, and is, therefore, a proper exercise of the Board’s
discretion. The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of
the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of
certificated employees as determined by the Board. No particular kinds of services
were lowered to levels less than those levels mandated by state or federal law.

5.

The District considered all positively assured attrition, including

resignations, retirements and requests for transfer, in determining the actual number
of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its employees.

2

6.

On March 12, 2013, the District timely notified respondents, pursuant

to California Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, of the District’s intent not to
reemploy them for the upcoming school year. Accordingly, respondents received
written notice, on or before March 15, 2013, notifying them that the Board had
recommended they not be re-employed in the upcoming, 2013-2014, school year.

7.

On March 12, 2013, respondents were served with a copy of the Notice

of Recommendation That Services Will Not Be Required, the Resolution to Reduce
or Eliminate Particular Kinds of Certificated Services, the Accusation, the Notice of
Accusation, a blank Notice of Defense and Request for Hearing, and other related
materials.

8.

The following certificated employees were timely served with layoff

notices or a precautionary layoff notice:

14 Layoff Notices: Molly Anderson; Eduardo DeAnda; Michael Hahn; Diane
Kendall; Jeremy Little; Amy Martinez; Manuel Marquez; Jennifer Maybin; Sharon
Meagher; Susan Oberneder; Jana Roberts; Shauna Ward; Katherine Williams; and,
Joy Wright.

2 Precautionary Notices: Dottie Jaeger; and, Andrea McLinn.

9.

The following 11 certificated employees (respondents) timely requested

a hearing and filed notices of defense: Eduardo DeAnda; Dottie Jaeger; Diane
Kendall; Jeremy Little; Amy Martinez; Andrea McLinn; Sharon Meagher; Susan
Oberneder; Jana Roberts; Shauna Ward; and, Katherine Williams.

10.
instant hearing.

All respondents were properly noticed of the date, time and place of the

11.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

12.

Respondents have been selected for notice of layoff pursuant to their
seniority date, which is based on the first day of paid service of each respondent in a
probationary position. Respondents were ranked for layoff in the inverse order of
their seniority dates.

13.

During the instant hearing the District reduced the proposed 9.3 FTE

reduction by 3.4 FTE based on three (3) retirements and the decision to retain 0.2
FTE in Middle School and 0.2 FTE of physical education. Consequently, the layoff
notices issued to the following respondents were rescinded: Molly Anderson; Amy
Martinez; Manuel Marquez; and, Susan Oberneder.

3

Issue Raised During the Hearing

14.

Due to the exemplary efforts of counsel all issues were resolved except

for the following issue concerning a certificated employee who is teaching two
periods of Math without holding an appropriate credential for that assignment. During
the 2012-2013 school year Doreen De Nigiris, who holds an “Ed Specialist”
credential, was assigned outside her credential to teach two periods of Math. During
the hearing counsel for respondents noted that Diane Kendall, who holds Ed
Specialist and Multiple Subject credentials with Math Authorization and
supplementary certification in Math, is slated for a 0.4 FTE reduction. The District
represented that the “missassignment” will be corrected for the 2013-2014 school
year but that Diane Kendall had “no priority right” to fill Doreen DeNigiris’ position
because the two periods of math being taught by Doreen DeNigiris are not being
eliminated; instead, the District will be moving a properly credentialed teacher into
the math teaching position(s).

15.

The District is correct. Since the 0.4 Math FTE’s being taught by

Doreen DeNigiris are not being eliminated the issue is not ripe for consideration in
these proceedings.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949

and 44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections
were satisfied.

2.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board
of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

3.

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is not

tied in with any statistical computation. It is within the governing authority’s
discretion to determine the amount by which a particular kind of service will be
reduced or discontinued as long as the District does not reduce a service below the
level required by law. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627,
635-636.) A school district has wide discretion in setting its budget and a layoff
decision will be upheld unless it was fraudulent or so palpably unreasonable and
arbitrary as to indicate an abuse of discretion as a matter of law. (California Sch.
Employees Assn. v. Pasadena Unified Sch. Dist. (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 318, 322.)

4

4.

The services listed in Factual Finding 3 are each determined to be a

particular kind of service within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.

5.

Based on the Factual Findings, considered in their entirety, cause exists
to reduce the number of certified employees of the District due to budgetary reasons.

6.

7.

Cause to reduce or discontinue services relates solely to the welfare of

the District and its pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

Cause exits to give the following eight (8) respondents notice that their

services are not needed for the ensuing, 2013-2014, school year: Eduardo DeAnda;
Michael Hahn; Diane Kendall; Jeremy Little; Sharon Meagher; Jana Roberts;
Katherine Williams; and, Joy Wright.

ADVISORY DETERMINATIONS

1.

Prior to May 15, 2013, notice shall be given to respondents Eduardo

DeAnda; Michael Hahn; Diane Kendall; Jeremy Little; Sharon Meagher; Jana
Roberts; Katherine Williams; and, Joy Wright that their services will not be required
for the ensuing school year due to the projected budget deficit and the resulting need
to reduce and/or discontinue certain services.

2.

The Accusation is dismissed as to respondents Molly Anderson; Amy

Martinez; Manuel Marquez; and, Susan Oberneder and their layoff notices are
rescinded.

DATED: April 24, 2013

_____________________________
ROY W. HEWITT
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

