BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
MOUNTAIN VIEW SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusations Against:

ANTONIO BALBUENA, et al.,

OAH No. 2013030804

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge David L. Benjamin, State of California, Office of

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 18, 2013, in El Monte, California.

Margaret A. Chidester, Attorney at Law, Margaret A. Chidester & Associates,

represented complainant Gloria Diaz, Assistant Superintendent, Mountain View School
District.

Maria Keegan Myers, Attorney at Law, Rothner, Segall & Greenstone, represented
respondents Antonio Balbuena, Debra Bates-Ho, Marcos Bowers, Sandy Cannon, Tammy
Capilla, Rachel Chan, Sharon Durall, Hannah Estes, Maria Estevez, Lourdes Fonseca, Olga
Gallegos, Maricela Gonzalez, Laura Gorgonio, Christina Correa Grebel, Chad Greene,
Patricia Gutierrez-Bowers, Jacqueline Hernandez, Aracely Hernandez-Lopez, Vinh Huynh
Kieu, Michele Ivey, Karyn Johnny, Kathy Kurtz, Cecilia Leonin, Rose McGrath, Ryan
Namihira, Juan Orellana, Irma Parisi, Diana Rich, Jose Santiago, Tashanda Seiji, Neelam
Tandon, Fernando Velasquez, Ricky Villacorte and Maria Villavicencio.

The matter was submitted on April 18, 2013.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

3.

Complainant Gloria Diaz issued the accusation in her official capacity as

assistant superintendent of the Mountain View School District.

Respondents are certificated employees of the district.

On March 7, 2013, the district’s governing board adopted Resolution #13-267

(the PKS resolution). In that resolution, the board determined that it is necessary to

1

discontinue certain particular kinds of services at the close of the 2012-2013 school year. It
states that the particular kinds of services to be discontinued are as follows:

(1.1) 10.40 K-8 Multiple Subject Classroom Teaching Positions (10.40 F.T.E.)1
1.10 Single Subject Physical Education Teaching Positions (1.10 F.T.E.)
(1.2)
.60 7th Grade Biological Science Teaching Position (.60 F.T.E.)
(1.3)
.60 8th Grade Physical Science Teaching Position (.60 F.T.E.)
(1.4)
.40 Opportunity Room Teaching Position (.40 F.T.E.)
(1.5)

13.10 TOTAL F.T.E.

4.

5.

The resolution directs the superintendent to send appropriate notices to all employees whose
positions may be reduced or eliminated by virtue of the board’s action.

The board took this action because the district faces uncertain and reduced state

funding, and because of declining enrollment.

The PKS resolution establishes tie-breaking criteria to establish the relative

seniority among employees with the same first date of paid service.

On or before March 15, 2013, the district gave written notice to respondents of

the recommendation that their services will be reduced or eliminated for the 2013-2014
school year. The reasons for the recommendation were set forth in these preliminary layoff
notices. Before issuing the preliminary layoff notices, the district took into account all
positively assured attrition.

6.

Respondents filed timely requests for hearing to determine if there is cause for
terminating their services for the 2013-2014 school year. An accusation was served on each
respondent, all of whom filed timely notices of defense. All prehearing jurisdictional
requirements have been met.

Skip criteria

7.

The PKS resolution states that the district will deviate from laying off teachers

in inverse order of their seniority by skipping employees in the following categories:

1.

2.

Certificated personnel who possess administrative
credentials, who are currently assigned to administrative
positions, and who will be assigned to administrative
positions for the 2013-2014 school year.

Certificated personnel who possess a credential
authorizing service in special education with an autism

1 “F.T.E.” means full-time equivalent.

2

3.

4.

5.

6.

spectrum disorders authorization, who are presently
assigned within the scope of that credential, and who will
be assigned within the scope of that credential for the
2013-2014 school year.

Certificated personnel who possess a credential
authorizing service as a Newcomer teacher who are
presently assigned to the Newcomer program, and who
will be assigned to the Newcomer program for the 2013-
2014 school year.

Certificated personnel who possess a credential
authorizing service in alternative education who are
presently assigned at the Magnolia Learning Center
within the scope of that credential, and who will be
assigned within the scope of that credential for the 2013-
2014 school year.

Certificated personnel who possess a credential
authorizing service as an English Language
Development (ELD) Teacher on Special Assignment
(TOSA) who are presently assigned within the scope of
that credential, and who will be assigned within the
scope of that credential for the 2013-2014 school year.

Certificated personnel who possess a Certificate in
STEM (science, technology, engineering, mathematics)
Education and are currently teaching a MESA Science –
Math Science Engineering Technology – class, and who
will be assigned within the scope of that authorization for
the 2013-2014 school year.

Some or all of these skip criteria have been challenged in past layoff proceedings in

the district. No evidence or argument against any of the skip criteria, however, was
presented in this proceeding.

Rescissions

8.

The district has rescinded the preliminary layoff notices it issued to Sandy

Cannon, Tammy Capilla, Maria Estevez, Jacqueline Hernandez, Aracely Hernandez-Lopez,
Vinh Huynh Kieu, Karyn Johnny, Rose McGrath, Juan Orellana, Jose Santiago, Fernando

3

Velazquez, and Maria Villavicencio. The accusations against these teachers are dismissed.
They are no longer respondents in this proceeding. 2

Other matters

9.

Neelam Tandon teaches 8th grade science at Madrid Middle School. Her

seniority date is August 28, 2002. She has been identified for layoff. Tandon testified that
she updated her authorizations two days before the hearing, to add authorizations to teach
Introductory English, Literature, and English Composition. She believes that these
authorizations will affect her relative seniority among other teachers with the first date of
paid service. Even if Tandon were the most senior employee among that group, however,
she would still be subject to layoff by virtue of her assignment, and the assignments of the
other teachers who share her seniority date.

Tandon’s contentions that there are teachers who are “misassigned,” and that those

misassignments affect the layoff, were not supported by the evidence.

Tandon testified that she is “NCLB compliant” and that other teachers, who are not

NCLB compliant, are not being laid off. The evidence established, however, that all district
teachers are NCLB compliant.

10.

The cause for the reduction in particular kinds of services relates to the welfare

of the district’s schools and the pupils thereof.

11.

Except as otherwise permitted by statute, no permanent employee is being

terminated while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is
being retained to render a service which the permanent employee is certificated and
competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSION

Cause exists because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services
pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to the remaining respondents in
13.10 F.T.E. positions that their services will not be required for the 2013-2014 school year.

2 The district also rescinded the preliminary layoff notices it issued to Steve
Brownson, Bellanira Pesina, Edith Sandoval, Haile Ucbagaber, and Michael Yurkas, but
these employees did not request a hearing and therefore were not served with an accusation.

4

RECOMMENDATION

Notice may be given to all remaining respondents in 13.10 F.T.E. positions that their

services will not be required for the 2013-2014 school year because of the reduction or
elimination of particular kinds of services.

DATED: _________________________

_______________________________________
DAVID L. BENJAMIN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

