In the Matter of the Reduction in Force
Involving the Respondents Identified in
Exhibit A.

OAH No. 2013030317

BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
VISTA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 26, 2013, in Vista, California.

Melanie A. Peterson and Kelly Owen, Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP, represented

Myrna Vallely, the Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources.

Fern Steiner, Esq., Smith, Steiner, Vanderpool & Wax, represented 27 of the

respondents identified in Appendix A.

Respondents Chelsea Sorich and Elizabeth O’Shae-West appeared and represented

themselves. 39 respondents properly served did not request a hearing.

Before the hearing the accusations served on Patricia Arosemena, Sylvia Arteaga,

Susan Stewart and Misty Oleson were withdrawn and their layoff notices rescinded.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and the matter was submitted on April

26, 2013.

1.

2.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Myrna Vallely made and filed the accusation in her official capacity as

Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources of the Vista Unified School District.

Respondents are identified on Appendix A. Each respondent is a certificated

employee of the district.

1

3.

On February 21, 2013, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 13-49
reducing particular kinds of services and directing the superintendent to give appropriate
notices to certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the action. The
resolution called for the elimination of the following services and the entire adult education
program:

- Reduce/eliminate Elementary Counselor Service

- Reduce/eliminate Adult Education/ROP Supervisor

4.5 FTE

1.0 FTE

-Reduce/eliminate Adult Education/ROP Assistant Principal

1.0 FTE

- Eliminate Entire Adult Education Program/Services:

Adult Basic Education (ABE)
Adult Education/Career Education
Adult Education/Older Adults
Career Technical Education-Adult Education
Driver Education
English as a Second Language (ESL)
English as a Second Language/Citizenship
English as a Second Language/Community
Based English Tutoring (ESL/CBET)
High School Diploma (HSD)
High School Diploma/Concurrent

77.0 Hours/Week
40.0 Hours/Week
37.0 Hours/Week
304.0 Hours/Week
37.5 Hours/Week
345.5 Hours/Week
12.0 Hours/Week

41.6 Hours/Week
129.0 Hours/Week
10.0 Hours/Week

4,

Consistent with the Board’s Resolution, the District identified certificated

employees for layoff. The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a
matter reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this
proceeding. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64
Cal.App.3d 167.) A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not
be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.
App. 3d 627, 637.)

5.

6.

The district established tie-breaking criteria to determine the order of

termination for those employees who shared the same seniority dates.

The District considered attrition, resignations, retirements and requests for

transfers in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered to its
employees. No evidence was presented that any known positively assured attrition was not
considered. The District must issue final layoff notices before May 15, and when it does so
it will take into account any additional attrition that has occurred. After that, further attrition
will allow the District to rehire laid off employees. The layoffs will not reduce any of the
District’s offerings in code mandated courses below the level required by law.

2

7.

On or before March 15, 2013, the District timely served on Respondents a

written notice that the Superintendent had recommended that their services would be
terminated at the close of the current school year. The reasons for the recommendation were
set forth in these preliminary layoff notices.

8.

9.

An accusation was served on each respondent. No evidence was introduced

demonstrating that all prehearing jurisdictional requirements were not met.

Assistant Superintendent Vallely testified about the District’s financial crisis

which necessitated this layoff.

Elementary School versus Secondary School Counselor Issue

10.

The District’s resolution will result in its retention of more junior employees

who are secondary school counselors and the release of more senior employees who are
elementary school counselors.

11.

All the District’s counselors possess a Pupil Personnel Services (PPS)
credential which authorizes an individual to teach “school counseling.” There are six
requirements that all individuals with a specialization in school counseling must meet and all
holders of a PPS may perform the following duties:

(cid:120) Develop, plan, implement, and evaluate a school counseling and guidance
program that includes academic, career, personal, and social development;

(cid:120) Advocate for the high academic achievement and social development of all

students;

services;

(cid:120) Provide schoolwide prevention and intervention strategies and counseling

(cid:120) Provide consultation, training, and staff development to teachers and parents

regarding students’ needs; and

(cid:120) Supervise a district-approved advisory group program as described in [the

Education Code]

12.

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing, which awards the PPS, does not

distinguish between elementary and secondary school counselors.

13.

The District’s job description for an “elementary school counselor” indicates

that the primary function of this position is to provide “developmental and supportive
counseling services to elementary school students;” to “consult with teachers and
administrators to assist in developing interventions and alternatives to facilitate student’s

3

academic performance and emotional adjustment;” to “serve as a liaison between school and
home to ensure appropriate transition of students;” and to be “available for crisis
counseling.” There are 12 assigned responsibilities of elementary school counselors, which
primarily pertain to the counselor acting as a liaison between the home and teacher and
assisting with the child's development and growth at school.

14.

The District’s job description for a “school counselor” (which the District

asserted is the job description for secondary school counselors) identifies the primary
function of this position as advising “the students on their educational program, citizenship,
Scholastic and vocational aspirations, and their relationships with teachers and other
students.” There are 16 assigned responsibilities of a school counselor, many of which
pertain to advising the students of their academic progress, post-school choices, testing and
studies, and schedule preparation.

15.

Both job descriptions list a PPS and a Bachelor’s degree as “minimum
qualifications.” While both indicate that a teaching credential is “desirable” and that
teaching experience “is highly desirable,” only the District’s job description for a “special
education counselor” specifies that a minimum qualification of “three years’ experience in
counseling is preferred.” There is no similar minimum qualification required for an
elementary school counselor or a school counselor.

16.

Assistant Superintendent Vallely testified that the job description for "school

counselor" is for those individuals hired to work as secondary school counselors. She
explained the difference between an elementary school counselor and a secondary school
counselor is that the former's the fifth major focus is to assist individual students with social,
emotional issues and their adjustment to school, whereas a secondary school counselor’s
major focus is more on academic counseling, preparing students for college or a career and
making sure they have class schedules so they can graduate with the necessary A-G
requirements.

Assistant Superintendent Vallely acknowledged that each counselor position only

requires a PPS credential, but testified that each job has different skill sets which the District
looks for when hiring employees. For secondary school counselors the District looks for
individuals with experience and a knowledge of the academic needs of secondary school
students. With elementary school counselors the District looks more for individuals with
counseling experience and with running group sessions. Assistant Superintendent Vallely
described the prior bad experience the District had placing an elementary school counselor as
a secondary school counselor at Rancho Buena Vista high school. That counselor had no
knowledge regarding the class requirements necessary for graduation, resulting in students
not getting the classes they needed. Assistant Superintendent Vallely testified that
secondary school counselors must “hit the ground running,” there cannot be on-the-job
training because students have to be given the correct course selection advice.

17.

Jose Villareal, a principal at Vista Magnet Middle School and a former

counselor, testified about his education and employment experience. His only experience as

4

an elementary school counselor was during an internship while in school. Villareal was a
secondary school counselor for five years in another district. While in school, Villareal
worked on a pilot program at the University of California (UC). That pilot program became
the UC training program which secondary school counselors attend to learn about the UC
admission requirements and financial aid programs.

Villareal testified about the differences between an elementary school and secondary

school counselor but admitted that both follow the national model of the three domains of
counseling: academics, career and personal/social. Villareal asserted that secondary school
counselors are more concentrated on the first and second domains, whereas elementary
school counselors are more focused on the third domain. Secondary school counselors must
know the UC and California State University requirements, information regarding financial
aid and “must be very well versed” in high school course requirements and exams. Villareal
claimed that the district’s job descriptions are very specific about how the counselors are
utilized in the District in order to best serve the students; the District would not be served by
allowing elementary school counselors to be employed as secondary school counselors “at
this time.”

Villareal acknowledged the “huge shift” in the changing of admission policies which

secondary school counselors must know. There are also “quite extensive financial aid
packets” that must be completed, financial aid information which must be provided, and
vocational counseling/military service options which must be offered to students, all of
which is the responsibility of secondary school counselors. Villareal agreed that there have
been yearly changes in the school models based upon current, ongoing research.

On cross-examination Villareal admitted that he was unaware of any secondary

school counselors being retained who had been hired by the district straight out of school.
He did not know of any secondary school counselor who had been hired right from school
and also did not know if any elementary school counselors who had secondary school
experience. Villareal further acknowledged that the secondary school counselors who work
in the District’s middle schools are “in the middle,” as they “straddle the roles” elementary
school and high school counselors play. When asked if an elementary school counselor
could receive training and attend the UC conference so as to become a secondary school
counselor, Villareal testified that he did not believe that would “best serve the students,” but
did agree that elementary school counselors could learn from those conferences.

18.

Respondent Chelsea Sorich graduated from Sonoma State with a Bachelor’s
degree in psychology. She received a Master’s degree in counseling from the University of
San Diego and obtained her PPS credential. In 2009 Sorich began working as a secondary
school counselor for the San Diego Unified School District (SDUSD) where she worked at
both a middle school and a high school, offering the many services and attending the UC
conference which Villareal testified about. In 2011 Sorich was laid off in that district during
a reduction in force and began working at one of this District’s elementary schools, where
she is presently employed.

5

Sorich testified that she was hired by SDUSD right out of school, she had no
secondary school counselor experience, but she worked hard, worked closely with peers, and
taught herself all she needed so that she could successfully counsel secondary school
students. Sorich testified that it is the person, and not the training, that determines whether
or not an individual will be a good or poor employee as a secondary school counselor. She
described herself as very hands-on, as someone very concerned about the academic success
of her students and that she worked very hard to ensure they achieved it. As a secondary
school counselor, Sorich had a caseload of 500 students, she was responsible for all their
transcripts, recommendation letters, scholarship applications, financial aid applications,
hosting parent nights to inform parents of the application process, ensuring compliance with
A-G requirements, providing vocational and technical education to students and providing all
of the secondary school counseling services about which Villareal testified. No evidence
refuted Sorich’s assertion that she could provide secondary school counseling services to the
District.

19.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), authorizes the District to
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority if it demonstrates a
specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study and that the
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or
course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.

20.

Because subdivision (b) of section 44955 mandates that “the services of no

permanent employee may be terminated . . . while any probationary employee, or any other
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent employee
is certificated and competent to render,” junior employees may be given retention priority
pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), only if they possess special training and
experience that their more senior counterparts lack. (Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983)
139 Cal.App.3d 567, 571; Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648,
655.)

21.

The “special training and experience necessary” language in section 44955,

subdivision (d)(1), must be read in context with 44955, subdivision (b). When one does that,
it appears that the word “necessary” substantially limits 44955, subdivision (d)(1). A district
may require special training and special experience, but a district cannot require more of
either than is “necessary” to teach the course. If “necessary” were not read in that limiting
way, 44955, subdivision (d)(1), could be used to circumvent the seniority rights secured by
44955, subdivision (b). On the other hand, reading “necessary” in that limiting way
harmonizes the language of the two subdivisions.

22.

Thus, a district may not use skipping criteria that are not “necessary” to teach

a course. Requiring a certain type of experience or a certain length of experience may be
appropriate but only if it is shown to be “necessary.” There are a few decisions in which
courts have approved of a requirement of prior experience. Martin v. Kingfield School
District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, is an example. That case concerned the section 44956
preferred right of reappointment. An elementary school teacher who had been terminated

6

asserted her right to be rehired to fill a new position as a middle school science teacher, a
position for which she was credentialed. The district established a requirement of prior
experience as a middle school teacher and did not rehire Martin for the position. The case
stands for the proposition that a district, in requiring prior middle school experience for a
middle school science position, did not abuse its discretion. However, as the job descriptions
introduced at this hearing demonstrated, the District did not require prior secondary school
experience before hiring counselors, it merely desired it.

23.

The seminal case for the retention of less senior employees, Bledsoe v. Biggs

Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, requires a district to not only establish a
specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study, but to also establish that the
certificated employee it proposes to retain has special training and experience necessary to
teach that course or course of study or to provide those services. (Id. at p.138.) Prior
administrative law decisions may be relied upon when making those determinations. (Id. at
137-142.)

24.

In 2002, in a pre-Bledsoe decision, the District determined that secondary

school counseling was a distinct, particular kind of service, which permitted it to retain those
employees over more senior employees who were elementary school counselors.

25.

Skipping a junior teacher and terminating a senior teacher instead of

terminating the junior teacher is such a fundamental departure from the tenure system that
the legislature’s limitation of “necessary” should be strictly respected. A district should be
allowed to terminate a senior teacher for not having “necessary” experience only if the
experience actually is “necessary.” And it is useful to consider that there was no evidence
that prior to employment, any of the District’s secondary school counselors had any such
experience; whereas the evidence did establish that Sorich has prior secondary school
experience.

26.

All counselors in the District hold a PPS credential. All provide counseling

services to the students. While it is true that a secondary school counselor offers a different
type of counseling service than an elementary school counselor, as secondary school
counseling is more focused on post-high school pathways, the District failed to establish that
the respondents who are elementary school counselors are not certified and competent to
render secondary school counseling services. The initial certification for counselors is the
same, a PPS; there is no distinction between certification for an elementary school counselor
and certification for a secondary school counselor. The District failed to establish that the
counselors that it proposes to retain have special training and experience that any of the
elementary school counselors it is proposing to release do not. In fact, at least as to Sorich,
the evidence established that she possesses the special training and experience that would
allow her to hold that position if she were senior to a secondary school counselor being
retained.1 Although it is understandable why the District’s prior experience with an

1 During the hearing, the District’s counsel advised that there is no one junior to

Sorich who is being retained.

7

elementary school counselor who did not pan out as a secondary school counselor would
make it reluctant to venture down that road again, the law requires that it demonstrate that
retained junior employees have special training and experience that more senior employees
do not; not that one employee who made such a career move in the past did not work out.

27.

The evidence regarding special training and experience, primarily offered by
Villareal, was non-persuasive. Villareal’s testimony was little more than a self-promoting
recitation of his “preferences.” His assertion that elementary school counselors could not
obtain the requisite knowledge at the UC conference made no sense and he failed to provide
any foundation for his belief that elementary school counselors could not apply information
learned at the UC conference and be able to work as secondary school counselors, but that
secondary school counselors could. That testimony was especially all the more unclear given
that elementary school counselors must satisfy 12 assigned responsibilities identified in their
job description, many of which presumably require the same skill set they would employ if
permitted to attend a UC conference and thereafter apply that information at work. In sum,
neither Villareal’s testimony, nor that offered by Assistant Superintendent Vallely met the
District’s burden of proof. Moreover, the 2002 decision, although instructive, is not
controlling. Different witnesses testified in that matter and in that case “persuasive
testimony was elicited,” as opposed to the non-persuasive testimony put forth here.
Moreover, that matter was decided prior to Bledsoe which set forth the burden a district must
meet, which did not occur here. Accordingly, the evidence established that the District’s skip
involved making a distinction without a difference, making the skip arbitrary and capricious.

28.

The evidence regarding Sorich demonstrated that the District failed to prove

that it is justified in skipping her merely based upon her current position. That, however,
does not necessarily mean that she is spared from termination. She may or may not be. The
District must retain the most senior counselors who are certificated and competent to render
the service that any junior counselors will be rendering. That may be Sorich or it may be
someone more senior than she is; in fact, during the hearing, the District’s counsel advised
that there is no one junior to Sorich who is being retained. In any event, the District must
rescind the layoff notices issued to any elementary school counselor who is senior to a
secondary school counselor who was retained.

Adult Education Issue

29.

The District proposes eliminating the adult education program based upon the

governor's recommendation that responsibility for adult education be transferred to the
community colleges, despite the fact that the governor's recommendation has yet to be
adopted or implemented. Assistant Superintendent Vallely acknowledged that the District’s
adult education program has been very successful and that other districts are not eliminating
their adult education programs as they await word from Sacramento. Assistant
Superintendent Vallely admitted that the District would still receive federal money for adult
education although it might not be a line item on the district budget.

8

30.

Respondent Elizabeth O’Shae-West testified that the District will continue to
receive federal funding for the adult education program, even if that program is eliminated.
The adult education program services 17,000 students, uses only 1% of the District’s budget,
and generates revenue for the District as adults are charged for the courses they take.
O’Shea-West could not understand why the District would eliminate such a highly
successful, revenue-generating, miniscule budget-using program. She also feared for the
future of the adults taking courses as an added benefit of the program was the support it lent
the District because the students’ parents received further education, vocational training and
English language learning, all of which promote the overall well-being of the District, its
students and the Vista community.

31. While O’Shea-West’s testimony was heartfelt and sincere, and she raised very

valid concerns, the decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is matter
reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this proceeding.
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d
167.) The evidence did not demonstrate that the District’s decision to eliminate the adult
education program was fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (San Jose Teachers Association v.
Allen (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 637.)

Final Layoff Notice

32.

Except for the counselors referenced above, the District is not retaining any

employee with less seniority to perform a service that any respondent is certificated and
competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955,

and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been provided as required.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.)

3.

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a

continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.) Junior teachers
may be given retention priority over senior teachers only if the junior teachers possess
superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack. (Santa Clara

9

Federation of Teachers, Local 2393, v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School
District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.)

4.

Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant
to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be
required for the 2013-2014 school year. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. The
district has identified the certificated employees who are providing the particular kinds of
services that the Governing Board directed be reduced or discontinued. It is recommended
that the Governing Board, consistent with the findings herein, give respondents notice before
May 15, 2013, that their services will not be required by the District for the school year
2013-14.

5.

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the charges set forth in the

accusation subject to the recommendations listed in the factual findings. This determination
is based on all factual findings and on all legal conclusions.

RECOMMENDATIONS

It is recommended that the governing board give notice to the respondents whose

names are set forth below except for those respondents who are elementary school
counselors as referenced above in the Findings of Fact Nos. 10-28, inclusive, that their
employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services
will not be needed for the 2013-2014 school year.

It is recommended that the governing board reevaluate the respondents who are

elementary school counselors and rescind the layoff notices to any of those whose dates of
hire are senior to secondary school counselors the District skipped.

DATED: May 7, 2013

________________________________
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

VISTA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

EXHIBIT “A”

Adams
Adolphs-Harris
Albert
Alon
Apodaca

Hillary
Vickie
Jenna
Margo
Irma

Susan
Axson
Baltazar-Moreno Zonia
Reeva
Barwicke
Nicole
Bechtold
Morella
Bermudez
Jacqueline
Bispo
Valentyna
Borgstede
Karen
Brown
Patricia
Campbell
Sonia
Confrome
Rosa
De La Cruz
Joseph
DeMaria
Claudia
Diaz
Denise
Douglass
Jennifer
Dufresne
Rosa
Enriquez
Kathleen
Escandon
Guadalupe
Fierros
Kathy
Figueroa
Patricia
Fox
Tracy
Gillanders
Andrew
Gorgueiro
Veronica
Gutierrez
Renee
Hasan
Cristina
Hernandez
JoAnn
Honeycutt
Luis
Juarez
Pedro
Juarez
Kamdar
Nilufa
Kildiszew-Smith Diana
Lamb
Lee
McGrath

Kathleen
Mary Patricia
Rosanne

11

Mejia
Melkonian
Napier
Newcomer
Niavez

O'Shea-West
Parker
Park
Parr-Garcia
Pierce
Quinlan
Quisenberry-
Boyd
Scott
Simica
Sloat
Sorich
Steier
Stevenson
Stiemke

Tempos
Thompson
Travers
Ulbert
Vasquez
Villagrana
Villegas
Vinson
Vitiello II
Wallner
Wehrli
Zurita

Heidi
Mark
Martie
Mary Jean
Edward

Elizabeth
Deborah
Florence
Carol
Elizabeth
David
Kathryn

Nicole
Melinda
Frank
Chelsea
Kim
Lisa
Kimberley

Rosa
Maria
Stephany
Sean
Aida
Lupe
Gloria
Cheryl
Terrance
Mary
Nicole
Lizette

12

