BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
CHARTER OAK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH No. 2013020842

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE
CHARTER OAK UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT IMPACTED BY REDUCTION
IN FORCE, ET AL.,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Jennifer M. Russell, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Covina, California on April 17, 2013.

Margaret A. Chidester, Attorney at Law, represented Terry Stanfill, Ed.D.,
Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, Charter Oak Unified School District
(District).

Michael R. Feinberg, Attorney at Law, represented respondents, Brandy
Campbell, Elizabeth Diaz, Victoria Ingledue, Luiza Kartouch, Sara Litch, Valerie Lopez
Jennifer Maletz, Dina McGhghy, Mary Moore, Lauren Morris, Paticia Santiago, Jennifer
Seagle, Carol Sepulveda, Gregory Solis, Karen Tanaka, Gail Troncoso, Cheryl Wallace
and Kathleen White, all of whom, with the exception of Ms. Kartouch, Ms. Morris, and
Ms. Wallace, were present at the hearing.

Kim Breen, Staff Representative, California Teachers Association represented

exempted certificated employees Kelly Chavez, Joanna Corrales, Robert Demonteverde,
Nichol Hope, Michelle Mackay, and Tom Parslow, all of whom received preliminary
notices and all of whom were present at the hearing.

Beth Smith, President of the Charter Oaks Educators Association and Phyllis
Peters, Staff Representative, California Teachers Association were also present at the
hearing.

The District has decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and
has given respondents notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2013-2014 school
year. Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for
not reemploying them for the 2013-2014 school year.

Oral and documentary evidence was received at the hearing and the matter was

submitted for decision April 29, 2013.1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Terry Stanfill, Ed.D., Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, of the

District filed the Accusations in his official capacity. Superintendent Stanfill and his
staff, including Janice Monteleone, Administrative Assistant, implemented the technical
aspects of the layoff.

2.

Respondents at all relevant times were certificated employees of the

District.

3.

On February 23, 2013, the District provided written notice to respondents
pursuant to Education Code2 sections 44949 and 44955 that their services would not be
required for the 2013-2014 school year. Each written notice set forth the reasons for the
District’s decision and noted that 26.1 full time equivalent (FTE) positions would be
reduced or discontinued.

4.

On March 15, 2013, the District filed and thereafter served the

Accusations and related documents on respondents. Each respondent appearing in this
matter filed a Notice of Defense requesting a hearing for a determination of whether
cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2013-2014 school year. All prehearing
jurisdictional requirements were met.

5.

The Governing Board of the District (Governing Board) adopted

Resolution Number 09-12-13 (Resolution) and Supplemental Resolution Number 11-12-
13 (Supplemental Resolution) reducing or discontinuing the following particular kinds of
services (PKS) at the close of the 2012-2013 school year:

Pursuant to a Post-Hearing Order issued April 19, 2013, the record
remained open for submissions of written closing arguments. The parties’ timely
submissions were marked for identification only.

All statutory citations are to the Education Code, unless indicated

1

2

otherwise.

2

Service

FTE Reduction

K-6 Grade Classroom Instruction
Oak Knoll Virtual Academy K-8 Teacher
Spring Kindergarten Teacher
7-8 Grade English Teacher
7-8 Grade Social Science Teacher
7-8 Grade Drama Teacher
7-8 Grade Colorguard Teacher
9-12 Grade Drama Teacher
9-12 Grade ROP Stagecraft Teacher
9-12 Grade English Teacher
9-12 Grade Social Science Teacher
9-12 Grade Physical Education Teacher
9-12 Grade Health Teacher
9-12 Grade French Teacher
High School Counselor
High School Dean of Students
School Psychologist
Adult with Disabilities Adult Education Teacher

16
1
.60
1.2
.60
.80
.20
.20
.20
1
.40
.60
.40
.20
.50
.50
.70
1

26.1

Total

(Ex 1a.)

6a.

Respondents’ counsel challenges the Resolution contending that English

services do not encompass Journalism and Yearbook courses. The California
Commission on Teacher Credentialing May 2012 Supplementary Authorization
Guideline Book establishes that journalism and yearbook are subjects within the single
subject area of English. (Ex. 14 at p. 16.) Respondents’ counsel’s contention to the
contrary is without merit. The Resolution authorizes the discontinuation of a 9-12 Grade
English Teacher 1 FTE. Jennifer Maltez (Seniority #190), who has a clear single subject
teaching credential for English, teaches both English (.8FTE) and Journalism (.2FTE).
Ms. Maltez is properly subject to lay off because of the District’s discontinuation of
services in 9-12 Grade English by 1 FTE at the close of the 2012-2013 school year.

6b.

Respondents’ counsel alternatively argues for limiting the reduction of

Ms. Maltez’s services to .4 FTE. Counsel contends that Ms. Maltez’s clear single subject
teaching credential in English authorizes her to teach Yearbook (.2 FTE), which
Christopher Case (Seniority #201; clear single subject teaching credential for music)
currently teaches, and Study Skills (.2 FTE), which Timothy McCabe (Seniority #226;
clear single subject teaching credential for geoscience and biological science) currently
teaches. Counsel envisions Ms. Maltez “bumping” Mr. Case and Mr. McCabe’s
respective .2 FTE for Yearbook and Study Skills, which in turn would be added to
Journalism for a total of .6 FTE. As set forth above in Factual Finding 6a, Ms. Maltez’s
layoff properly encompasses the Journalism course (.2 FTE) she teaches under the

3

subject area of English. There is no evidence that Study Skills is within the exclusive
preserve of English or that Study Skills cannot be taught by a credentialed personnel
other than one, such as Ms. Maltez, holding a teaching credential in English. Assigning
certificated personnel to teaching assignments in increments of one-period classes—a .2
FTE assignment to teach Yearbook—primarily to avoid lay off is impractical and
inefficient. Assistant Superintendent Stanfill’s credible testimony establishes that the
parsing of teaching assignments to avoid layoff undermines the District’s efforts to
achieve its performance standards and that teachers are unlikely to accept such
assignments. The reduction of Ms. Maltez’s services is not limited to .4 FTE.

The services set forth in Factual Finding 5 are particular kind of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.

The Governing Board took action to reduce services set forth in Factual

Finding 5 because of an ongoing decrease of State funding. The decision to reduce
services was not related to the capabilities and dedication of the individuals whose
services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated. The decision to reduce the particular
kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious. The decision to reduce the particular
kinds of services is a proper exercise of the District’s discretion.

7.

8.

9.

Assistant Superintendent Stanfill and Administrative Assistant

Monteleone compiled a tentative seniority list containing seniority dates, current
assignments, and credentials and certifications, which was distributed to District’s
certificated employees for their review and verification of pertinent information.

10.

The District used the seniority list to identify District certificated

employees subject to and exempt from layoff and, in the case of certificated employees
with equal seniority, their relative order of termination as provided for in the Resolution.

11.

The Resolution exempts from layoff the following certificated personnel
on the basis of special training, experience, or credentials that others with more seniority
do not possess:

1. Certificated personnel who possess administrate credentials, who are
currently assigned to administrative positions, and who will be
assigned to administrative positions for the 2013-2014 school year.

2. Certificated personnel who possess single subject math credentials, or

single subject foundational math credentials, who are currently
assigned to math positions, and who will be assigned to math positions
for the 2013-2014 school year.

3. Certificated personnel who possess autism authorization for special

education credentials, who are currently assigned to special education
positions, and who will be assigned to special education positions for
the 2013-2014 school year.

4

4. Certificated personnel who possess single subject business credentials,
who are currently assigned to business positions, and who will be
assigned to business positions for the 2013-2014 school year.

5. Certificated personnel who possess single subject social science

credentials, who are currently assigned to social science positions, and
who will be assigned to social science positions for the 2013-2014
school year.

(Ex. 1a.)

12.

Counsel for respondents contends that the District’s exemption criteria 2,

4, and 5 are inherently defective because they permit the District to “skip” junior
employees “assigned to a specific subject matter position [math, business, and social
science] for the 2013-2014 school year . . . that cannot be ascertained.” (Respondents’
Post-hearing Brief at p.2.) Counsel for respondents further contends that “[n]othing in
[section 44955, subdivision (d)(1)] . . . permits the District to ‘skip’ or ‘exempt’ junior
employees based on their assignment to a specific subject matter position for the
upcoming school year. To do so would only allow the District to create a self-fulfilling
prophecy constructed on what the District wants to have happen, not established on the
basis of objective facts available at the time of the [reduction in force] hearing.” (Ibid.)
Counsel’s contention that the District’s exemption criteria 2, 4, and 5 are inherently
defective is rejected for the reasons stated below in Factual Finding 14.

13a.

Superintendent Standfill credibly explained that the District anticipates

implementing the Common Core State Standards Initiative, which raises both
instructional levels and expectations for the knowledge and skills students are required to
learn in order to be successful in college and careers. The District therefore has an
expressed preference for retaining teachers holding a single subject teaching credential in
mathematics or foundational mathematics, social science, or business. In its view,
possession of such teaching credentials is indicia of the deep fund of knowledge required
of teachers to educate the District’s pupils consistent with Common Core standards.
Such teaching credentials afford the District flexibility when scheduling assignments
throughout the district even as budgetary constraints require a reduction in services.
Teachers holding such credentials are not limited to teaching assignments in the District’s
elementary and middle schools; rather, those teachers are authorized to fulfill
assignments in the District’s one and only high school where in-depth subject matter
knowledge is required.

13b.

Superintendent Standfill testified, for example, that with respect to the

math exemption, Kelly Chavez (Seniority # 236) is exempt from layoff and will be
skipped despite the seniority of Jennifer Seagle (Seniority # 177) because Ms. Chavez’s
clear single subject teaching credential for foundational level mathematics authorizes her
to teach general mathematics, all levels of algebra, geometry, probability and statistics,
and consumer mathematics in grades twelve and below. Ms. Seagle, on the other hand,
has a clear multiple subject teaching credential for general subjects in a self-contained
classroom as a self-contained teacher in grades twelve and below, and has a subject

5

matter authorization in introductory mathematics to teach preschool, K-12, and adult
students where the curriculum is designed for grades nine and below. Ms. Seagle’s
subject matter authorization in introductory mathematics does not enable her to teach any
mathematics course in the curriculum for grades 10, 11, and 12.

13c. With respect to the business exemption, Thomas Parslow (Seniority # 216)

is exempt from layoff and will be skipped despite the seniority of Lauren Morris
(Seniority # 193) because Mr. Parslow’s clear single subject teaching credential for
business authorizes him to teach business management, business marketing or
introduction to business, computer concepts and applications, economics, business
communications or business English, or accounting in grades twelve and below. Ms.
Morris, on the other hand, has a clear multiple subject teaching credential for general
subjects in a self-contained classroom as a self-contained teacher in grades twelve and
below and a clear multiple subject teaching credential for computer concepts and
applications in grades nine and below. Neither of Ms. Morris’ credentials authorizes her
to teach computer concepts or other courses comprising the business curriculum in grades
10, 11, and 12.

13d. With respect to the social science exemption, Robert Demonteverde

(Seniority # 222) is exempted from layoff and will be skipped despite the seniority of
Valerie Lopez (Seniority# 194) because Mr. Demonteverde’s clear single subject
teaching credential for social science authorizes him to teach courses in the social science
curriculum in grades twelve and below. Ms. Lopez, on the other hand, has a clear
multiple subject teaching credential with a supplemental authorization to teach social
science in grades nine and below. There are no required courses for social science in the
District’s ninth grade to which Ms. Lopez may be assigned. In addition, Ms. Lopez is not
authorized to teach courses in the social science curriculum for grades 10, 11, and 12,
which includes World History and United States History.

14.

In light of the need to reduce services while retaining personnel with the
training, experience, and credentials to adapt to Common Core standards, the District’s
exemption criteria requiring single subject mathematics, foundational mathematics,
business, and social science credentials and current assignments to mathematics,
foundational mathematics, business, and social science positions are valid. In this case,
the possession of a single subject credential in mathematics, foundational mathematics,
business, or social science is the dispositive factor in determining which of the District’s
certificated employees is exempt from layoff. The “who will be assigned to . . . positions
for the 2013-2014 school year” language in the District’s exemption criteria is
superfluous and therefore its effect need not be considered.

15.

The District properly exempted Kelly Chavez, Thomas Parslow, and

Robert Demonteverde from layoff pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), set forth
in Legal Conclusion 2.

6

16.

The manner in which the District chose to exempt or “skip” its certificated

employees to implement its layoff was neither arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a
proper exercise of its discretion.

17.

The Resolution provides that as between certificated employees who first
rendered service to the District on the same date, the order of termination is determined
by reference to the following tie-breaking criteria and point system:

a. 3 points for holding a Bilingual Cross-cultural Language and

Academic Development (BCLAD) Certificate or Bilingual Certificate
of Competence (BCC).

b. 2 points for each current, valid Single Subject or Multiple Subject

credential held, excluding supplemental authorizations.

c. 3 points for “hard to hire” preliminary or clear credentials held in

Math, Science, Special Education.

d. 3 points for “hard to hire” preliminary or clear credentials held in

Foundational Math

e. 2 points for an earned Master’s degree

f. 1 point for each year of step placement on salary schedule (maximum

of 10 years).

g. 2 points for Autism Authorization.

h. 2 points for National Board Certification

i. 1 point for serving as a BTSA Support Provider within the last two

years in Charter Oak Unified School District.

2.
Individuals who are specifically exempted by resolution and
individuals who do not receive a notice of layoff due to the scope of their
credential will nevertheless receive point totals so that their service may
be properly credited in the event of a dispute.

Employees who receive a notice and who share the same date of

3.
first paid service shall be ranked by point totals. Low point totals indicate
low seniority for the hire date. For example, an individual with a point
total of “1” will be laid off before an individual with a point total of “3”
where both individuals share the same date, and provided layoff was not
otherwise determined by virtue of credential or exemption.

7

4.
If the criteria listed above do not break a tie, the District shall hold
lotteries at least five work days prior to the layoff hearing. Each group of
tied employees shall have the right to attend the lottery and pick a lottery
number. In the absence of the employee, the Superintendent or designee
will select a lottery number on behalf of the employee.

5.
As between tied employees, low lottery numbers will indicate
low seniority for the hire date. For example, and individual with a
lottery number or “1” would be laid off before an individual with a
lottery number of “10.”

(Ex. 1a; Bold emphasis in original.)

18.

The District applied the tie-breaker criteria and point system to its

certificated personnel appearing on the seniority list to create a tiebreak chart. (Ex. 10.)
At the hearing, the tiebreak chart was amended to correct an error assigning Jaime
Somerville (#172) the wrong number of tie-breaking points. (Ex. 20.) The correction
does not impact the order of termination for District certificated personnel subject to
layoff.

19.

The District rescinded layoff notices to Christopher Case, Geoffrey Grund,

Mary Mckinley, Renette McNeil, and Carrie Smith. Respondents’ counsel argues that
the District should additionally rescind the layoff notice to Karen Tanaka (Seniority
#168). After leave of absence in the 2012-2013 academic year, Aubrey Brinegar
(Seniority #151) resigned from the District effective June 30, 2013. Counsel contends
that the District should use Ms. Brinegar’s “departure as attrition to reduce the number of
layoffs needed.” (Respondents’ Post-hearing Brief at p.8.) During Ms. Brinegar’s leave
of absence, the District retained no temporary personnel to fill Ms. Brinegar’s position,
even though the District is obligated to preserve the position in the event of Ms. Bringar’s
return. The District was therefore able to reemploy previously laid-off, credentialed
personnel as needed. Consequently, Ms. Brinegar’s subsequent resignation opens no
position into which any District certificated personnel, including Ms. Tanaka, may move.
Ms. Tanaka is properly noticed for layoff.

20.

The District properly considered all known reassignments, resignations,

and retirements in determining the actual number of layoff notices to be delivered to
employees by March 15, 2013.

21.

Respondent’s counsel argues that Brandy Campbell (Seniority #206) “did

not receive a precautionary notice” and that “the annotated seniority list [does not]
indicate any exemption or PKS reduction for her.” (Respondents’ Post-hearing Brief at
p.8.) Ms. Campbell acknowledged her receipt of a Preliminary Notice Not to Reemploy
Probationary and Permanent Certificated Personnel for 2013-2014 School Year Due to
Layoff, Education Code §§ 44949 and 44955 by affixing her signature to Alphabetical
List of Employees Receiving Preliminary Notices 2012-2013 Sign In Sheet. (Ex. 3.) Ms.
Campbell additionally completed a Request for Hearing form, which she signed and

8

dated February 27, 2013. (Ex. 4.) It is factually incorrect to claim that Ms. Campbell
was not noticed about her possible layoff. As Assistant Superintendent Standfill testified,
the District served Ms. Campbell with notice because, as set forth above in Factual
Finding13b, Ms. Chavez is exempt from layoff, and consequently skipping Ms. Chavez
subjects Ms. Seagle to layoff. Ms. Seagle is senior to Ms. Campbell, and Ms. Seagle’s
seniority enables her to bump Ms. Campbell. The possibility of such a scenario makes it
prudent for the District to serve Ms. Campbell with preliminary notice of the layoff
because it affects her, notwithstanding that neither the Resolution or the Supplemental
Resolution indicates an applicable exemption or PKS reduction for her, and the District
has done so.

22.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Section 44949 provides in pertinent part as follows:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the
governing board that his or her services will not be required for the
ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section 44955, the governing
board and the employee shall be given written notice by the
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the
reasons therefore.

2.

Section 44955 provides in pertinent part as follows:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for
causes other than those specified in Sections 44907 and 44923, and
Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, and no probationary employee shall
be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as specified in
Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive.

(b) Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all of the
schools district for the first six months in which school is in session shall
have declined . . . , whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced
or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year,
. . . and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall
have become necessary by reason of any of these conditions to decrease
the number of permanent employees in the district, the governing board
may terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of
the certificated employees of the district, permanent as well as
probationary, at the close of the school year. Except as otherwise
provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee may be

9

terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render
a service which said permanent employee is certified and competent to
render.

[¶] . . . [¶]

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on
the same date, the governing board shall determine the order of
termination solely on the basis on needs of the district and the students
thereof. Upon the request of any employee whose order of termination is
so determined, the governing board shall furnish . . . a statement of the
specific criteria used in determining the order of termination and the
application of the criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other
employees in the group . . . .

(c) [S]ervices of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the
order in which they were employed, as determined by the board in
accordance with Sections 44844 and 44845. In the event that a permanent
or probationary employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing
as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed reemployed
for the ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a
manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which their
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. . . .

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from
terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority for either of the
following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrated a specific need for personnel to teach a
specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee
has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or
course of study or to provide those services, which others with more
seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.

3.
44955 were met.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and

4.

The services set forth in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of services

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955. The
Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither

10

arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the
reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s
schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

5.

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section

44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students
shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce service’ by
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees
are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

6.

The District properly identified the certificated personnel providing the

particular kinds of services that the Governing Board directed be reduced or
discontinued.

7.

Cause exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44945 to terminate the

services provided by respondents Brandy Campbell, Elizabeth Diaz, Victoria Ingledue,
Luiza Kartouch, Sara Litch, Valerie Lopez Jennifer Maletz, Dina McGhghy, Mary
Moore, Lauren Morris, Paticia Santiago, Jennifer Seagle, Carol Sepulveda, Gregory
Solis, Karen Tanaka, Gail Troncoso, Cheryl Wallace and Kathleen White for the 2013-
2014 academic year, by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 22, inclusive, and Legal
Conclusions 1 through 6, inclusive.

ORDER

Charter Oak Unified School District may give notice to respondents Brandy
Campbell, Elizabeth Diaz, Victoria Ingledue, Luiza Kartouch, Sara Litch, Valerie Lopez
Jennifer Maletz, Dina McGhghy, Mary Moore, Lauren Morris, Paticia Santiago, Jennifer
Seagle, Carol Sepulveda, Gregory Solis, Karen Tanaka, Gail Troncoso, Cheryl Wallace
and Kathleen White that their services will not be required for the 2013-2014 school year
due to the reduction of particular kind of services.

Dated: May 6, 2013

____________________________________
JENNIFER M. RUSSELL
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

11

