BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
AZUSA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:

OAH No. 2013030787

GUADALUPE ALVARADO, et al.,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Laurie R. Pearlman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) of the

Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 30, 2013, in Azusa,
California.

Sharon J. Ormond and Jabari A. Willis, Attorneys at Law, represented the Azusa
Unified School District (District). Richard Schwab, Attorney at Law, represented Guadalupe
Alvarado, Eugenia Behnamfar, Alicia Braaksma, Xiomara Calzadias, Rena Esther Campos-
Ball, Nancy De Lap, Darla Elliott, Whytnie Grennan, Olivia Martin, Silvio Quintas, Timothy
Relph, Nora Sandoval-Gutierrez, and Andrea Sherman. Keven Gayton was present during
the morning session only and represented herself.1 These individuals will be collectively
referred to as Respondents.

The District decided to reduce or discontinue certain educational services and gave
Respondents and other certificated District employees notice of its intent not to reemploy
them for the 2013-2014 school year. Respondents requested a hearing for a determination of
whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 2013-2014 school year.

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The matter was submitted for decision

on April 30, 2013.

1 Ms. Gayton was present at the morning session at which time the ALJ offered her
the opportunity to present her case at the conclusion of the District’s case, before the repre-
sented Respondents. Ms. Gayton told the ALJ that she planned to attend a meeting at 1 p.m.
and that she would prefer to present her case after the represented Respondents had complet-
ed their testimony. However, Ms. Gayton did not return for the afternoon session. She had
contacted the District Office during the lunch break to inform the District that she would not
be returning to the hearing.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Linda Kaminski is the Superintendent of the District. She filed the Accusation

in her official capacity. Corey James, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, and his
staff were responsible for implementation of the technical aspects of the layoff.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

2.

3.

On March 5, 2013, the Superintendent recommended to the Governing Board

of the District (Governing Board) that it reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services for
the 2013-2014 school year and, for that reason, that it give notice to certain certificated
employees that their services will not be required for the 2013-2014 school year. On the
same date, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 12-13:69 to reduce or discontinue
37.00 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) classroom teaching services, as follows:

PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES

NO. OF FULL-TIME
EQUIVALENT
(FTE)
POSITIONS

K-5 Classroom Teaching Services

20.00

6th Grade Classroom Teaching Services

Middle School Math Teaching Services

Middle School Art Teaching Services

Middle School Leadership Teaching Services

Middle School English/Language Arts Teaching

High School Business Teaching Services

Continuation High School English Teaching

Continuation High School U.S. History Teaching

Services

Services

Services

2

3.00

1.00

.80

.20

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.20

Continuation High School World History

Teaching Services

Continuation High School Government Teaching

Continuation High School Yearbook Teaching

Services

Services

Continuation High School Social Studies Elective

Teaching Services

High School Assistant Principal

Continuation High School Assistant Principal

Director, Adult Education

Program Specialist-Staff Development

Director, Categorical Programs-Instruction

Support

Total FTE Reduction

.60

.20

.20

.80

2.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

37.00

4.

Pursuant to Resolution 12-13:69, prior to March 15, 2013, the District served

preliminary layoff notices, via personal service, to 35 certificated employees currently
serving as K-12 teachers or management, including Respondents, that the District’s
Superintendent had recommended to the Governing Board that the District give notice to
these employees that their services will not be required in the 2013-2014 school year. The
Preliminary Layoff Notice packets included a Request for Hearing form that, if returned to
the District by March 22, 2013, would constitute a request for hearing. On or before March
22, 2013, 22 of the 35 individuals served returned this form.

5.

The Governing Board modified Resolution 12-13:69 on March 19, 2013 when
it adopted Resolution 12-13:79, which rescinded the reductions of five FTE K-5 Classroom
Teaching Services, leaving a reduction of 15 FTE for that particular kind of service.

6.

During the time that employees were permitted to submit requests for hearing,

the Governing Board decreased by five F.T.E. the total number of K-5 classroom teaching
services to be reduced, as set out in Factual Finding 5. As a result, the District rescinded five
of the preliminary layoff notices which had been issued to K-5 teachers. Three of the five
teachers had already submitted requests for hearing and subsequently withdrew their requests
for hearing.

3

7.

On April 8 and 9, 2013, the District served 19 employees with an Accusation

and related materials, including the Governing Board’s resolution adopting the
Superintendent’s recommendation. Of the 19 employees served with an Accusation packet,
14 submitted Notices of Defense, four withdrew their Requests for Hearing, and one failed to
submit any Notice of Defense (Madeli Nanda, who is currently out on maternity leave).

8.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

9.

The services set forth in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services
which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code (the Code)
section 44955.2

10.

The Governing Board took action to reduce the services set forth in Factual

Finding 3 primarily because of the State’s proposed reduction of funding for education. The
decision to reduce services was not related to the capabilities and dedication of the
individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated. The decision to reduce
or discontinue the particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious, but is rather
a proper exercise of the District’s discretion.

11.

The reduction or discontinuance of services set forth in Factual Finding 3 is
related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease
the number of certificated employees, as determined by the Governing Board.

12.

On December 11, 2012, the Governing Board adopted Resolution 12-13:43
which includes criteria for determining the order of seniority of those employees with the
same first date of paid service (tie-breaking criteria). These tie-breaking criteria included:
credentialing; authorization to teach English Language Learners; experience within the
District; and number of higher education credits/degrees. The District applied these criteria
to determine the order of seniority among employees who had the same seniority date.

13.

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority

dates (first date of paid service), current assignments, and credentials. The District used the
seniority list to develop a proposed lay-off list of the least senior employees currently
assigned to the various services being reduced. In determining who would be laid off for
each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by
the known vacancies and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of
seniority. The District then determined whether these employees held credentials in another
area and were entitled to “bump” other, more junior employees.

14a. Respondent Rena Esther Campos-Ball (Campos-Ball) holds a clear multiple
subject credential3 and a supplementary authorization to teach introductory social science.4

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

4

Campos-Ball is teaching business classes at the high school level currently and is one of only
three teachers authorized to teach accounting and marketing. Ten years ago, she taught
Social Science at the high-school level. Matthew Lee Snyder, who is less senior, is being
retained. Snyder holds a Social Science credential and has taught History in a District K-8
classroom setting for at least one complete year out of the past 10 years, while Campos-Ball
has not. Campos-Ball maintains, in turn, that she has the credentials and competence to
“bump” Mr. Snyder, who is being retained by the District to teach middle school history
classes under single subject social science credentials.

14b. The District has assigned August 28, 2003, as Campos-Ball’s seniority date.

Since 2005, Campos-Ball has taught core subjects to fifth and sixth graders.

In

14c. The Governing Board’s Resolution No. 12-13:69 established competency
criteria for purposes of allowing an employee currently assigned in a position subject to
layoff to “bump” a less senior employee holding another position not subject to layoff.
order for Campos-Ball to be eligible for reassignment to a position held by an employee with
less seniority, she must be both credentialed and competent to render the services currently
being performed by the junior employee. Resolution No. 12-13:69 provides, “For purposes
of implementing this Resolution, a more senior employee is defined as competent for
reassignment into a position currently held by a more junior employee, if he or she: (a)
currently possesses a clear or preliminary credential which authorizes instruction in each
subject(s) or grade level to which the employee will be assigned at the beginning of the
2013-2014 school year; (b) has previously taught under the credential(s) required for the
entire assignment to which the employee will be assigned at the beginning of the 2013-2014
school year in the District for one complete school year within the last 10 school years; . . . In
no event may a more senior employee displace a more junior employee unless the more
senior employee is both competent and credentialed for the entire assignment of the more
junior employee.” (Exhibit 1.)

14d. Campos-Ball did not teach in a District departmentalized history classroom for

one complete school year within the last 10 school years, which is necessary under the
District’s competency criteria to enable her right to “bump” any middle school history
teachers with less seniority. Although Campos-Ball has previously taught .4 social science
in a core sixth grade curriculum, she has used her multiple subject credential to authorize her
to perform this assignment, not her supplementary authorization to teach introductory social

3 A clear multiple subject credential authorizes the holder, among other things, to

teach core classes consisting of two or more subjects to the same group of students in grades
five through eight, and to teach any of the core subjects she is teaching to a single group of
students in the same grade level as the core for less than fifty percent of her work day.

4 Authorization allows the holder to teach only the subject matter content typically

included for the introductory subject or subjects listed, in curriculum guidelines and
textbooks approved for study in grades 9 and below, to students in preschool, kindergarten,
grades 1-12, or in classes organized primarily for adults.

5

science. Campos-Ball does not meet the District’s competency criterion requiring her to
have teaching experience under her supplementary authorization for one complete school
year within the last 10 school years, and thus, she is not “competent” to “bump” into a
middle school history assignment requiring such credential. In contrast, Snyder taught
History in a K-8 classroom setting using his Social Science subject credential, which is the
credential required to teach a middle school History class. Campos-Ball failed to establish
that she is competent to “bump” into Snyder’s position.

15a. Alicia Braaksma has a seniority date of August 23, 2007. She has been
teaching a Ninth Grade curriculum in middle school, consisting of .8 English, .2 Journalism,
and .2 Yearbook, utilizing a multiple-subject credential. While she does not yet have a
single-subject English teaching credential, she is very close to obtaining one.

15b. Braaksma is being “bumped” by Joo Hyon Ko, a middle school English

teacher who is senior to her. The District sought to eliminate one middle school English
teacher and Ko was the most junior English teacher among those teaching K-8. Braaksma
does not contend that she should not be “bumped” by Ko. Rather, she contends that since
she has been teaching English, as well as a sought-after journalism elective, she should be
placed into the vacancy which may be created if an English teacher who is senior to her,
Timothy Conklin, retires.5

15c. Braaksma has used a multiple subject credential to perform her teaching

assignment. She does not yet have a single subject credential to teach English. Thus, she
does not meet the District’s competency criterion requiring her to have teaching experience
under a single subject credential for one complete school year within the last 10 school years,
and thus, she is not “competent” to “bump” into any assignment requiring such a credential.
As for her contention that the District should place her into a slot which may open up if
Conklin chooses to retire, lay-off decisions can only be based on positively assured attrition
that has occurred by the date of the lay-off resolution. The District cannot be required to
account for possible future attrition in issuing lay-off notices. Braaksma failed to establish
that she should be “skipped”6 or is competent to “bump” into another position.

5 The District produced an attrition list (Exhibit 16.) In addition to known attrition,
which the District accounted for in its lay-off resolution, nineteen teachers are listed as pos-
sible retirees, pending Governing Board approval of a retirement incentive, which will be
taken up at the Governing Board’s May 7, 2013 meeting.

6 “Skipping” refers to the District’s exercise of its discretion to deviate from the order
of seniority by choosing to retain a more junior individual who has special skills, training, or
qualifications. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), allows the District to de-
viate from the order of seniority if there is a need for personnel to teach a specific course or
course of study, and if a junior certificated employee has special training and experience
necessary to teach that course or course of study which others with more seniority do not
possess.

6

16a. Darla Elliott has a seniority date of January 17, 2007. She is the most junior of

five teachers who teach English at a continuation high school. Like Braaksma, Elliott
contends that she should be “skipped” over more senior employees or placed into the
vacancy which may be created if an English teacher who is senior to her, Timothy Conklin,
retires.

16b. Elliott has used a multiple subject credential to perform her teaching
assignment, although she also holds a single subject credential to teach Introductory English
(up to 9th grade.) Thus, she does not meet the District’s competency criterion requiring her to
have teaching experience under a single subject credential for one complete school year
within the last 10 school years, and thus, she is not “competent” to “bump” into any
assignment requiring such a credential. As for her contention that the District should place
her into a slot which may open up if Conklin chooses to retire, lay-off decisions can only be
based on positively assured attrition that has occurred by the date of the lay-off resolution.
The District cannot be required to account for possible future attrition in issuing lay-off
notices. Elliott failed to establish that she should be “skipped” or is competent to “bump”
into another position.

17a. Olivia Jean Martin has a seniority date of August 29, 2002. She holds a

multiple subject credential and a single subject credential in Introductory Science, which
allows her to teach 7th to 9th grade science. She currently teaches 6th grade (.4 Language Art/
.4 History/ .2 Language Arts Support.) Martin previously taught 9th and 10th grade science
at a private all-girls school.

17b. Martin contends that she should be permitted to “bump” a science teacher

who is junior to her. However, because she has not utilized her single subject credential to
teach science for a full day in a departmental setting, she does not meet the District’s
competency criterion requiring her to have teaching experience under a single subject
credential for one complete school year within the last 10 school years, and thus, she is not
“competent” to “bump” into any assignment requiring such a credential. Martin failed to
establish that she is competent to “bump” into another position.

18.

At the hearing, the district announced that due to additional attrition, it has

rescinded its preliminary layoff notices and dismissed the Accusation pertaining to Xiomara
Calzadias, Jacqueline Palmeira, and Nora Sandoval-Gutierrez.

19.

The District did not retain any certificated employee junior to Respondents

Guadalupe Alvarado, Eugenia Behnamfar, Alicia Braaksma, Rena Esther Campos-Ball,
Nancy De Lap, Darla Elliott, Whytnie Grennan, Olivia Martin, Silvio Quintas, Timothy
Relph, Andrea Sherman, and Keven Gayton, to render a service which these Respondents are
certificated and competent to render.

7

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

3.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and

44955, by reason of Factual Findings 1 through 8.

The services listed in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services that

could be reduced or discontinued under section 44955.

Cause exists for the District to reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of

services listed in Factual Finding 3, which cause relates solely to the welfare of the District's
schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949, as set forth in Factual Findings 1
through 11.

4.

Cause exists within the meaning of Education Code section 44955 to terminate
the employment of Respondents Guadalupe Alvarado, Eugenia Behnamfar, Alicia Braaksma,
Rena Esther Campos-Ball, Nancy De Lap, Darla Elliott, Whytnie Grennan, Olivia Martin,
Silvio Quintas, Timothy Relph, Andrea Sherman, and Keven Gayton for the 2013-2014 school
year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services, by reason of Factual Findings numbers
1 through 19, and Legal Conclusions 1 through 3.

5.

Cause does not exist within the meaning of Education Code section 44955 to

terminate the employment of Respondents Xiomara Calzadias and Nora Sandoval-Gutierrez for
the 2013-2014 school year, by reason of Factual Finding 18.

ORDER

Accusations are sustained against Respondents, Guadalupe Alvarado, Eugenia

Behnamfar, Alicia Braaksma, Rena Esther Campos-Ball, Nancy De Lap, Darla Elliott,
Whytnie Grennan, Olivia Martin, Silvio Quintas, Timothy Relph, Andrea Sherman, and
Keven Gayton. Notice may be given to those Respondents that their services will be
reduced or terminated for the 2013-2014 school year due to the reduction or discontinuation
of particular services. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

The Accusations are dismissed against Respondents Xiomara Calzadias and Nora

Sandoval-Gutierrez.

Dated: May 6, 2013

_______________________________
LAURIE R. PEARLMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

8

