BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
ORLAND UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction
in Force of:

OAH No. 2014040535

SUE ANDERSON,

Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

Danette C. Brown, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings,

State of California, heard this matter on April 29, 2014, in Sacramento, California.

Paul N. Boylan, Attorney at Law, represented the Orland Unified School District.

Lesley Beth Curtis, Attorney at Law, represented Sue Anderson (respondent).

Evidence was received, the matter was submitted and the record was closed on April

29, 2014.

FINDINGS

2.

3.

1.

Jeff Scheele is the Interim Superintendent of the Orland Unified School

District (District). The District operates five elementary, junior high, community day and
high schools for approximately 2,215 students.

The actions of Interim Superintendent Jeff Scheele, and the actions of the

Governing Board (Board), were taken in their official capacities.

The District is facing a budget shortfall for the 2014-2015 school year. Last

month, the District declared a fiscal emergency, and is on the brink of insolvency. The
Board hired a fiscal advisor, Jan Combes, to analyze the District’s financial circumstances.
Ms. Combes had discussions with the District regarding its ability to fund its obligations and
pay off its debt. Consequently, the District believes it is necessary to reduce a number of
certificated positions to address the budget shortfall.

1

4.

On March 10, 2014, the Board adopted Resolution No. 12-13/14, providing for
the reduction or elimination of the following particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2014-
2015 school year:

Service

Full Time
Equivalent

OUSD School Nurse Position

OUSD School Librarian Position

Mill Street Title 1 Teacher Position

Fairview Title 1 Teacher Position

Middle School/Alternative Education School
Counselor Position

TOTAL

0.5

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

4.5

5.

The PKS resolution recited that the Board finds that it shall be necessary to

decrease the above programs and services no later than the beginning of the 2014-2015
school year because it is in the best interest of the District and its students.

6.

The services set forth in the PKS resolution are particular kinds of services

that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.
The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was not arbitrary or
capricious. The reduction or elimination of services constituted a proper exercise of the
Board’s discretion, within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.

7.

On or before March 15, 2014, the Interim Superintendent gave the Board

written notice of his recommendations that notice be given to affected certificated employees
that their services would not be required for the ensuing school year, and the reasons
therefor.

8.

The District alleges that on or before March 15, 2014, it served respondent

with written notice of its recommendation that notice be given to respondent of the 0.5 FTE
reduction of her position for the ensuing school year 2014-2015. The District’s written
notice was not introduced into evidence, however, respondent did not deny receiving the
notice, and timely filed a request for hearing.

9.

The Interim Superintendent made and filed an Accusation against respondent

on April 10, 2014. The Accusation with required accompanying documents and a blank

2

Notice of Participation were timely served. Respondent timely filed a Notice of
Participation.

10.

Respondent is presently a certificated permanent employee of the District.

11.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code

sections 44949 and 44955.

12.

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority

dates (first date of paid service), and the number of credentials, authorizations and advanced
degrees each employee holds.

13.
August 23, 1989.

Respondent is the only school nurse in the District, with a seniority date of

14.

The District’s decision to reduce nursing services was based upon the

District’s determination that it could comply with all statutory mandates with a reduced
nursing staff. After reduction of respondent’s nursing services by 0.5 FTE, the District will
have remaining 0.5 FTE registered nurse services provided by respondent.

15.

Respondent contends that the District’s reduction of nursing services is not in

the best interests of the students, and that the District is reducing nursing services to the point
that mandated programs will be affected. She offered evidence of the numerous State
mandated services a school nurse provides, including vision and hearing exams, scoliosis
screening, immunizations, serving as a member of individual education plan (IEP) teams and
implementing nursing components of the IEP, carrying out individualized health care plans,
medication training, specialized physical health care procedures (Glucagon and EpiPen
injections), and maintaining health care records. Additionally, nurses provide numerous
services not mandated by the State, but necessary for the health and welfare of the students.
These services include, among others, first aid, administration of medications, and treating
children that become ill while at school, i.e., vomiting, headaches, etc., communicating with
parents about child’s health issues, and coordinating care beyond the school day.

16.

Respondent described with particularity the individualized health care plans

that she carries out for many students. One student’s individualized health care plan involves
the student’s doctor, who requires respondent, as the only school nurse, to assess and then
make the determination if medication for the student’s cardiac condition should be given.
The doctor would not sign the medication authorization unless respondent assured him that
she was the only one administering the medication. Respondent has “raced” to the student’s
school site approximately 10 times this school year to assess and/or administer the
medication. Respondent also performs: twice daily catheterization of a student with spina
bifida; administers daily medication for a student with cystic fibrosis; administers daily
insulin to one diabetic student and monitors two other diabetic students who administer their
own insulin; monitors three students with various allergies requiring EpiPens; monitors 15
students requiring inhalers at school; and monitors four students requiring attention deficit

3

disorder medications on an “as needed” protocol. Respondent will have an entering
kindergarten student requiring daily assistance with blood sugar testing and insulin
administration. She will also have two post-cancer treatment students returning to school in
2014-2015. Respondent maintains that nursing services are already below mandated levels
and cannot legally be reduced further.

17.

The District contended that reducing respondent’s nursing position by 0.5 FTE
will not compromise the District’s ability to provide mandated health care services to District
students. The District indicated that contracting out is available, if needed, to meet its
mandatory nursing requirements, and in case of medical emergencies, District staff is to call
911. The District may provide mandated services by contracting with outside agencies
authorized to perform the services by the County Superintendent of Schools. (Ed. Code, §§
49452.5 (scoliosis screening), 49452 (sight and hearing tests).)

18.

Respondent is a longtime and very valued employee of the District. She has at
all times been a superior nurse. The District decision to reduce her services was due solely to
the financial circumstances and needs of the District.

19.

The Interim Superintendent correctly identified respondent as the certificated
employee providing the particular kinds of services that the Board directed be reduced. No
junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services which a more
senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

1.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections

44949 and 44955 were met.

2.

The service identified in Board Resolution No. 12-13/14 is a particular kind of
service that could be reduced or discontinued under section 44955. The Board’s decision to
reduce or discontinue the identified service was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a
proper exercise of its discretion.

3.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955,

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not,
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.

4.

An existing budget shortfall, and expected decline in enrollment and the

anticipation of receiving less money from the State for the next school year are appropriate
bases for a reduction in services under section 44955. As stated in San Jose Teachers Assn v.
Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of particular kinds of services on

4

the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that section, and, “in fact, when
adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section 44955 is the
only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.” The
District must be solvent to provide educational services, and cost savings are necessary to
resolve its financial crisis. The Board’s decision was a proper exercise of its discretion.

5.

Cause exists to reduce 0.5 FTE of the school nurse position. Cause for the
reduction of nursing services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils
within the meaning of section 44949.

RECOMMENDATION

Notice shall be given to respondent Sue Anderson that her services will be reduced

for the 2014-2015 school year by .5 FTE because of the reduction and discontinuance of
particular kinds of services.

Dated: May 5, 2014

________________________________
DANETTE C. BROWN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

