BEFORE THE
SUPERINTENDENT OF THE
PLACER COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction
in Force of:

OAH No. 2014030866

JULIE COMBS
EMILY HARMAN
MIKE JENSEN

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Danette C. Brown, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings,

State of California, heard this matter on April 23, 2014, in Auburn, California.

Marie A. Nakamura, Attorney at Law, represented the Placer County Superintendent

of Schools, Placer County Office of Education (PCOE).

Lesley Beth Curtis, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Julie Combs and Mike

Emily Harman withdrew her Request for Hearing and Notice of Participation.

Evidence was received, the matter was submitted and the record was closed on April

Gayle Barbolino-Mojica is the Placer County Superintendent of Schools

(Superintendent). Her actions were taken in her official capacity.

On March 6, 2014, the Superintendent adopted Resolution No. 2014-03-06

Certificated Employee (Resolution), providing for the reduction or elimination of the
following particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2014-2015 school year:

Jensen.

23, 2014.

1.

2.

FINDINGS

1

Service

Full Time
Equivalent

Special Education Program

Autism Spectrum Disorders Program

Severe Multiple Disabilities

Functional Skills

Adapted Physical Education

School Nurse

Speech and Language Pathologist

Student Services Program

Teacher, At-Risk Students

TOTAL

4.00

1.00

1.00

0.40

0.50

1.20

2.00

10.10

3.

The Resolution recited that the Superintendent has deemed it necessary to
reduce or eliminate 10.10 FTE as a result of the reduction and/or elimination of the PKS
listed above for the 2014-2015 school year.

4.

The Resolution provided that the Superintendent shall give appropriate notice

to affected employees no later than March 14, 2014. The resolution was adopted by the
Superintendent on March 6, 2014.

5.

On March 10, 2014, the Superintendent issued a Notice of Non-reemployment

to Julie Combs (respondent Combs), informing her that her services would be discontinued
no later than the beginning of the school year.

6.

On April 3, 2014, the PCOE served on respondents a written “Notice of Placer

County Office of Education’s Statement of Reduction in Force” (Notice). The Notice
advised that the Board had passed a Resolution reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of
services which reduced the certificated staff by 10.1 FTE certificated positions. The Notice
stated that pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, respondents were advised
that his/her services would not be required or were reduced.

7.

Respondents timely filed Requests for Hearing.

2

8.

The Superintendent made and filed a Statement of Reduction in Force

(Statement). The Statement with required accompanying documents and a blank Notice of
Participation was timely served on respondents.

9.

Respondents timely filed Notices of Participation to the Statement.

10.

Each respondent is presently a certificated permanent employee of the County

Office of Education.

11.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code

sections 44949 and 44955.

Implementation of Layoff Procedure

12.

In anticipation of the PKS reduction, the Superintendent and her staff began

updating the PCOE’s seniority list. Associate Superintendent Phillip Williams and Executive
Director of Human Resources (HR Director), Marianne Garcia, identified the individuals
serving in the positions affected by the PKS reductions. PCOE staff used the updated
seniority list to identify vacant positions and to identify the least senior persons occupying
the positions affected by the PKS reductions. PCOE staff took into account known attrition,
existing vacancies and student enrollment.

13. When the least senior persons occupying the positions affected by the PKS

reductions were identified, Ms. Garcia looked at each individual’s credentials to determine
whether he or she could displace any less senior certificated employees. On April 3, 2014,
PCOE served the Notices identified in Finding 6, on the most junior employees affected by
the PKS reduction.

Respondent Julie Combs

14.

Respondent Julie Combs (respondent Combs) is a permanent employee with a

seniority date of August 22, 2005. She holds a clear multiple subject credential and a clear
Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development (CLAD) certification. She currently
teaches at the Placer County Juvenile Detention Facility. Ms. Combs received a Notice
pursuant to the PKS elimination of 2.0 FTE in the Student Services Program, At-Risk
Students (At-Risk). Ms. Combs held an At-Risk 1.0 FTE position, and the other At-Risk 1.0
FTE position was vacated by teacher Gary Rose in March 2014. Ms. Combs is the least
senior employee teaching in the At-Risk Student program.

15. Ms. Combs contends that she should be retained because: (1) Placer County

Pathways Charter School (Pathways Charter) is not exempt from teacher layoffs and that she
should be able to displace the less senior teachers at Pathways Charter; (2) PCOE allowed
permanent employee Debbie Lum, an At-Risk teacher with a seniority date of February 16,
1999, to fill teacher Gary Rose’s vacant At-Risk position, a 1.0 FTE position which was

3

eliminated; and (3) the reduction cannot be upheld because PCOE is reducing the level of
services at Pathways Charter below the legally mandated level.

Pathways Charter School

16. Ms. Combs placed in evidence an excerpt of the approved Pathways Charter
Petition. Pathways Charter was formed pursuant to Education Code section 47605, which
details the petition process for establishment of charter schools.

17.

The Pathways Charter petition addresses the governance structure of the

school in Element 4, at page 15. Under “Governance,” it states in pertinent part:

The Placer County Pathways Charter School is a public charter school
within the Placer County Office of Education (“PCOE”). The Placer
County Board of Education (“Board”) will be the governing body of
Pathways Charter School and holder of the charter, which includes the
authority to renew and close the Charter School. The ultimate authority
for the governance of Pathways remains with the Board. However, the
Board designates the County Superintendent to operate Pathways and
to ensure that is it operated in accordance with the terms of this charter
and applicable PCOE policies and procedures. The Board delegates to
the County Superintendent the responsibility to establish and approve
all major educational and operational policies, approve all contracts,
manage the Charter Schools fiscal affairs, and hire and be the employer
of the Charter School’s staff …

The PCOE will provide all appropriate support services in order to
contribute to the successful operation of Pathways Charter School. In
general, direct support costs of personnel, financial, legal, purchasing,
and facility services shall be budgeted for and paid by revenue
generated by student average daily attendance as reported by Pathways
and included in the overall budget of the PCOE. Pathways will be
funded through the PCOE as other PCOE non-charter schools.

18.

In Element 5, at page 16, under “Employee Qualifications,” the Pathways

Charter petition states in pertinent part:

The qualifications and duties of the certificated and classified staff
employed who work [sic] at the Charter School shall be
determined by PCOE. The County Superintendent shall have the
ultimate decision-making authority with respect to hiring,
evaluating, disciplining and releasing of employees working at the
Charter School.

4

19.

The Pathways Charter petition addresses employee rights in Element 13, at

pages 22-23: The section states in pertinent part:

Certificated Employees

Any certificated individual who is a member of the Placer Association
of Certificated Educators, CTA/NTA certificated bargaining unit
(PACE), who is offered employment at the Charter School, and
chooses to work at the Charter School, will not be covered by the
PACE collective bargaining agreement while working at the Charter
School.

While PCOE certificated employees who obtained permanent status at
the time they began working at the Charter School will continue to
have permanency with regards to employment by PCOE in non-charter
school programs, they will not have any right to a permanent
employment assignment at the Charter School.

Option to Request Reassignment

Certificated employees employed by PCOE as of June 30, 2012, who
choose to work at the Charter School will not be given any return rights
back to a non-charter PCOE program except for those that may be
applicable to PCOE employees under the Education Code. However,
such employees will be given the option to request a reassignment to a
non-charter PCOE program for the following school year if they notify
the PCOE’s Human Resources Department in writing of the request for
reassignment to a non-charter PCOE program by no later than February
1 of the current school year for a reassignment in the following school
year …

Certificated employees hired by PCOE to work at the Charter School
after June 30, 2012 (“New Hires”) will be employees of PCOE, but will
not be given the option to request a reassignment to a non-charter
PCOE program described above in this Element 13. New Hires will
not have any permanency or seniority rights or other job retention
rights or privileges unless afforded individually by PCOE.

20.

Charter schools operate independently from existing school district structure,

as intended by the legislature under the Charter Schools Act. (Ed. Code, § 47601.) The
legislature exempted charter schools from virtually all of the Education Code provisions that
do not specifically pertain to charter schools. (Ed. Code, § 47610.) Charter schools are
exempt from Education Code section 44955 relating to teacher rights in layoff proceedings.
Respondent has not cited any provision of law or case holding which conflicts with the plain
meaning of Education Code 47610. Thus respondent Comb’s assertion that Pathways

5

Charter is not exempt from the layoff provisions of Education Code sections 44949 and
44955 lacks merit.

21.

In Wilson v. State Board of Education (1999) 75 Cal. App. 4th 1125, the court

addressed challenges to the constitutionality of the Charter School Act. In upholding the
Act, the court held that the legislature determined that charter schools “would be free from
most state laws pertaining uniquely to school districts.” Id. at p. 1131. The court held that
charter schools are “under the jurisdiction of chartering authorities …within the Public
School System” and explained: “School districts, county boards of education and respondent
Board share several things in common: The formation of each entity is provided for in
article IX (§ 7 [Board and county boards of education], §§ 14 & 16 [local school districts and
their governing boards]). As such each entity is “authorized to maintain” the various schools
in our public school system. ( Id., § 6.) Finally, each entity is a defined chartering and
revoking authority under the Act (§§ 47605, subds. (b), (j), 47605.5, 47607), with
supervisorial oversight over their charter schools (§§ 47604.3, 47607, 47613.7).” Id. at p.
1142.

22.

Respondent Combs contends that Pathways Charter employees are PCOE

employees , and thus she should be able to displace the less senior Pathways Charter At-Risk
teachers. This argument is not persuasive. PCOE is mandated by the Charter Schools Act to
govern Pathways Charter. The charter petition and Education Code sections 47610 [charter
schools exempt from laws governing school districts], 47611.5 [charter shall contain
declaration whether charter school is exclusive public school employer, otherwise, school
district is public school employer], and 47611 [regarding whether state teachers retirement
system is available to charter school employees], establish that employees of a charter school
are school district employees only if the charter petition states so. Here, the charter petition
designates PCOE as the employing entity for Pathways Charter teachers. Pathways Charter
teachers are not automatically afforded the rights of other certificated employees. They are
not afforded the same retirement benefits and tenure provided to PCOE certificated school
district employees, and Pathways Charter may set salaries and terms of employment which
differ from those of PCOE certificated school district employees. PCOE certificated school
district employees have no statutory right to bump into positions within a charter school.
Likewise, Pathways Charter certificated employees cannot bump into a non-charter PCOE
program. The evidence did not establish that Pathways Charter employees are PCOE
certificated school district employees such that they may be assigned to and from Pathways
Charter and non-charter school district programs.

23.

Respondent Combs also contended that PCOE treated Pathways Charter

employees the same as PCOE certificated school district teachers, because PCOE included
Pathways Charter employees on its seniority list. However, HR Director Marianne Garcia
testified credibly that Pathways Charter employees were kept on the seniority list just so that
PCOE could keep track of them. Pathways Charter employees were not placed on the
seniority list for purposes of PCOE layoffs. Respondent Comb’s argument is not persuasive.

6

24.

Respondent Combs may apply for a vacant position at Pathways Charter;

however, she cannot be guaranteed employment at the charter school, and her layoff from
PCOE is completely separate and unrelated to any employment possibility at Pathways
Charter.

Filling of Vacancy at Alder Grove School

25.

Respondent Combs also contends that a PCOE teacher, Debbie Lum, was

assigned to fill a vacant At-Risk position at Alder Grove School which was identified as a
PKS in the resolution to be eliminated. She asserted that the At-Risk position was vacated
by teacher Gary Rose, who left employment with PCOE in March 2014. Associate
Superintendent Phillip Williams testified credibly that Ms. Lum was assigned to Independent
Study, not to an At-Risk classroom. Independent Study was not identified as a PKS to be
reduced or eliminated in the resolution. Respondent Comb’s argument was not persuasive.

Level of Services below Legally Mandated Level

26.

Respondent Combs contended that her layoff cannot be upheld because the

level of services at the Placer County Juvenile Detention Facility (juvenile hall) will fall
below the legally mandated level. She offered in evidence an excerpt from the 2010-2011
Placer County Grand Jury Final Report, which contained a finding that there are only two
certificated teachers for three classrooms at juvenile hall. Because the report is over three
years old, it is given little weight, as it does not reflect the current teaching and classroom
status at juvenile hall. Elizabeth Iannone-Lee, a special education teacher at Koinonia and
Alder Grove Schools, 1 testified on respondent’s behalf. Ms. Iannone-Lee taught special
education at juvenile hall for the past two school years with one other teacher. She also
provided non-special education services, which felt like two full time jobs. However, she
conceded that she was able to provide the students with their full Individual Educational Plan
(IEP) requirements, and did not offer testimony that PCOE failed to meet its legally-
mandated requirements. While it is clear that the At-Risk teachers who remain in their
Districts will be working harder due to the 2.0 FTE reduction, it was not established that the
reduction would prevent the Districts from providing mandated services.

Michael Jensen

27.

Respondent Michael Jensen (respondent Jensen) is a permanent employee with

a seniority date of August 24, 1998. He holds a clear adaptive physical education specialist
credential, a clear single subject credential, and a clear certificate for completion of staff
development. He currently teaches adaptive physical education (adaptive PE) at nine school

1 Koinonia School and Alder Grove School are community schools within the
Alternative Education Program at PCOE. Students served by the Juvenile Court and
Community Schools (JCCS) have been expelled from a local school district, referred by the
Probation Department, the local School Attendance Review Board (SARB), or have been
placed in the Receiving Home.

7

sites. He is the only adaptive PE teacher employed by PCOE. His services as an adaptive
PE teacher will be reduced from 0.8 FTE in the 2013-2014 school year, to 0.4 FTE for the
2014-2015 school year.

28. Mr. Williams testified that PCOE chose to reduce the FTE for adaptive PE

because students at Penryn Elementary School were being served by their school district, the
adaptive PE program was closed at EV Cain, Olive Ranch and Sierra Elementary Schools,
and students were “aging out” of the program. Mr. Phillips determined that the number of
students served by respondent Jensen will be reduced from 23 in the 2013-2014 school year
to 11 in the 2014-2015 school year.

29.

Respondent Jensen contends that PCOE will not be meeting its legally-

mandated level of services for adaptive PE with only 0.4 FTE for the 2014-2015 school year.
He asserted that he is required to attend student IEP meetings by law, but could not attend
IEP meetings that were scheduled on his day off in the 2013-2014 school year. It is not
known how many IEP meetings respondent Jensen missed, or whether he contacted PCOE to
inform them of this issue. Respondent Jensen did not establish that the FTE reduction would
prevent PCOE from providing mandated services.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and

44955. All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections were satisfied.
Each respondent is presently a certificated probationary or permanent employee of the
District.

2.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code section
44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to
deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167,
178-179.) The burden is on the District to demonstrate that the reduction or elimination of
the particular kinds of services is reasonable and that the District carefully considered its
needs before laying off any certificated employee. (Campbell Elementary Teachers
Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 807-808.)

3.

The services identified in Resolution No. 2014-03-06 are particular kinds of

services that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code sections 44949 and
44955. The description of services to be reduced, both in the PKS resolution and in the
Notices, adequately described particular kinds of services. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002)
98 Cal.App.4th 838, see also, Degener. v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)

4.

Cause exists to reduce or eliminate 10.1 FTE of particular kinds of services
offered by the PCOE as set forth in detail in the Findings. PCOE’s decision to reduce or

8

discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper
exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or elimination of services relates solely to
the welfare of PCOE’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code section
44949.

5.

No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained to perform any

services which any respondent was certificated and competent to render.

RECOMMENDATION

1.

2.

3.

Cause exists to reduce or eliminate the certificated positions no later than the

beginning of the 2014-2015 school year in accordance with the PKS resolution.

Notice may be given to respondent Julie Combs that her services will not be

required for the 2014-2015 school year.

Notice may be given to respondent Michael Jensen that his services will be

reduced to 0.4 FTE for the 2014-2015 school year.

Dated: May 1, 2014

________________________________
DANETTE C. BROWN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

9

