BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
PLUMAS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Case No. 2014030844

In the Matter of the Plumas Unified
School District’s Statement of Reduction
in Force Against:

BRIAN SCOTT, EMILY READ,
KATHLEEN COPELAND, MICHAEL
WEEKS, ALETHA O’KELLEY, and
SUSAN TANTARDINO,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 28, 2014, in Quincy, California.

Attorney Michelle L. Cannon of the law firm Kronick, Moskovitz, Tiedemann &

Girard represented Micheline Miglis, Superintendent of the Plumas Unified School District
(District). Terry Oestreich, Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, also appeared on
behalf of the District.

Attorney Lesley Beth Curtis of the law firm Langenkamp, Curtis & Price, LLP,

represented respondents.

decision on April 28, 2014.

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Superintendent Miglis made and signed the Plumas Unified School District’s

Statement of Reduction in Force solely in her official capacity.

Adoption of Resolution No. 1427

2.

Based upon an anticipated reduction in the demand for classes and in class

sizes for the 2014/2015 school year, Superintendent Miglis recommended to the Governing
Board of the Plumas Unified School District (Board) that particular kinds of services (PKS)
be reduced or discontinued beginning no later than the commencement of the 2014/2015
school year.

3.

On March 13, 2014, the Board adopted Resolution No. 1427 authorizing the

reduction or discontinuance of PKS, and affecting 6.16 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)
certificated positions.

4.

Resolution No. 1427 states that it will be necessary to reduce or discontinue
the following PKS of the District, and to decrease a corresponding number of certificated
employees in the District no later than the beginning of the 2014/2015 school year:

PKS

FTE K-6 Self Contained Classroom Teachers
FTE K-12 Special Education Teacher
FTE 7-12 Spanish Teacher
FTE 7-12 Study Skills Teacher
FTE 7-12 English Teacher
FTE 7-12 Social Science Teacher
Total

FTE
3.50
0.50
0.33
0.17
0.83
0.83
6.16

5.

The PKS set forth in Resolution No. 1427 are the “particular kinds of services”

that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.
The reduction or discontinuance of the PKS set forth in Resolution No. 1427 constitutes a
proper exercise of the Board’s discretion within the meaning of Education Code section
44955.

6.

As a result of the above PKS reductions or discontinuances, the Board

determined that it was necessary to decrease 6.16 FTE certificated positions in the District
before the beginning of the 2014/2015 school year in accordance with Education Code
section 44955.

Implementation of the Reduction of PKS

7.

Assistant Superintendent Oestreich has been in charge of the District’s Human
Resources Department for the past nine months. Prior to her current position, she worked in
the Human Resources Department in “classified hr.” She has also held positions in the
District as the ROP director, Alternative Education director, Technology Department
director, and an elementary school principal. Assistant Superintendent Oestreich is currently
in her 15th year of employment with the District.

2

The District’s seniority list for certificated employees

8.

Assistant Superintendent Oestreich’s current duties include overseeing the

maintenance of the District’s seniority list for certificated employees. That list contains the
following information for each certificated employee: seniority ranking, name, first date of
paid service with the District, employment status (i.e., temporary, probationary, or
permanent), current site assignment, whether the person is full-time or part-time, current
class(es)/grade(s) taught, credential authorization, credential expiration date, and college
major/minor.

9.

At the beginning of the 2013/2014 school year, Assistant Superintendent
Oestreich and her staff began reviewing the personnel files for the District’s certificated
employees and cross-referencing the information contained in each file with the credentialing
information on the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing’s website for each
employee.

10.

Additionally, a memorandum and copy of the District’s seniority list for

certificated employees was sent to all school site principals and secretaries in November
2013. The memorandum instructed each school site principal and secretary to provide a
copy of the seniority list to each certificated employee at the particular site and to have any
employee who disputed his or her information on the list notify the Human Resources
Department.

11.

Based upon information obtained from each certificated employee’s personnel

file, as updated where necessary with information from the California Commission on
Teacher Credentialing’s website and information provided by the particular employee,
Assistant Superintendent Oestreich and her staff updated the District’s seniority list for
certificated employees. At hearing, she explained that this process required the application
of the tie-breaking criteria agreed to by the District and the Plumas County Teachers’
Association (PCTA), the recognized bargaining unit for those certificated employees of the
District in the following job classifications: elementary and secondary teachers, librarians,
speech therapists, music specialist, elementary and secondary special education teachers,
opportunity class teachers, community day school teachers, nurses, continuation education
teachers, counselors, school psychologist, and ROP instructors, half-time or more.1

1 The following are the tie-breaking criteria provided in the bilateral agreement

between the District and PCTA:

B. In the event that a number of individuals have the same first
date of paid service, the following criteria will be used in
determining the order of layoff. Equal weight shall be given
each of the following:

1.
2.

Teaching experience in subject areas of credentials
Authorization of credentials

3

12.

After Assistant Superintendent Oestreich and her staff applied the tie-breaking

criteria to the pertinent employees, they used the seniority list to determine the specific
certificated employees affected by the Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue PKS.2

Determination of those affected by the reduction or discontinuance of PKS

13.

Assistant Superintendent Oestreich and her staff used the seniority list to

determine which certificated employees are currently performing the PKS the Board decided
to reduce or discontinue. Once they determined those employees, they analyzed each of
those employees’ respective bumping rights, if any, by looking at each particular employee’s
credential(s), reviewing the seniority list, and reviewing the District’s current master
schedule of classes to determine whether there are any certificated employees with less
seniority who are being retained to perform a service which the particular employee
identified for layoff is certificated and competent to perform.

K-6 Self Contained Classroom Teachers (3.5 FTE)

14.

According to the District’s seniority list, and after the tie-breaking criteria is

applied to determine the relative seniority between Travis Ross (No. 116 on the list)3 and
Susan Tantardino (No. 118), the following are the four most junior K-6 teachers in the
District, in order of most senior to least: Aletha O’Kelley (No. 108),4 Ms. Tantardino, and
Mr. Ross. When Assistant Superintendent Oestreich and her staff analyzed Ms. O’Kelley’s,
Ms. Tantardino’s, and Mr. Ross’s respective bumping rights, it was determined that they had

3.

Number of years of classroom teaching experience

C. In the event the above criteria are not successful in
determining seniority, a lottery will be used to determine the
order of layoff. The lottery shall take place prior to the issuance
of layoff notices and shall be conducted in the presence of
representatives of the Board and the Association.

2 The final version of the District’s seniority list (Exhibit 4) does not reflect the
application of the tie-breaking criteria. For example, Susan Tantardino (No. 118 on the list)
is senior to Travis Ross (No. 116 on the list) after application of those criteria.

3 Future references to numbers in parentheses refer to the particular employee’s

placement on the District’s security list.

4 Ms. O’Kelley and Ryan Miller (No. 109) share the same seniority date. However,

the tie-breaking criteria were not applied to determine their relative seniority because the
Board received notice at its March 13, 2014 hearing that Mr. Ryan will not be returning to
the District for the 2014/2015 school year.

4

none. Therefore, Superintendent Miglis sent each of them a Notice of Intent to Reduce or
Eliminate (Notice of Intent).5

K-12 Special Education Teacher (.50 FTE)

15.

Kathleen Copeland (No. 115) currently teaches special education full-time at
Chester Junior/Senior High School. Superintendent Miglis sent her a Notice of Intent based
on the Board’s decision to reduce K-12 Special Education Teacher by the equivalent of a .50
FTE certificated position. Assistant Superintendent Oestreich and her staff analyzed Ms.
Copeland’s bumping rights and concluded she had none. But as discussed further below,
their conclusion was incorrect.

7-12 Spanish Teacher (.33 FTE)

16.

Brian Scott (No. 60) currently teaches Spanish full-time. He teaches a total of

four sections, two sections at Chester Junior/Senior High School and two at Greenville
Junior/Senior High School.6 He received a Notice of Intent based on the Board’s decision to
reduce Spanish by the equivalent of a .33 FTE certificated position, which equates to two of
his sections. Assistant Superintendent Oestreich explained that Mr. Scott bumping into
Tania Hutchins’s (No. 70) position teaching Spanish at Portola Junior/Senior High School is
“definitely an option,” but requiring him to travel between Chester Junior/Senior High
School, Greenville Junior/Senior High School, and Portola Junior/Senior High School (where
Ms. Hutchins works) would present a “physical impossibility.” As discussed below,
Assistant Superintendent Oestreich did not properly analyze Mr. Scott’s bumping rights.

7-12 Social Science Teacher (.83 FTE)

17. Michael Weeks (No. 122) currently teaches Social Science at Quincy
Junior/Senior High School on a part-time basis equal to a .83 FTE certificated position. He
is the third most junior certificated employee in the District, and is not certificated and
competent to perform any of the services for which the two most junior employees are being

5 Mr. Ross did not request a hearing challenging his Notice of Intent and therefore

waived any challenge to the Notice. (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b).)

6 Assistant Superintendent Oestreich explained that one junior high/senior high school

section equates to a .17 FTE certificated position. Teaching four sections equates to a .67
FTE position. Therefore, a reasonable inference is drawn from the evidence that Mr. Scott is
allowed an amount of time equivalent to two sections (.33 FTE) for travel between his two
site assignments, and his full-time position is comprised of four sections of teaching and two
of travel.

5

retained to perform. Therefore, he received a Notice of Intent based on the Board’s decision
to reduce Social Science Teacher by the equivalent of a .83 FTE certificated position.7

Challenges to the Notices of Intent

K-6 Self Contained Classroom Teachers

Attrition

18.

Respondents argued that each of the Notices of Intent issued based on the
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the equivalent of 3.5 FTE K-6 self contained
classroom teaching positions should be set aside because the Board did not consider all
positively assured attrition that occurred between the March 13, 2013 Board meeting and the
April 28, 2014 administrative hearing. Specifically, they contend that the Board did not
consider the notices it received during that time period that Kathy Morris (No. 50), Lori
Hahn (No. 75), and Ryan Miller (No. 109) were not returning to the District at the beginning
of the 2014/2015 school year. Therefore, respondents contend, the Notices of Intent
attributable to the equivalent of 3.0 FTE K-6 self contained classroom teaching positions
should be rescinded.

Respondents’ argument is not persuasive. As discussed above, Assistant

Superintendent Oestreich and her staff considered the notice that Mr. Miller is not returning
after the current year when it identified Mr. Ross (1.0 FTE), Ms. Tantardino (1.0 FTE), and
Ms. O’Kelley (.50 FTE) as the K-6 teachers to receive Notices of Intent. Mr. Miller’s 1.0
FTE position, which will be vacant at the beginning of the 2014/2015 school year, makes up
the remainder of the 3.5 FTE K-6 self contained classroom teaching positions designated for
reduction or discontinuation. Furthermore, a district “need not consider positively assured
attrition occurring between the date of the preliminary notice and the final notice in
determining the number of certificated employees to be terminated by reason of a reduction
or discontinuation of a particular kind of service.” (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 630.)

Misclassification of temporary certificated employees

19.

Janae LaGroue and Tanaya Kooyman-Gordon are identified on the District’s

seniority list as temporary certificated employees with seniority dates of August 29, 2013,
and December 2, 2013, respectively. Both hold positions with the District as full-time K-6
Self Contained Classroom Teachers.

7 The remaining PKS which the Board identified for reduction or discontinuation –
Study Skills (.17 FTE) and English (.83 FTE) – are currently being performed by Amanda
Osburn (No. 110), and she received a Notice of Intent on that basis. However, she did not
request a hearing challenging her Notice of Intent and therefore waived any challenge to the
Notice.

6

20. Ms. Kooyman-Gordon testified that she began teaching for the District on

December 2, 2013. She further testified that she never received from the District a written
contract specifying that her teaching position was “temporary.” Therefore, she contends that
she should be reclassified as “probationary” pursuant to Education Code section 44916 and
the California Supreme Court’s decision in Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High
School District (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911.

21.

A similar argument was made on behalf of Ms. LaGroue, who did not testify at

hearing. The seniority date listed for her on the District’s seniority list is the same as that
which is listed on her Notice of Employment, that was introduced on her behalf.

22.

Neither argument is persuasive. Education Code section 44949 makes it clear
that jurisdiction in these proceedings is limited to those certificated employees of the District
who: 1) received a notice from the Board that his or her services are being reduced or will
not be required for the ensuing year, 2) timely requested a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year, 3) was served with the Plumas
Unified School District’s Statement of Reduction in Force, and 4) timely filed a Notice of
Participation. Since the District classified them as “temporary employees,” Ms. Kooyman-
Gordon and Ms. LaGroue did not, and were not entitled to, receive a Notice of Intent.
(Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association v. Bakersfield City School District (2007) 145
Cal.App.4th 1260, 1273 [“Moreover, temporary employees, unlike permanent and
probationary employees, may be dismissed at the pleasure of the board and need be given
only a more limited form of notice before the end of the school year, and no hearing.
[Citations.]”])8

23.

Furthermore, neither employee’s placement on the District’s seniority list
affects any respondent’s bumping rights. Both Ms. Kooyman-Gordon and Ms. LaGroue
received notice of the District’s decision not to reelect them for the 2014/2015 school year.
(See, Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b) [“[T]he services of no permanent employee may be
terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or any
other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee as certificated and competent to render.”]; italics added.)

Special Education Teacher

24.

As previously discussed, Ms. Copeland received a Notice of Intent based on

the Board’s decision to reduce the number of the District’s special education teachers by the
equivalent of a .50 FTE certificated position. She is No. 115 on the District’s seniority list,
holds an Education Specialist Instruction credential with an authorization to teach students

8 That is not to say Ms. Kooyman-Gordon and Ms. LaGroue do not have a forum for

challenging their classifications. They may file a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to
Code of Civil Procedure section 1085, and nothing in this decision should be interpreted as
expressing an opinion about the appropriateness of the District’s decision to classify them as
temporary employees.

7

with mild to moderate disabilities, and currently teaches special education classes at Chester
Junior High/Senior High School. Ms. Copeland is not the most junior special education
teacher in the District, as both Bryan Freschi and Timmie Woods, Nos. 120 and 123,
respectively, on the seniority list, teach special education and hold credentials with
authorizations to teach students with moderate to severe disabilities. Neither Mr. Freschi nor
Mr. Woods received a Notice of Intent.

25.

Assistant Superintendent Oestreich explained at hearing that the decision to

issue Ms. Copeland a Notice of Intent, and not Mr. Freschi or Mr. Woods, was based on the
District’s need for special education teachers authorized to teach students with moderate to
severe disabilities.

26.

Additionally, Assistant Superintendent Oestreich explained that Breeanna

Allan (No. 99) is currently on a leave of absence from the District and scheduled to return at
the beginning of the 2014/2015 school year. Ms. Allan holds an Education Specialist
Instruction credential, is authorized to teach those with mild to moderate disabilities, and
would be entitled to bump into the position teaching special education students with mild to
moderate disabilities currently held by Jennifer Dyrr (No. 106), who in turn would be entitled
to bump into Ms. Copeland’s teaching position.

27.

The issue is not whether Ms. Copeland is authorized to teach students with

moderate to severe disabilities, but whether the Notice of Intent gave her sufficient notice to
be able to reasonably assess the likelihood that her certificated position will be reduced for
the 2014/2015 school year. (See, Santa Clara Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v.
Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 841
[“[T]he March 15 notice is intended to ensure that the affected employee is informed of the
facts upon which [she] can reasonably assess the probability [she] will not be reemployed …
.”]) And under the District’s method of implementing the Board’s decision to reduce PKS,
the Notice of Intent did not give her sufficient notice because special education teachers
teach students with many different types of disabilities which require different types of
teaching credentials and authorizations. (See, Ed. Code, § 44265, see also, Cal. Code Regs,
tit. 5, §§ 80046.5-80048.9.3.) Therefore, the Board’s designation of “K-12 Special
Education Teacher” generally as the service to be reduced or discontinued did not give her
sufficient notice that two special education teachers with less seniority than her and who each
hold the equivalent of an 1.0 FTE position would not be subject to layoff simply because
they are authorized to teach students whom she is not authorized to teach.

28.

Assistant Superintendent Oestreich’s argument that the District has a

legitimate basis for “skipping” Mr. Freschi and Mr. Woods based on its need for special
education teachers authorized to teach students with moderate to severe disabilities was not
persuasive. The District failed to demonstrate “a specific need for personnel to teach a
specific course or course of study … .” (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1); italics added;
Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 131 [the district has
the burden of proving its right to skip the more junior employee].)

8

29.

Assistant Superintendent Oestreich’s argument about Ms. Allan’s right to

bump Ms. Dyrr and Ms. Dyrr’s right to bump Ms. Copeland was not persuasive either. First,
her contention that Ms. Allan is currently on a leave of absence is contradicted by the
seniority list, which identifies her as currently teaching Alternative Education. Second, such
argument only explains why the District did not issue a Notice of Intent to Ms. Allan or Ms.
Dyrr (two employees with greater seniority than Ms. Copeland), and does not explain or
justify the District’s decision not to issue one to Mr. Freschi or Mr. Woods.

30.

For the reasons discussed above, the District is required to implement the

Board’s directive to reduce K-12 Special Education Teacher by the equivalent of a .50 FTE
position by selecting the most junior employee teaching any type of special education
students. And the persuasive evidence established that Ms. Copeland is not that employee.
Therefore, her Notice of Intent must be rescinded.

7-12 Spanish Teacher

31.

As discussed above, Mr. Scott (No. 60) teaches four sections of Spanish. He
holds a Single Subject credential in Spanish. Superintendent Miglis issued him a Notice of
Intent based on the Board’s decision to reduce 7-12 Spanish Teacher by the equivalent of a
.33 FTE certificated position.

32.

Tania Hutchins is No. 70 on the District’s seniority list. She currently teaches

four sections of Spanish, one section of 8th grade Science, and one section of Plumas
Academies at Portola Junior/Senior High School. She holds a Multiple Subject credential, a
Single Subject credential in Life Science and Spanish, and a Cross-Cultural, Language and
Academic Development Certificate.

33.

Assistant Superintendent Oestreich explained that Plumas Academies is a type

of class in which a student may learn any one of a number of subject matters, depending on
his or her particular needs. The subject matter learned may be a core class or an elective, and
the class may be taken online or with a teacher in a classroom setting. While a teaching
credential is required to teach Plumas Academies, the District does not require any particular
type of credential.

34.

In discussing her staffs’ and her analysis of Mr. Scott’s bumping rights,

Assistant Superintendent Oestreich explained that allowing him to bump into Ms. Hutchins’s
four sections of Spanish at Portola High School is “definitely an option.” But she also
explained that requiring Mr. Scott to travel between Chester Junior/Senior High School,
Greenville Junior/Senior High School and Portola Junior/Senior High School each day would
constitute a “physical impossibility” due to their relative geographical locations.

35.

The District relied on the decision in Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School

District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, to justify its conclusion that the “physical
impossibility” of requiring Mr. Scott to travel between three different schools to maintain his
full-time position teaching Spanish supersedes his seniority rights under Education Code

9

44955, subdivision (b). In Hildebrandt, the appellate court relied on a school district’s wide
discretion in the manner in which it defines the services provided by certificated employees
when it concluded that Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), cannot be used to
force a school district to split a full-time position held by a junior employee to accommodate
a senior employee’s desire for a part-time position.

As the court held in Murray,9 a district may define a “service” in
terms of the hours required to perform it, so that two part-time
employees performing the same responsibilities do not
necessarily perform the same “service” as one full-time
employee. A school district need not define a service in such a
manner, and in many situations may well determine that an
assignment can equally effectively be shared by two or more
part-time employees. However, so long as the determination is
reasonable and made in good faith, neither section 49455 nor
any other provision of the Education Code precludes a school
district from defining a position, or a “service,” as full time
[sic].

(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District, supra, 172 Cal.App.4th at pp. 343-344.)

36.

The rationale of Hildebrandt is not applicable because allowing Mr. Scott to
bump into Ms. Hutchins’s four sections of Spanish would not require the District to split an
existing position to allow him to travel between school sites since he already travels between
Chester Junior/Senior High School and Greenville Junior/Senior High School. Additionally,
Mr. Scott is certificated and competent to teach Ms. Hutchins’s Plumas Academies class
since Assistant Superintendent Oestreich testified that no specific type of teaching credential
is required to teach that class.10 Therefore, Mr. Scott’s seniority rights under Education Code
section 44955, subdivision (b), must prevail, and “the governing board shall make
assignments and reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render
any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.” (Ed. Code, §
44955, subd. (c).) The Notice of Intent issued to Mr. Scott must be rescinded.

9 Murray v. Sonoma County Office of Education (1989) 208 Cal.App.3d 456.

10 Evidence of the anticipated class assignments for the 2014/2015 school year was

not considered since those assignments are only in the draft stage and are still subject to
change. (People v. Berryman (1993) 6 Cal.4th 1048, 1081 [“But speculation is not evidence,
less still substantial evidence.”]; disapproved on different grounds by People v. Hill (1998)
17 Cal.4th 800, 823, fn. 1.)

10

Emily Read

37. Ms. Read is No. 119 on the District’s seniority list. She has a Multiple Subject

credential, and currently teaches English at Quincy Junior/Senior High School on a .50 FTE
basis. The District did not introduce any evidence to show a clear relationship between the
PKS designated for reduction or discontinuance in Resolution No. 1427 and Ms. Read, either
by showing that Ms. Read is performing that PKS or is being bumped by a certificated
employee with more seniority who either is rendering a service that is being reduced or
discontinued or is being bumped by a more senior certificated employee who is certificated
and competent to render the service that that employee is now rendering. The District may
not lay off any respondent whose layoff cannot be traced back to a PKS being reduced or
discontinued in Resolution No. 1427. Therefore, the Notice of Intent issued to Ms. Read
should be rescinded.11

Welfare of the District and Its Students

38.

The reduction of the PKS set forth in Resolution No. 1427 are related to the

welfare of the schools and the students thereof within the meaning of Education Code
sections 44949 and 44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is
neither arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of its discretion.

39.

After due consideration and adjustments made as discussed in Factual

Findings 30, 36, and 37, no permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being
retained to render a service for which a respondent is certificated and competent to perform.

40.

Any other assertions raised by the parties at hearing which are not addressed

above are found to be without merit.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Education Code section 44949 provides the following, in pertinent part, with

regard to a school district’s jurisdiction to lay off certificated employees:

(a)(1) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given
notice by the governing board that his or her services will not be
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her

11 Based on the information contained on the District’s seniority list, it appears that

Amanda Osburn (No. 110) may be certificated and competent to bump into the position
currently held by Ms. Read. As previously discussed, however, Ms. Osburn did not request a
hearing and has waived her right to challenge her Notice of Intent. (Ed. Code, § 44949,
subd. (b).)

11

designee, or in the case of a school district that has no
superintendent by the clerk or secretary of the governing board,
that it has been recommended that the notice be given to the
employee, and stating the reasons therefor.

(b) The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is
cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing year. A
request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the person who sent the notice pursuant to subdivision (a), on or
before a date specified in that subdivision, which shall not be
less than seven days after the date on which the notice is served
upon the employee. If an employee fails to request a hearing on
or before the date specified, his or her failure to do so shall
constitute his or her waiver of his or her right to a hearing. The
notice provided for in subdivision (a) shall advise the employee
of the provisions of this subdivision.

(c)(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of
participation, if any, within five days after service upon him or
her of the District Statement of Reduction in Force and he or she
shall be notified of this five-day period for filing in the District
Statement of Reduction in Force.

[¶]…[¶]

[¶]…[¶]

[¶]…[¶]

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the
schools and the pupils of the schools. The proposed decision
shall be prepared for the governing board and shall contain a
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a
recommendation as to disposition. However, the governing
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of
the cause and disposition. None of the findings,
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be
binding on the governing board. Nonsubstantive procedural
errors committed by the school district or governing board of
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors. Copies of the

12

proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the
proceeding is commenced. All expenses of the hearing,
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid
by the governing board from the district funds.

[¶]…[¶]

(e) If after a request for hearing pursuant to subdivision (b) a
continuance is granted pursuant to Section 11524 of the
Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) that
occur on or after the date of granting the continuance and the
date prescribed in subdivision (c) of Section 44955 that occurs
after the date of granting the continuance shall be extended for a
period of time equal to the continuance.12

(Ed. Code, § 44949.)

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth above,

and no respondent argued otherwise.

2.

When a school district’s governing board decides to reduce or discontinue

particular kinds of services and a corresponding number of certificated employees, the
general rule is that the order of layoffs must be determined by seniority. (Ed. Code, § 44955,
subd. (b) [“Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent employee
may be terminated under the provisions of this section while any probationary employee, or
any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent
employee is certificated and competent to render.”]; Davis v. Gray (1938) 29 Cal.App.2d
403, 406.) This general rule is applied equally to probationary certificated employees.
(Krausen v. Solano County Junior College District (1974) 42 Cal.App.3d 394, 402.)

3.

After a school district’s governing board decides to reduce or discontinue

services, the school district’s first step is to identify those certificated employees providing
the particular services to be reduced or discontinued. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) The
district has a mandatory duty to make an initial determination whether those certificated
employees who are performing the services to be reduced or discontinued are certificated and
competent to perform the services of any certificated employee with less seniority who is
being retained. (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District, supra, 172 Cal.App.4th
334, 340.) But once the school district makes the initial determination, the burden shifts to

12 This matter was originally scheduled to be heard on April 7, 2014. Pursuant to the

parties’ stipulation, however, that date was continued to April 28, 2014. Therefore, the
statutory deadline for issuing a proposed decision was continued from May 7, 2014, to May
28, 2014, and the statutory deadline for the District to issue final notices of termination was
continued from May 15, 2014, to June 5, 2014.

13

the certificated employee asserting the right to bump the junior employee to prove that the
former is certificated and competent to perform the service for which the latter is being
retained. (Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 656.)

4.

The services identified in Resolution No. 1427 are the particular kinds of
services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor
capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. (See, e.g., San Jose Teachers
Association v. Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at p. 638-639) Cause for the reduction or
discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and their
pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.

5.

For the reasons discussed in Factual Findings 14 and 18 through 23,cause

exists for not reemploying Susan Tantardino during the 2014/2015 school year based on the
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue K-6 Self Contained Classroom Teachers by the
equivalent of 3.5 FTE certificated positions, and the Board has a legal basis for issuing her a
final layoff notice for that reason.

6.

For the reasons discussed in Factual Findings 14 and 18 through 23, cause
exists for reducing Aletha O’Kelley’s certificated position by the equivalent of a .50 FTE
position for the 2014/2015 school year based on the Board’s decision to reduce or
discontinue K-6 Self Contained Classroom Teachers by the equivalent of 3.5 FTE
certificated positions, and the Board has a legal basis for issuing her a final layoff notice for
that reason.

7.

For the reasons discussed in Factual Findings 24 through 30, no cause exists
for reducing Kathleen Copeland’s certificated position for the 2014-2015 school year, and
the Board has no legal basis for issuing her a final layoff notice.

8.

For the reasons discussed in Factual Findings 31 through 36, no cause exists

for reducing Brian Scott’s certificated position for the 2014-2015 school year, and the Board
has no legal basis for issuing him a final layoff notice.

9.

For the reasons discussed in Factual Finding 17, cause exists for reducing

Michael Weeks’s certificated position by the equivalent of an .83 FTE position for the
2014/2015 school year based on the Board’s decision to reduce 7-12 Social Science Teacher
by the equivalent of an .83 FTE position, and the Board has a legal basis for issuing him a
final layoff notice for that reason.

10.

For the reasons discussed in Factual Finding 37, no cause exists for reducing
or discontinuing Emily Read’s certificated position for the 2014-2015 school year, and the
Board has no legal basis for issuing her a final layoff notice.

11.

After the adjustments discussed in Factual Findings 30, 36, and 37 and Legal
Conclusions 7, 8, and 10 are made, no permanent or probationary teacher with less seniority

14

is being retained to render a service for which any respondent is certificated and competent
to perform.

12.

Except as discussed in Legal Conclusions 7, 8, and 10, cause exists to give

notice to respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2014-
2015 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.

2.

Cause exists for the Plumas Unified School District to reduce or discontinue

6.16 Full-Time Equivalent certificated positions at the end of the 2013-2014 school year.

As set forth in Legal Conclusions 7, 8, and 10, the Plumas Unified School

District shall rescind the Notice of Intent to Reduce or Eliminate issued to respondents
Kathleen Copeland, Brian Scott, and Emily Read.

3.

Other than as set forth in Recommendation No. 2, notice may be given to
respondents that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2014-2015
school year. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED: May 9, 2014

____________________________
COREN D. WONG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

15

