 

BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
ACTON  AGUA  DULCE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  District’s  Reduction  in 
force  of: 

OAH  No.  2014030849 

Marilynn  Alford;  Taiz  Carnewal;  Paul 
Chhuo;  Jacob  Gama;  Shelley  Kinsey;  Kelly 
Kubasak;  Amanda  Majewski;  Sara 
Meissner;  Kristyn  Phillips;  Patricia  Raposo- 
Reyes;  Bonnie  Russon;  Nicholas  Steed; 
Kelly  Sutliff;  Ryan  Thurlow;  Daniel 
Tirozzi;  and  Melissa  Trusel, 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Julie  Cabos-Owen,  Administrative  Law  Judge  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  15,  2014,  at  the  Acton  Agua  Dulce 
Unified  School  District  Offices  in  Acton,  California. 

Kerrie  Taylor  with  Fagen,  Friedman  &  Fulfrost,  LLP,  represented  the  Acton  Agua 

Dulce  Unified  School  District  (District).  Amy  Moolin  Cu  with  Schwartz,  Steinsapir, 
Dohrmann  &  Sommers,  LLP,  represented  all  Respondents  except  Shelley  Kinsey,  Sara 
Meissner,  and  Nicholas  Steed  who  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing,! 

: 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received,  and  argument  was  heard.  The  record 

was  closed,  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  15,  2014. 

Hf 
Myf 
Hi 
if 
Mi 
if 
Hf 
lf 
Hf 
Hf 

'  Testimony  at  the  hearing  established  that  Respondent  Sara  Meissner  retired  from  the 

District,  effective  March  31,  2014. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction 

1. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

On  March  13,  2014,  the  Governing  Board  (Board)  of  the  District  adopted 

Resolution  Number  13-14.48  (Resolution)  to  reduce  and  discontinue  the  following  particular 
kinds  of  services  provided  by  the  District  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2014-2015 
school  year: 

‘ 

 

Services  Being  Reduced  or 
Eliminated 

Number  of  Full-Time 
Equivalent  (FTE)  Positions 

Elementary  Classroom  Teacher 
Secondary  Classroom  Teacher  —  English 
Secondary  Classroom  Teacher  ~  Art 
Secondary  Classroom  Teacher  —  P.E. 
Secondary  Classroom  Teacher  —  Spanish 
Special  Education  Teacher 

Total  FTE  Reduction: 

7.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.6  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
3.0  FTE 

15.6  FTE 

3. 

The  Board  further  determined  that  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services 

necessitated  the  employment  termination  of  certificated  employees  by  a  corresponding 
number  of  FTE  positions.  The  Board  directed  the  Superintendent  to  notify  the  appropriate 
employees  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2014-2015  school  year. 

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2014,  the  District  served  each  Respondent  with  a 

Notice  of  Recommendation  that  Services  Will  Be  Terminated  (preliminary  layoff  notice), 
informing  him/her  that  his/her  services  would  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  2013-2014 
school  year. 

5. 

Respondents  timely  submitted  requests  for  hearing. 

6. 

On  March  27,  2014,  Meghan  Freeman,  the  District’s  Director  of  Student 
Services,  filed  the  District’s  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  while  acting  in  her  officia. 
. 
capacity. 

7. 

On  March  27,  2014,  the  District  timely  filed  and  served  on  each  Respondent  a 

Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force,  Statement  to  Respondent,  blank  Notice  of  Participation 
form,  and  copies  of  pertinent  provisions  of  the  Government  and  Education  Codes.  On  that 
date,  the  District  also  served  a  Notice  of  Hearing  on  Respondents. 

 

8. 

Respondents  timely  filed  their  Notice  of  Participation. 

Propriety  of Reduction  of Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

9. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Resolution  and  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  2  are 

particular  kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44955.  (See  also  Legal  Conclusion  2.) 

10.  —  The  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  was  based  in  part  on  a 
fiscal  solvency  problem  arising  from  the  District’s  inability  to  maintain  the  required  amount 
in  reserve.  The  Board  has  determined  to  reduce  its  budget  next  year,  in  part  by  reducing 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

11.  .  Prior  to  the  adoption  of  the  Resolution,  the  District  considered  all  known 

attrition  in  determining  the  number  of  layoff  notices  to  be  served  on  its  employees.” 

12(a).  The  District  determined  that,  even  with  the  proposed  reductions,  it  will  be  able 

to  meet  the  minimum  staffing  required  by  law.  (See  Factual  Findings  22,  23  and  24,  below, 

.  Specifically  addressing  English,  Spanish  and  Physical  Education  services.) 

12(b).  The  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  FTE  positions  will  not  reduce  services 

below  mandated  levels.  (See  also  Legal  Conclusion  3.) 

13. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  particular  kinds  of 

services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  and  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

14. 

The  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  identified  particular  kinds  of  services 

relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  in  the  District  and  its  students.  (See  also  Legal 
Conclusion  2.) 

Seniority  List  and  Tiebreaking  Criteria 

15. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates,  current  assignments,  and  credential  and  certificate  information. 

16. 

The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  with  seniority  dates  to  develop  a  proposed 
layoff  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  particular  kinds  of 
services  being  reduced.  The  District  also  considered  each  teacher’s  credentials  and. 
certifications. 

*  Ina  layoff  proceeding  like  this,  a  governing  board  need  only  consider  positively 

assured  attrition  which  occurs  prior  to  the  March  15th  layoff  notice  deadline,  not  thereafter. 
(San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v,  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  635.) 

   

17. 

In  its  Resolution,  the  Board  established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the 
relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date. 
According  to  the  Resolution,  in  order  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students,  the  , 
following  rating  system  shall  be  applied  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of 
certificated  employees: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

Type  of  Credential. 
Rating:  +2  for  Clear;  +1  for  Preliminary 

Number  of  teaching  and/or  special  service  credentials. 
Rating:  +1  per  credential 

Number  of  supplementary  authorization. 
Rating:  +1  per  supplementary 

Earned  degrees  beyond  the  BA/BS  level. 
Rating:  +1  per  degree 

In  the  event  that  common  day  hires  have  equal  qualifications  based  on’ 
application  of  the  above  criteria,  the  District  will  then  break  ties  by 
utilizing  a  lottery. 

(Exhibit  F,  attachment  1.) 

18. 

The  District  did  not  apply  the  Resolution’s  tie  breaking  criteria  since  it 

determined  that  there  was  no  need  to  do  so. 

19. 

The  District  determined  that  nobody  less  senior  than  Respondents  was  being 

retained  to  render  services  which  Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Elementary  Classroom  Teachers 

Respondent  Marilynn  Alford  —  Currently  Teaching  Middle  School 

20(a).  The  District  issued  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  to  Respondent  Marilynn  Alford 

as  a  1.0  FTE  Elementary  Classroom  Teacher,  a  particular  kind  of  service  (PKS)  which  is 
being  reduced.  However,  Respondent  Alford  is  not  an  Elementary  Classroom  Teacher.  She 
currently 
teaches  middle  school,  and  her  assignment  consists  of  three  periods  of  eighth  grade 
science,  one period  of  eighth  grade  history  and  one  period  of  Medal  of  Honor*.  The  District 
admitted  that  it  is  not  reducing  secondary  classroom  science  or  history  teachers  as  part  of  the 
layoff.  The  District  does  not  know  yet  if  the  Medal  of  Honor  program  will  be  offered  next 
year. 

>  Medal  of  Honor  is  a  non-teaching,  non-pupil  special  assignment  promoting  a 

District-wide  initiative  on  core  values, 

 

20(b).  The  District  identified  Respondent  Alford  as  an  individual  subject  to  layoff 

because  it  determined  that  her  current  assignment  is  a  “mis-assignment”  and  that  she  needs  to 
be  re-assigned  to  an  elementary  classroom  teaching  position.  Respondent  Alford  holds  a 
clear  multiple  subject  credential  and  a  clear  single  subject  credential  in  foundational  science. 
The  District  contends  that  Respondent  Alford  has  been  teaching  her  current  middle  school 
classes  under  her  multiple  subject  credential  which  it  initially  determined'had  authorized  her 
to  teach  the  combination  of  middle  school  science  and  history.  The  District  now  asserts  that 
she  was  not  authorized  to  teach  her  courses  under  her  multiple  subject  credential  and  that  it 
mis-assigned  her.’  However,  the  District  admitted  that  Respondent  Alford  could  teach  her 
three  middle  school  science  classes  under  her  single  subject  science  credential,  but  not  her 
one  period  of  history.  For  the  2014-2015  school  year,  the  District  intends  to  assign 
Respondent  Alford  to  an  elementary  classroom  position  under  her  multiple  subject 
credential,  and  asserts  that  based  on  her  seniority  date,  she  would  be  one  of  the  “multiple 
subject  credential  teachers”  subject  to  layoff. 

: 

20(c).  Respondent  Alford  provides  services  to  the  District  outside  the  scope  of  the 
PKS  identified  for  reduction  in  the  Resolution.  The  District  is  not  authorized  to  reduce  or 
eliminate  any  FTE  positions  of  Secondary  Classroom  Science  or  History,  and  cannot 
terminate  Respondent  Alford’s  employment  based  on  her  currently  rendering  services  in  a 
PKS  not  identified  for  reduction.  Instead,  the  District  is  seeking  to  terminate  Respondent 
Alford’s  1.0  FTE  under  a  PKS  category  in  which  she  is  not  rendering  services.  Although  the 
District  has  asserted  that  Respondent  Alford  is  mis-assigned,  it  has  shown  only  that  she  may 
not  be  authorized  to  teach  history  under  either  of  her  credentials.  She  is  certificated  to  teach 
her  three  periods  of  middle  school  science.  The  District  has  not  established  that  Respondent 
is  subject  to  layoff  as  an  Elementary  Classroom  Teacher  based  on  the  District’s  projected 
decision  to  move  her  from  her  current  assignment  (which  she  is  at  least  partially  authorized 
to  teach)  into  an  assignment  which  has  been  identified  for  reduction/elimination. 

20(d).  The  Resolution  specifically  authorizes  a  7.0  FTE  reduction  in  the  PKS 
category  of  Elementary  Classroom  Teachers.  However,  if  the  District  terminates  Respondent 
Alford’s  employment,  it  would  not  be  reducing  7.0  FTE  of  Elementary  Classroom  Teachers 
because  Respondent  Alford  is  not  teaching  an  elementary  classroom,  and  she  is  not  being 
bumped  by  a  teacher  teaching  such  an  assignment.  The  District  is  in  fact  reducing  only  6.0 
FTE  of  Elementary  Classroom  Teachers  at  end  of  2013-2014  school  year.  These  Elementary 
Classroom  Teachers  are:  Respondent  Paul  Chhuo  (seniority  date  8/31/13),  Respondent  Kelly 
Sutliff  (seniority  date  3/1/12),  Respondent  Shelley  Kinsey  (seniority  date  8/25/08), 
Respondent  Bonnie  Russon  (seniority  date  10/16/06),  Respondent  Kelly  Kubasak  (seniority 
date  8/28/06),  and  Respondent  Melissa  Trusel  (seniority  date 

*  Only  the  District  has  identified  Respondent’s  assignment  as  a  “mis-assignment.” 

The  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education  has  not  done  so. 

 

9/26/05).°.  Consequently,  if  Respondent  Alford’s  services  are  terminated,  there  will  still  be 
an  Elementary  Classroom  Teacher  retained  to  render  the  seventh  1.0  FTE  of  Elementary 
Classroom  Teacher  services  in  the  2014-2015.  This  is  not  a  reduction  of  7.0  FTE 
Elementary  Classroom  Teachers  as  authorized  by  the  Resolution.® 

20(e). 

The  District  also  asserts  that,  if  Respondent  Alford  is  retained  in  her  “multiple 

The  District’s  analysis  is  flawed.  Respondent  Alford  is  not  rendering  services  in  a 

subject  credential”  position,  other  more  senior  “multiple  subject”  teachers  would  be  subject 
to  layoff. 
“multiple  subject  position.”  She  is  rendering  particular  kinds  of  services  as  a  middle  school 
science  and  history  teacher,  and  she  is  certified  and  competent  to  render  at  least  the  three 
periods  of  middle  school  science  services.  If  Respondent  Alford  is  retained  in  her  current 
science  assignment,  no  Respondent  with  greater  seniority  who  is  credentialed  to  teach  middle 
school  science  would  be  subject  to  layoff. 

20(f).  The  evidence  established  that  Respondent  Alford  is  not  properly  subject  to 

layoff. 

AES  is: 

Skipping  —  Alternative  Education  Specialist 

21(a).  The  District  did  not  issue  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  to  Anali  Ortiz  (seniority 

date  8/28/06),  but  issued  preliminary  layoff  notices  to  Respondent  Kubasak  (seniority  date 
8/28/06)  and.  Respondent  Melissa  Trusel  (seniority  date  9/26/05)  as  Elementary  School 
Teachers. 

21(b).  Ms.  Ortiz  is  currently  assigned  as  an  Alternative  Education  Specialist  (AES). 

21(c).  As  set  forth  in  the  Board-approved  job  description,  the  General  Purpose  of  the 

Under  general  supervision  of  the  school  principal,  provides  instruction 
and  tutors  individual  and  small  groups  of  students  in  enrichment 
programs.  Provides  subject-matter  and  classroom  lessons,  observes, 
monitors  and  records  student  performance  and  behavior;  performs 

°  Elementary  Classroom  Teacher  Erin  Steuer  (seniority  date  8/27/13)  received  a 

Notice  of  Nonreelection  on  March  14,  2014.  The  District  took  into  account  her 
nonreelection  prior  to  identifying  the  7.0  Elementary  Classroom  Teacher  FTE’s  for  issuance 
of  preliminary  layoff  notices. 

°  Where  a  service  will  continue  to  be  performed,  there  is  no  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  a  particular  kind  of  service.  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831,  843-844  (citing  Campbell  Elementary 
Teachers  Assn.,  Inc.  vy.  Abbott  (1978)76  Cal_App.3d  796  at  p.  812).) 

administrative  functions  in  support  of  classroom  activities;  and 
performs  related  duties  as  assigned.  In  addition,  provides  counseling 
services  to  students  and  parents  which  assist  the  student  in  making 
appropriate  decisions  relative  to  his/her  educational,  emotional,  and 
social  development.  Assists  the  student  in  making  maximum  use  of 
his/her  potential.  Will  facilitate  public  relations  regarding  alternative 
education  programs  and  college  and  career  opportunities  throughout  the 
district  . 

    

21(d).  As  listed  in  the  Board-approved  job  description  for  the  AES  position,  the 

Minimum  Qualifications  are: 

Teaching  Credential,  General  Secondary,  Single  Subject,  Multiple 
Subject.  In  addition  to  a  California  Teaching  Credential,  a  Pupil 
Personnel  Services  Credential  highly  desirable.  Minimum  5  years 
classroom  teaching  experience, 

(Exhibit  H.) 

(Exhibit  H.) 

21(e).  Ms.  Ortiz  holds  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject  Credential.  She  is  currently  enrolled 
in  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services  Credential  program  and  is  scheduled  to  complete  that  program 
by  the  end  of  the  2013-2014  school  year.  Additionally,  Ms.  Ortiz  has  completed  District- 
funded  training  in  transcript  reading,  teenage  grief  counseling,  peer  counseling,  addressing 
bullying,  and  legal/law  training  as  it  pertains  to  her  position.  She  has  now  had  experience  in 
the  position  of  AES. 

21(f).  Both  Respondent  Kubasak  and  Respondent  Trusel  hold  Clear  Multiple  Subject 

Credentials.  Neither  holds  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services  Credential  nor  is  enrolled  in  a  Pupil 
Personnel  Services  Credential  program.  Neither  Respondent  Kubasak  nor  Respondent 
Trusel  have  had  any  experience  as  an  AES,  and  neither  have  had  any  training  in  transcript 
reading,  teenage  grief  counseling,  peer  counseling,  addressing  bullying,  and  legal/law 
training  as  it  pertains  to  the  AES  position. 

21(g).  The  District  has  a  special  need  for  someone  to  hold  the  position  of  AES  and 
determined  that  only  Ms.  Ortiz  has  the  necessary  skills,  training  and  experience  to  provide 
services  as  the  AES  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

21(h).  The  District  appropriately “skipped”  Ms.  Ortiz  because  she  is  rendering 

services  which  the  more  senior  Respondents  (Kubasak  and  Trusel)  are  not  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

Hl 
iff

Secondary  Classroom  Teachers 

English  Teachers 

22(a).  The  District  intends  to  reduce  Secondary  Classroom  English  Teachers  by  2.0 
FTE.  Respondent  Nicholas  Steed  (seniority  date  9/20/10)  and  Respondent  Krystyn  Phillips 
(seniority  date  8/27/13)  teach  high  school  English  and  received  preliminary  layoff  notices. 

22(b).  Amy  Ciceri  teaches  at  Vasquez  High  School  as  follows:  one  period  of  Drama, 

one  period  of  Beginning  Vocals,  one  period  of  Advanced  Vocals,  one  period  of  Music 
Theory,  one  period  of  ROP  Stage  Craft,  and  one  period  of  ASB.  Although  the  District 
admitted  that  a  teacher  with  a  single  subject  credential  in  English  can  teach  Drama,  the 
evidence  did  not  establish  that  it  would  be  appropriate  for  Respondent  Steed  to  bump.into 
one-sixth  of  Ms.  Cicieri’s  1.0  FTE.  It  appears  that  splitting  her  1.0  FTE  position  to  that 
degree  to  accommodate  a  senior  employee  would  be  impractical  and  inefficient,  and  it  is 
within  the  District’s  discretion  to  decline  to  do  so.’ 

i 

22(c).  Respondent  Nicholas  Steed  and  Respondent  Krystyn  Phillips  both  teach  five 

periods  of  high  school  English.  The  District  acknowledged  that  over  400  students  are 
enrolled  at  the  District’s  high  school.  The  Seniority  List  indicates  that  several  teachers 
holding  Clear  Single  Subject  Credentials  in  English  would  be  retained.  The  District  has 
determined  that  even  with  the  2.0  FTE  reduction  it  will  be  able  to  satisfy  the  needs  of 
students  and  meet  legally-mandated  staffing  levels.  The  evidence  did  not  contradict  the 
District’s  determination. 

Spanish  Teachers 

23(a).  The  District  intends  to  reduce  Secondary  Classroom  Spanish  Teachers  by  1.0 

FTE.  Courtney  Straka  and  Respondent  Patricia  Raposo-Reyes  are  currently  the  only  Spanish 
teachers  in  the  District.  Respondent  Raposo-Reyes  teaches  five  periods  of  Spanish;  one 
period  at  High  Desert  middle  school  (Introduction  to  Spanish-  7  students)  and  four  periods  at 
Vasquez  High  School  (Spanish  I  -18  students;  Spanish  II  Honors  —  6  students;  Spanish  11  — 
15  students;  and  Advanced  Placement  Spanish  —  17  students).  Respondent  Raposo-Reyes’s 
five  periods  have  a  combined  total  of  65  students.  Ms.  Straka  teaches  three  periods  of 
Spanish  at  Vasquez  High  School.  There  are  currently  145  students  enrolled  in  Spanish 
classes  at  the  high  school.  Ms.  Straka’s  three  periods  have  a  combined  total  of 
approximately  90  students. 

23(b).  The  District  determined  that  based  on  enrollment  numbers,  Spanish  classes 

were  not  at  the  maximum  number.  The  District  anticipates  fewer  students  will  enroll  in 
Spanish  classes  next  year.  Although  the  District  intends  to  offer  Spanish  I,  H,  I 
Advanced  Placement  Spanish  at  Vasquez  High  School  during  the  2014-2105  school  year,  it 
does  not  know  if  it  will  offer  Spanish  instruction  at  the  middle  school.  The  District 

and 

- 

7  See, King  v.  Berkeley  Unified  School  District  (1979)  89  Cal.App.3d  1016.)

 

acknowledged  that  high  school  students  need  three  years  of  foreign  language  in  order  to  meet 
“A  -  G  requirements”  for  college  entrance.  However,  it  is  not  required  to  offer  Spanish 
instruction  to  middle  school  students.  The  District  is  exploring  the  implementation  of  online 
language  laboratory  instruction  at  Vasquez  High  School  for  the  2014-2015  school  year  which 
would  be  administered  by  qualified  instructors.  However,  the  District  has  determined  that 
even  with  the  1.0  FTE  reduction  it  will  be  able  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  students  and  meet 
legally-mandated  staffing  levels.  The  evidence  did  not  contradict  the  District's 
determination. 

Physical  Education  Teachers 

24(a).  The  District  intends  to  reduce  Secondary  Classroom  Physical  Education  (PE) 

Teachers  by  1.6  FTE.  The  PE  teachers  receiving  preliminary  layoff  notices  for  this  PKS 
were:  Linda  Edwards  -  0.4  FTE  (seniority  date  10/17/11);°  Respondent  Daniel  Tirozzi  —  0.8 
FTE  (seniority  date  9/1/06);  and  Jacob  Gama  —  0.4  FTE  (seniority  date  8/28/01). 

24(b).  Carolina  Serrano  is  currently  rendering  1.0  FTE  of  services  as  an  Adapted  PE 

(APE)  Specialist.  She  holds  a  Clear  APE  Specialist  credential  and  a  Clear  Single  Subject 
credential  in  PE.  Ms.  Serrano  did  not  receive  a  preliminary  layoff  notice,  since  APE 
Specialist  was  not  a  PKS  identified  for  reduction  or  elimination. 
APE  services  for  special  education  students  in  APE  classes,  Ms.  Serrano  provides  APE 
services  for  one  period  of  general  education  PE  pursuant  to  an  Individualized  Education  Plan 
(TEP)  for  a  student  in  that  class  who  has  been  mainstreamed  into  the  general  education 
population.  Ms.  Serrano  teaches  half  of  the  students  in  that  class  period,  including  the 
student  with  the  JEP,  and  Respondent  Gama  teaches  the  other  half  of  the  students. 

In  addition  to  providing 

24(c).  Ifthe  student’s  IEP  did  not  require  an  APE  specialist  to  teach  that  period  and  it 

became  a  purely  general  education  PE  class,  Respondent  Gama  is  credentialed  and 
competent  to  teach  that  class.  However,  as  long  as  the  student’s  IEP  requires  an  APE 
Specialist  to  teach  at  least  that  student’s  portion  of  the  class,  Ms.  Serrano  is  the  only  teacher 
who  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render  services  as  an  APE  Specialist  and  general 
education  PE  teacher  for  that  class.  No  Respondent  with  more  seniority  than  Ms.  Serrano  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render  services  as  an  APE  Specialist. 

24(d).  With  the  total  1.6  FTE  reduction  in  PE,  Respondent  Gama  would  remain  as 

the  only  teacher  with  a  Clear  Single  Subject  credential  in  PE  rendering  services  as  a  PE 
teacher.  The  District  has  determined  that  even  with  the  1.6  FTE  reduction,  it  will  be  able  to 
satisfy  the  needs  of  students  and  meet  legally-mandated  staffing  levels.  The  evidence  did  not 
contradict  the  District’s  determination. 

Hf 
Hf 
Hl 

*  Linda  Edwards  did  not  request  a  hearing  and  is  not  a  Respondent  in  this  matter. 

Art  Teacher 

25(a).  The  District  intends  to  reduce  Secondary  Classroom  Art  Teachers  by  1.0  FTE. 
Respondent  Taiz  Carnewal  (seniority  date  9/1/06)  received  a  preliminary  layoff  notice.  She 
holds  a  Clear  Single  Subject  credential  in  Art,  and  she  is  the  only  Art  teacher  in  the  District. 

25(b).  The  District  is  not  required  to  offer  Art  next  year. 

25(c).  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  Respondent  Carnewal  could  bump  into  the 

position  of  any  junior  teacher  for  which  Respondent  Carnewal  was  certificated  and 
competent  to  render  services. 

Special  Education  Teachers  —  Skipping  Pre-school  Class  Teacher 

26(a).  The  District  issued  preliminary  layoff  notices  to  Respondent  Amanda 
Majewski  (seniority  date  8/28/12)  and  Respondent  Ryan  Thurlow  (seniority  date  11/28/11) 
as  Special  Education  Teachers,  but  did  not  issue  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  to  Andrea 
Freedman  (seniority  date  8/29/12). 

26(b).  Ms.  Freedman  teaches  the  District’s  only  Preschool  Special  Day  Class  (SDC) 

offered  to  special  education  students  between  ages  three  and  five.  Ms.  Freedman  holds  a 
Level  IJ  Education  Specialist  credential  which  allows  her  to  teach  special  education  and  a 
Child  Development  Permit  which  allows  her  to  teach  preschool.  She  also  has  15  yeats  of 
experience  in  this  field.  Neither  Respondent  Amanda  Majewski  nor  Respondent  Ryan 
Thurlow  holds  a  Child  Development  Permit  which  would  allow  them  to  teach  preschool. 

26(c).  The  District  has  a  special  need  for  someone  to  teach  the  Preschool  SDC  and 

determined  that  only  Ms.  Freedman  has  the  necessary  skills,  training  and  experience  to  teach 
the  Preschool  SDC  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

26(d).  The  District  appropriately  “skipped”  Ms.  Freedman  because  she  is  rendering 

services  which  the  more  senior  Respondents  (Majewski  and  Thurlow)  ate  not  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

AU  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District  due 
to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44955. 

10

  

3. 

The  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  FTE  positions  will  not  reduce  services 

below  mandated  levels. 

4(a). 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

[T]he  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  . 
...  while 
any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority, 
is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

[]...  [1] 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on 
the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of 
termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students 
thereof. 

4(b). 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  allows  the  District  to 

deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  if  the  District 
demonstrates  that  there  is  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of 
study  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to 
teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

5. 

The  District  demonstrated  that  there  was  a  specific  need  to  retain  Anali  Ortiz 
as  an  Alternative  Education  Specialist  and  that  she  has  the  special  training  and  certification 
necessary  to  hold  this  position  which  no  Respondent  with  more  seniority  possessed. 
Therefore,  the  District  appropriately  “skipped”  Ms.  Ortiz. 

6. 

The  District  also  demonstrated  that  there  was  a  specific  need  to  retain  Andrea 
Freedman  as  the  District’s  Preschool  Special  Day  Class  teacher  and  that  she  has  the  special 
training  and  certification  necessary  to  hold  this  position  which  no  Respondent  with  more 
seniority  possessed.  Therefore,  the  District  appropriately  “skipped”  Ms.  Freedman. 

7(a). 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  20,  the  District  improperly  issued  Respondent  Marilynn 

Alford  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  under  the  PKS  category  of  Elementary  Classroom 
Teacher.  If  Respondent  Alford  is  retained  in  her  current  assignment,  no  Respondent  with 
greater  seniority  who  is  credentialed  to  teach  middle  school  science  would  be  subject  to 
layoff. 

7(b). 

Given  the  foregoing,  the  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  against  Respondent 

Marilynn  Alford  should  be  dismissed,  and  she  should  not  be  issued  a  final  layoff  notice. 

11

 

8.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  is  being  retained  to 

perform  any  services  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

9. 

Other  than  Respondent  Marilynn  Alford  (see  Finding  20  and  Legal  Conclusion 

7),  cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955  for  terminating  or 
reducing  Respondents’  employment  for  the  2014-2015  school  year,  as  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  1  through  26  and  Legal  Conclusions  1  through  8. 

ORDERS 

1. 

The  Statements  of  Reduction  in  Force  served  on  Respondents  Taiz  Carnewal, 

Paul  Chhuo,  Jacob  Gama,  Shelley  Kinsey,  Kelly  Kubasak,  Amanda  Majewski,  Kristyn 
Phillips,  Patricia  Raposo-Reyes,  Bonnie  Russon,  Nicholas  Steed,  Kelly  Sutliff,  Ryan 
Thurlow,  Daniel  Tirozzi,  and  Melissa  Trusel  are  sustained.  Notice  may  be  given  to  these 
Respondents  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or  terminated  for  the  2014-2014  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  services  as  indicated. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority, 

2. 

3. 

The  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  against  Respondent  Marilynn  Alford  is 

dismissed,  and  no  final  layoff  notice  shall  be  issued  to  her. 

4. 

Due  to  her  retirement  from  the  District,  the  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force 

against  Sara  Meissner  is  dismissed,  and no  final  layoff  notice  shali  be  issued  to  her. 

Dated:  April  24,  2014 

  JULIE  CABOS-OWEN 
Adininistrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

12 

  

