  

BEFORE  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  COUNTY 
SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force  of: 

CERTIFICATED  STAFF  OF  THE  LOS 
ANGELES  COUNTY  OFFICE  OF 
EDUCATION, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  2014020972 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Ralph  B.  Dash  heard  this  matter  on  April  17  and  18,  2014, 

in  Downey,  California. 

Office  of  Education  (LACOE). 

attachment  A. 

Jennifer  A.  Williams,  Deputy  General  Counsel,  represented  the  Los  Angeles  County 

Richard  J.  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondents,  who  are  identified  in 

The  matter  was  continued  for  10  days,  until  April  28,  2014,  for  the  submission 
closing  briefs.  The  parties  agreed  that  the  statutory  due  date  of  the  Proposed  Decision  in  this 
matter  is  extended  for  10  days  making  the  due  date  May  19,  2014. 

Complainant’s  brief  was  timely  received  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  22  for 
identification.  Respondent’s  brief  was  timely  received  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  H  for 
identification.  The  record  was  then  closed. 

Evidence  having  been  received  and  the  matter  having  been  submitted,  the 

Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Proposed  Decision. 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Darren  McDuffie,  Ed.D.,  made  the  District  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  in 

his  official  capacity  as  the  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  of  LACOE.

  

  

  

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  LACOE. 

2. 

3. 

On  March  11,  2014,  Arturo  Delgado,  Ed.D.,  the  Los  Angeles  Superintendent 

of  Schools  (Superintendent)  adopted  Resolution  No.  1-S  to  reduce  and  discontinue  the 
particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  specified  therein  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
2014-2015  school  year  by  a  total  of  256  full-time  equivalent  positions  (FTE). 

4. 

The  Superintendent  further  determined  it  necessary  by  reason  of  said 

reductions  or  discontinuances  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at  the  close 
of  the  present  school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  FTE  and  directed  Dr.  McDuffie,  or 
his  designees,  “to  take  all  actions  necessary  and  proper  to  the  accomplishment  of  the 
purposes”  of  Resolution  No.  1-S. 

5. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,'  the  Superintendent 

was  given  notice  by  Dr.  McDuffie  of  the  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to 
Respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  and  stating 
the  reasons  therefore.  This  recommendation  is  dated  March  12,  2014,  the  day  after  the 
Superintendent  signed  Resolution  No.  1-S  (Exhibit  2,  page  30). 

6. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2013,  pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  1-S  and  the 

provisions  of  sections  44949  and  44955,  Dr.  McDuffie  gave  written  notice  to  Respondents 
that  it  had  “been  recommended”  to  the  Superintendent  that  notice  be  given  to  them  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2014-2015  school  year?  Respondents  requested  a 
hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 
Respondents  were  provided  with  all  required  documents. 

7. 

Some  Respondents  were  served  only  pursuant  to  a  provisional  credential,  and 

were  non-reelected  for  that  reason  pursuant  to  the  Superintendent’s  Resolution  No.  4-S, 
independent  of  this  layoff  process.  Those  Respondents  were  provided  notification  as  a 
precaution,  so  that  they  could  participate  in  and  exercise  any  claimed  rights  in  this  matter 
should  they  choose  to  do  so. 

8. 

During  the  hearing,  LACOE  rescinded  the  preliminary  layoff  notice  issued  to 

Respondent  Sandra  Goodwick. 

. 

' 

2 

noted. 

All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

Even  though  the  Notice  is  incorrect  (the  Resolution  was  adopted  before  the 

recommendation  had  been  made),  this  appears  to  be  a  procedural  error  that  did  not  affect  the 
rights  of  any  teacher. 
Section  44949,  subdivision  (c)(3),  states:  “Nonsubstantive  procedural 
errors  committed  by  the  school  district  or  governing  board  of  the  school  district  shal!  not 
constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial  errors.” 

 

  

Reduction  and  Elimination  of Particular  Kinds  of Services 

9. 

Resolution  No.  1-S  provides  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following 

particular  kinds  of  services: 

EDUCATIONAL  PROGRAMS 

A. 

Division  of  Pupil  Services 

1. 
2. 
3. 

Psychologist 
Audiologist 
Counselor 

Division  of  Special  Education 

1, 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14, 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 

Principal 
Coordinator  IT 
Assistant  Principal 
Senior  Program  Specialist 
Consultant  I 
Teacher  APE 
Teacher  AUT 
Teacher  CAR 
Teacher  DH 
Teacher  DIS-HH 
Teacher  DIS-VIS 
Teacher  ED 
Teacher  ID 
Teacher  LSS 
Teacher  MD 
Teacher  Mobility 
Teacher  OH 
School  Nurse 

B. 

Division  of  Student  Programs 

1. 
2. 
3. 

Counselor 
Teacher  APE 
Teacher  CCS 

Subtotal 

14.0 

2 

Subtotal 

178.0 

FTE 

12.0 
1.0 
1.0 

FTE 

4.0 
1.0 
8.0 
3.0 
1.0 
7.0 
20.0 
4.0 
1.0 
4.0 
2.0 
31.0 
45.0 
20.0 
18.0 
1.0 
1.0 
7.0 

FTE 

4.0 
1.0 
2.0 

 

  

B. 

Division  of  Curriculum  and  Instructional  Services 

FTE 

Subtotal 

EDUCATIONAL  SERVICES 

A. 

Division  of  Accountability,  Support  and  Monitoring 

FTE 

Subtotal 

28.0 

Teacher  ISP 
Teacher  JCS 
Teacher  LSS 
Teacher  Resource  Specialist 
Teacher  SDC 

Project  Director  HI 
Project  Director  II 
Consultant  II 
Consultant  II 

Project  Director  II 
Consultant  IT 
Senior  Program  Specialist 
Teacher  Outdoor  Education 

4, 
5. 
6. 
5. 
5. 

1. 
2, 
3, 
4, 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4, 

lL. 
2. 
3. 
4, 
5. 

Cc. 

Division  of  Student  Support  Services 

Project  Director  I] 
Consultant  IT 
Coordinator  I 
Coordinator  I 
Counselor 

HUMAN  RESOURCE  SERVICES 

A. 

Division  of  Human  Resource  Services 

1, 

Coordinator  II 

1.0 
14.0 
2.0 
1.0 
3.0 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
3.0 

6.0 

3.0 
9.0 
1.0 
2.0 

FTE 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
9.0 

FTE 

1.0 

Subtotal 

15.0 

Subtotal 

13.0 

 

TECHNOLOGY  SERVICES 

A. 

Division  of  Instructional  Technology  Outreach 

FTE 

1. 

Consultant  II 

Subtotal 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

Subtotal 

TOTAL  256.0 

10. 

The  services  or  programs  set  forth  in  Finding  9  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  The 
Superintendent’s  determination  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  services  or  programs  is  within 
his  sound  discretion  and  was  not  proven  to  be  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  LACOE  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has 
become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees. 

11. 

LACOE  considered  personnel  changes  due  to  attrition,  retirements,  and  the 

releases  of  provisionally  credentialed  and  temporary  employees  in  making  its  determination 
to  issue  layoff  notices. 

12. 

LACOE  maintains  a  seniority  list  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates, 

current  assignments  and  locations,  credentials,  and  authorizations.  LACOE  used  the 
seniority  list  to  identify  the  most  junior  employees  working  in  a  particular  kind  of  service 
being  reduced  or  discontinued  and  determine  which  employees  would  receive  layoff  notices. 

13. 

The  Superintendent  also  adopted  Resolution  3-S,  which  contained  criteria  to 

be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered 
paid  service  to  LACOE  on  the  same  date.  The  Superintendent  determined  that  such  criteria 
best  served  the  needs  of  LACOE  and  its  pupils.  Respondents  did  not  challenge  the  tie- 
breaking  criteria. 

Skipping 

14. 

Respondents  did  not  challenge  the  delivery  or  content  of  the  Reduction  in 

Force  notices.  Nor  did  they  challenge  seniority  dates  or  credentials  of  skipped  staff.  Pursuant 
to  exhibit  A  of  Resolution  No.  1-S,  the  Superintendent  determined  to  retain  certain 
certificated  staff  in  the  particular  kinds  of  services  identified  in  Finding  9,  regardless  of 

 

  

  

seniority  who,  by  their  training,  experience  and  assignment,  met  any  of  criteria  set  forth  in 
exhibit  A  to  the  Resolution  which,  in  pertinent  part,  reads  as  follows: 

Probationary 

have 
or 
1) 
Success 
experience  teaching  and  specialized  training 
Academy’s  customized  curriculum  for  female  incarcerated  high  school 
students. 

employees 
the  Road  to 

certificated 

permanent 

who 

in 

to 

Challenger  Memorial  Youth  Center 
in 
training 

Probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  who  are  currently 
2) 
received 
assigned 
wide 
specialized 
implementation  of  the  Positive  Behavior  Interventions  and  Supports  (PBIS) 
pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  the  Casey  A.  Court  Order  and  Settlement 
Agreement  section  5. 

have 
facility 

experience 

and 
the 

have 

and 

to 

Challenger  Memorial  Youth 

Probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  who  are  currently 
3) 
received 
assigned 
specialized  training  and  are  experienced  in  the  facility  wide  implementation 
of  the  Advance  Path  program  and/or  other  specialized  programs/courses  of 
court  order  and 
the  requirements  of  the  Casey  A. 
study  pursuant  to 
Settlement  Agreement. 

Center 

have 

and 

as 

and 

(d)(2), 

Pursuant  to 

separate  ground,  Probationary  or 
a 
4) 
permanent  certificated  employees  who  are  currently  assigned  to  Challenger 
Memorial  Youth  Center  whose  assignment  is  necessary  to  maintain  and 
equal 
achieve  compliance  with  constitutional  requirements  relating 
Court  Order  and  Settlement 
protection,  consistent  with  the  Casey  A. 
Agreement. 

to 

15. 

LACOE  is  the  local  educational  agency  charged  with  providing  educational 

services  to  students  in  juvenile  halls  and  probation  camps  in  Los  Angeles  County, 
including  Christa  McAuliffe  High  School  at  Challenger  Youth  Memorial  Center 
(McAuliffe)  and  Road  to  Success  Academy  (RTSA)  at  Camp  Scott-Scudder.  LACOE 
also  provides  specialized  programs  for  students  with  special  education  and  alternative 
education  needs,  such  as  the  program  at  Pace  School  (Pace)  for  students  with  emotional 
disturbance. 

16. 

LACOE  is  party  to  a  federal  court  class-action  lawsuit  entitled  Casey  A.,  et 

al,  v.  Delgado,  et  al.,  case  no.  CV10-00192GHK(FMO)  (C.D.  Cal.).  LACOE  entered 
into  a  settlement  agreement,  which  is  enforced  by  order  of  the  federal  district  court.  The 
court  order  and  subsequent  action  plan  created  the  need  for  a  unique  course  of  study 
focused  on  intensified  instruction  and  Positive  Behavior  Intervention  Support  (PBIS)  to 
ensure  the  student  population  at  McAuliffe  would  receive  appropriate  educational 
support.  The  Court  order  requires  ongoing  monitoring  and  consultation  by  a  technical 

 

  

consulting  advisory  (TCA)  team  that  periodically  reports  to  the  court  to  monitor  that 
McAuliffe  staff  is  receiving  continuous  training  and  consistently  implementing  the  course 
of  study.  Respondents'  sole  challenge  is  to  the  validity  of  the  skips  adopted  by  the 
Superintendent  for  the  trained  staff  at  McAuliffe,  RTSA  at  Scott-Scudder,  and  Pace.  Their  legal 
position,  discussed  below,  is  that  the  District  has  retained  junior  employees  over  senior 
employees  (skips)  who  have  the  training,  experience  and  credentials  to  render  the  same  services 
for  which  the  junior  employees  were  retained  to  render. 

SKIPS  AT  MCAULIFFE 

17: 

Staff  at  McAuliffe  has  received  significant  training  in  the  area  of  PBIS,  including 
training  from  University  of  Oregon,  weekly  PBIS  discussion  collaborations,  weekly  professional 
developments,  daily  collaboration  coaching  from  a  PBIS  committee,  and  one-to-one  coaching 
from  a  PBIS  school  psychologist.  TCA  team  co-chair,  Dr.  Peter  Leone  testified  as  to  the  positive 
impact  of  retention  of  the  trained  staff  following  last  year's  skip  and  how  this  stability  ensured 
progress  towards  the  Court  ceasing  jurisdiction.  He  further  testified  as  to  the  negative  impact 
that  the  2011  layoffs  had  on  the  progress  of  the  action  plan  when  no  skip  was  sought  and  trained 
staff  was  laid  off. 

18. 

Staff  at  McAuliffe  received  in-depth  training  for  instruction,  including  training  on 

the  Marzano  Nine,  focused  classroom  walkthroughs,  and  weekly  participation  in  one-to-one 
coaching  with  academic  consulting  staff.  Staff  has  also  received  training  on  the  Advance  Path 
credit  recovery  program,  the  only  multi-faceted  credit  recovery  program  of  its  kind  in  LACOE's 
school  system.  The  training  and  implementation  of  that  training  by  McAuliffe  staff 
fundamentally  affects  the  delivery  of  instruction  to  students  in  a  unique  way  by  offering  a 
systemic  approach  to  PBIS  and  intensified  instruction,  including  Advance  Path.  No  Respondent 
offered  testimony  of  comparable  training  or  implementation  in  this  course  of  study. 

SKIPS  AT  RTSA 

19.  | RTSA  at  Scott-Scudder  serves  a  population  of  incarcerated  female  youth  with 

distinct  social  and  emotional  needs.  Based  on  these  students!  specialized  needs,  LACOE 
developed  a  course  of  study  focused  on  a  thematic,  interdisciplinary  project-based  learning 
curriculum  with  content  and  support  relevant  and  specific  to  the  population.  To  implement  this 
course  of  study,  RTSA  staff  at  Scott-Scudder  underwent  extensive  training  and  participated  in 
one-to-one  coaching  support  training.  Staff  also  launched  new  programmatic  components 
exclusive  to  RTSA  and  its  female  population. 

20. 

LACOE  is  currently  involved  in  expanding  the  RTSA  course  of  study  to  other 

LACOE  sites.  This  is  a  three  year  process  with  multiple  stages  of  training  and  implementation. 
The  testimony  of  the  Director  of  RTSA,  Ms.  Diana  Velasquez,  established  that  the  other  LACOE 
sites  are  in  the  early  planning  stages  and  have  not  implemented  the  RTSA  course  of  study.  Ms. 
Velasquez  testified  that  only  the  staff  at  RTSA  at  Scott-Scudder  has  been  fully  trained  to 
implement,  and  is  implementing,  the  course  of  study.

  

  

  

21. 

Respondents  argued  that  teacher  number  572,  Ms.  Diem  Johnson,  who  is  listed  on 

the  seniority  list  as  a  literary  specialist,  should  not  be  included  in  the  skip,  as  she  is  currently 
assigned  as  an  Acting  Senior  Program  Specialist  for  RTSA  and  is  not  teaching  her  regular  class. 
Ms.  Johnson's  designation  is  temporary  during  the  hiring  process.  LACOE  argues  that  under  its 
policies  and  procedures,  Ms.  Johnson’s  literary  specialist  teaching  position  at  RTSA  is  her 
designated  current  position,  and  that  even  though  she  is  not  currently  on  site,  she  still  retains 
rights  to  that  position  as  her  current  designation  has  not  changed.  Should  Ms.  Johnson  be hired 
into  the  position  of  Senior  Program  Specialist,  a  vacancy  would  open  at  RTSA,  allowing  for  a 
staff  member  to  be  reemployed.  However,  if  Ms.  Johnson  is  not  hired,  she  would  return  to  her 
literary  specialist  teaching  position  at  RTSA. 

22. 

Respondents  did  not  challenge  the  training  Ms.  Johnson  received  or  her 

implementation  of  the  RTSA  course  of  study.  However,  Respondent’s  Edpao  and  Hong  testified 
that  they  each  had  the  credentials  and  experience  necessary  to  act  as  a  literary  specialist  at  RTSA 
and  they  were  senior  to  Ms.  Johnson.  Both  presented  documentation  of  attending  four  to  five 
“Saturday  Summits.”  Ms.  Velasquez  testified  that  the  Saturday  Summits  are  designed  to 
introduce  staff  to  the  RTSA  course  of  study.  These  summits  do  not  provide  the  embedded 
training,  weekly  training,  and  professional  development  that  the  staff  at  Scott-Scudder  receive. 
Respondents  Edpao  and  Hong  failed  to  offer  sufficient  evidence  of  training  to  the  level  of  staff  at 
RTSA  at  Scott-Scudder  or  that  they  were  in  fact  implementing  a  thematic,  interdisciplinary 
project-based  learning  course  of  study  in  their  current  assignments  as  all  the  RTSA  teachers  were 
trained  to  do  and  were  in  fact  doing.  Accordingly,  it  is  found  that  no  senior  teacher  was  laid  off 
in  favor  of  Ms.  Johnson  who  had  the  requisite  training  and  experience  to  serve  as a  literary 
specialist  at  RTSA. 

PACE  SKIPS 

23. 

The  deviation  for  trained  staff  at  Pace  is  based  on  the  intensive,  specialized, 
multicourse  UCLA  Extension  program  specifically  developed  for  educating  students  with 
Emotional  Disturbance  (ED).  Pace  is  a  center-based  therapeutic  program  for  ED  students, 
specializing  in  mental  health  needs  and  behavioral  challenges.  Kim  Hopko,  Director  of  Special 
Education,  testified  there  is  a  critical  need  to  serve  California  Youth  Authority  ED  students  in  an 
alternative  setting  comparable  to  that  of  a  Non-Public  School  to  assure  compliance  with  the 
Individuals  with  Disabilities  Education  Act.  The  teaching  model  at  Pace  directly  incorporates 
components  of  UCLA-based  intensive  training  received  by  the  four  staff  members  at  Pace  that 
LACOE  seeks  to  skip.  Respondents  Richard  Burns  and  Jessica  Reed,  both  of  whom  are  senior  to 
the  four  skipped  Pace  teachers,  presented  certificates  from  UCLA  Extension  programs  showing 
they  had  received  the  same  or  similar  course  training  as  the  skipped  teachers.  Their  testimony 
corroborated  the  training  was  the  same  and  in  fact,  more  extensive,  than  the  skipped  teachers. 
LACOE  argues  that  even  if  their  course  work  was  similar,  they  were  not  currently  utilizing  that 
training.  At  hearing,  the  testimony  was  clear  that  LACOE  relied  on  the  fact  that  it  used  the 
special  UCLA  training  as  a  basis  for  skipping.  Mr.  Burns  and  Ms.  Reed,  through  no  fault  of  their 
own,  were  not  given  the  opportunity  to  “utilize”  the  skills  they  had  learned  at  UCLA  and  the 
evidence  was  insufficient,  as  to  Pace,  that  the  skipped  teachers  had  such  additional  specialized 
training  and  experience  that  they  should  be  retained  over  senior  employees  Burns  and  Reed. 

 

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

The  parties  met  all  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  sections 

2. 

Except  as  specifically  noted  below,  cause  exists  to  sustain  LACOE’s  action  to 

reduce  or  discontinue  256  full-time  equivalent  positions,  as  set  forth  by  resolution,  for  the  2014- 
2015  school  year,  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1-23 
and.  Legal  Conclusions  3-8. 

3. 

Section  44955  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

T---  0 

(b) 

whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  or... 
when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become 
necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of 
permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the 
services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated 
employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while 
any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained 
to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent 
to  render. 

4, 

Section  44949  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

(a) 

No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by 

the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing 
year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the 
employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his 
or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent  by  the 
clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  the 
notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

(]..- 

(b) 

The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause 

for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year. 

(c) 

In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding 

shall  be  conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5 

 

  

(commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of  the 
Government  Code. 

(.--  00 

(3) 

The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge 

who  shall  prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a 
determination  as  to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related  to 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The  proposed  decision  shall  be 
prepared  for  the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a  determination  as  to  the 
sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  a  recommendation  as  to  disposition.  However,  the 
governing  board  shall  make  the  final  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the 
cause  and  disposition.  None  of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations 
contained  in  the  proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge  shall 
be  binding  on  the  governing  board.  Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors  committed 
by  the  school  district  or  governing  board  of  the  school  district  shall  not  constitute 
cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial  errors.  Copies  of 
the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governing  board  and  to  the 
employee  on  or  before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the  proceeding  is  commenced. 

5. 

The  services  identified  in  LACOE’s  Resolution  No.  1-S  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  it  can  reduce  or  discontinue  under  Section  44955.  LACOE’s  decision  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  identified  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious;  it  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
LACOE’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  sections  44949  and  44955.  LACOE 
correctly  identified  the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  it 
directed  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued. 

6. 

A  school  district  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal 
with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178- 
179.) 

7. 

Except  as  set  forth  in  Finding  23,  no  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to 

be  retained  to  perform  services  that  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  By  reason  of  said  Finding,  LACOE  shall  retain  the  services  of  Richard  Burns  and  Jessica 
Reed  for  the  2014-2015  school  year. 

10

  

if 

if 

if 

  

8. 

Based  on  Finding  8,  LACOE  shall  retain  the  services  of  Sandra  Goodwick. 

ORDER 

LACOE  may  serve  final  notices  to  all  Respondents  identified  on  Exhibit  A,  except 
Richard  Burns,  Jessica  Reed  and  Sandra  Goodwick  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2014-2015  school  year. 

Dated: 

=  &-]}  Y 

     

B.  DASH 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

11

  

  

EXHIBIT  A 

Anavhe,  Taye  O 
Anyanwu,  Stephanie 
Arellano,  Alexandra  H 
Arteaga,  Monique 
Atkinson,  Stephanie 
Avila,  Laura 
Baird,  Jeffrey 
Bastian,  Scott  P 
Bledsoe,  Stephanie  E 
Bowen,  Tiffani  M 
Bowman,  Pamela 
Breuninger,  David 
Burns,  Richard  E 
Burton,  Michelle  C 
Campbell,  Janet  M 
Candelas-Morale,  Elvira* 
Cashman,  Daniel  B* 
Castillo,  Jesus  A 
Chavira,  Alejandro 
Cho,  Kimberly 
Cissoko,  Miriam  E 
Clayton,  John  C 
Collier,  Karen  M 
Crummitt,  Ray  A 
Cruz  Boddie,  Mary  A 
Currie,  William  J 
D  Souza,  Susan  F 
Davis,  Kathleen  M 
De  La  Torre,  Stephanie 
Di  Pierro,  Gary  $ 
Didomenico,  Jory 
Edpao,  Allan 
Ejimole,  David  O 
Escamilla,  Oscar 
Ferrell,  Margaret  E 
Ferrufino,  Veronica 
Fischer,  Steven  J 
Flores,  Gerardo 
Foresta,  Melissa  A 
Franco,  Ofelia 
Frelot,  Denise  M 
Frias,  Emilia  P 
Gomez,  Laura 

12

  

  

Gonzalez,  Randy  $ 
Goodwick,  Sandra  L 
Gordon,  Francis  O* 
Gray,  Debora  J 
Hairrington,  Lisa 
Harn,  Teresa* 
Hart  Riley,  Linda  R 
Hayman,  April  E 
Henges,  Kristina  Cea 
Hennessy,  Mary  K 
Hernandez,  Karl 
Hoching,  Tauvaga  D 
Hong,  Danny 
Hossum,  Cheryl  § 
Howard,  Delories 
Howell,  Dawn 
Hutzler,  Heidi  A 
Iraheta,  Kenny* 
Ivey,  Rodney  Bruce 
Jacobsen,  Annika 
Jew,  Vincent  L 
Johnson,  Eric  C 
Johnson,  Yves  D 
Keffelew,  Elfykendu 
Kelley,  Kyle  § 
Kennison,  Barbara 
Kern,  James  F 
Kirschner,  Harry 
Kuehner,  Joseph 
Lamarra,  Parisa  B 
Larsonsilva,  Bon  B 
Lizardo,  De  Ana 
Lochhead,  Susie  C 
Lopez,  Jazmin 
Lorenze,  Steven  J 
Mackley,  Jayne  M 
Magana,  Elan  N 
Maldonado,  Jeanette 
Mallet,  Monica  M 
Malomo,  Oghenevwaire 
Martin,  Ariana* 
Martinez,  Emily  M 
Maselli,  Peter  A 
Mayfield,  Valencia  Lynn 
Mc  Cloud,  Richard  C 

13

  

  

Mc  Kee,  Victoria 
Mcnamara,  Laura  A 
Medina,  Delora  J 
Mejia,  Alicia  P 
Miyasato,  Philip  R 
Mizrahi,  Lara  L 
Molho,  Emil  Y 
Moore,  Tonya  A 
Morales,  Andrea  I 
Murray,  Irene  E 
Najera,  Karla  V 
Nwankwo,  Ifeyinwa  Ngozi 
Ogbechie,  Abimbola  A 
Oh,  David 
Okoro,  Hilary  O 
Okunna,  Gloria  M 
Olivares,  David  L 
Orji,  Anthony  C 
Osae  Brown,  Isaac 
Osuji,  Samuel* 
Pawar,  Diane 
Pearson,  Amy  M 
Pellegrino,  Bryn 
Perez,  Blanca  E 
Perez,  Felicia  Mercado 
Pinedo,  Adrian 
Pruszynski,  Rita  M 
Pullens,  Reginald  E 
Quincy,  Gissell 
Rada,  Elizabeth* 
Ravare,  Regina  C 
Reed,  Jessica  V 
Roberts,  Jenifer  C 
Roberts  Wilson,  Laura 
Rodriguez,  John 
Rodriguez,  Leticia* 
Rodriguez,  Nancy  E 
Rojas,  Gustavo 
Romero,  Luis  A 
Rosenberg,  Charlene  Jane 
Saenz,  Laura  S* 
Salazar,  Francisco  A* 
Salazar-Becerra,  Luvina 
San  Luis,  Beatriz  B 
Sandoval,  Teresa* 

14 

 

  

Sanipe-Ihediwa,  Nye  T 
Schlie,  Mayte 
Shafer,  James  D 
Shah,  Rina* 
Simpson,  Peggy  S 
Soto,  Claudia  L* 
Spivery,  Rudy  C. 
Starnes,  Brent  E 
Stell,  Luz  E 
Stiffel,  Caren  B 
Stuart,  Tara 
Stump,  Gail  K 
Taylor,  Cynthia  L 
Teller,  Adair  L 
Thompson,  Rosemary  C 
Tittle,  Anne  W 
Torres,  Araceli 
Tran,  Tuyen  B 
Uti,  Eno  E 
Vargas,  Margarita 
Villalobos,  Rosanna  N 
Walton,  Tyesa 
Warren,  Natasha* 
White,  Keysha  D 
Wilhelmus,  Christy 
Woods,  Gayle 
Zuniga,  Victoria  A 

15

  

