BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 

OF  THE  INGLEWOOD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force  of 
Certificated  Staff  of  Inglewood  Unified 
School  District, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No,  2015040175 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  on  April  23,  2015,  in  Inglewood, 
California,  before  H.  Stuart  Waxman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings,  State  of  California. 

Sharon  J.  Ormond  and  Aaron  V.  O*Donnell,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the 

Inglewood  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Lawrence  B.  Trygstad,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  respondents. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision 

on  April  23,  2015. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  the  District  rescinded  the  layoff  notices  of 

Respondents  Nyieshia  Irby,  Christopher  Wade,  and  Mary  Spruce. 

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  District  is  currently  under  the  authority  of  a  State  Trustee,  Dr.  John  Brand  (State 

Trustee),  who  was  appointed  after  the  District  borrowed  $29,000,000  from  the  State  of 
California  to  help  cover  its  expenses.  The  State  Trustee  has  assumed  all  legal  rights,  duties 
and  powers  of  the  District’s  Board  of  Education  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  41326. 

The  State  Trustee  determined  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

provided  by  teachers  and  other  certificated  employees  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision 
was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are 
proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated.

District  staff  carried  out  the  State  Trustee’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process 

involving  review  of  credentials  and  seniority,  “bumping,”  and  breaking  ties  between 
employees  with  the  same  first  dates  of  paid  service.  The  selection  process  was  in  accordance 
with  the  requirements  of  the  Education  Code. 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Nora  Roque,  Executive  Director,  Human  Resources,  made  and  filed  the 

District  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  in  her  official  capacity. 

2. 
program. 

Respondents  are  certificated  District  employees  in  the  K-12  regular  education 

Hf 

Hl 

Mit 

If 

Mf 

Ml 

it 

lif 

lit 

Mit 

Hf 

Mf 

if 

Mt

3. 

On  March  9,  2015,  the  State  Trustee  adopted  Resolution  No.  34-2014-2015 
that  proposed  the  layoff  of  51  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions  in  the  K-12 
regular  education  program.  Specifically,  the  resolution  provided  for  the  reduction  or 
elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services:' 

Service 

FTE  Reduction 

Eliminate  Executive  Director  of  School 
and  Community  Relations 
Eliminate  Executive  Director  of  Secondary  Support  Services 
Eliminate  Executive  Director  of  Strategic 
Development  Initiative 
Eliminate  Executive  Director  of  School  Improvement 
Eliminate  Principal  on  Special  Assignment—SIG 
Eliminate  Coordinator  —  ASES  Program 
Eliminate  Assistant  Principal  —-  Elementary  Services 
Reduce  K-6  Elementary  Teaching  Services 
Reduce  7-8  Language  Arts  Teaching  Services 
Reduce  7-8  Social  Science  Teaching  Services 
Reduce  7-8  Math  Teaching  Services 
Reduce  7-8  Study  Skills  Teaching  Services 
Reduce  9-12  English/Language  Arts  Teaching  Services 
Reduce  9-12  Social  Studies  Teaching  Services 
Reduce  9-12  Physical  Education  Teaching  Services 
Reduce  9-12  Foreign  Language  —  French  Teaching  Services 
Reduce  9-12  Computer  Applications  Teaching  Services 
Reduce  9-12  Industrial  Arts  -  Home  Economics 
Teaching  Services 
Reduce  Counseling  Services 
Eliminate  Program  Instructional  Facilitator  Services 
Eliminate  Reading  180  Teaching  Services 
Eliminate  Instructional  Coach  -  ELA 
Eliminate  Instructional  Coach  —  Math 
Eliminate  Instructional  Coach  —  Professional  Development 
Eliminate  Instructional  Coach  —  Literacy 

1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 

1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
3.00  FTE 
6.00  FTE 
2.00  FTE 
2.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
.20  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 

1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
14.00  FTE 
3.80  FTE 
2.00  FTE 
2.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 

51.00  FTE 

TOTAL 

Hi 

lif 

"In  addition  to  reductions  in  the  K-12  program,  the  resolution  also  provided  for  a 

reduction  of  33  hours  per  day  in  the  Adult  Education  program.  The  Adult  Education 
reductions  were  not  at  issue  in  the  present  action.

4. 

Executive  Director  Roque  also  provided  written  notice  to  the  State  Trustee  of 

her  recommendation  not  to  reemploy  certain  certificated  employees,  including  the 
respondents,  and  that  notice  be  provided  to  those  employees  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  following  school  year. 

5. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2015,  the  District  served,  by  personal  service,  certified 

mail,  and/or  United  States  Mail,  on  each  respondent  a  written  notice  that  it  had  been 
recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  each  respondent,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955,  that  his/her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year 
(District  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force).  Each  written  notice  set  forth  a  reason  for  the 
recommendation  and  noted  that  the  State  Trustee  had  passed  a  Resolution  (Resolution 
Number  34-2014-2015)  reducing  the  certificated  staff. 

6. 

Each  respondent  timely  submitted  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  and/or  notice 

of  participation  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  him/her  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

7. 

Board  Resolution  Number  34-2014-2015,  adopted  on  March  9,  2015, 

established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees 
who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  It  provided  that  the  order  of  termination 
shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

8. 

The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees, 
credentials,  and  authorizations.  Credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from  the 
records  of  the  County  Office  of  Education,  at  which  certificated  employees  must  register 
such  documents,  and  from  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  website. 

9. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

10. 

No  certificated  employce  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

11. 

The  eliminated  services  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be 

reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  State 
Trustee’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not 
arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

12. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  State  Trustee. 

if

Jonathan  Barbee 

13. 

Respondent  Jonathan  Barbee  (#447)  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  26,  2008. 

He  holds a  clear,  single-subject  credential  in  social  science.  Mr.  Barbee  teaches  social 
science,  World  History  Honors,  United  States  History  Honors,  and  AP  United  States  History 
at  City  Honors  High  School.  He  was  “bumped”  by  Tambera  Thompson  (#86)  who  also 
holds  a  clear,  single-subject  credential  in  social  science  but  with  a  supplemental 
authorization  in  introductory  math.  Ms.  Thompson  also  holds  a  CLAD  certificate. 

14. 

Mr.  Barbee  argued  that  he  is  specially  trained  and  certified  to  teach  AP  World 

History  and  AP  United  States  History  and  should  be  retained  by  virtue  of  that  special 
training. 

15. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  states: 

Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the 
following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 
course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for 
a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and 
experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide 
those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with  constitutional 
requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws. 

16. 

The  above  statute  provides  a  district  discretion  to  permit  skipping  under  the 

conditions  listed.  However,  a  district  is  not  required  to  employ  the  skipping  mechanism. 
Therefore,  although  Mr.  Barbee  may  be  eminently  qualified  to  teach  advanced  social 
science/history  courses,  the  District  is  not  obligated  to  skip  him  so  that  he  may  do  so. 
Accordingly,  he  is  subject  to  layoff. 

17. 

Respondent  Doris  Macdonald  (#469)  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  27, 

2010.  She  holds  a  clear  single-subject  credential  in  French  and  a  clear  certificate  of 
completion  in  staff  development.  She  teaches  French  1,  2,  and  3  at  City  Honors  High  School 
and  is  certified  to  teach  AP  French.  However,  she  has  no  AP  students  this  school  year. 

Doris  Macdonald 

Hf 

*  Numbers  in  parentheses  indicated  teachers’  positions  on  the  District’s  seniority  list.

18. 

At  City  Honors  High  School,  students  must  complete  at  least  two  years  of  a 

foreign  language.  The  school  offers  classes  in  French  and  Spanish.  Ms.  Macdonald  argued 
that  many  of  the  students  take  French  because  they  are  Hispanic  and  already  know  Spanish. 
Therefore,  if  a  language  had  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated,  it  should  have  been  Spanish.  Since 
Ms.  Macdonald’s  seniority  date  is  earlier  than  that  of  the  Spanish  teacher,  Ms.  Macdonald 
believes  the  Spanish  teacher  should  have  been  laid  off  and  Ms.  Macdonald  should  have  been 
permitted  to  retain  her  position.  Ms.  Macdonald  also  argued  that,  if  she  is  laid  off,  those 
students  who  took  their  first  year  of  French  will  now  have  to  begin  their  foreign  language 
requirement  again  because  both  years  of  language  instruction  must  be  in  the  same  foreign 
language. 

19. 

Ms.  Macdonald  has  gone  beyond  the  basic  teaching  requirements  for  a  high 

school  teacher  by  starting  a  chapter  of  the  French  Honor  Society  at  City  Honors  High  School. 
Students  belonging  to  that  chapter  wear  a  special  cord  at  graduation. 

20. 

Provided  it  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  the  decision  regarding  which 

programs  to  eliminate  or  reduce  is  within  the  District’s  (in  this  case,  the  State  Trustee’s) 
discretion.  No  evidence  was  offered  to  show  that  the  State  Trustee’s  decision  to  reduce 
French  instruction  was  either  arbitrary  or  capricious.  Therefore,  Ms.  Macdonald  is  subject  to 
layoff. 

Paula  Morrison 

21. 

Respondent  Paula  Morrison  (#37)  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  8,  1986. 

She  holds  a  clear  single-subject  credential  in  home  economics  and a  clear  certificate  of 
completion  in  staff  development.  She  also  holds  a  certification  for  eligibility  for 
administrative  service.  She  teaches  home  economics  at  Inglewood  High  School.  Ms. 
Morrison  is  the  only  home  economics  teacher  in  the  District. 

22. 

Ms.  Morrison  spoke  in  glowing  terms  of  the  home  economics  program  at 

She  has  designed  her  program  to  be  consistent  with  the  position  of 

Inglewood  High  School. 
the  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction  and  has  modified  it  to  align  with  Common  Core 
goals.  The  program  makes  it  possible  for  students  to  “merge  into  the  21st  century.”  (Ms. 
Morrison’s  testimony.)  The  classes  help  to  provide  students  with  skills  in  various  fields,  and 
the  program  has  produced  numerous  successes.  Ms.  Morrison  questioned  where  students 
will  obtain  those  skiils  if  the  home  economics  program  is  eliminated. 

23. 

As  with  the  French  program  at  City  Honors  High  School,  no  evidence  was 

offered  to  establish  that  the  State  Trustee’s  decision  to  eliminate  the  home  economics 
program  was  arbitrary  or  capricious.  Accordingly,  the  decision  cannot  be  questioned  at  the 
administrative  level.  Ms.  Morrison  is  subject  to  layoff. 

if 

fit

Maria  Aguirre 

24. 

Respondent  Maria  Aguirre  (#534)  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  2,  2014. 

She  holds  a  clear  multi-subject  credential  and  a  BCLAD  certificate.  She  teaches 
kindergarten  at  Woodworth  Elementary  School.  She  was  “bumped”  by  Elizabeth  Amador 
(#298).  Ms.  Amador  also  holds  a  clear  multi-subject  credential,  and  she  holds  a  CLAD 
certificate. 

25. 

Ms.  Aguirre  was  first  employed  by  the  District  on  August  1,  1995,  under  an 

emergency  credential.  Her  credential  subsequently  became  permanent.  She  took  maternity 
leave  effective  April  17,  2001.  She  claims  to  have  thereafter  taken  a  leave  of  absence.  Ms. 
Aguirre  did  not  return  to  the  District  until  2010  when  she  was  re-hired  as  a  substitute  teacher. 
She  returned  to  a  full-time  teaching  position  in  2014.  Ms.  Aguirre  argued  that  she  never 
resigned  from  the  District  and  was  never  notified  that  she  had  been  discharged.  Therefore, 
she  believes  her  seniority  date  should  be  August  1,  1995. 

26. 

On  January  22,  2002,  Ms.  Aguirre  submitted  a  Statement  of  Intent  to  the 

District  indicating  that  she  intended  to  return  to  her  employment  in  the  District  for  the  2002- 
2003  school  year,  but  that  she  requested  a  transfer  to  a  substitute  teacher  position.  On  March 
14,  2002,  she  reiterated  her  request  to  transfer  from  her  permanent  teacher  position  to  a 
substitute  teacher  position.  She  was  a  permanent  employee  of  the  District  when  she  made 
the  request.  Ms.  Aguirre  never  received  a  response  from  the  District  regarding  her  request. 

27. 

Between  January  22,  2002,  when  she  made  the  request  to  transfer  into  a 

substitute  position,  and  February  25,  2010,  when  she  returned  to  the  District  as  a  substitute 
teacher,  Ms.  Aguirre  did  not  serve  as  a  substitute  in  the  District  even  one  day. 

28. 

At  the  hearing  in  the  instant  matter,  Ms.  Aguirre  testified  that  she  considered 
herself  on  a  leave  of  absence  for  the  entire  period  between  January  2002  and  February  2010. 
However,  the  evidence  did  not  contain  any  written  request  for  a  leave  of  absence,  and  Ms. 
Aguirre  testified  that  she  never  received  word  from  the  District  that  a  request  for  leave  of 
absence  had  been  granted. 

29. 

Ms.  Aguitre’s  preliminary  credential  expired  on  February  1,  2002.  She 

obtained  a  clear,  professional  multi-subject  credential  on  October  1,  2002.  She  did  not  hold 
any  teaching  credential  between  those  two  dates.  The  District's  records  show  her  status  as  of 
February  1,  2002  as  terminated.  However,  a  formal  termination  notice  or  proceeding  was  not 
initiated. 

30.  —  Included  in  Exhibit  11  is  Ms.  Aguirre’s  resume  which  she  prepared  in 

connection  with  her  2010  application  to  serve  as  a  substitute  teacher  with  the  District. 
resume,  Ms.  Aguirre  represented  that  she  had  worked  for  the  District  as  a  kindergarten 
teacher  from  1995  to  2002.  The  resume  contains  no  reference  to  working  for  the  District  as  a 
substitute  teacher  between  2002  and  2010,  or  to  being  on  a  leave  of  absence  between  those 
dates.

In  her 

31. 

On  June  20,  2014,  Ms.  Aguirre  wrote  a  letter  to  the  District  to  accompany  her 

application  for  a  full-time  teaching  position.  In  that  letter,  she  wrote: 

I  am  also  a  former  Inglewood  School  District  classroom  teacher  and  have  a 
great  desire  to  return  full-time.  I  left  to  stay  home  and  care  for  my  children. 

(Exhibit  11,  page  39.) 

32. 

On  August  21,  2014,  Ms.  Aguirre  submitted  an  electronic  application  for  a 

full-time  teaching  position  with  the  District.  In  that  application,  she  represented  that  she  had 
worked  for  the  District  from  September  1,  1995,  to  June  30,  2001,  and  that  she  had  been 
currently  employed  by  the  District  since  September  1,  2009.  She  made  no  reference  to  a 
period  of  substitute  teaching  between  2002  and  2010  or  a  leave  of  absence.  However,  she 
also  indicated  on  the  application  that  she  had  been  an  employee  of  the  Lawndale  Elementary 
School  District  since  September  1,  2004,  which  was  during  the  period  of  time  she  now 
claims  she  was  on  a  leave  of  absence  from  the  District.  (Exhibit  11,  page  42.) 

33. 

When  Ms.  Aguirre  accepted  the  District’s  offer  to  return  to  a  full-time 

position  in  2014,  she  accepted  the  position  as  a  probationary  employee  even  though  she  was 
aware  that  she  had  been  a  permanent  employee  when  she  left  in  2002. 

34. 

Ms.  Aguirre’s  testimony  at  the  hearing  was  disingenuous.  She  offered  no 
convincing  evidence  of  continued  employment  with  the  District  between  2002  and  2010 
either  as  a  substitute  teacher  or  by  virtue  of  a  leave  of  absence. 

35. 

The  parties  offered  argument  regarding  whether  the  District  followed  proper 

procedures  under  the  Education  Code  and  applicable  case  law  in  discharging  Ms.  Aguirre 
from  her  employment  with  the  District.  Those  arguments  are  not  germane  to  the  issue 
because  Ms.  Aguirre  is  found  to  have  left  the  District  by  her  own  volition. 

36.  —  The  District  correctly  calculated  Ms.  Aguirre’s  seniority  date,  and  Ms.  Aguirre 

is  subject  to  layoff. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met. 

2. 

The  services  identified  in  Resolution  Number  34-2014-2015  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955. 
The  State  Trustee’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither 
arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  his  discretion.  Cause  for  the  reduction 
or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949,

3. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shal!  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

4. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 

to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  District  identified 
the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  State  Trustee 
directed  be  reduced  or  discontinued. 

5. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

6. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers, 
Local  2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of  Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116 
Cal.App.3d  831,  842-843.) 

ORDER 

1. 

The  District  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  against  the  respondents  is 

sustained.  Notice  may  be  given  to  the  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2015-2016  school  year  because  of  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

Dated:  April  27,  2105 

UN, 

H.  STUART  WAXMA 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

