BEFORE THE  
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 
ALAMEDA COUNTY 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 

 
In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction 
in Force Against: 
 
AARON GRANT III, JOSEPH ROBERTS,  
NATHAN SAMSON AND HEIDI SMITH, 
                        

                                           Respondents. 

     
 
 
     
    
     
 
 

OAH No.  2015031272 

 
 
PROPOSED DECISION 
 
Administrative Law Judge Mary-Margaret Anderson, State of California, 

Erika Anderson, Attorney at Law, Garcia, Hernandez, Sawhney & Bermudez, 

 
Office of Administrative Hearings heard this matter on April 23, 2015, in Hayward, 
California.   
 
 
LLP, represented the Alameda County Office of Education (ACOE). 
  
 
Joseph Roberts, Nathan Samson, and Heidi Smith, who were present. 
 
 
 
 

Dale L. Brodsky, Attorney at Law, represented Respondents Aaron Grant III, 

The record closed on April 23, 2015. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 

2.     Respondents are certificated employees of the ACOE.     

1.       Movetia Salter, Chief Human Resources Officer of the ACOE, filed the 

3.     On March 3, 2015, L. Karen Monroe, Alameda County Superintendent of 

 
Statement of Reduction in Force in her official capacity. 
 
 
 
 
Schools, adopted Resolution No. 01-14/15.  The resolution provides that particular 
kinds of certificated services will be reduced by four full-time equivalent positions no 
later than the beginning of the 2015/2016 school year, and directs that notices be 
given to a corresponding number of certificated employees that their services will not 
be needed for the 2015/2016 school year. 
 

 

1 

4. 

5. 

Attached to the Superintendent’s resolution are three exhibits.  Exhibit 
 
A is entitled “‘Skipping’ Criteria Pursuant to Education Code Section 44955(d)(1).”  
It states that if an employee meets any of the criteria, he or she will be “skipped” from 
layoff, regardless of seniority status (unless the employee is “bumped” by a more 
senior and competent employee).  The four criteria are, in sum, a special education 
credential, a speech services credential, an infant-early intervention credential, and a 
nursing credential. 
 
 
employees share the same first date of paid probationary service.  The tiebreaking 
criteria were not utilized in determining which employees would be noticed for 
layoff. 
 
 
Section 44955(b).”  Resolution paragraph E states that Exhibit C “shall be used to 
determine whether an employee is competent to render services. . . .”  Exhibit C 
defines “competent to teach in the County School programs” as: 
 

Exhibit C is entitled “Competency Criteria Pursuant to Education Code 

Exhibit B contains tiebreaking criteria, to be used to break ties where 

6. 

(1)  The employee must be a “highly qualified 
professional” within the meaning of the No Child Left 
Behind Act in the subject matter areas necessary to teach 
secondary school Math and Science; and (2) the 
employee must be authorized by the California 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing to Teach English 
Learners as of March 15, 2015.  

7.        By letter dated March 10, 2015, Salter notified Respondents of her 

recommendation that their services would not be required for the 2015/2016 school 
year.  The letters state that the reason for the recommendation is the Superintendent’s 
adoption of a resolution to reduce particular kinds of services no later than the 
beginning of the 2015/2016 school year.  Each Respondent timely requested a 
hearing. 
 
 
pleading, Superintendent Monroe and Salter allege, in part: 
 

In the County Office of Education Statement of Reduction in Force 

8. 

4.   In the opinion of the Superintendent it has become 
necessary, for the reasons stated in Paragraph 5 herein, to 
decrease the number of certificated employees of the 
ACOE. 

Paragraph 5, however, does not state reasons for the decrease.  It states: 

5.   On or before March 15, 2015, the Superintendent 
gave notice to the Respondent, pursuant to Education 

 

 
 
 

 

2 

Code sections 44949 and 44955, that Respondent’s 
services would not be required for the ensuing year, and 
stated the reasons therefore. 

9. 

Salter testified that ACOE staff applied the skipping criteria and the 

10.  Alysse Castro is the ACOE Interim Director for Student Programs and 

 
There is no statement of reasons in the pleading. 

 
 
 
 
competency criteria to determine which teachers would be notified of layoff.  
Employees were skipped for layoff if they held any of the four listed credentials.  
Employees were subject to layoff if they were not authorized to teach English learners 
or if they were not highly qualified teachers in both Math and in Science under the No 
Child Left Behind Act (NCLB). 
 
 
Despite the competency criteria resolution, ACOE employs teachers in 
addition to Respondents who do not hold the NCLB certifications in Math and 
Science.  Salter testified that these teachers are still employed because such was not 
necessary to achieve the reduction of four FTE positions. 
 
 
Services.  She has held that position since 2014.  She testified that she is “very 
slightly familiar” with the Resolution.  To Castro, Exhibit C means that 
Superintendent Monroe has determined that the ACOE needs teachers who meet the 
NCLB requirements in Math and Science and are certified to teach English learners.  
Superintendent Monroe’s staff told her that this is because the ACOE runs extremely 
small schools and typically only one or two teachers are available to work with 
students.  In addition, there is “no capability to move students between schools” and  
ACOE “needs a workforce that can provide teaching in multiple subject areas.”       
 
Teachers employed by ACOE instruct students in a variety of locations, 
 
including the Juvenile Justice Center (Juvenile Hall).  The students include those who 
are incarcerated or have been expelled from a school district within Alameda County, 
and others with special needs, such as pregnant teenagers. 
 
 
12.  No Respondent holds a credential that would have entitled him or her 
to be skipped.  As to the competency criteria, all four are authorized to teach English 
learners.  They were noticed for layoff because they do not hold both Math and 
Science NCLB certifications. 
 
 
Respondents.  These teachers were not noticed for layoff because they hold both Math 
and Science NCLB certifications. 
 
 
There are only two teachers there; the other teacher teaches Math and Life Skills and 
Grant teaches all of the other subjects.  He holds a single subject Social Science 

14.  Aaron Grant III teaches at Bridge Academy, a community school.  

The ACOE’s seniority list shows that there are teachers junior to 

13. 

11. 

 

3 

15. 

Joe Roberts teaches physical education at Butler Academic Center, 

Roberts teaches four PE classes and has substituted in science and special 

credential and NCLB certification in Math and English; he is not NCLB certified in 
Science.  Grant is currently enrolled in the Science course, which is starting in May 
2015.  He is in compliance with the special terms of his employment contract, which 
requires that he “work towards NCLB compliance in Math & Science (Completing at 
least one of these by March 1, 2014).” 
 
 
Grant was not informed that failing to obtain the certifications would result in 
termination.  He was not notified prior to receiving the layoff notice that he was not 
competent due to a lack of Science certification. 
 
 
located at Juvenile Hall.  He is the only PE teacher.  Roberts has taught for ACOE for 
seven years.  He holds a bachelor of science degree, with a major in PE and minor in 
biology, two masters’ degrees, and has training in adaptive PE.  When Roberts was 
hired, he was instructed to obtain certification to teach English language learners, and 
did so.   
 
 
education.  He was shocked when he was informed by the notice about the 
competency requirements of NCLB certification.  Both principals he has worked for 
informed him that PE is exempt from NCLB.  No one at ACOE has ever told him that 
he was not competent, or that he needed to obtain NCLB certification.   
 
 
Social Science in a special program for pregnant and parenting teenagers at  
CalSAFE-Fruitvale.  When hired, he was NCLB certified only in Social Science. 
 
 
His timing to do so was accepted by his principal, Carolyn Hobbs, and Adrian V. 
Kirk, who was the Director of ACOE Student Programs and Services.  In a series of 
emails in February 2014, Kirk advised Samson that Kirk was “not trying to change 
the timing only looking to make sure that our information is correct.”  Currently, 
Samson has obtained the English certification.  He has taken Tier One in Science and 
will take Tier Two this summer.  Following completion of that class, he will take 
Math.        
 
 
No special terms were made part of her contract; it notes that she held Multiple 
Subject credential with EL Authorization.  In 2013, Smith and was assigned to Butler 
Academic Center, where she teaches now.  Smith took the first half of the NCLB 
Science certification course last year.  She enrolled for the second half this year, but 
withdrew after she was noticed for layoff.   
 
 
certification process slowly; “no one treated it as a necessary imperative.”  She 

Samson is proceeding through a plan to become NCLB certified in four areas.  

16.  Nathan Samson was hired by ACOE in 2012, and teaches English and 

17.  Heidi Smith was hired in August 2011 as a teacher for Project EAT.  

Smith is aware that other teachers at Butler worked their way through the 

 

4 

assumed that she was qualified for her position, in that she was hired and became 
permanent.  The first time Smith heard about a problem with the lack of certification 
in Math and Science was in connection with the layoff. 

 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
 

Respondents contend that ACOE should be estopped from laying them off.  

Estoppel contention 
 
 
The elements of estoppel are specific: 1) the party to be estopped must be apprised of 
the facts; 2) he or she must intend that his or her conduct shall be acted upon, or must 
so act that the party asserting the estoppel had a right to believe it was so intended;  
3) the other party must be ignorant of the true state of facts; and, 4) he or she must 
rely upon the conduct to his or her injury.  (See City of Long Beach v. Mansell (1970) 
3 Cal.3d 462.)  The basis for Respondents’ estoppel argument was unclear.  The 
theory appears to be that they relied on the fact that ACOE previously took no action 
regarding their lack of NCLB certifications.  They also assert they were treated 
unfairly.  Respondents did not establish the elements of estoppel.          
 
Arbitrary or capricious competency criteria contention 
 
 
certifications is arbitrary, thus invalidating the layoff.  It is well established that “A 
reduction in services may not be based on fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious action of 
the District.”   (Brough v. Governing Board of the El Segundo Unified School District 
(1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 702, 717.)  “Arbitrary” and “capricious” are largely 
synonymous terms; “arbitrary” has been defined in one dictionary as “capricious; 
unreasonable; unsupported” (Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1991)) 
and in another as “based on one’s preference, notion, whim, etc.; capricious.”  
(Websters New World Dictionary of the American Language, (2nd college ed. 1976) 
p. 70.)  On the other hand, an action will not be found to be arbitrary or capricious if it 
is “supported by a fair and substantial reason.”  (Campbell Elementary Teachers 
Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.)  It is recognized that the 
Superintendent has wide latitude and discretion in these matters (See Hildebrandt v. 
St. Helena Unified SD (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 224), but there still must be an 
articulated, fair and substantial basis for the decision. 
 

Respondents contend that the definition of competency to include NCLB 

Education Code section 44865 addresses the qualifications for teachers in 
special settings and schools, such as the settings and schools where Respondents 
teach.  For such settings, a valid teaching credential is the only requirement, provided 
the teacher consents to the assignment.  As stated in Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School 
District (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, “section 44865 provides an additional category 
of credentialed teachers who are authorized to teach” at the specified types of schools.  
As regards the NCLB requirements, California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 

 

5 

6105 subdivision (e), provides that teachers in such settings have three years to 
become certified.  And for physical education, there are no NCLB requirements.   

 
Given this context, the rationale for making NCLB certification in math and 

science a competency requirement for ACOE teachers is not substantiated.  It was 
undisputed that all four Respondents are competent in the generic sense to teach for 
the ACOE in the positions they hold.  Respondents are credentialed and hold various 
certifications; just not both the math and science NCLB certifications.  The holding of 
such certifications does not materially improve flexibility in assignments because 
there is great flexibility under the Education Code.  In the case of PE, NCLB 
certification is not relevant at all.  Joe Roberts holds the least number of credentials 
and certifications among the four respondents; but under the Code, he may teach other 
classes.   

 
The evidence did not establish a link between the competency requirement and 
the teaching positions; the ACOE’s evidence consisted primarily of conclusory, often 
hearsay, statements.  The record does not demonstrate a fair and substantial reason for 
Superintendent Monroe’s creation of a competency requirement of NCLB math and 
science certification.  The competency requirement is therefore arbitrary and 
capricious, and was an abuse of discretion.  Accordingly, the matter will be 
dismissed. 
 
Conclusions 

 

1.     

 Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education 

 
Code sections 44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those 
sections have been provided as required.    
 

2. 

It was not established that the Superintendent’s decision to establish 

3. 

competency criteria had a reasonable basis; it was therefore an arbitrary or capricious 
decision and not a proper exercise of her discretion.   
 
 
It was established that application of the competency criteria would 
result in employees with less seniority than Respondents being retained to render 
services which Respondents are certificated and competent to render.  
 
 

 

 

6 

ORDER 

 
The County Statement of Reduction in Force against Respondents Aaron 

Grant III, Joe Roberts, Nathan Samson, and Heidi Smith is dismissed.  Notice may 
not be given to Respondents that their services will not be required for the 2015/2016 
school year.  
 
 
DATED:  April 29, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

       _______/S/_____________________  
       MARY-MARGARET ANDERSON 
      Administrative Law Judge 
      Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

7 

