BEFORE  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  COUNTY 
SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force  of: 

CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES  OF  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  COUNTY  OFFICE  OF 
EDUCATION 

  

OAH  No.  2015030133 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Howard  W.  Cohen,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  April  13  and  14,  2015,  in  Downey. 

Jennifer  A.  Williams,  Deputy  General  Counsel,  represented  the  Los  Angeles  County 

Office  of  Education  (LACOE). 

Richard  J.  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law,  with  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented 

respondents,  who  are  identified  in  attachment  A. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  At  hearing,  respondents  submitted  a 
trial  brief,  which  was  marked  as  Exhibit  D.  The  matter  was  continued  to  May  12,  2015,  for 
the  submission  of  closing  briefs.  The  parties  stipulated,  and  it  was  ordered,  that  the  statutory 
due  date  of  the  Proposed  Decision  in  this  matter  is  extended  to  May  29,  2015.  By  order  dated 
April  22,  2015,  LACOE  was  allowed  until  May  5,  2015,  to  file  an  exhibit,  omitted  from  but 
referred  to  in  the  marked  and  admitted  copy  of  LACOE’s  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force, 
and  respondents  were  allowed  until  May  12,  2015,  to  file  any  objection  to  the  exhibit. 
LACOE  timely  filed  the  additional  exhibit,  which  was  marked  as  Exhibit  31.  Respondent 
timely  filed  an  objection  to  that  exhibit,  stating  no  grounds  for  the  objection.  The  objection  is 
overruled  and  Exhibit  31  is  admitted.  LACOE  and  respondents  timely  submitted  closing 
briefs,  which  were  marked  as  Exhibit  32  and  Exhibit  E,  respectively. 

The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  May  12,  2015. 

Hf 

if 

if

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Darren  McDuffie,  Ed.D.,  made  and  filed  LACOE’s  Statement  of  Reduction  in 

Force  in  his  official  capacity  as  LACOE’s  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resource 
Services. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  LACOE. 

2. 

3. 

On  February  24,  2015,  Arturo  Delgado,  Ed.D.,  the  Los  Angeles  County 

Superintendent  of  Schools  (Superintendent)  adopted  Resolution  Number  1-S,  to  reduce  and 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  specified  therein  for  the  2015-2016 
school  year,  thereby  reducing  or  eliminating  69.0  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

4. 

The  Superintendent  further  determined  it  to  be  necessary,  by  reason  of  the 
reductions  or  discontinuances  in  particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  at  the  close  of  the  present  school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of 
FTE  positions,  and  directed  Dr.  McDuffie  or  his  designees  to  take  all  actions  necessary  and 
proper  to  accomplish  the  purposes  of  Resolution  1-S  and  to  notify  the  appropriate  employees 
of  a  recommendation  not  to  reemploy  them  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955.! 

5. 

In  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  on  March  11, 

2015,  Dr.  McDuffie  gave  the  Superintendent  notice  of  a  recommendation  that  notice  be 
given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  and 
stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

6. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2013,  under  Resolution  Number  1-S  and  the 

provisions  of  sections  44949  and  44955,  Dr.  McDuffie  gave  written  notice  to  respondents 
that  he  had  recommended  to  the  Superintendent  that  notice  be  given  to  them  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2015-2016  school  year.  Respondents  were  provided  with 
all  required  documents.  Respondents  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  whether  there  is  cause 
for  not  employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

7. 

Some  respondents  provided  services  while  holding  only  a  provisional 

credential  and  were  non-reelected  for  that  reason  under  Superintendent’s  Resolution  No.  4-S, 
independent  of  this  layoff  process.  LACOE  notified  those  respondents  as  a  precaution,  so 
that  they  could  participate  and  exercise  any  claimed  rights  in  this  matter. 

8. 

Some  respondents  provided  services  under  temporary  contract  with  LACOE 

and  were  non-reelected  for  that  reason  under  Superintendent’s  Resolution  No.  2-S, 

"  Except  as  otherwise  noted,  all  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.

independent  of  this  layoff  process.  LACOE  notified  those  respondents  as  a  precaution,  so 
that  they  could  participate  and  exercise  any  claimed  rights  in  this  matter. 

9. 

During  the  hearing,  LACOE  rescinded  the  preliminary  layoff  notices  issued  to 

respondents  Kathleen  M.  Davis,  Kenise  N.  Grigsby,  Eva  S.  Mutray-Yavar,  Jennifer  L. 
Strutzenberg,  and  Vanessa  M.  VanNiman. 

Reduction  and  Elimination  of Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

10. 

Resolution  No.  1-S  provides  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following 

particular  kinds  of  services: 

Educational  Programs 

A. 

Division  of  Special  Education 

B. 

Division  of  Student  Programs 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
3. 
6. 
7. 
8. 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

Assistant  Principal 
School  Psychologist 
Teacher  Autism 
Teacher  DHH 
Teacher  DIS-HH 
Teacher  ED 
Teacher  LSS 
Infant 

Regional  School  Psychologist 
School  Psychologist 
Teacher  CDS 
Teacher  CUR 
Teacher  JCS 
Teacher  SDC 
Teacher  Independent  Study 
Literacy  Specialist 
Resource  Specialist 

Subtotal 

Subtotal 

if 

if

FTE 

1.0 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
5.0 
1.0 
1.0 

13.0 

FTE 

1.0 
1.0 
6.0 
3.0 
17.0 
1.0 
1.0 
3.0 
3.0 

36.0 

Educational  Services 

A. 

Division  of  Accountability,  Support  and  Monitoring 

FTE 

1. 
2. 

Project  Director  III 
Consultant  II 

B. 

Division  of  Curriculum  and  Instructional  Services 

1 
2 
3. 
4 

Project  Director  III 
Consultant  III 
Consultant  II 
Senior  Program  Specialist 

Cc. 

Division  of  Regional  Occupational  Preparation-CTE 

1. 

Director 

Subtotal 

Subtotal 

Subtotal 

D. 

Division  Student  Support  Services 

1. 
2. 

Consultant  II 
Coordinator  I 

2.0 
3.0 

5.0 

FTE 

1.0 
1.0 
70 
1.0 

10.0 

FTE 

1.0 

1.0 

FTE 

3.0 
1.0 

4.0 

Subtotal 

TOTAL 

69.0 

11. 

These  services  are  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise 
of  discretion.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was 
related  to  the  welfare  of  LACOE  and  its  pupils,  and  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  of  LACOE  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

12. 

The  Board  properly  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements, 

deaths,  and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices 
to  be  delivered  to  its  employees  as  of  March  15,  2015.

13. 

LACOE  maintains a  seniority  list,  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates, 

current  assignments  and  locations,  credentials,  and  authorizations.  LACOE  identified  the 
most  junior  employees  working  in  a  particular  kind  of  service  being  reduced  or  discontinued 
and  determined  which  employees  would  receive  layoff  notices. 

14. 

The  Superintendent  adopted  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of 

termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  LACOE  ina 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date.  The  Superintendent  resolved  that  the  order  of 
termination  of  those  employees  shall  be  determined  by  reference  to  certain  tiebreaker  criteria 
set  forth  in  Resolution  Number  3-S.  The  Superintendent  determined  that  such  criteria  best 
serve  the  needs  of  the  programs  administered  by  LACOE  and  of  its  students. 

Temporary-Status  Disputes 

15. 

Resolution  Number  2-S  identifies  three  employees,  serving  in  teaching 

positions  under  temporary  contracts,  who  are  being  non-reelected:  Gerardo  Flores,  Elan  N. 
Magana,  and  Richard  C.  McCloud.  They  are  not  identified  on  LACOE’s  seniority  list  or  list 
of  respondents.  LACOE  provided  them  with  a  precautionary  notice  of  the  hearing  to  allow 
them  to  assert  any  rights  they  may  have.  Respondents’  counsel  argued  that  their  names 
should  appear  on  the  seniority  list,  and  that  they  may  not  waive  their  seniority  rights  and 
rights  of  reappointment.  They  were  probationary  or  permanent  employees—the  record  is  not 
clear  which—who  were  laid  off  for  the  2013-2014  school  year  and  placed  on  LACOE’s  list 
of  laid-off  employees  with  a  preferred  right  of  reappointment.  LACOE  contacted  each  of 
them  and  offered  them  reappointments  to  all  known  available  probationary  or  permanent 
positions  for  the  2014-2015  school  year.  Each  of  them  exercised  their  reappointment  right  to 
accept  or  reject  those  positions,  and  chose  to  reject  them.  LACOE  then  contacted  each  of 
them  and  offered  them  temporary  contracts  to  fill  the  positions  of  teachers  who  were  on 
leaves  of  absence.  Each  of  them  accepted  those  offers,  signed  the  temporary  contracts,  and 
took  the  temporary  positions.  The  temporary  contracts  will  expire  on  June  30,  2015.  All  three 
employees  are  currently  on  the  reappointment  list;  they  will  remain  on  the  list  and  maintain 
their  seniority  status  for  the  applicable  period  specified  in  sections  22956  and  44957,  from 
the  date  of  their  termination  as  probationary  or  permanent  employees. 

Skipping 

16. 

In  Resolution  No.  5-S,  the  Superintendent  determined  to  retain  certain 

certificated  staff  in  the  particular  kinds  of  services  identified  in  Factual  Finding  10, 
regardless  of  seniority,  who,  by  their  training,  experience,  and  assignment,  met  any  of  criteria 
set  forth  in  Resolution  5-S,  which,  in  pertinent  part,  reads  as  follows: 

Probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  who 

a. 
have  experience  teaching  and  specialized  training  in  the  Road  to 
Success  Academy’s  customized  curriculum  for  female 
incarcerated  high  school  students.

Probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  who 
b. 
have  experience  teaching  and  specialized  training  in  the  Civic 
Democracy  Initiative  customized  curriculum  for  female 
incarcerated  high  school  students. 

Probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  who 

c. 
are  currently  assigned  to  Challenger  Memorial  Youth  Center 
and  have  received  specialized  training  and  have  experience  in 
the  facility  wide  implementation  of  the  Positive  Behavior 
Interventions  and  Supports  (PBIS)  pursuant  to  the  requirements 
of  the  Casey  A.  Court  Order  and  Settlement  Agreement  section 
5. 

Probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  who 

d. 
are  currently  assigned  to  the  Challenger  Memorial  Youth  Center 
and  have  received  specialized  training  and  are  experienced  in 
the  facility  wide  implementation  of  the  Advance  Path  program 
and/or  other  specialized  programs/courses  of  study  pursuant  to 
the  requirements  of  the  Casey  A.  court  order  and  Settlement 
Agreement. 

Pursuant  to  (d)(2)  [sic],  and  as  a  separate  ground, 

€. 
Probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  who  are 
currently  assigned  to  Challenger  Memorial  Youth  Center  whose 
assignment  is  necessary  to  maintain  and  achieve  compliance 
with  constitutional  requirements  relating  to  equal  protection, 
consistent  with  the  Casey  A.  Court  Order  and  Settlement 
Agreement. 

17. 

LACOE  is  the  local  educational  agency  charged  with  providing  educational 

services  to  students  in  juvenile  halls  and  probation  camps  in  Los  Angeles  County,  including 
Christa  McAuliffe  High  School  (McAuliffe)  and  the  Road  to  Success  (RTS)  Academy 
(RTSA)  at  Camp  Scott-Scudder. 

18.  | LACOE  is  party  to  a  federal  court  class-action  lawsuit  entitled  Casey  A.,  et  al., 

v.  Delgado,  et  al.  (Casey  A.),  Case  No.  CV10-00192GHK(FMO)  (C.D.  Cal.).  LACOE 
entered  into  a  settlement  agreement  (settlement  agreement)  that  is  enforced  by  order  of  the 
federal  district  court.  Respondents  were  not  parties  to  that  litigation,  and  were  not  involved  in 
the  settlement.  Prior  to  the  settlement  agreement,  McAuliffe  was  unsafe  for  students  and 
faculty,  there  were  frequent  fights,  suspensions,  and  referrals  there,  and  students  received  a 
subpar  education.  The  court  order  and  subsequent  action  plan  required  a  unique  course  of 
study  focused  on  intensified  instruction  and  Positive  Behavior  Intervention  Support  (PBIS) 
to  ensure  the  student  population  at  McAuliffe  would  receive  appropriate  educational  support. 
The  court  order  requires  ongoing  monitoring  and  consultation  by  a  technical  consulting

advisory  (TCA)  team  that  periodically  reports  to  the  court  to  certify  that  McAuliffe  staff  is 
receiving  continuous  training  and  consistently  implementing  the  course  of  study. 

19. 

Respondents  challenge  the  validity  of  the  decisions  adopted  by  the 

Superintendent  to  retain  (skip)  junior  employees,  who  are  trained  staff  at  McAuliffe  and 
RTSA  at  Camp  Scott-Scudder,  over  more  senior  employees  who,  respondents  allege,  have 
the  training,  experience,  and  credentials  to  render  the  same  services  that  the  junior  employees 
were  retained  to  render.  Respondents  did  not  challenge  the  delivery  or  content  of  the 
Reduction  in  Force  notices.  Nor  did  they  challenge  seniority  dates  or  the  credentials  of 
skipped  staff. 

MCAULIFFE 

20. 

All  the  students  at  McAuliffe  are  male;  at  least  half  of  them  are  in  need  of 

special  educational  services.  They  feed  into  McAuliffe  from  four  juvenile  camps.  The  typical 
period  of  attendance  for  students  is  five  to  seven  months,  after  which  time  they  generally 
transfer  to  another  facility  or  leave  Probation  Department  supervision. 

21. 

‘It  was  alleged  in  the  Casey  A.  lawsuit  that  the  rehabilitative  and  educational 
programs  at  McAuliffe  were  constitutionally  deficient.  The  settlement  agreement  requires 
ongoing  monitoring  and  periodic  reporting  to  the  district  court,  as  well  as  significant  and 
extensive  skills  training  and  cross-training  of  staff  and  implementation  of  programs  unique  to 
McAuliffe.  The  23  teachers  at  McAuliffe  have  received  extensive  training  and  experience 
offered  exclusively  in  these  specialized  areas  and  programs  to  ensure  compliance  with  the 
settlement  agreement.  Untrained  staff  members  not  assigned  to  McAuliffe  do  not  possess  the 
same  training  and  experience.  All  McAuliffe  teachers  receive,  on  average,  several  hours  per 
week  of  training,  including  one-on-one  instructional  coaching,  weekly  collaborative  sessions, 
weekend  training,  and  access  to  on-line  course  materials.  Staff  members  have  received 
training  in  the  PBIS  process,  which  focuses  on  productively  responding  to  negative 
behaviors.  Training  in  PBIS  is  provided  by  nationally-certified  school  psychologist  Tracy 
Thurman,  who  works  exclusively  at  McAuliffe,  and  a  PBIS  consultant  who  provides  training 
at  McAuliffe  and  other  schooi  districts,  though  not  at  other  LACOE  sites.  McAuliffe  is  the 
only  LACOE  site  at  which  PBIS  is  currently  implemented  systemically  and 
comprehensively,  and  is  the  only  LACOE  site  providing  experience  with  PBIS  as  a  systemic 
and  comprehensive  component  of  the  educational  program.  Some  PBIS  training  and 
curriculum  is  offered  at  other  camps  or  schools,  but  it  is  not  bundled  together  in  the  same 
comprehensive  and  intensive  manner  as  at  McAuliffe.  Also  unique  to  McAuliffe  are  training 
in  the  Marzano  Nine,  a  set  of  high-yield  instructional  strategies,  and  Advance  Path  Academy, 
a  credit  recovery  program,  though  other  sites  have  different  credit  recovery  programs.  The 
training  of  McAuliffe  staff  fundamentally  affects  the  delivery  of  instruction  to  students  in  a 
unique  way  by  offering  a  systemic  approach  to  PBIS  and  instruction.  No  respondent  offered 
testimony  of  comparable  training  in  or  experience  implementing  this  course  of  study. 

22. 

Since  2011,  overall  progress  toward  achieving  McAuliffe’s  action  plan  goals 
has  increased  dramatically;  school  behavior  data  show  a  marked  downward  trend  in  student

suspensions  and  referrals.  TCA  team  co-chair,  Dr.  Peter  Leone,  testified  as  to  the  positive 
impact  of  retention  of  the  trained  staff. 

RTSA  AT  SCOTT-SCUDDER 

23. 

The  RTSA  at  Scott-Scudder  Camp  is  an  all-girls  school  for  juvenile  offenders. 

It  is  the  only  one  of  its  kind  in  Los  Angeles  County.  The  camp  is  operated  by  the  Probation 
Department;  RTSA  is  operated  by  LACOE.  RTSA  is  similar  in  some  ways  to  McAuliffe,  in 
that  the  student  population  is  in  need  of  specialized  education  and  is  transitory.  Based  on  the 
students’  specialized  needs,  LACOE  developed  a  course  of  study  focused  on  a  thematic, 
interdisciplinary  project-based  learning  curriculum  with  content  and  support  relevant  and 
specific  to  the  population.  To  implement  this  course  of  study,  RTSA  staff  at  Scott-Scudder 
underwent  extensive  training  and  participated  in  one-to-one  coaching  support  training,  as 
well  as  further  support  and  training  off-site,  to  develop  unique  skills  and  experience  for 
certificated  personnel  at  RTSA.  Staff  also  launched  new  programmatic  components 
exclusive  to  RTSA  and  its  female  population.  RTSA  plans  its  own  curriculum.  RTSA  is  also 
the  only  LACOE  site  that  has  been  chosen  to  implement  the  California  Democracy  School 
Civic  Learning  Initiative  (California  Democracy  Initiative).  The  grant-funded  program  brings 
civics  education  into  the  classroom  as  a  systemic  part  of  the  education  provided  at  RTSA. 
The  California  Democracy  Initiative  takes  three  years  to  fully  implement;  it  is  now  nearing 
the  end  of  its  second  year  at  Scott-Scudder,  having  begun  there  in  the  summer  of  2013.  To 
introduce  the  initiative,  a  team  of  RTSA  teachers  attended a  five-day  training  symposium  led 
by  program  director  Michelle  Herzog;  those  teachers  then  trained  the  other  RTSA  teachers  in 
monthly  training  sessions,  and  the  program  has  been  implemented  at  RTSA  since  that  time. 

24. 

Untrained  senior  staff  members  not  assigned  to  RTSA  do  not  possess  the  same 

training  and  experience  as  staff  members  at  RTSA.  LACOE  is  currently  involved  in 
expanding  the  RTS  course  of  study  to  other  LACOE  sites.  This  will  be  a  three  year  process 
with  multiple  stages  of  training  and  implementation.  But  while  some  of  the  specialized 
training  and  curriculum  used  at  RTSA  is  available  at  other  sites  within  LACOE,  they  are  not 
yet  systemically  integrated  into  the  course  of  study  at  those  other  sites.  Diana  Velasquez,  the 
RTSA  Director,  testified  that  only  the  staff  at  RTSA  at  Scott-Scudder  has  been  fully  trained 
and  is  currently  experienced  at  implementing  the  course  of  study. 

PARTICULAR  SKIPS 

25. 

Respondent  Karen  Collier  is  assigned  to  Central  Juvenile  Hall.  William 

Bermudez,  with  greater  seniority,  bumped  Collier.  Collier  holds  a  clear  multiple  subject 
credential,  an  educational  specialist  (mild/moderate  disabilities)  credential,  and  a  CLAD.  She 
contends  that  she  should  be  retained  instead  of  three  employees  who  either  have  less 
seniority  than  she,  or  inferior  credentials.  Jennifer  C.  Roberts,  at  Vista  High  School,  has  the 
same  seniority  date  and  credentials  as  Collier;  Roberts,  however,  holds  an  educational 
specialist  (moderate/severe  disabilities)  credential.  Roshawn  Perkins  is  less  senior  than 
Collier;  Perkins,  however,  holds  an  educational  specialist  (moderate/severe  disabilities) 
credential,  teaches  at  McAuliffe,  and  has  training  and  experience  Collier  lacks.  Paul  Wecker

is  also  less  senior  than  Collier  and  holds  the  same  credential  as  Collier;  Wecker,  however, 
teaches  at  McAuliffe  and  has  training  and  experience  that  Collier  lacks.  Collier  testified  that 
she  will  soon  receive  a  Level  1  moderate/severe  disabilities  credential.  She  also  testified  that 
Central  Juvenile  Hall  is  in  the  first  year  of  providing  RTS  training  to  some  staff  members, 
including  Collier,  although  her  school  will  not  implement  the  RTS  course  of  study  until  next 
year.  Collier  attended  one  day  of  training  with  Chaffee,  in  May  or  June  2014,  and  one  class 
in  the  California  Democracy  Initiative  with  Michelle  Herzog  this  academic  year;  she  did  not 
attend  subsequent  classes,  however,  because  they  were  offered  only  to  teachers  senior  to  her. 
At  this  time,  Collier  has  been  trained  in  and  implements  only  certain  elements  of  the 
California  Democracy  Initiative.  Collier  has  not  been  trained  by  Thurman.  Collier  does  not 
participate  in  a  weekly  PBIS  professional  development  session.  She  does  not  prepare  weekly 
PBIS  lesson  plans.  It  was  not  established  that  Collier  has  the  same  special  training  and 
experience  as  Perkins  and  Wecker  and  other  McAuliffe  staff  members,  or  the  credentials  that 
Perkins  and  Roberts  hold.  For  those  reasons,  she  may  not  bump  into  their  assignments,  nor 
should  she  skip  under  the  Superintendent’s  skipping  criteria. 

26. 

Respondent  Jessica  Reed  teaches  moderately-to-severely  disabled  autistic 

students.  Barbara  Wilson  retreated  to  teacher  from  an  administrative  position  and  bumped 
junior  teacher  Karla  Williams;  Williams,  who  is  senior  to  and  has  the  same  credentials  as 
Reed,  bumped  Reed.  Reed  contends  that  junior  employees  have  been  retained  to  provide 
services  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  perform,  specifically  Paul  Wecker, 
Roshawn  Perkins,  and  Tae  Ho  Mauk,  all  at  McAuliffe.  Reed  took  a  PBIS  class  as  part  of  a 
six-month  study  program  at  Ramona  Elementary  School  in  Hawthorne,  training  she  contends 
is  equivalent  to  that  received  by  teachers  junior  to  her.  She  uses  PBIS  daily  lesson  plans, 
based  on  her  students’  needs.  Reed  has  attended  six  courses  over  a  six-month  period  in  the 
UCLA  Extension  Program;  one  of  those  courses  included  PBIS  and  clinical  techniques  for 
educating  students  with  emotional  disturbances.  She  consults  two  to  three  times  per  week 
with  a  psychologist,  a  Board  Certified  Behavioral  Analyst  with  a  national  certificate,  to 
implement  and  adjust  students’  behavioral  support  plans.  Reed  has  not,  however,  received 
any  training  with  Chaffee  or  Thurman  and  does  not  know  the  content  of  the  training  they 
offer.  She  does  not  participate  in  weekly  PBIS  trainings,  and  her  school,  though  its  staff 
implements  behavioral  plans,  does  not  implement  PBIS  on a  systemic  level.  It  was  not 
established  that  Reed  has  the  same  special  training  and  experience  as  Wecker,  Perkins, 
Mauk,  and  other  McAuliffe  staff  members.  For  this  reason,  she  may  not  bump  into  their 
assignments,  nor  should  she  skip  under  the  Superintendent’s  skipping  criteria. 

27. 

Respondent  Norma  Van  Metre  is  employed  as a  literacy  specialist  at  Pacific 

Lodge,  in  the  Santa  Monica  Mountains  Principal  Administrative  Unit.  She  has  a  clear 
specialist  instruction  credential  in  reading  that  does  not  appear  on  LACOE’s  seniority  list 
because  she  did  not  inform  LACOE  of  the  credential.  She  was  bumped  by  Karl  Hernandez, 
who  is  senior  to  her;  he  was  bumped  by  the  more  senior  Ramiro  Palomar.  Van  Metre 
contends  that  two  employees  with  less  seniority  are  being  retained  to  provide  services  in  a 
position  she  is  competent  and  certificated  to  perform,  specifically  Tae  Ho  Mauk,  at 
McAuliffe,  and  Ebony  A.  Nicholson,  at  Scott-Scudder.  The  position  she  wishes  to  fill  was 
described  by  LACOE  as  a  position  for  a  literacy  specialist  teacher  requiring  five  or  more

years  of  classroom  instruction  with  an  emphasis  on  reading  instruction.  Van  Metre  contends 
she  has  the  necessary  experience.  Pacific  Lodge  is  beginning  to  offer  RTS  project-based 
instruction,  and  Van  Metre  has  been  attending  “Saturday  Summit”  trainings  for  that  program, 
which  Pacific  Lodge  started  implementing  onsite  just  weeks  before  this  hearing.  These 
summits  do  not  provide  the  embedded  training,  weekly  training,  and  professional 
development  that  the  staff  members  at  Scott-Scudder  and  McAuliffe  receive,  however.  It  was 
not  established  that  Van  Metre  has  the  same  special  training  and  experience  as  Mauk, 
Nicholson,  and  other  McAuliffe  and  Scott-Scudder  staff  members.  For  this  reason,  she  may 
not  bump  into  their  assignments,  nor  should  she  be  skipped  under  the  Superintendent’s 
skipping  criteria. 

28. 

Respondent  Danny  Hong  teaches  at  Central  Juvenile  Hall;  he  has  a  clear 

multiple  subject  credential,  a  reading  certificate,  and  an  advanced  reading  certificate. 

a. 

Hong  testified  that  a  junior  employee,  Ebony  Nicholson,  is  being 

retained  to  provide  services  he  is  credentialed  and  competent  to  perform.  Nicholson  holds  a 
multiple-subject  credential  and  teaches  at  Scott-Scudder.  Hong  has  received  specialized 
training,  including  one-on-one  coaching,  to  serve  as  a  literacy  teacher.  LACOE  has  asked 
Hong  to  train  other  literacy  teachers  at  various  locations,  including  McAuliffe,  and  has 
videotaped  his  lessons  for  use  in  a  webinar.  (Exs.  B11,  B13.)  He  worked  alongside  Dr.  Leone 
to  ensure  that  the  literacy  component  of  the  Casey A.  settlement  agreement  was  met,  and 
provided  one-on-one  coaching  to  several  teachers.  He  is  familiar  with  RTS;  two  years  ago, 
Central  Juvenile  Hall  applied  to  become  an  RTS  school,  and  Hong  has  trained  teachers  there 
during  Saturday  Summits.  Hong  was  a  committee  member  in  Scholastic  Read  180,  a  literacy 
training  program;  he  received  extensive  training  in  2009-2012,  after  which  the  training 
program  ended;  junior  employees  being  skipped  now  will  not  be  able  to  receive  that  training. 
(Ex.  B11.)  Hong  also  worked  with,  among  others,  then-Assistant  Principal  Kimberly 
Humphries,  to  train  the  probationary  officers  and  students  running  the  dormitory  libraries  at 
McAuliffe.  He  did  not  receive  any  training  at  McAuliffe  in  PBIS  and  the  other  programs  in 
place  there,  though.  His  location,  Central  Juvenile  Hall,  is  not  currently  implementing  RTS. 
While  Hong  has  extensive  experience  teaching  other  literacy  teachers,  it  was  not  established 
that  Hong  has  the  same  special  training  and  experience  as  Nicholson  and  other  McAuliffe 
and  Scott-Scudder  staff  members.  For  this  reason,  he  may  not  bump  into  Nicholson’s 
assignment. 

b. 

Hong  also  contends  that  the  Superintendent  should  have  skipped  him 

over  Lola  Skelton,  who  is  senior  to  him.  Skelton  has  a  clear  multiple  subject  credential  and  a 
reading  certificate.  Hong  contends  that  he  has  training  and  the  five  years’  instructional 
experience  specified  in  LACOE’s  literacy  specialist  job  posting  that  Skelton  lacks.  Hong 
trained  Skelton  in  how  to  enroll  students  and  evaluate  their  eligibility  for  Scholastic  Read 
180  in  2014,  when  she  was  a  new  literacy  specialist  teacher  at  Munz/Mendenhall,  a  LACOE 
site.  Hong  does  not,  however,  meet  any  of  the  five  skipping  criteria  adopted  by  the 
Superintendent  in  Resolution  5-S;  he  may  not,  therefore,  be  skipped  over  Skelton. 

10

29. 

Taking  into  account  the  changes  described  above,  no  junior  certificated 

employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  that  a  more  senior  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  Superintendent  is  respondents’  employer.  (§  1293.)  The  procedures 

governing  school  district  layoffs  of  certificated  employees  under  sections  44949  and  44955 
apply  to  the  Superintendent.  (§  1294.) 

2. 

The  parties  met  all  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  under  sections  44949 

and  44955.  (Factual  Findings  1-9.} 

3. 

In  administrative  hearings  dealing  with  personnel  matters,  the  burden  of  proof 

is  ordinarily  on  the  agency  prosecuting  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of Fountain  Valley 
(1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113.)  For  example,  in  personnel  matters  concerning  the  dismissal 
of  a  teacher  for  cause,  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the  discharging  school  district.  (Gardner  v. 
Comm.  on  Prof.  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035.)  In  this  case,  the  Superintendent 
bears  the  burden  of  proof.  Because  no  other  law  or  statute  requires  otherwise,  the  standard  of 
proof  in  this  case  is  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Evid.  Code,  §  115.) 

4. 

The  Superintendent  has  significant  discretion  in  determining  the  need  to 

reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services,  and  is  not  open  to  second-guessing  in  this 
proceeding.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167;  California  Teachers 
Assn.  v.  Huff  (1992)  5  Cal.App.4th  1513,  1529.)  The  Superintendent’s  decisions  and  actions 
must  be  reasonable  under  the  circumstances;  that  standard  “may  permit  a  difference  of 
opinion.”  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Bd.  (1981)  116  Cal-App.3d 
831;  see  also  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.  3d  796 
(layoff  process  allows  flexibility.) 

5. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Resolution  Number  1-S  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case 
law.  (See  §  44955.)  The  Superintendent’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  was 
neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  his  discretion.  Services  will  not 
be  reduced  below  mandated  levels.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  those 
particular  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  LACOE’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the 
meaning  of  section  44949.  (Factual  Findings  1-14.) 

6. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  LACOE  due  to 

the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  (Factual  Findings  1-29.) 

7. 

Section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  permits  a  school  district  to  deviate  from  the 

order  of  seniority  in  teacher  layoffs  when  “the  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for 
personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study  . 
retained]  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study 

.  and  that  the  employee  [who  is 

. 

1

...  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”  In  this  case,  the  Superintendent 
established  a  specific  need  for  teachers  at  McAuliffe  and  RTSA  to  use  methods  and 
processes  in  which  they  have  been  extensively  trained  and  coached  and  in  implementing 
which  they  have  developed  a  special  degree  of  experience.  The  special  experience  and 
training  received  by  staff  have  become  integral  to  the  unique  curriculum  and  courses  of  study 
offered  at  McAuliffe  and  RTSA,  and  have  been  instrumental  in  the  dramatic  positive  changes 
in  the  learning  and  behavior  of  students  at  both  sites.  It  was,  therefore,  established  that  the 
Superintendent’s  skipping  decisions  relative  to  McAuliffe  and  RTSA  were  appropriate,  in 
that  the  skipped  teachers  possess  special  training  and  experience  to  teach  the  unique  courses 
of  study  at  those  schools  that  others  within  LACOE  more  senior  to  them  do  not  possess. 
(Factual  Findings  1-29.) 

8. 

During  the  hearing,  LACOE  rescinded  the  preliminary  layoff  notices  issued  to 

respondents  Kathleen  M.  Davis,  Kenise  N.  Grigsby,  Eva  S.  Murray-Yavar,  Jennifer  L. 
Strutzenberg,  and  Vanessa  M.  VanNiman.  The  Accusations  against  them  will  be  dismissed. 
(Factual  Finding  9.) 

9. 

LACOE’s  non-reelection  of  temporary  employees  Gerardo  Flores,  Elan  N. 
Magana,  and  Richard  C.  McCioud  did  not  violate,  nor  was  there  any  waiver  of,  any  rights 
those  employees  may  have  as  previously  laid-off  permanent  or  probationary  employees. 

10. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

that  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

The  Accusations  against  respondents  Kathleen  M.  Davis,  Kenise  N.  Grigsby,  Eva  S. 

Murray-Yavar,  Jennifer  L.  Strutzenberg,  and  Vanessa  M.  VanNiman,  identified  in 
Attachment  A,  are  dismissed.  LACOE  shall  not  give  those  respondents  final  layoff  notices 
for  the  2015/2016  school  year. 

The  Accusations  are  sustained  as  against  the  other  respondents  identified  in 
Attachment  A.  LACOE  may  serve  final  notice  to  those  respondents  that  their  services  will 
not  be  required  for  the  2015-2016  school  year. 

Dated:  May  13,  2015 

HOWARD  W.  COHEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

12

ATTACHMENT  A 

Johnson,  Eric  C. 
Johnson,  Yves  D. 

Mercado  Perez,  Felicia 

  

  

Arellano,  Alexandra  H. 
Atkinson,  Stephanie 
Calyton,  John  C. 

VanMetre,  Norma  P. 
Warren,  Natasha 
Walton,  Tyesa 
Won,  Kimberly  C. 
Woods,  Gayle 
Yu,  Theresa  W. 

  

  Coleman,  Talaya  M. 
  Collier,  Karen 

  

  

  

Davis,  Kathleen  M. 
Driscoll,  David  E. 
Dundes,  Amanda  R. 
  Figueroa,  Mayra  A. 
Fischer,  Seven,  J. 
Gordon,  Francis  O. 

  

  

  Grigsby,  Kenise  N. 
  Hairrington,  Lisa 
  Hong,  Danny 

  

  

  Lizardo,  DeAna 

  

  

  

  

  

  

Reed,  Jessica  V. 

Murray,  Irene  E. 
Okunna,  Gloria  M. 
Olivares,  David  L. 
Price,  Darren  E. 

  Rivas,  Brandon 

  Moore,  Joseph  R. 
  Murray-Yavar,  Eva  S. 

  Pullens,  Reginald  E. 
  Ravare,  Regina  C. 

    
 
    

  Strutzenberg,  Jennifer  L. 
  Stump,  Gail  K. 
  Taylor,  Cynthia  L. 
VanNiman,  Vanessa  M. 

Roberts,  Jenifer  C. 
Rodriguez,  John 
Romero,  Luis  A. 

Shafer,  James.  D. 

  

  

  

  

  

13 

