 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
SISKIYOU JOINT COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SISKIYOU 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the District Statement of 
Reduction in Force of: 
 
JUAN ROBERTO MAZARIEGOS, 
 
                                                          Respondent. 
 

 

 

OAH No. 2015040059 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Karl S. Engeman, State of 

California, Office of Administrative Hearings, on April 13, 2015, in Weed, California. 
 

Eileen O’Hare-Anderson, Attorney at Law, Liebert Cassidy Whitmore, represented 

the Siskiyou Joint Community College District (District). 
 

Donald A. Selkie, Jr., Attorney at Law, appeared on behalf of Juan Roberto 

Mazariegos (respondent), who was also present.  
 

Evidence and testimony were received, and the matter was submitted for decision on 

April 13, 2015.  
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Scotty Thomason is the President and Superintendent of the District.  On 

March 10, 2015, President Thomason gave notice to the District’s Board of Trustees 
(Governing Board) of his recommendation that notice be given to respondent that his 
services will not be required for the 2015-2016 academic year.   
 

2. 

On March 10, 2015, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2014-15-08, 

entitled “In the Matter of the Reduction or Discontinuance of Certain Particular Kinds of 
Services for the 2014-2015 School Year” (PKS Resolution).  Pursuant to the PKS 
Resolution, the Governing Board determined that it was necessary and in the best interests of 
the District to eliminate the equivalent of a 1.0 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) 175-day Spanish 
Instructor and to decrease a corresponding number of District academic employees no later 

1 

 

 

than the beginning of the 2015-2016 academic year.  The PKS Resolution directed the 
District President/Superintendent or his designee to initiate and pursue procedures necessary 
to not reemploy the equivalent of 1.0 FTE academic employee (175-Day Spanish Instructor) 
of the District in accordance with Education Code sections 87740 and 87743.1   
 

3. 

On March 10, 2015, respondent was served with the recommendation 

regarding reduction/discontinuance of services and that his services would no longer be 
required.  The preliminary layoff notices informed respondent of his right to request a 
hearing, and enclosed a copy of the PKS Resolution, sections 87740 and 87743, and a blank 
request for hearing form.  In response to the preliminary layoff notice, respondent filed a 
Notice of Participation, including a request for a hearing, on April 6, 2015.  On April 2, 
2015, the District served the Accusation/District Statement of Reduction in Force, copies of 
relevant sections of the Education and Government Codes, and form Notice of Defense on 
respondent. 
 
Sufficiency of the PKS Reduction   

Respondent is the District’s only Spanish Instructor.  In the fall of this school 
year, he taught a combined Spanish III and IV course (Intermediate Spanish) and a Spanish I 
course (Elementary Spanish).  This semester, he has been teaching two “on-line” Spanish I 
courses and a face-to-face Spanish II (second semester of Elementary Spanish) course.  The 
District administration determined to reduce the Spanish offerings because of the small 
number of students enrolled in the classes.  This was part of an overall survey of courses to 
assess the cost-effectiveness of the curriculum.  There are only four Spanish majors enrolled 
in the college, and District will find alternatives, such as on-line courses at other institutions, 
to help them complete their required community college course work for a Spanish degree.  
 

5. 

Despite the Governing Board’s Resolution reciting the elimination of 1.0 Full-

Time Equivalent Faculty (FTEF), District has scheduled respondent to teach an on-line 
Spanish course (Spanish I) in the fall of the 2015-2016 school year and another (Spanish II) 
in the spring.  Thus, the actual PKS reduction is approximately .7 FTEF of Spanish 
Instruction, with respondent retaining approximately .3 FTEF of his position.   

 
Bumping Rights 
 

6. 

Education Code section 87743, quoted in its entirety below, describes the 
causes for laying off tenured employees, including those noticed based on a reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of service.  The District’s authority to do so is limited by 
the sentence that reads:   

However, the services of no tenured employee may be 
terminated under this section while any probationary employee, 

                                                 

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise indicated.   

  
4. 

 

2 

 

 

or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a 
service in a faculty service area in which the records of the 
district maintained pursuant to Section 87743.5 reflect that the 
tenured employee possesses the minimum qualifications 
prescribed by the board of governors and is competent to serve 
under district competency criteria.  
 
Respondent has identified three positions to which he asserts his bumping 

7. 

rights.  They are (1) positions held by various temporary part-time faculty members working 
in the District’s Critical Skills Lab; (2) the Yreka Site Supervisor; and (3) the Men’s’ and/or 
Women’s Head Soccer Coach.  The factual findings regarding each position are recited 
below and respondent’s entitlement to bump into any of them is discussed in the Legal 
Conclusions.   
 

Critical Skills Lab 
 

8. 

The District offers a non-credit course, EDU 0670, Critical Skills Lab, in the 

Academic Success Centers of the Weed campus and the Yreka campus for students requiring 
additional instruction in English (Reading and Writing), Mathematics, Computer Skills, and 
researching.  Students enroll at any time (open enrollment) and sign in on a computer to 
confirm attendance.  Prior to this school year, all of the instructors were temporary part-time 
faculty with a master’s degree (or equivalency) in one or more of the remedial subjects.  
Their schedules varied, depending on the individual instructor’s availability and the needs of 
students.  They were paid by the hours worked at half the rate for adjunct faculty because this 
is a lab rather than a conventional class.  District limits their hours to maintain the 
instructors’ part–time status and avoid the expense of benefits such as health care.  The labs 
are open for most of normal business hours from Monday through Friday while school is in 
session.  This school year, approximately 10 temporary instructors worked in the lab course 
at the Weed campus and at least two temporary instructors worked in the lab course at the 
Yreka campus.  The labs also used student tutors and instructional aides to assist students.   

 
9. 

There was a change in staffing the Weed lab this school year.  In addition to 

the temporary instructors, at least three full time faculty members were assigned for periods 
of time.  Two full time instructors, including respondent, were assigned to the lab because of 
low enrollment in their respective courses.  The lab hours supplemented their regular 
teaching assignments to reach a full load.  The number of hours that respondent was assigned 
to the lab was not established, nor were the hours that the other two instructors worked in the 
lab.  The other instructor who has been assigned to the lab this year to make up for low 
enrollment is Michael Read.  He holds bachelor’s degrees in civil engineering and physics 
and a master’s degree in civil engineering.  His teaching disciplines are astronomy, computer 
science, engineering, engineering technology and physical science.  The third full time 
faculty member assigned to the lab was Ms. Heath.  She holds a bachelor’s degree in 
biochemistry and a master’s degree in agricultural and environmental chemistry.  Her 
teaching discipline is chemistry.  One of Ms. Heath’s classes had low enrollment and she 
intended to take a pregnancy leave-of-absence.  She was assigned to the lab for two weeks 

3 

 

 

before the beginning of her pregnancy leave.  The District’s President/Superintendent has 
determined that next school year, the District will not assign full time faculty to the lab to 
supplement teaching hours when enrollment is low.  The college will return to the former 
practice of staffing the labs exclusively with temporary part-time instructors and ancillary 
tutors.   
 
10. 

Respondent was observed in the skills center on multiple occasions by Dennis 

Weathers.  Mr. Weathers is the Interim Dean of Liberal Arts and Sciences and one of 
respondent’s three performance evaluators.  On the occasions that Mr. Weathers observed 
respondent, respondent was working independently on a computer.  Respondent, in 
testimony at the hearing, described his role in the course as the “instructor of record,” with 
the responsibility of directing students to appropriate specialists based on a student’s 
declared deficiencies. The evidence did not establish whether the District counts enrollment 
in the lab as part of its “apportionment,” or entitlement to state funding based on full-time 
equivalent students. 
 

11.  District has defined one Faculty Service Area for its instructors:  teaching.2  

Competencies for full-time faculty require faculty members to meet one of three criteria:  (1) 
satisfying the minimum qualifications established by the Board of Governors of the 
California Community Colleges; (2) Possession of a Community College teaching credential 
in the discipline; or (3) Equivalence in the discipline as established by the District’s 
Equivalency Committee and application for such equivalency submitted to Human Resources 
no later than February 15 of the academic year.3  The relevant minimum qualifications for 
lab instructors are discussed in the Legal Conclusions.     
 
Yreka Site Supervisor 
 

12.  District has a satellite campus in Yreka, California.  Before this academic year 
and for a period of time not established by the evidence, the positon of Yreka Site Supervisor 
had been filled by a District administrator.  This school year, Steven Reynolds, a full time 
faculty member, was assigned to the position.  According to the MOU between District and 
the Faculty Association, the Site Supervisor reports to the Vice President for Academic 
Affairs and generally oversees the operations of the Yreka campus, including supervision of 
personnel assigned there.  Mr. Reynolds’s discipline is English and he holds a bachelor’s 
degree in human relations and organizational behavior, a master’s degree in English, and a 
doctorate in educational administration.  His date of hire is August 11, 2011, so he is junior 
to respondent whose date of hire is August 9, 1996. 

 
13. 

The District intends to return to staffing the Yreka Site Supervisor position 
with a District administrator next school year.  No evidence was presented regarding the 
                                                 

2 Article 20, section 20.1 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement between District 

and District’s Faculty Association (MOU).  

 
3 Article 20, section 20.2 of the MOU. 

4 

 

 

 

manner in which the previous District administrator performed his or her Site Supervisor 
duties or the manner in which such duties shall be performed by the administrator assigned to 
the position in the ensuing academic year.  However, District and the Faculty Association felt 
it necessary to enter into an MOU specifying Mr. Reynolds’ duties this academic year, 
including hours allocable to the position (and those allocable to Mr. Reynolds’ other role as 
“Accreditation Liaison” position) and incorporated a Site Supervisor duty statement tailored 
to Mr. Reynolds.  This strongly suggests that the manner in which Mr. Reynolds has 
performed the services are not identical to those of administrators previously assigned to 
such duties or those to be assigned the administrator assuming the role in the ensuing 
academic year.    
 
Men’s and Women’s Head Soccer Coaches 
 

14. 

The District’s coaches are faculty members.  District intends to revive its 

soccer teams next school year which will be coached by faculty members.  District 
advertised for a Women’s head soccer coach and a Men’s head soccer coach on its website.  
On April 5, 2015, respondent addressed a letter to District’s Human Resources Department 
expressing his interest in “the soccer position.”  He recited his semi-professional experience 
as a soccer player in Guatemala for several years before emigrating to the United States and 
his participation on a pre-Olympic Guatemala soccer team training for the 1976 Olympics.  
Respondent also noted that he took several soccer theory classes at Canãda College in 
Redwood City, California, in the fall of 1987 and advanced soccer classes at CSU-Chico 
during the fall of 1989 and spring of 1990.  He was the Assistant Coach of District’s 
women’s soccer team during the 1997 and 1998 seasons.  This was a volunteer position.   

 
15.  On a date not established by the evidence, but after respondent’s April 5, 2015 

 
letter, District took down the on-line advertisements for a men’s and women’s head soccer 
coaches.  District decided to combine soccer coaching duties with a teaching assignment in 
the discipline of kinesiology and will advertise for the position in the future.       
 
 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Section 87743 reads: 

1. 
  

No tenured employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 
causes other than those specified in Sections 87453, 87467, and 
87484, and Sections 87732 to 87739, inclusive, and no 
probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position 
for cause other than as specified in Section 87740 except in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 87463 and Sections 
87743 to 87762, inclusive. 
 

Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all 
of the schools of a district for the first six months in which 

5 

 

 

school is in session shall have declined below the corresponding 
period of either of the previous two school years, or whenever a 
particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not 
later than the beginning of the following school year, and when 
in the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have 
become necessary by reason of either of these conditions to 
decrease the number of tenured employees in the district, the 
governing board may terminate the services of not more than a 
corresponding percentage of the employees of the district, 
tenured as well as probationary, at the close of the school year.  
However, the services of no tenured employee may be 
terminated under this section while any probationary employee, 
or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a 
service in a faculty service area in which the records of the 
district maintained pursuant to Section 87743.4 reflect that the 
tenured employee possesses the minimum qualifications 
prescribed by the board of governors and is competent to serve 
under district competency criteria. 
 
Notice of the termination of services either for a reduction in 
attendance or reduction or discontinuance of a particular kind of 
service to take effect not later than the beginning of the 
following school year, shall be given before the 15th of May in 
the manner prescribed in Section 87740 and services of the 
employees shall be terminated in the inverse of the order in 
which they were employed, as determined by the board in 
accordance with Sections 87413 and 87414. In the event that a 
tenured or probationary employee is not given the notices and a 
right to a hearing as provided for in Section 87740, he or she 
shall be deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year. 

 

The board shall make assignments and reassignments in a 
manner that employees shall be retained to render any service 
which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.  
 

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth 

(Emphasis added.) 
 
2. 

in sections 87740 and 87743. 
 
PKS Reduction Issue 
 

3. 

Spanish Instructor services identified in the PKS Resolution is a particular 
kind of service that may be reduced or discontinued under section 87743.  The Governing 
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue this service was neither arbitrary nor capricious, 

6 

 

 

and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of these 
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s college and its students within the meaning 
of section 87740. 
 

4.  While the Governing Board’s Resolution reflects a reduction of 1.0 full-time 

equivalent (175-day Spanish Instructor), the evidence established that the actual reduction in 
Spanish is approximately .3 FTEF.  Therefore, a “corresponding percentage” of employees 
that may be noticed is .7 FTEF.4 
 
Bumping Issues 
 
 
Critical Skills Lab 
 
5. 

Next year, no full time faculty will be assigned to the Critical Skills Lab, but 

respondent’s rights to continued employment are superior to the temporary part-time 
instructors who will continue to be employed in the lab (Daniels v. Shasta-Tehama-Trinity J. 
Community College Dist. (1989) 212 Cal. App.3d 910, 920.)  Thus, respondent’s right to 
occupy positions held by one or more of them to regain his .7 FTEF position depends upon 
whether he meets the minimum qualifications specified for the faculty service area and his 
competency under District competency criteria.  In this case, satisfaction of minimum 
qualifications also establishes competency by virtue of MOU article 20, section 20.2.1.    

Minimum qualifications are defined by the Board of Governors of the 

California Community Colleges and described in regulations promulgated by the 
Chancellor’s Office.   There are two regulations that include minimum qualifications that 
may pertain to the Critical Skills Lab instructors.   

 
6. 

 
7. 
 

California Code of Regulations, title 6, section 53415, reads:  

The minimum qualifications for service as a learning assistance 
or learning skills coordinator or instructor, or tutoring 
coordinator, shall be either (a) or (b) below: 
 
(a) the minimum qualifications to teach any master's level 
discipline in which learning assistance or tutoring is provided at 
the college where the coordinator is employed; or 
 
(b) a master's degree in education, educational psychology, or 
instructional psychology, or other master's degree with emphasis 
in adult learning theory. 

                                                 

4 The .3 FTEF was the District’s rough approximation of the portion of the 
respondent’s Spanish Instructor assignment that will remain with a single Spanish course 
taught in each of the fall (Spanish I) and spring (Spanish II) semesters next academic year.  

7 

 

 

Minimum qualifications do not apply to tutoring or learning 
assistance for which no apportionment is claimed. 
 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 53412, subdivisions (a), (b) and 

8. 
(c),5 read:  

 

Except as provided elsewhere in this article, the minimum 
qualifications for service as a faculty member teaching a 
noncredit course shall be the same as the minimum 
qualifications for credit instruction in the appropriate discipline, 
or as follows: 
 
(a) For an interdisciplinary noncredit basic skills course, a 
bachelor's in any social science, humanities, mathematics, or 
natural science discipline or in liberal studies, as appropriate for 
the course. 
 
(b) For a noncredit basic skills course in mathematics, a 
bachelor's in mathematics. 
 
(c) For a noncredit basic skills course in reading and/or writing, 
either:  a bachelor's degree in English, literature, comparative 
literature, composition, linguistics, speech, creative writing, or 
journalism; or a bachelor's degree in any discipline and twelve 
semester units of coursework in teaching reading. 
 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 53415, lists the minimum 

9. 

 
10. 

qualifications for service as a “learning assistance or learning skills coordinator or instructor, 
or tutoring coordinator.”  Respondent did not function as a learning skills coordinator, 
learning skills instructor, or tutoring instructor in the lab.  Although respondent described his 
role in the course as the “instructor of record,” he limited his responsibilities to directing 
students to appropriate specialists.  The evidence did not clearly establish respondent’s 
designated role, if any, in the lab this school year.  As noted in the Factual Findings, he was 
observed in the lab working independently on a computer and not assisting students.  More 
importantly, it was not established that such a position even existed in the lab this year or 
will exist in the next academic year.   

Even if respondent’s duties met the descriptions of those to whom Regulation 
53415 applies, by its terms the regulation does not apply to “tutoring or learning assistance 
for which no apportionment is claimed.”  California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 
58170, prescribes the conditions for apportionment based on student attendance in tutoring 
courses.  Several of the requirements are not satisfied by District’s course including the 

                                                 

5 The remaining subdivision relate to courses that are taught in the Critical Skills Lab.  

8 

 

 

required course designation and referrals of students only by a counselor or instructor that 
includes identified deficiencies.  The requirements also include a designated supervisor 
meeting the requirements of Regulation 53415.  Thus, while the District’s administrators 
who testified were not sure if District has claimed apportionment for the Critical Skills Lab 
students, it is reasonable to assume it has not.  In summary, Regulation 53415 does not 
impose any minimum qualifications on instructors or supervisors assigned to teach in the 
Critical Skills Lab that might bar respondent from bumping into positons occupied by the 
part-time temporary instructors.   
 

11. 

The Critical Skills Lab is, however, a non-credit course and the minimum 

qualifications for instructors in non-credit courses are set out in California Code of 
Regulations, title 5, section 53412.  The minimum qualifications for non-credit versions of 
for-credit courses are the same as those for credit courses in the same discipline.  The 
regulation also establishes minimum qualifications for non-credit basic skills courses.  For an 
interdisciplinary non-credit basic skills course, faculty must hold a bachelor’s in any social 
science, humanities, mathematics, or natural science discipline or in liberal studies, as 
appropriate for the course.  For basic skills courses in mathematics or reading, faculty must 
hold a bachelor’s degree in mathematics for the former and the latter requires a bachelor’s 
degree in English, literature, comparative literature, composition, linguistics, speech, creative 
writing, or journalism or a bachelor’s degree in any discipline plus twelve semester units in 
coursework in teaching reading. 

Respondent holds a bachelor’s and master’s degree in Spanish which falls 

within the humanities discipline.  However, his discipline is not “appropriate for the course,” 
because the lab provides individual instruction in the targeted subjects of English, including 
reading and writing, mathematics, use of a computer, and research.  Respondent’s discipline 
does not include any of the requisite skills to tutor students in any of the remedial areas.  

  

Finally, while District assigned respondent to the Critical Skills Lab this 

school year, this action does not obviate the District’s obligation to adhere to the standards 
required by the Board of Governors of the California Community College system.  Section 
87743 expressly requires that a faculty member seeking to occupy a position of a retained 
junior employee must meet the minimum qualifications established by the California 
Community Colleges’ Board of Governors.  Respondent does not meet the minimum 
qualifications in Regulation 53412 and is therefore unable to bump into any position in the 
lab tentatively assigned to one or more temporary part-time instructors for the next academic 
year.   

 
Yreka Site Supervisor 
 
14.  Next year, the District will staff this position with an administrator.  Thus, 

there will be no position held by a junior faculty member which respondent could occupy by 
virtue of his seniority.  District may provide the service in a different manner without 
eliminating it as PKS.  Cases interpreting section 44955, the analogous statutory provision 
for layoffs in school districts, have held that school districts have the discretion to determine 

 
12. 

 
13. 

9 

 

 

 

particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a service continues to be 
performed or provided in a different manner by the district.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers 
Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 812,; Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 
Cal.App.4th 1571, 1582–1585; Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 
Cal. App.4th 334, 343.)  Here, the District and the Faculty Association were required to 
prepare and execute a separate MOU for Mr. Reynolds’ role as the Yreka Site Supervisor.  
The MOU incorporated a duty statement tailored to Mr. Reynolds and outlining his authority 
and responsibilities.  These acts reflect that the services required of Mr. Reynolds are unique 
to him, and not identical to those of District administrators occupying the position.   

 
Men’s and Women’s Head Soccer Positions 
 
15.  While there was considerable evidence and argument presented by the parties 
regarding this issue, there is currently no soccer team for either gender, and no coaches have 
been hired for the next academic year when the teams are expected to begin play.  Thus, 
there are no soccer coaching positions tentatively assigned to junior faculty members that 
respondent can point to as possible bumping opportunities.  Once the position, or multiple 
positions, are established, respondent may apply based on his qualifications and seniority.  
He may also exercise any reemployment rights he possesses pursuant to Education Code 
section 87744.    
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice may be given to respondent Juan Roberto Mazariegos that approximately .7 

FTEF of his services as a Spanish Instructor will not be required for the 2015-2016 academic 
year.   
 
 
 
DATED:  April 20, 2015 
 
 
 

________________/s/___________________ 
KARL S. ENGEMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

10 

