 

 

 

BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF TRUSTEES  
MCCLOUD UNION ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SISKIYOU, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the District Statement of 
Reduction in Force of: 
 
FRANKIE DEVORE, 
ROGER GUGGENHEIMER 
 
                                            Respondents. 
 
 
 

     
 

 
  

 

OAH No. 2015030879 

PROPOSED DECISION 

McCloud Union Elementary School District was represented by Gabriela Flowers and 

Respondents Frankie Devore and Roger Guggenheimer were represented by Lesley 

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Marcie Larson, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 15, 2015, in McCloud, California. 
 
 
Thomas Gauthier, Attorneys at Law. 
 
 
Beth Curtis, Attorney at Law. 
 
 
were made.  The record was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on April 15, 
2015. 
  
 

Testimony and documentary evidence were received, and oral closing arguments 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 

Jurisdiction 
 

 
2.  

1. 

Shelley Cain is the Superintendent of the McCloud Union Elementary School 
District (District).  The actions of Superintendent Cain, and those of the District’s staff and 
Board of Trustees (Board), were taken solely in their official capacities.  

On February 12, 2015, Superintendent Cain recommended that the Board 

reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) no later than the beginning of the 
2015-2016 school year in the amount of 2.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.  The Board 
adopted Resolution No. 15-16, entitled “Resolution of Intention to Dismiss Certificated 

1 

 

 

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

Employees” (Resolution), which provides that it was necessary to reduce or discontinue PKS 
in the amount of 2.0 FTE. 

The Board further determined that it was necessary by reason of the reduction 
or discontinuance of services to decrease the number of certificated employees at the close of 
the 2014-2015 school year by a corresponding number of FTE positions.  The Board directed 
Superintendent Cain or her designee to send appropriate notices to all employees whose 
services would be terminated as a result of the Board’s action to reduce or discontinue PKS. 

On February 13, 2015, Superintendent Cain served respondents written notice, 
entitled “Notice of Recommendation that Services will be Terminated” (Notice), pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, of her recommendation to the Board that 
respondents’ services be terminated at the close of the 2014-2015 school year.  A copy of the 
Resolution was served with the Notice.   

The parties stipulated that respondents were properly and timely served with 

the Notice and that they timely requested a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying them for the 2015-2016 school year.  The parties also stipulated the respondents 
were properly and timely served with the District’s Statement of Reduction of Force, signed 
by Superintendent Cain on February 25, 2015, and that respondents timely filed notices of 
participation.  
 
6. 
 
7. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code 

Both respondents are certificated permanent employees of the District. 

sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
Services to be Reduced or Discontinued 
 

8. 

The Resolution authorized Superintendent Cain to take action to reduce or 

discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2015-2016 school year: 
 

 

 

 

Services 
 
Multiple Subject Teaching Services  
 
Total FTE Reduction 

             

 

2.0 FTE 

2.0 FTE 

Number of FTE Positions 

 
Cause for Reduction or Discontinuance of Services  
 

9. 

The District is a small school district, with one campus that services 

approximately 68 elementary school children in kindergarten through eighth grade.  The 
District employs four and one-half certificated employees.  Over the years, the District has 
experienced declining enrollment and declining revenue.  The District has been operating in 
a budget deficit for a number of years, and has utilized its reserve funds to pay for operating 

2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

expenses.  There is a possibility that there will be a decline in revenue next year, in part, due 
to decreased enrollment.  The District also expects that its expenses will increase. 
Considering all of this, the reduction or discontinuances of services are in the interest of the 
District’s school and its pupils.   

 
10. 

The services set forth in the Resolution are “particular kinds of services” that 
may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.  The Resolution does 
not reduce services below the mandated levels.  There was no evidence that the Board’s 
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was arbitrary or capricious.  The 
reduction or elimination of the services set forth in the Resolution constituted a proper 
exercise of the Board’s discretion, within the meaning of section 44955.   

District’s Intention to Deviate from Seniority – Skipping Criteria 
 

11. 

In the Resolution, the Board established criteria for deviating from seniority 

and skipping junior employees.  The Resolution provides in relevant part:   

WHEREAS, pursuant to Education Code section 44955, 
subdivision (d), the District may deviate from terminating a 
certificated employee in order of seniority (“skipping”) if the 
District demonstrates:  (1) a specific need for personnel to teach 
a specific course or course of study; (2) the certificated 
employee has special training and experience necessary to teach 
that course or course of study, which others with more seniority 
do no possess; or (3) for purposes of maintaining or achieving 
compliance with constitutional requirements related to equal 
protection of the law.  For the 2015-2016 school year only, to 
meet the requirements of Education Code section 44955, 
subdivision (d), the Governing Board determines the needs of 
the District and its students as follows: 

1.  At least two (2) school years of experience in 
the past five (5) school years teaching math in 
grades 6-8.  

12. 

Superintendent Cain drafted and recommended the skipping criteria, based 

upon the District’s current staffing and her belief that middle school math is more complex 
and should be taught by a teacher with experience teaching middle school math. Since 2001, 
the District had “departmentalized” math, which means that students rotate out of their 
general education classrooms to receive math instruction.  Superintendent Cain selected the 
criteria of at least two years of experience teaching middle school math in the last five years 
because Kathleen Poehlmann has been teaching middle school math in a “departmentalized” 
setting for the District and meets the criteria.  

3 

 

 

13.   Ms. Poehlmann is the only certificated employee in the District that meets the 

skipping criteria.  She was not served with a Notice.  Ms. Poehlmann’s seniority date is 2007.  
She has a clear multiple subject credential, a single subject credential with authorization to 
teach introductory mathematics and home economics.  She also holds a cross-cultural, 
language and academic development certificate.  Ms. Poehlmann currently teaches math to 
children in all grades except fifth grade.  She also teaches spelling and physical education to 
second and third grade students.   
 

14. 

Superintendent Cain was also skipped.  Her seniority date is 2002.  She holds a 

clear multiple subject credential and an administrative credential.  During the school year, 
Superintendent Cain holds .50 FTE.  She teaches reading and English language arts to 
seventh and eighth grade students, five days per week from 8:25 a.m. until noon.  
Superintendent Cain does not meet the skipping criteria.  She does not have two years of 
experience in the last five years teaching middle school math.  Superintendent Cain was not 
served with a Notice.  The District did not explain why Superintendent Cain was skipped or 
provide any justification as to why she retained her .50 FTE when two senior certificated 
employees were not skipped and received notices.  As a result, the District failed to establish 
any basis for skipping Superintendent Cain. 
 

15.   Respondents were not skipped because they have not taught middle school 

math in a “departmentalized” setting in two of the last five years.   

 
16.  Mr. Guggenheimer has a seniority date of 1986.  He has a clear multiple 
subject credential, a standard secondary teaching credential for physical education and 
Italian, and a certificate of completion of staff development.   He has taught middle school 
math in a self-contained classroom, but not in a “departmentalized” setting.  In 2012 and 
2013, Mr. Guggenheimer attended three math trainings presented at the District by the 
County Office of Education.  Mr. Guggenheimer currently teaches English language arts, 
science and social studies to second and third grade students, and science, history and 
physical education to seventh and eighth grade students.   

 
17.    Ms. Devore has a seniority date of 1992.  She has a clear multiple subject 

credential, a specialist instruction credential in special education, a resource specialist added 
authorization and a certificate of completion of staff development.  Ms. Devore worked as a 
special education teacher until approximately 2002.  She taught middle school math in a self-
contained classroom, as part of her duties a special education teacher.  Ms. Devore also 
attended the 2012 and 2013 math trainings presented at the District by the County Office of 
Education.  Ms. Devore currently teaches all subjects to kindergarten and first grade students. 
 

18. 

Superintendent Cain drafted a document titled “Potential Arrangements for 

2015-2016” which sets forth possible teaching arrangements in the event the District reduces 
the number for certificated employees by either 1.0 or 2.0 FTE.  She did not discuss the 
document or potential teaching arrangements with the Board or staff.  In both scenarios set 
forth in the document, teachers would be assigned multiple grades levels that would be 

4 

 

 

combined in self-contained classrooms.  The potential arrangements do not provide for math 
to be “departmentalized.”   

 
19. 

Respondents contend that the District’s is attempting to skip two junior 

teachers to teach a course, departmentalized middle school math, which the District failed to 
establish will exist in the future.  Respondents also contend that the skipping criteria is 
inappropriately and narrowly defined in order to retain Ms. Poehlmann, because she 
possesses a math credential, for a position that does not require such a credential.  
Respondents further contend that they are competent to teach math in a self-contained 
setting, such as the settings that are contemplated in “Potential Arrangements for 2015-
2016,” because they hold clear multiple subject teaching credentials.  Respondents’ 
credentials authorize them to “teach all subjects in a self-contained class” and “to teach core 
classes consisting of two or more subjects to the same group of students in grades five 
through eight, and to teach any of the core subjects he or she is teaching to a single group of 
students in the same grade level as the core for less than fifty percent of his or her work day.” 
 

20. 

In order to deviate from seniority order and retain a junior teacher, the District 

must satisfy the requirements of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d).  This 
section provides in relevant part: 
 

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate 
from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority 
for either of the following reasons: 

 

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to 
teach a specific course or course of study, . . . and that the 
certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which 
others with more seniority do not possess. 
 

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 

constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the 
laws. 

 
21. 

 
22. 

Thus in order to skip Ms. Poehlmann and Superintendent Cain and layoff 
respondents who are more senior, the District must first demonstrate a specific need for 
personnel to teach a specific course or course of study.  Second, the District must 
demonstrate that respondents do not have the special training and experience necessary to 
teach that course.  The District may not use specified periods of experience in its skipping 
criteria simply to secure continuity in a position.   

Education Code section 51014 defines “course of study” to mean the “planned 

content of a series of classes, courses, subjects, studies, or related activities.”  Education 
Code section 51015 defines “course” as an “instructional unit of an area or field of organized 
knowledge, usually provided on a semester, year, or prescribed length-of-time basis.”  The 

5 

 

 

  

 

District failed to demonstrate a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of 
study.  Although historically the District has “departmentalized” math by pulling children 
from their general education classrooms to receive math instruction, such an approach is not 
planned for the 2015-2016 school year.  The potential teaching arrangements for the 2015-
2016 school year anticipate that grades will be combined and all instruction will be provided 
in a self-contained classroom settings.  As a result, the District failed to establish a specific 
need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study. 

 
23. 

Furthermore, the District may not use skipping criteria that are not “necessary” 

to teach a course.  The District failed to establish that it is necessary for certificated 
employees to have two school years of experience in the past five school years teaching math 
in grades sixth through eighth.  Respondents have the special training and experience 
necessary to teach math in a self-contained classroom setting.  Mr. Guggenheimer has taught 
for the District for over 28 years.  Ms. Devore had taught for 23 years.  Respondents hold 
clear multiple subject teaching credentials which authorize them to “teach all subjects in a 
self-contained class.”  Both respondents have experience teaching math in a self-contained 
classroom settings and within the last three years have attended math training.  While the 
District may desire to have a teacher with recent experience teaching middle school math, the 
District failed to establish that such experience is necessary as required under Education 
Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). 
 

24. 

The District has not established cause under Education Code section 44955, 
subdivision (d), to deviate from seniority order with respect to respondents.  Respondents 
have been affected by the District’s erroneous decision to skip Ms. Poehlmann and 
Superintendent Cain.  The appropriate remedy for this error is to direct that notices to 
respondents Mr. Guggenheimer and Ms. Devore be rescinded. 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The fundamental principle of a particular kinds of services layoff is that 

permanent teachers must be laid off in inverse of their seniority.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subds. 
(b) & (c).)  As set forth in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b): 

 

 

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated . . . while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less 
seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render. 

2. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 

6 

 

 

 

 
4. 

5. 

178-179.)  The burden is on the District to demonstrate that the reduction or elimination of 
the particular kinds of services is reasonable and that the District carefully considered its 
needs before laying off any certificated employee.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers 
Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 807-808.)   
 

3. 

Legal cause exists to reduce or discontinue 2.0 FTE of particular kinds of 

services offered by the District as set forth in detail in the Factual Findings.  The Board’s 
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, 
and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of 
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s school and pupils within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44949. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), a district may 

deviate from seniority and retain junior employees only when authorized by statute to do so.  
In Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1) the Legislature has authorized districts 
to deviate from terminating in order of seniority in very limited and specified circumstances.  
Specifically, subdivision (d)(1), provides that the District may deviate from seniority if: 

 
The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach 
a specific course or course of study, or to provide services 
authorized by a service credential with a specialization in either 
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that 
the certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course of study or to provide those 
services, which others with more seniority do not possess.   
 
The District may not create skipping justifications other than those authorized 

by statute in order to avoid the seniority protection afforded to certificated employees with 
earlier dates of hire.  This is true even if the District believes that skipping junior certificated 
employees is in the best interests of the District and of its students.  (Alexander v. Board of 
Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 573-576 [invalidating school district’s skipping of 
junior teachers based solely on language skills].)  “A contrary construction would place all 
teachers in a single group measured by the sometimes vague needs of the district and pupils, 
as determined by the school board.”  (Id. at p. 574.)   

6. 

 
As set forth in Factual Findings 11 through 24, because the District did not 
establish compliance with section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), when it skipped respondents, 
the notices served on Ms. Devore and Mr. Guggenheimer should be rescinded.  
 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

1. 

Cause exists for the reduction of 2.0 full-time equivalent certificated positions 

at the end of the 2014-2015 school year. 

7 

2. 

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 6, the District shall rescind the notices given 

to Frankie Devore and Roger Guggenheimer. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 24, 2015 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

________________/s/___________________ 
MARCIE LARSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

8 

