BEFORE THE  
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE  
RIM OF THE WORLD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of 
Certain Employees of the Rim of the World 
Unified School District Identified in 
Appendix A. 

OAH No. 2015030874 

 
 
 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Todd Robbins, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Rudd & Romo, Attorneys at Law, 

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Carlos Perez, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented 11 of the respondents1 listed in 

 
 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Blue Jay, California, on April 22, 2015. 
 
 
represented Rim of the World Unified School District.   
 
 
Appendix A, which is attached hereto and incorporated by this reference.    
 
 
appear.  
 
 
 
 

Respondent Steven Hartranft failed to timely file a Request for Hearing and did not 

The matter was submitted on April 22, 2015. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

On March 5, 2015, the Board of Education adopted Resolution Number 14/15-
15, reducing particular kinds of certificated services and directing the Superintendent to give 
appropriate notices to certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the 
action.  The resolution stated that “competency” as described in Education Code section 
44955, subdivision (b), for the purposes of bumping “shall necessarily include:  (1) 
possession of a valid credential in the relevant subject matter area; (2) for bumping a holder 
of a Single Subject credential in a departmentalized course in grades 7-12, an equivalent 
Single Subject credential authorizing service in all grades 7-12; (3) ‘highly qualified’ status 
                                                

1  Respondent Lauren Tovar was represented by Mr. Perez but did not appear at the 

hearing. 

 
 

 
 
 

1 

 
2. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 
7. 
 
8. 

under the No Child Left Behind Act in the area to be assigned (if required by the position); 
and (4) an appropriate EL authorization (if required by the position).”   

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a matter 

reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this proceeding.  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 
167.)  A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not be 
fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal. 
App. 3d 627, 637.)      

Consistent with the board’s resolution, on March 11, 2015, Donna Kellogg, 

Superintendent, Rim of the World Unified School District, in her official capacity, 
recommended to the board in the Notice of Recommendation that Services Will Not be 
Required that the respondents identified in Appendix A be given notice that their services 
would not be required for the 2015-2016 school year.  The reasons for the recommendation 
were set forth in the notice. 

On March 11, 2015, Edward Dardenne-Ankinga, Assistant Superintendent 

Personnel/Pupil Services, made and filed the District Statement of Reduction in Force in his 
official capacity.  Mr. Dardenne-Ankinga testified in this proceeding.  He explained that 
financial considerations were the primary rationale behind the district’s layoff decision 
including a decline in average daily attendance, a consolidation of programs, and the 
impending closure of an elementary school.  Mr. Dardenne-Ankinga also explained the 
process that was used to identify those teachers subject to layoff.    

Mr. Dardenne-Ankinga testified that the district implemented a bump analysis 
to determine which employees identified for layoff could bump into a position being held by 
a junior employee.  A senior teacher whose position was discontinued had the right to 
transfer to a continuing position which he or she was certificated and competent to fill.  In 
doing so, the senior employee was entitled to displace or “bump” a junior employee who was 
filling that position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-
474.)  No evidence was introduced that established the district improperly “bumped” any 
employees.   
 
6. 

Respondents are identified in Appendix A.  Each respondent is a certificated 

employee of the district. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 

The services identified in Resolution 14/15-15 are particular kinds of services 
that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  
The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue those services was neither arbitrary nor 
capricious; rather, it was for the fiscal reasons outlined in Finding No. 4, above.  It was a 
proper exercise of the board’s discretion.  The reduction and discontinuation of services was 
related to the welfare of the district and its pupils, and it became necessary to decrease the 

 
 

 

2 

9. 

number of certificated employees as determined by the board.  No particular kinds of 
services were lowered to levels less than those levels mandated by state or federal law.     
 
Mr. Dardenne-Ankinga testified that he had not yet received a directive about 
 
how he was to proceed as a result of the district employees who recently notified the district 
that they intend to retire at the end of the current school year.  As such, the district has not 
yet determined whether attrition will affect the layoffs, but Mr. Dardenne-Ankinga 
anticipates that he will be given instructions regarding attrition and the district “most 
certainly” will rehire teachers as permitted by attrition.     
 
Tie-Breaking Issue 
 

10. 

Resolution Number 14/15-14 established criteria for resolving ties in seniority 

pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for those employees who share 
the same seniority dates.  The resolution identified eight criteria to be used to break ties.   
 
 
affect the layoff decisions.  
 
 

11.  Mr. Dardenne-Ankinga testified that the district’s tie-breaking criteria did not 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

2. 

3. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections were provided as 
required. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)   
 
 
notice of recommendation concerning the services that will not be required.   
 
 
particular kinds of services that the board directed be reduced or discontinued.  Because of 
the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant to Education Code section 
44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be required for the 2015-2016 
school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.   
 
 
 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the statements set forth in the 

The district identified the certificated employees who are providing the 

4. 

  

 

 

3 

RECOMMENDATION 

It is recommended that before May 15, 2015, the Board of Education give notice to 

the respondents whose names are set forth below in Appendix A, that their employment will 
be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed 
for the 2015-2016 school year. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 29, 2015 
 
 
 
                               
                               
 
 
 
 

_____________/s/_________________ 
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

4 

Appendix A 
 

ANN BARANY 

JOHN BERESFORD JR. 

STEVEN HARTRANFT (0.2 FTE) 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

SARAH HOUCK 

KIRSTEN KARN 

KIMBERLY LAVERS 

JESSICA MAZAKAS 

ERIC NEWCOMBE 

RYAN REISBORD (0.8 PTE) 

10. 

CONSTANCE REYNOLDS 

11. 

LAUREN TOVAR 

12. 

SUSAN WILLIAMS 

5 

 

 

