BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
CASTAIC  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  LOS  ANGELES 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoffs  Of: 

Certificated  Employees  of  the 
Castaic  Union  School  District, 

Respondents. 

  

Case  No.  2015030698 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  22,  2015,  in  Valencia,  California. 

Margaret  A.  Chidester,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  James  M.  Gibson  (Gibson), 

Superintendent  of  the  Castaic  Union  School  District  (District). 

Amy  M.  Cu,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Andria  L.  Adams  (Adams),  Ernestina 
Aguilar  (Aguilar),  Lesli  Bjerke  (Bjerke),  Sylvia  Borg-Otting  (Borg-Otting),  Ann  Shannon 
Boyd  (Boyd),  Jamie  Davis  (Davis),  Joy  C.  Ediger  (Ediger),  Michelle  Fitzpatrick  (Fitzpatrick), 
Matt  Gilpin  (Gilpin),  Ireneo  P.  Gimenez  (Gimenez),  Tara  Gordon  (Gordon),  Susan  Lieberman 
(Lieberman),  Jodi  Lopata  (Lopata),  April  Mailander  (Mailander),  John  Michels  (Michels),  Erin 
Oxhorn-Gilpin  (Oxhorn-Gilpin),  Karry  Pena  (Pena),  Glenda  Robinson  (Robinson),  John  Lee 
Simons  (Simons),  Kerry  Summers  (Summers),  Jackeline  Tapia  (Tapia),  and  Edward  J.  Zippay 
(Zippay),  who  are  collectively  referred  to  as  Respondents. 

Julie  Pomilia  (Pomilia),  Elizabeth  Smith  (Smith),  and  Patty  Van  Sloten  (Van  Sloten), 

who  are  included  in  references  to  Respondents,  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing. 

The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2015-2016  school year.’ 
not 
Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for 
reemploying  them  for  the  2015-2016  school  year. 

a  determination  of  whether  cause 

exists 

for 

1  The  District  no  longer  seeks  to  lay  off  Respondents  Ediger,  Lieberman,  Mailander, 

Simons,  or  Van  Sloten.

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing.  The  record  was  left  open 
for  the  submission  of  additional  evidence  and  for  the  filing  of  closing  argument.  On  April  24, 
2015,  District  submitted  a  document  titled  “Declaration  of  Ms.  Wendy  Mullins  in  Support  of 
Petitioner’s  Reduction  in  Particular  Kinds  of  Service,”  which  has  been  marked  as  Exhibit  15. 
No  objection  was  raised  to  the  receipt  of  Exhibit  15,  and  it  is  received  in  evidence. 

On  April  27,  2015,  the  parties  filed  Petitioner’s  Closing  Argument  and  Respondents’ 
Post  Hearing  Brief,  which  documents  have  been  marked  as  Exhibits  16  and  J,  respectively.  On 
April  30,  2015,  the  parties  filed  Petitioner’s  Reply  Brief  and  Respondents’  Reply  Brief,  which 
documents  have  been  marked  as  Exhibits  17  and  K,  respectively. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  30,  2015. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Superintendent  Gibson  filed  the  Accusations  in  his  official  capacity. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  February  26,  2015,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board), 
following  the  recommendation  of  Superintendent  Gibson,  adopted  Resolution  Number  14/15- 
24,  reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the  2015-2016  school  year: 

Service 

FTE?  Reduction 

1.1 
1.2 
13 
14 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7. 
1.8 
1.9 
1.10 
1.11 
1.12 

Director,  Administrative  Services 
Director,  Instruction/Special  Projects 
Director,  Business  Services/Fiscal  Services 
Assistant  Principal 
Counselors 
 TK°-6  General  Education  Teachers 
TK-6  Physical  Education  Teachers 
TK-6  Music  Teachers 
7-8  Math  Teachers 
7-8  English  Teachers 
7-8  History/Social  Science  Teachers 
7-8  Physical  Education  Teachers 

>  Full-time  equivalent  position. 

?  Transitional  Kindergarten.

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.6 
31.0 
2.0 
1.5 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

1.13 
1.14 

SDC‘  Preschool  Mild/Moderate 
SDC  Middle  School  Mild/Moderate 

Total 

0.3 
10 

45.4 

4. 

Superintendent  Gibson  thereafter  notified  the  Governing  Board  that  he  had 
recommended  that  notice  be  provided  to  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2015-2016  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

On  or  about  March  2,  2015,  the  District  provided  notice  to  Respondents  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2015-2016  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

6. 

Respondents  thereafter  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  whether  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2015-2016  school  year. 

7. 

On  March  26,  2015,  the  District  issued  an  accusation  to  each  Respondent,  and 
served  it  and  other  documents  on  each  Respondent,  which  documents  included  the  Governing 
Board’s  Resolution  Number  14/15-24,  a  statement  to  respondent,  a  notice  of  hearing,  and  a 
blank  notice  of  defense  for  Respondents  to  use  to  contest  the  Accusation. 

8. 

Respondents  Adams,  Bjerke,  Borg-Otting,  Boyd,  Davis,  Ediger,  Gimenez, 
Gordon,  Lieberman,  Lopata,  Mailander,  Michels,  Pena,  Pomilia,  Robinson,  Simons,  Summers, 
and  Zippay  submitted  timely  notices  of  participation  utilizing  District-provided  notices  of 
defense.  Respondents  Adams,  Borg-Otting,  Boyd,  Ediger,  Gilpin,  Gordon,  Lieberman,  Lopata, 
Mailander,  Michels,  Oxhorn-Gilpin,  Pena,  Pomilia,  Robinson,  Smith,  Summers,  Van  Sloten, 
and  Zippay  submitted  timely  notices  of  participation  on  forms  provided  by  the  certificated 
employees  association.  On  March  30,  2015,  Counsel  for  Respondents  submitted  a  timely  Joint 
All  Respondents  have  therefore  filed 
Notice  of  Participation  on  behalf  of  all  Respondents. 
timely  notices  of  participation.  District  did  not  question  any  respondent’s  right  to  participate  in 
the  hearing  or  to  demand  to  know  if  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2015-2016 
school  year. 

9. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

10. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code”  section  4495S. 

*  Special  Day  Class. 

>  Unless  otherwise  noted,  all  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.

11. 

The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth 
in  factual  finding  number  3  because  of  significant  shortfall  in  funding.  The  shortfall,  which  is 
expected  to  exceed  $3,000,000,  is  primarily  due  to  decline  in  student  enrollment  and  changes  in 
the  State  of  California  school  funding  formula.  The  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  is  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's 
discretion. 

12. 

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 3 is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  its  pupils,  in  the  context  of  the  loss  of  revenue  and  the  need 
to  continue  providing  services  to  students  in  the  District,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to 
decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

a. 

for 

13.0 

any 

follows: 

credential 

Credential 

two  points 

authorizing  special  education  services 

On  February  26,  2015,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  criteria  for  breaking 
Tie-break  points  were 
seniority  ties  for  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service. 
a  Bilingual  Cross-cultural  Language  and  Academic 
awarded  as 
Development  (BCLAD)  Certificate  or  Bilingual  Certificate  of  Competence  (BCC);  one  point  for 
a  Special  Education  Credential,  Resource 
a  Reading  Specialist  Credential;  one  point  for 
Specialist 
in  grades 
or 
Kindergarten  to  Eighth;  one  point  for  each  current,  valid  credential  held,  excluding  supplemental 
authorizations;  one  point  for  “hard  to  hire”  single  subject  credentials  held  (math,  science);  one- 
half  point  for  each  additional  supplemental  authorization  appearing  on  the  face  of  the  credential 
provided  that  (1)  the  subject  is  offered  in  the  District’s  instructional  program  in  2015-2016,  and 
(2)  that  the  teacher  is  “highly  qualified”  in  that  area;  one  point  for  completion  of  approved  and 
certified  GLAD  training,  authorized  by  the  Castaic  Union  School  District  and  provided  by  the 
Newhall  School  District;  one  point  for  serving  as  a  Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment 
(BTSA)  Support  Provider  or  PAR  Consulting  Teacher  in  the  Castaic  Union  School  District;  three 
points  for  each  full  year  of  actual  service  (75%  or  more  of  the  days  schools  were  in  session)  as  a 
full-time  permanent  certificated  employee  in  the  District;  one  point  for  an  earned  Master’s 
degree;  and  two  points  for  an  earned  Doctorate  degree.  A  lottery  was  employed  to  break  any 
remaining  ties. 

b. 

District.  Superintendent  Gibson  testified 

Testimony  and  argument  were  received  about  the  propriety  and  wisdom  of 
awarding  three  points  for  each  full  year  of  actual  service  as  a  full-time  certificated  employee  for 
the 
and 
experience,  and  that  it  came  to  an  agreement  about  the  75  percent  cutoff  with  the  certificated 
employees’  association.  Respondents  argued  that  they  should  not  be  penalized  for  having  taken 
maternity  leave  or  other  authorized  leave. 

District  values 

service 

actual 

that 

the 

c. 

On  their  face,  the  tie-breaking  criteria  are  reasonable  in  that  they  relate  to 

the  skills  and  qualifications  of  certificated  employees. 

14. 

Application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  impacted  the  layoff  status  of  certificated 
employees  hired  on  August  19,  2002.  Of  the  11  teachers  with  the  same  date  of  hire  who  were

laid  off  because  of  the  reduction  in  elementary  school  general  education,  the  District  plans  to 
retain  Respondent  Ediger  as  a  full-time  employee  and  Respondent  Pena  at  .5  FTE.  Respondent 
Ediger  had  the  highest  number  of  tie-breaking  points,  38.  Respondent  Pena,  who  had  35  points 
and  who  was  tied  for  second  highest  point  total  with  Respondent  Curtis,  was  partially  retained 
by  virtue  of  the  lottery  tie-breaker.  Respondent  Van  Sloten,  who  has  26  points,  was  retained  by 
virtue  of  her  special  education  credential  to  teach  in  the  subject  matter. 

15. 

|  Respondent  Kerry  argues  that  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to  her  is 
discriminatory.  On  each  of  the  2005-2006,  2007-2008,  and  2014-2005  school  years,  she  took 
approved  maternity  disability  leave.  On  a  fourth  school  year,  2008-2009,  Respondent  Kerry 
worked  a  job-sharing  assignment  and  did  not  receive  credit  for  working  on  a  full-time  basis.  It 
is  unclear  of  the  impact,  if  any,  that  re-application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  would  have  on  the 
order  of  layoff,  as  all  ten  affected  individuals  are  women,  and  no  evidence  was  received  at  the 
hearing  about  their  leave  history.  However,  even  if  Respondent  Kerry  were  given  credit  for 
each  of  the  three  years  for  which  her  maternity  leave  precluded  her  from  working  more  than  75 
percent  for  the  school  year,  it  would  still  not  impact  her  selection  for  layoff. 
If  she  were  to 
receive  three  points  for  each  of  the  three  years  in  question,  her  total  points  would  be  33,  which 
is  still  below  a  laid  off  teacher  with  a  higher  tie-breaking  point  total. 

16. 

The  District  exempted  from  layoff,  or  skipped,  certain  employees  because  it 
concluded  that  the  employees  possessed  special  training,  experience,  or  credentials  that  others 
The  District  seeks  to  exempt  four  groups  of  employees: 
with  more  seniority  did  not  possess. 
(1)  certificated  personnel  who  possess  administrative  credentials,  who  are  currently  assigned  to 
administrative  positions,  and  who  will  be  assigned  to  administrative  positions  for  the  2015- 
2016  school  year;  (2)  with  the  exception  of  SDC  Pre-School  Mild/Moderate,  and  an  SDC 
Middle  School  Mild/Moderate,  certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  credential  authorizing 
service  in  a  special  education  job  description  who  are  presently  assigned  within  the  scope  of 
that  credential,  and  who  will  be  assigned  within  the  scope  of  that  credential  for  the  2015-2016 
school  year;  (3)  certificated  personnel  who  have  taught  AVID/REACH®  classes  in  the  District 
for  at  least  three  years  out  of  the  last  five,  who  during  that  time  have,  on  at  least  three  occasions, 
received  AVID  summer  training  and  certification,  and  who  will  be  assigned  to  teach  AVID 
classes  in  the  2015-2016  school  year;  and  (4)  grades  7-8  certificated  personnel  who  possess 
authorization  to  teach  Health,  and  whose  combined  assignment  includes  Physical  Education 
and  Health,  and  who  will  be  placed  in  the  same  assignment  in  the  2015-2016  school  year.  Of 
the  four,  Respondents  challenged  the  AVID/REACH  and  the  Health  exemptions. 

a. 

17, 

Started  in  2009,  the  AVID  program  is  designed  to  provide  educational 
instruction  and  support  to  students  who  are  not  eligible  to  participate  in  programs  for  the  gifted 
or  for  the  economically  disadvantaged.  The  goal  is  to  prepare  the  students  to  ultimately  attend 

®  Advancement  Via  Individual  Determination  and  Reaching  Excellence  at  College 

Heights,  respectively.

District 
college,  and  classes  are  provided  at  the  elementary  and  at  the  middle  school  levels. 
certificated  staff  in  the  program  are  required  to  complete  training,  typically  a  summer  program 
Some  of  the  training,  which 
and  school  year  in-services,  and  to  obtain  AVID  certification. 
involves  coordination  planning,  takes  place  with  certificated  staff  at  the  William  S.  Hart  Union 
High  School  District  (Hart  District),  which  runs  a  similar  college  preparatory  program  under 
the  name  REACH.  Hart  District  is  the  public  high  school  district  with  geographic  overlap  with 
the  District.  AVID  teachers  work  to  recruit  students  into  the  program,  and  work  with  Hart 
District  staff  for  District  students  to  transition  into  the  REACH  program  once  they  attend  high 
school  in  Hart  District. 

b. 

The  State  of  California  will  not  fund  AVID  instruction  in  the  2015-2016 
school  year,  but  the  District  and  Hart  District  plan  to  continue  funding  REACH.  The  District 
plans  to  continue  to  offer  the  AVID  classes  under  the  REACH  name  and  to  continue  the 
coordination  with  the  REACH  program  at  Hart  District  without  State  funding,  and  referred  the 
services  as  “AVID/REACH?”  in  the  skip  resolution. 

c. 

The  District  plans  to  retain  Deborah  Rupel  (Rupel),  who  has  a  seniority 
date  of  August  4,  2005,  and  Melissa  Solomon  (Solomon),  who  has a  seniority  date  of  August 
30,  2005.  Rupel  holds  a  multi  subject  teaching  credential  with  supplemental  authorizations  in 
English  and  in  Social  Science,  and  a  single  subject  (English)  credential.  She  currently  teaches 
one  period  of  AVID  instruction  and  four  other  classes.  Solomon  holds  a  single  subject  (Social 
Science)  credential.  Solomon  teaches  two  periods  of  AVID  and  three  periods  of  history.  Rupel 
and  Solomon  have  received  AVID  training  and  hold  AVID  certification.  They  both  worked 
with  students  in  the  program  and  with  staff  at  the  Hart  District. 

d. 

No  Respondent  testified  that  he  or  she  has  received  training  to  teach  in 
the  AVID  program,  that  he  or  she  possesses  AVID  certification,  or  that  he  or  she  has  taught  an 
AVID  class. 

a. 

18. 

In  years  past,  District  students  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  grades  received 
health  education  as  part  of  their  general  science  curriculum.  At  an  undetermined  time  in  the 
past,  the  District  concluded  that  Health  was  important  enough  to  warrant  its  own  class,  and  a 
Health  class  is  offered  each  term.  The  District  has  been  utilizing  physical  education  teachers  to 
teach  the  Health  class,  as  they  are  typically  the  employees  who  hold  certificates  in  the  area  or 
who  have  taken  Health  coursework  in  their  own  schoo!  training. 

b. 

The  District  seeks  to 

skip  Wendy  Gingrich  (Gingrich),  who  has  a 
Gingrich  holds  a  single  subject  (Physical  Education) 
seniority  date  of  August  9,  2005. 
credential  with  a  supplemental  authorization  in  Introduction  to  Health  Sciences. 
Gingrich  is 
currently  teaching  the  Health  class  and  four  periods  of  Physical  Education,  and  the  District 
plans  to  make  a  similar  assignment  for  the  2015-2016  school  year.

19. 

Respondent  Robinson  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  4,  2005. 

She  teaches 
Physical  Education  at  the  elementary  school  level. 
She  has  also  taken  sufficient  classes  in 
Health  to  be  able  to  teach  the  subject  matter  to  middle  school  students  if  authorized  by  the 
Governing  Board,  and  is  in  the  process  of  acquiring  a  supplemental  authorization.  Respondent 
Robinson  testified  that  she  can  teach  the  Health  and  middle  school  Physical  Education  classes 
that  the  more  junior  Gingrich  was  retained  to  teach. 

20. 

As  established  by  the  testimony  of  Superintendent  Gibson,  it  would  be  difficult 
for  the  District  to  hire  or  retain  staff  to  teach  a  single  period  of  Health  or  one  to  three  periods  of 
REACH.  In  addition  to  the  diminished  workload,  the  rotating  nature  of  periods,  where,  for 
instance,  Health  classes  are  taught  on  different  days  each  week,  would  make  it  nearly 
impossible  to  find  a  part-time  employee  to  teach  the  subjects.  Each  of  the  current  individuals 
teaching  Health  and  Reach  has  other  classes  to  make-up  their  full-time  positions. 

21. 

The  District  plans  to  lay  off  both  Physical  Education  certificated  employees  in 
grades  Transitional  Kindergarten  to  Sixth,  Respondents  Robinson  and  Zieper.  Superintendent 
Gibson  testified  that  the  District  plans  to  meet  State  mandates  using  qualified  personnel.  While 
definite  plans  have  not  been  made,  the  District  plans  to  provide  mandated  physical  education 
instruction,  400  minutes  per  ten  days  of  instruction,  through  elementary  school  teachers  and 
support  staff. 

22. 

Respondent  Boyd  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  19,  2002,  and  holds  a  multi 
subject  teaching  credential  and  a  reading  specialist  credential.  Her  assignment  since  August  9, 
2002  has  been  as  a  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment  (TOSA)  at  Live  Oak  Elementary  School. 
Her  duties  primarily  include  providing  remedial  reading  instruction  to  elementary  school 
students. 

a. 

23. 

Respondent  Oxhorn-Gilpin  started  working  for  the  District  on  October 
17,  2005.  Her  first  assignment  was  that  of  a  long-term  substitute  in  the  classroom  of  her  sister, 
who  had  taken  maternity  leave.  She  signed  three  employment  contracts  during  the  2005-2006 
school  year,  on  October  24,  2005,  March  27,  2006,  and  June  2,  2006,  each  extending  the  end  of 
her  assignment.  She  ultimately  worked  through  June  9,  2006,  the  end  of  the  school  year.  All 
contracts  designated  her  as  a  full-time  employee,  serving  as  long-term  substitute  pursuant  to 
section  44917.  Respondent  Oxhorn-Gilpin  worked  the  entire  2006-2007  school  year,  and 
signed  a  contract  that  designated  her  position  as  temporary  pursuant  to  section  44920 
She  signed  a  similar  temporary 
(employment  for  employee  on  a  long-term  leave  of  absence). 
contract  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  with  a  start  date  of  August  10,  2007. 
Her  next 
employment  contract,  signed  on  May  25,  2008,  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  listed  her  status 
Respondent  Oxhorn-Gilpin  was 
as 
She  holds  a  multiple 
retained  for  the  2009-2010  school  year  and  attained  permanent  status. 
subject  credential  and  taught  in  First  Grade  for  during  the  2014-2015  school  year.

a  full  time  probationary  employee  in  her  second  year. 

b. 

The  District  concluded  that  Respondent  Oxhorn-Gilpin  had  first  rendered 
paid  service  in  a  probationary  capacity  on  August  10,  2007,  and  assigned  her  that  seniority  date. 
Respondent  Oxhorn-Gilpin  argues  that  her  seniority  date  is  October  17,  2005.  However,  it  is 
unnecessary  to  determine  if  she  is  correct,  which  the  District  disputes,  because  even  if  her 
seniority  date  is  October  17,  2005,  it  will  not  impact  her  order  of  layoff  because  several 
respondents  with  multiple  subject  credentials  were  hired  on  August  19,  2002. 

24. 

The  District  has  taken  into  account  all  positively  assured  attrition  in  determining 

the  need  to  layoff  certificated  employees. 

25. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  9. 

2. 

Effective  January  1,  2014,  section  44949  was  amended  to  change  the  name  of 
certain  jurisdictional  documents.  While  hearings  must  still  be  conducted  pursuant  to  the 
Administrative  Procedure  Act’s  formal  hearing  procedures  (Government  Code  section  11500 
et  seq.),  which  refer  to  the  filing  of  an  “accusation,”  a  responsive  “notice  of  defense,”  and  to 
a  “statement  to  respondent”  as  pleadings,  districts  acting  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 
44955  are  required  to  file  a  “district  statement  of  reduction  in  force”  as  the  operative  pleading 
and  teachers  are  required  to  file  a  responsive  “notice  of  participation.”  References  to  the 
“accusation”  and  “notice  of  defense”  in  the  prior  version  of  section  44949,  which  served  the 
same  function  as  the  statement  of  reduction  in  force  and  notice  of  defense,  were  removed  and 
replaced  by  the  new  terms. 

As  set  forth  in  factual  finding  numbers  7  and  8,  the  District  used  the  pre-2014  names 
for  operative  pleadings. 
However,  this  mislabeling  did  not  deprive  any  Respondent  of  the 
opportunity  to  participate  in  the  instant  proceeding  or  otherwise  prejudice  his/her  rights.  The 
District’s  error  is,  at  most,  a  nonsubstantive  procedural  error  which  does  not  constitute  cause  for 
dismissing  the  charges.  (§  44949,  subd.  (c)(3).) 

3. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  3 
and  10. 

4. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  which  cause

relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers  1  through  24. 

5. 

Section  44955  directs  that  certificated  permanent  and  probationary  employees 
are  to  be  laid  off  by  inverse  order  of  seniority,  consistent  with  their  qualifications  and  status. 
Thus,  subdivision  (b),  provides,  in  pertinent  part:  “Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the 
services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.” 
Moreover, 
and 
reassignments  in  such  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  ..  .” 

shall  make  assignments 

(§  44945,  subd.  (c).) 

governing  board 

requires 

“[T]he 

statute 

the 

Respondents  question  some  of  the  assignments  and  reassignments  made  by  the 
6. 
For  instance,  Respondents  point  out  that  the  District  reassigned  Claudia  Ahlman 
District. 
(AhIman),  one  of  the  most  senior  teachers  in  an  area  impacted  by  the  reductions,  Physical 
Education,  to  a  counselor  position  instead  of  having  her  bump  into  the  position  of  a  more  junior 
Physical  Education  teacher,  who  would  then  be  laid  off. 
Ahlman’s  reassignment  prevented 
Respondent  Lopata,  who  is  junior  to  Ahlman,  from  bumping  into  the  counselor  position. 
However,  the  fact  that  the  District  could  have  made  assignments  and  reassignments  in 
a 
different  manner  does  not  render  the  assignments  that  were  made  arbitrary  or  capricious. 
Respondents  did  not  establish  that  any  of  the  assignments  or  reassignments  made  by  the 
District,  which  are  required  by  section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  constituted  an  abuse  of  discretion 
or  that  they  otherwise  violated  the  requirements  of  sections  44949  or  44955. 

7. 

Respondents  argue  that  Respondent  Boyd  should  not  be  laid  off  because  her 
TOSA  position  was  not  reduced  in  the  layoff  resolution.  Respondents  are  correct  in  that  the 
Governing  Board  did  not  reduce  TOSA  services.  However,  the  Governing  Board  did  reduce 
the  general  education  services  in  Transitional  Kindergarten  to  Sixth  Grade  that  are  provided  by 
teachers  with  multiple  subject  credentials  such  as  Respondent  Boyd.  Respondent  Boyd  taught 
in  a  general  elementary  education  classroom  before  and  could  do  so  again  in  the  future  despite 
her  assignment  for  the  2014-2015  school  year. 
The  District  may  therefore  consider  her  for 
layoff  along  with  other  certificated  employees  on  the  basis  of  their  seniority  and  qualifications. 

8. 

Districts  are  permitted  to  disregard  seniority  as 
a  school 

set  forth  in  section  44955, 
district  may  deviate  from 
subdivision  (d):  “Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b), 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons:  [1] 
(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course 
of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either 
pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has 
special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those 
services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.  ..  .”

9. 

The  District  has  demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  continue  to 
provide  AVID  instruction,  now  under  the  name  of  AVID/REACH,  or  simply  REACH.  It  has 
identified  students  who  can  benefit  from  the  college  preparatory  program,  namely,  those  not 
reached  by  programs  aimed  at  the  top  students  or  at  those  who  are  economically  disadvantaged, 
and  it  plans  to  continue  to  provide  the  same  type  of  program  and  supports. 

Respondents  argue  that  no  specialized  training  or  experience  is  required  to  provide 
instruction  and  that  the  AVID  program,  the  program  in  which  the  individuals  proposed  to  be 
skipped  were  trained,  no  longer  exists.  However,  the  testimony  of  Superintendent  Gibson  is 
sufficient  to  establish  that  the  same  program  will  be  offered  next  year,  under  its  new  name, 
AVID/REACH  or  REACH.  Despite  its  new  name  and  funding  sources,  the  program  will 
continue  to  employ  AVID  methodology  and  techniques  and  target  the  same  student  population. 

The  District  has  established  that  it  requires  certificated  employees  with  special  training 
As  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 
and  experience  to  provide  AVID/REACH  instruction. 
16,  Rupel  and  Solomon  possess  the  requisite  special  training,  experience,  and  certification  in 
the  AVID  program  necessary  to  teach  the  AVID/REACH  program,  and  are  scheduled  to  teach 
the  classes. 
Rupel  and  Solomon  have  received  training  in  the  methodology  to  be  employed, 
have  received  certification  in  the  program,  and  have  experience  teaching  AVID.  In  addition,  no 
Respondent  with  greater  seniority  testified  that  he  or  she  possessed  any  training  or  experience 
in  the  AVID  program. 

10. 

‘The  District  also  demonstrated  its  specific  need  to  teach  Health  as  a  separate 
class,  and  established  that  Gingrich  possesses  special  training  and  experience  to  teach  it.  Unlike 
Respondent  Robinson,  Gingrich  has  a  health  credential  and  has  experience  teaching  the  course. 

11. 

Respondents  further  argue  that  even  if  the  District  is  allowed  to  retain  Gingrich, 
Rupel  and  Solomon  to  teach  the  specific  Health  and  REACH  assignments,  Respondents  should 
be  able  to  bump  the  junior  teachers  from  their  other  assignments.  However,  the  District  has 
established,  as  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  19,  that  these  positions  should  be  treated  as 
integrated  positions  that  the  District  is  not  be  required  to  split.  (Hildebrandt  v. 
St.  Helena 
Unified  School  District  (2009)  172  Cal.App.4th  334;  Murray  v.  Sonoma  County  Office  of 
Education  (1989)  208  Cal.App.3d  456;  King  v.  Berkeley  Unified  School  District  (1979)  89 
Cal.App.3d  1016.) 

12, 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondents  Adams,  Aguilar,  Bjerke, 
Borg-Otting,  Boyd,  Davis,  Fitzpatrick,  Gilpin,  Gimenez,  Gordon,  Lopata,  Michels,  Oxhorn- 
Gilpin,  Pena  (.5  FTE),  Pomilia,  Robinson,  Smith,  Summers,  Tapia,  and  Zippay,  by  reason  of 
factual  finding  numbers  1  through  25,  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  1  through  11. 

10

1. 

The  Accusation  is  sustained. 

ORDER 

2. 

District  may  notify  Respondents  Adams,  Aguilar,  Bjerke,  Borg-Otting,  Boyd, 
Davis,  Fitzpatrick,  Gilpin,  Gimenez,  Gordon,  Lopata,  Michels,  Oxhorn-Gilpin,  Pena  (.5  FTE), 
Pomilia,  Robinson,  Smith,  Summers,  Tapia,  and  Zippay  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
during  the  2015-2016  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

S/  Vf 

€ 

     

-  Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

11

