BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
BASSETT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  District’s  Reduction  In 
Force  of: 

OAH  Case  No.  2015030802 

CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES  OF  THE 
BASSETT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT, 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Michael  A,  Scarlett,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  April  16,  2015,  in  La  Puente, 
California. 

Kerrie  McNally,  Attorney  at  Law,  Fagen  Friedman  &  Fulfrost  LLP, 

represented  the  Bassett  Unified  School  District  (District  or  BUSD). 

Richard  T.  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law,  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad, 
represented  respondents  Amy  Arreola,  Jorge  Avila,  Guadalupe  Barba,  Marta 
Castellanos,  Vanessa  Chavez,  Teresa  Fernandez,  Maria  Figueroa,  Elena  Gonzalez, 
Marlo  Leon,  Nicole  Macias-Puente,  Rafael  Melara,  Giuliana  Morales,  Jennifer  Pena, 
Belinda  Puente,  Isabel  Reyes,  Carin  Sakuma,  Luz  Torres,  and  Van  Truong, 
certificated  employees  of  the  BUSD  (referred  to  herein  collectively  as  respondents). 
Respondent  Israel  Avila  was  not  represented  and  did  not  appear  at  the  proceeding. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for 

decision  on  April  16,  2015. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  5,  2015,  Dr.  Alex  J.  Rojas,  Superintendent  of  BUSD 

(Superintendent),  made  and  filed  the  District’s  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  in  his 
official  capacity  as  public  officer.

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March  5,  2015,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing 
Board),  upon  the  recommendation  of  the  District’s  Superintendent,  adopted  Board 
Resolution  Number  25-15  (Resolution  No.  25-15),  recommending  to  reduce  or 
eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  provided  by  District  for  the  2015-2016 
school  year.  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the  following 
particular  kinds  of  services  were  recommended  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated: 

Services 

Number  of  Full-time 
Equivalent  Postions 
(FTE) 

7.0  FTE 

12.0  FTE 

19.0  FTE 

K-5  Elementary  School  Teaching 

6-8  Middle  School  Teaching,  “Core”  Instructional  Model 

Total  Full-time  Equivalent  Reduction: 

4, 

Resolution  No.  25-15  also  adopted  tie-breaking  criteria  and  procedures 

to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  seniority  of  the  District’s  certificated 
employees  who  have  the  same  credential  and  who  share  the  same  first  date  of  paid 
service  in  a  probationary  position.  The  validity  or  application  of  the  tie-breaking 
process  was  not  challenged  at  hearing  and  thus  is  not  at  issue  in  this  case. 

5. 

Pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  25-15,  the  Superintendent  was  directed  to 

send  appropriate  notices  to  all  certificated  employees  whose  services  would  be 
terminated  by  virtue  of  the  Resolution.  On  March  6,  2015,  the  District  timely  served 
respondents  a  “Notice  of  Recommendation  that  Service  Will  be  Terminated” 
informing  them  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  not  to  re-employ  them  in 
the  upcoming  2015-2015  school  year,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955.  The  District  further  informed  each  respondent  of  his  or  her  right  to  request  a 
hearing,  among  other  things. 

6. 

In  response  to  the  District’s  written  notice,  each  respondent  timely 

requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for 
the  ensuing  2015-2016  school  year. 

7. 

The  District  timely  served  a  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force, 

Statement  to  Respondent,  a  blank  Notice  of  Participation  in  Reduction  in  Force 
Hearing  Form,  relevant  sections  of  the  Education  Code  and  Government  Code,  and  a 
Notice  of  Hearing  (collectively,  “RIF  Packet”),  upon  each  respondent.  The  RIF 
Packets  were  served  and  filed  by  the  District’s  Superintendent  in  his  official  capacity. 

8. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code

sections  44949  and  44955. 

9. 

Respondent  Israel  Avila  timely  requested  a  hearing  but  failed  to  appear 
at  the  hearing.  Respondent  Israel  Avila  was  not  represented  by  Mr.  Schwab  because 
his  last  assignment  was  in  an  administrative  position  as  a  school  principal,  but  he  was 
reassigned  to  the  classroom  and  issued  a  layoff  notice  by  the  District.  Accordingly, 
respondent  Israel  Avila  waived  his  right  to  a  hearing  in  this  case.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44949, 
subd,  (c)(1).) 

Notices  of Non-reelection 

10. 

The  District  served  Notices  of  Non-reelection  on  five  certificated 

employees:  Yasmine  Baker,  Barbara  Granados,  Marisela  Renteria~-Hooker,  Maria 
Koreen,  and  Anna  Cervantes.  The  Notices  of  Non-reelection  were  served  on  these 
employees  prior  to  the  Governing  Board  taking  action  on  Resolution  No.  25-15  on 
March  5,  2015.  These  certificated  employees  did  not  receive  a  RIF  Packet  or 
precautionary  layoff  notices  from  the  District.  Thus,  they  did  not  request  a  hearing, 
did  not  appear  at  hearing  and  were  not  respondents  to  this  proceeding.  At  hearing, 
after  reviewing  the  Notices  of  Non-reelection  served  on  Renteria-Hooker  and 
Cervantes,  the  parties  stipulated  that  the  notices  were  served  on  or  before  March  9, 
2015,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44929.21,  and  thus  were  timely. 

11. 

Renteria-Hooker  and  Cervantes  were  listed  on  the  District’s  seniority 
list  as  temporary  employees  when  they  should  have  been  designated  as  probationary 
employees.  Respondents’  counsel  alerted  the  District  to  the  error  on  the  seniority  list 
after  the  March  15,  2015,  layoff  notices  had  been  served  on  the  respondents.  The 
District  does  not  dispute  that  Renteria-Hooker  and  Cervantes  should  have  been 
designated  as  probationary  employees  on  the  District’s  seniority  list.  Dr.  Julio 
Fonseca,  the  Associate  Superintendent  for  BUSD,  testified  that  the  District  hired 
Renteria-Hooker  and  Cervantes  as  long-term  substitute  teachers,  but  they  did  not  sign 
temporary  employee  contracts.  He  testified  that  even  though  they  were  listed  as 
temporary  employees  on  the  seniority  list,  the  District  treated  them  as  probationary 
employees.  Subsequently,  the  District  corrected  the  seniority  lists  in  April  2015  to 
show  Renteria~-Hooker  and  Cervantes  as  probationary  employees,  with  Renteria- 
Hooker  having a  seniority  date  of  October  18,  2013,  and  Cervantes  having a  seniority 
date  of  January  13,  2014. 

12. 

Respondents  argue  that  Renteria-Hooker  and  Cervantes  should  have 

been  served  with  layoff  notices  based  on  their  corrected  status  as  probationary 
employees  on  the  District’s  seniority  lists.  Respondents  rely  on  Cousins  v. 
Weaverville  Elementary  School  District  (1994)  24  Cal.App.4th  1846,  to  assert  that 
Renteria-Hooker  and  Cervantes  are  entitled  to  a  layoff  notice  and  a  RIF  Packet  from 
the  District.  Respondents’  argument  is  not  persuasive.

13. 

The  District  has  authority  to  non-reelect  probationary  teachers  for  any 
non-discriminatory  reason.  (Summerfield  vy.  Windsor  Unified  School  District  (2002) 
95  Cal.App.4th  1026;  Fischer  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (1999)  70 
Cal.App.4th  87;  Bellflower  Education  Association  v.  Bellflower  Unified  School 
District  (1991)  228  Cal.App.3d  805.)  However,  a  school  district  may  not  non-reelect 
probationary  teachers  exclusively  for  the  purpose  of  reducing  staff  for  economic 
reasons;  such  action  must  be  taken  in  accordance  with  the  layoff  statutes.  (Cousins  v. 
Weaverville  Elementary  School  District  (1994)  24  Cal.App.4th  1846;  Kavanaugh  v. 
West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District  (2003)  29  Cal.4th  911,  917,  fn.  4.) 
In  Cousins  v.  Weaverville  Elementary  School  District,  supra,  the  purpose  of  the  non- 
reelection  notices  was  to  reduce  staff  due  to  financial  circumstances  and  to  avoid  the 
time  and  expense  of a  layoff  hearing. 

14. 

|  Respondents’  argument  must  fail  because  first,  Renteria-Hooker  and 

Cervantes  were  not  served  with  a  RIF  Packet  or  a  precautionary  layoff  notice. 
Consequently,  they  did  not  request  a  hearing  and  did  not  appear  in  this  proceeding. 
Thus,  there  exists  no  jurisdiction  to  address  any  issue  regarding  these  certificated 
employees.  Second,  even  if  there  was  jurisdiction,  respondents  failed  to  show  that  the 
District  non-reelected  Renteria-Hooker  and  Cervantes  exclusively  to  reduce  staff  for 
economic  reasons.  Dr.  Fonseca  testified  that  the  District  treated  Renteria-Hooker  and 
Cervantes  as  probationary  employees,  even  though  they  were  incorrectly  designated 
as  temporary  employees  on  the  seniority  list.  Thus,  the  District  elected  to  send  them 
Notices  of  Non-reelection,  notifying  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required 
for  the  2015-2016  school  year.  The  District  terminated  their  employment  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44929.21,  subdivision  (b). 

15. 

After  the  Notices  of  Non-reelection  were  served  on  Renteria-Hooker 

and  Cervantes,  the  District  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  particular  kinds 
of  services  were  required  to  be  discontinued  and  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No. 
25-15  on  March  5,  2015.  Thus,  unlike  in  Cousins  v.  Weaverville,  the  District  did  not 
try  to  avoid  the  time  and  expense  of  a  layoff  proceeding  by  non-reelecting  Renteria- 
Hooker  and  Cervantes.  The  District  simply  erred  in  designating  the  two  employees  as 
temporary  employees  on  the  seniority  list,  but  treated  them  as  probationary  employees 
and  non-reelected  them  as  opposed  to  issuing  layoff  notices.  Finally,  as  a  practical 
matter,  Renteria-Hooker  and  Cervantes’s  exclusion  from  this  layoff  do  not  negatively 
affect  any  of  the  respondents  in  this  proceeding.  The  District  terminated  the  two 
employees.  Consequently,  respondents  cannot  claim  that  either  Renteria-Hooker  or 
Cervantes  is  performing  a  service  that  a  senior  certificated  employee  is  credentialed 
and  competent  to  render. 

Reduce/Discontinue  a  Particular  Kind  of Service 

16. 

The  services  identified  in  Resolution  No.  25-15,  Factual  Finding  3,  are 
particular  kinds  of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of 
section  44955,  Dr.  Fonseca  testified  that  the  Governing  Board  reduced  or  discontinued

the  services  because  the  District  is  experiencing  declining  enrollment  and  intends  to 
convert  Torch  Middle  School  (Torch)  from  a  “Core”  instruction  model  in  grades  six 
through  eight,  to  a  Departmentalized  model  in  seventh  and  eighth  grade  for  the  2015- 
2016  school  year.  Dr.  Fonseca  testified  that  87  to  90  percent  of  the  District’s  budget 
cost  are  allocated  to  certificated  employee  staff.  The  District  has  approximately  4,000 
students  attending  seven  schools  and  employs  approximately  210  certificated 
employees.  Dr.  Fonseca  testified  that  the  District’s  declining  enrollment  over  the  last 
four  or  five  school  years  was  a  factor  in  its  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services. 
He  testified  that  after  a  review  of  all  of  the  District’s  schools  and  the  curriculum  and 
staffing  projections  for  each  school,  it  was  determined  that  the  District  was  overstaffed 
with  certificated  employees  and  that  a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  would  be 
required  for  the  2015-2016  school  year. 

17. 

The  District  also  determined  that  the  “Core”  instruction  model  currently 
in  use  at  Torch  would  be  converted  to  the  Departmentalized  model  for  the  2015-2016 
school  year.  Currently  Torch  uses  teachers  with  multiple  subject  credentials  to  teach 
two  or  more  subjects  to  the  same  group  of  students  in  the  classroom  in  grades  six 
through  eight.  The  District  intends  to  convert  the  seventh  and  eighth  grades  at  Torch  to 
a  Departmentalize  model  of  instruction,  which  requires  teachers  with  single  subject 
teaching  credentials  to  teach  specific  areas  of  instruction  to  Torch’s  older  students  in  the 
seventh  and  eighth  grades.  Students  would  change  class  periods  and  instructors  for 
multiple  classes  teaching  single  subject  matters.  The  District  intends  to  continue  using 
the  Core  instruction  model  in  the  sixth  grade  for  the  2015-2016  school  year.  Because  of 
the  reorganization  at  Torch,  the  District  determined  that  it  must  reduce  the  number  of 
teachers  with  multiple  subject  teaching  credentials  who  can  only  teach  the  core 
curriculum  at  Torch. 

18. 

|  Respondents  argued  that  the  District’s  stated  reason  for  reduction  in 

services,  i.e.,  converting  Torch  from  the  Core  instruction  model  to  the 
Departmentalized  model  of  instruction  and  declining  enrollment,  did  not  justify  the 
proposed  reductions  in  the  particular  kinds  of  services.  This  assertion  is  not 
persuasive. 

19. 

The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue a  particular  kind  of  service  is  a 

matter  reserved  to  the  District’s  discretion.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 
Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.)  A  school  district  has 
wide  discretion  in  setting  its  budget  and  a  layoff  decision  will  be  upheld  unless  it  was 
so  unreasonable  and  arbitrary  as  to  indicate  an  abuse  of  discretion.  (California  Sch. 
Employees  Assn.  v.  Pasadena  Unified  Sch.  Dist.  (1977)  71  Cal.App.3d  318,  322.)  As 
long  as  there  is  a  change  in  the  method  of  teaching  a  subject,  a  particular  kind  of 
service  provided  in  access  of  any  statutorily  mandated  minimum  can  be  reduced  or 
eliminated  pursuant  to  section  44955.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627.)  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  in  Factual  Finding  3  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a  proper 
exercise  of  the  Governing  Board’s  discretion.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of

particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the  welfare  of  BUSD  and  its  pupils.  The 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to  decrease 
the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  BUSD,  as  determined  by  the  Governing 
Board. 

TOSA  Position  Not  Included  as  PKS  in  the  Resolution 

20. 

|  Respondent  Giuliana  Morales  argues  that  she  should  not  be  laid  off 

because  the  District  failed  to  include  her  position  as  Teacher  On  Special  Assignment 
— Instructional  Coach  (TOSA-IC)  as  a  particular  kind  of  service  in  Resolution  No.  25- 
15.  Respondent  Morales  has  a  seniority  date  of  November  4,  2008,  and  has  a 
Professional  Clear  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential  and  English  Language  (EL) 
and  Specially  Designed  Academic  Instruction  in  English  (SDATE)  authorizations. 
Her  Bilingual  Crosscultural  Language  and  Academic  Development  (BCLAD) 
authorization  is  pending.  The  District  issued  a  layoff  notice  to  respondent  Morales  as 
part  of  the  PKS  for  the  6-8  Middle  School  Teaching,  “Core”  Instruction  Model  12 
FTE  positions. 

21. 

_In  May  2014,  respondent  Morales  was  assigned  to  the  TOSA-IC 

position  at  Torch  for  the  2014-2015  school  year.  Prior  to  the  2014-2015  school  year, 
from  2008  through  the  2013-2014  school  year,  respondent  Morales  was  assigned  as  a 
middle  school  Core  instruction  teacher  at  Torch.  Respondent  Morales  testified  that 
she  interviewed  for  the  TOSA-IC  position  on  two  occasions  and  that  the  position 
requires  specific  training  that  she  obtained  during  the  2014-2015  school  year.  The 
District  published  a  job  description  for  the  TOSA-IC  position  that  was  revised  on 
March  18,  2014.  The  job  description  specified  that  under  the  direction  of  the 
Executive  Director,  for  Curriculum  and  Instructional  Services,  the  TOSA 
instructional  coach  would  assist  in  the  effective  implementation  of  the  new  Common 
Core  State  Standards.  The  role  of  the  instructional  coach  is  to  work  with  classroom 
teachers  through  supplemental  support,  staff  development,  on-site  coaching  to 
enhance  Language  Arts  and  Mathematics  instruction,  effective  instructional 
strategies,  and  improve  student  achievement.  The  education,  experience  and  required 
certification  for  the  TOSA-IC  position  was  specified  as:  minimum  five  years  teaching 
experience,  multiple  subject  teaching  credential,  including  EL  authorization  or  single 
subject  credential  with  EL  authorization,  no  child  left  behind  compliance,  and  valid 
California  driver’s  license. 

22. 

Dr.  Fonseca  testified  that  respondent  Morales  was  placed  in  the  TOSA- 

IC  position  as  a  special  assignment  outside  of  the  classroom.  The  TOSA-IC 
assignment  is  not  a  class  or  course  of  instruction  and  is  filled  by  the  District  based 
upon  need  each  school  year.  The  TOSA-IC  position  is  not  a  particular  kind  of 
service,  but  is  a  special  assignment  that  would  be  filled  by  any  teacher  with  a  multiple 
subject  or  single  subject  credential  and  EL  authorization.  The  District  need  not 
specify  TOSA-IC  as  a  particular  kind  of  service  because  the  position  is  a  special 
assignment  that  is  not  specific  to  any  particular  subject  matter  or  credential,  and  it  is

unclear  whether  District  resources  will  be  available  for  a  TOSA-IC  position  for  the 
2015-2016  school  year.  The  District  reduced  or  discontinued  certificated  middle 
school  teachers  who  taught  in  the  Core  instruction  model  using  their  multiple  subject 
credential.  Respondent  Morales  is  a  certificated  teacher  with  a  multiple  subject 
credential  teaching  who  has  taught  in  a  Torch  Core  instructional  classroom,  except  for 
the  one  year  she  was  placed  on  special  assignment  in  the  TOSA-IC  position  in  the 
2014-2015  school  year.  The  District  is  not  required  designate  the  TOSA-IC  position 
as  a  particular  kind  of  service  and  it  is  not  precluded  from  including  respondent 
Morales  in  the  12  FTE  positions  being  reduced  or  discontinued  as  a  PKS  for  middle 
school  teachers  teaching  Core  instruction  classes  at  Torch. 

Competency  Criteria  for  Alternative  Education 

23. 

Resolution  No.  25-15  determined  that  it  is  necessary  to  retain 

certificated  employees  competent  and  qualified  to  teach  alternative  education.  In 
order  for  a  certificated  employee  to  displace  a  less  senior  certificated  employee 
currently  serving  in  an  alternative  education  setting,  including  Nueva  Vista  High 
School,  the  certificated  employee  must  have  served  the  District  for  one  in  the  last  five 
school  years  in  an  alternative  education  setting.! 

24. 

Nueva  Vista  High  School  is  the  alternative  education  high  school  in 

BUSD  which  services  students  with  deficiencies  in  course  credits  and  who  have 
social  and  emotional  issues.  The  school  provides  a  smaller  classroom  setting  and  is 
design  to  give  students  a  second  opportunity  to  thrive  academically.  Nueva  Vista 
High  School  is  the  only  alternative  education  high  school  in  the  District.  Jessica 
Estrada  currently  teaches  at  Nueva  Vista  High  School  and  will  have  one  year  teaching 
at  alternative  high  school  at  the  end  of  the  2014-2015  school  year.  Estrada  has  a 
seniority  date  of  October  3,  2013,  is  number  191  on  the  seniority  list,  and  has  a  clear 
multiple  subject  teaching  credential  with  an  EL  authorization.”  Estrada  teaches 
classes in  California  High  School  Exit  Examination  (CAHSEE)  and  English 
Language  Development  (ELD)  to  students  at  Nueva  Vista  High  School.  She  is  also 
trained  in  the  Fuel  Education  Program,  which  is  a  credit  recovery  program  designed 
to  teach  alternative  education  students  at  Nueva  Vista  High  School  mathematics, 
science,  and  English  classes  on-line.  No  respondent  has  training  in  the  Fuel 
Education  Program. 

'  The  Resolution  also  determined  that  it  was  necessary  to  retain  certificated 

employees  competent  and  qualified  to  be  high  school  counselors.  The  validity  or 
application  of  this  competency  criteria  was  not  challenged  at  hearing  and  thus  is  not  at 
issue  in  this  case. 

?  The  seniority  list  did  not  reflect  that  Jessica  Estrada  held  an  EL 
authorization,  but  evidence  at  hearing  established  that  she  possessed  this 
authorization.

25. 

Respondent  Luz  Torres  contends  that  she  should  be  allowed  to  bump 

into  the  alternative  education  position  held  by  Jessica  Estrada  at  the  Nueva  Vista  High 
School.  Respondent  Torres  has  a  seniority  date  of  October  16,  2008,  is  number  167 
on  the  seniority  list,  and  has  a  professional  clear  multiple  subject  credential  with  EL 
and  SADIE  authorizations,  and  a  clear  single  subject  credential  in  introductory 
English.  She  is  currently  assigned  to  an  eighth  grade  Core  instruction  class  at  Torch. 
Respondent  Torres  has  not  taught  in  the  alternative  education  setting  for  one  year  in 
the  last  five  years,  and  has  never  taught  at  Nueva  Vista  High  School.  Respondent 
Torres  also  testified  that  she  was  qualified  and  competent  to  teach  drama  and 
introductory  visual  and  performing  arts  (VAPA)  and  would  accept  either  position  if 
offered  and  available.  However,  there  is  no  less  senior  certificated  employee  teaching 
drama  or  VAPA  that  respondent  Torres  is  qualified  and  competent  to  displace. 

26. 

|  Respondent  Elena  Gonzalez  also  contends  that  she  should  be  allowed 
to  bump  into  the  alternative  education  position  held  by  Jessica  Estrada  at  the  Nueva 
Vista  High  School.  Respondent  Gonzalez  has a  seniority  date  of  October  29,  2010,  is 
number  175  on  the  seniority  list,  and  has  a  professional  clear  multiple  subjects 
credential  with  EL  and  SADIE  authorizations.  She  is  currently  assigned  to  a  sixth 
grade  Core  instruction  class  at  Torch.  Respondent  Gonzalez  has  not  taught  in  the 
alternative  education  setting  for  one  year  in  the  last  five  years,  and  has  never  taught  at 
Nueva  Vista  High  School.  Respondent  Gonzalez  has  taught  CAHSEE  and  ELD  at 
Bassett  High  School.  However,  Bassett  High  School  is  a  traditional  comprehensive 
high  school,  and  not  an  alternative  education  school. 

27. 
provides: 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  in  relevant  part, 

Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent 
employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while 
any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority, 
is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

If  an  employee  identified  for  layoff  is  “certificated  and  competent”  to  provide  a 
service  that  a  more  junior  employee  has  been  retained  to  render,  the  senior  employee 
may  “bump”  into  the  position  occupied  by  the  junior  employee.  (Ed.  Code  §  44955, 
subd.  (b).) 

28. 

The  determination  of  whether  an  employee  is  “certificated  and 

competent”  is  a  “discretionary”  decision  within  the  “special  competence”  of  a  school 
district.  (Martin  v.  Kentfield  School  Dist,  (1983)  35  Cal.3d  294,  299.)  It  is  within  a 
school  district’s  discretion  to  establish  competency  standards,  including  “prior 
experience  teaching  middle  school  programs  and  students.”  (Id.  at  p.  300.)  In  Duax 
v.  Kern  Community  College  Dist.  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555,  567,  the  court  upheld  a 
competency  standard  that  required  that  an  employee  must  have  rendered  a  service  or

taught  in  a  specific  subject  area  for  one  year  in  the  preceding  10  years  to  be 
considered  “competent”  to  render  that  service  for  the  purpose  of  “bumping”  a  junior 
employee.  In  Bledsoe  v.  Biggs  Unified  School  District  (2009)  170  Cal.App.4th  127,  the 
court  upheld  a  rule  that  defined  competency  as  having  at  least  one  semester  actual 
teaching  experience  in  alternative  education  within  the  last  five  years. 

29. 

Resolution  No.  25-15  determination  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  retain 

certificated  employees  competent  and  qualified  to  teach  alternative  education  was 
within  the  discretion  of  the  District.  The  District’s  competency  criterion  is  not  too 
narrowly  construed  as  it  comports  with  the  competency  criteria  upheld  in  Duax  v. 
Kern  Community  College  Dist,  supra,  196  Cal.App.3d  555,  567,  and  Bledsoe  v.  Biggs 
Unified  School  District,  supra,  170  Cal.App.4th  127.  Thus,  the  District’s  competency 
criterion  requiring  a  more  senior  certificated  employee  to  have  served  for  at  least  one 
year  in  the  last  five  school  years  in  an  alternative  education  setting  in  order  to 
displace  a  less  senior  certificated  employee  currently  teaching  at  Nueva  Vista  High 
School  is  a  reasonable  exercise  of  the  Governing  Board’s  discretion.  Respondents 
Torres  and  Gonzalez  do  not  have  the  alternative  education  competency  criteria 
required  by  Resolution  25-15.  They  have  not  taught  in  an  alternative  education 
setting  for  one  year  in  the  last  five  years,  and  therefore,  are  not  certificated  and 
competent  to  displace  Jessica  Estrada  at  the  Nueva  Vista  High  School. 

30. 

The  District  considered  all  positively  assured  attrition,  including 

resignations,  retirements  and  requests  for  transfer,  in  determining  the  actual  number 
of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees. 

31. 

The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  containing  employees’  seniority 

dates,  current  assignments  and  locations,  credentials,  and  authorizations.  In 
anticipation  of  the  PKS  reduction,  the  District  and  staff  updated  the  District’s 
seniority  list.  The  District  sent  a  notice  containing  the  seniority  list  to  all  certificated 
employees  to  confirm  the  accuracy  of  their  seniority  dates  and  credentials  on  the 
seniority  list  and  give  them  an  opportunity  to  review  and  correct  any  errors  or 
discrepancies  contained  in  the  seniority  list.  Based  upon  responses  provided  by  the 
certificated  employees,  the  District  amended  the  seniority  list. 

32. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  order  of  layoff 
of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced. 
The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  other 
credentials  entitling  them  to  displace  or  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining 
who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  service  reduced  the  District  counted  the 
number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  known  vacancies,  and  determined  who  must  be 
laid  off  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The  District  continually  updates  to  the  seniority 
list  based  upon  new  information  received  from  the  certificated  employees.  The 
seniority  list  was  last  amended  and  updated  in  April  2015,  to  accurately  reflect  that 
Renteria-Hooker  and  Cervantes  were  probationary  employees.

33. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to 

render  a  service  that  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  parties  met  all  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

2. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall 
not,  thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘  reduce  services’  by 
determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer 
employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board 
of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.)  The  burden  is  on  the  District  to 
demonstrate  that  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is 
reasonable  and  that  the  District  carefully  considered  its  needs  before  laying  off  any 
certificated  employee.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott  (1978) 
76  Cal_App.3d  796,  807-808.) 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Resolution  No.  25-15  are  particular  kinds  of 
services  that  can  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  not 
arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  BUSD’s 
schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

services  that  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Cause  exists  to  give  notice  to  respondents  Amy  Arreola,  Israel  Avila, 

Jorge  Avila,  Guadalupe  Barba,  Marta  Castellanos,  Vanessa  Chavez,  Teresa 
Fernandez,  Maria  Figueroa,  Elena  Gonzalez,  Marlo  Leon,  Nicole  Macias-Puente, 
Rafael  Melara,  Giuliana  Morales,  Jennifer  Pena,  Belinda  Puente,  Isabel  Reyes,  Carin 
Sakuma,  Luz  Torres,  and  Van  Truong  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2015-2016  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

4. 

5. 

Hit 

Hil 

Hil 

10

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Amy  Arreola,  Israel  Avila,  Jorge  Avila, 

Guadalupe  Barba,  Marta  Castellanos,  Vanessa  Chavez,  Teresa  Fernandez,  Maria 
Figueroa,  Elena  Gonzalez,  Marlo  Leon,  Nicole  Macias-Puente,  Rafael  Melara, 
Giuliana  Morales,  Jennifer  Pena,  Belinda  Puente,  Isabel  Reyes,  Carin  Sakuma,  Luz 
Torres,  and  Van  Truong  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2015-2016  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  the 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

Dated:  May  6,  2015 

    

.  SCARLETT 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings 

11

  

