BEFORE THE 
SUPERINTENDENT OF THE  
MONO COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction 
in Force of: 
 
DIANA TODD, 
 
                                              Respondent. 
 

 
 
OAH No. 2015040061 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Dean T. Adams, Attorney at Law, represented the Mono County Office of Education.   

Danette C. Brown, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 13, 2015, in Bridgeport, California. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13, 2015. 
 
 

Diana Todd (respondent), was present and represented herself.  

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted on April 

FINDINGS 

Stacy Adler, Ph.D. is the Superintendent of the Mono County Office of 

Education (MCOE).  The MCOE consists of Mammoth Unified School District and Eastern 
Sierra Unified School District.   

The actions of Superintendent Adler were taken in her official capacity.   

On February 26, 2015, Superintendent Adler adopted a Resolution of Intention 
to Dismiss Certificated Employees (Resolution), providing for the reduction or elimination of 
particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 2015-2016 school year.  In the PKS Resolution, the 
Superintendent determined that it shall be necessary to reduce the services of a school nurse 
by .36 full time equivalent (FTE). 

 
1. 

 
2. 
 
3. 

 

1 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

The  PKS  Resolution  recited  that  it  shall  be  necessary  to  decrease  the  school  nurse 

 
services at the end of the 2014-2015 school year. 

 
4. 

8. 
 
9. 

 
10. 

 
11. 

 
12. 

The services set forth in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of services 

that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  
The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was not arbitrary or 
capricious.  The reduction or elimination of services constituted a proper exercise of the 
Board’s discretion, within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.   
 

5. 

On March 9, 2015, the Superintendent Adler gave respondent written notice, 

pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, of her recommendation that 
respondent’s services are to be terminated at the close of the current school year, and the 
reasons therefor. 
 
6. 

Respondent timely filed a request for hearing to determine if there is cause to 

not re-employ respondent for the 2015-2016 school year.    
 

7. 

Superintendent Adler made and filed a Statement of Reduction in Force 

against respondent on March 31, 2014.  The Statement of Reduction in Force with required 
accompanying documents and a blank Notice of Participation were timely served.  
Respondent timely filed a Notice of Participation.    
 

Respondent is presently a certificated permanent employee of the District. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955. 

The MCOE maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ hire dates, 

the credentials and licenses held, a position description, and the employees’ work location.  
The list is updated annually.    

Respondent is the only school nurse employed by the MCOE, with a seniority 

date of October 8, 2012.  Respondent holds a Preliminary School Nurse Credential.  

The Superintendent’s decision to reduce nursing services was based upon the 
MCOE’s determination that a majority of respondent’s time was spent on general education 
nursing duties.  The Mono County Special Education Local Plan Area (SELPA), which 
provides support services of a school nurse for special education students, cannot financially 
support a school nurse that performs mainly general education nursing functions.  SELPA 
believes that the school districts should be responsible for contracting for general education 
nursing services.  The school districts have agreed to do so.  After reduction of respondent’s 
nursing services by .36 FTE, the MCOE will have remaining .25 FTE school nurse services 
that it will be contracting in the 2015-2016 school year.   

 

 

2 

13. 

Respondent’s opposition to the MCOE’s PKS reduction was due to her 

misunderstanding of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), which provides four 
different ways in which a permanent certificated employee’s services may be reduced or 
terminated:  (1) a decline in average daily attendance; (2) a decline in attendance as a result 
of termination of an interdistrict tuition agreement; (3) a particular kind of service that is to 
be reduced or discontinued; or (4) whenever amendment of state law requires modification of 
curriculum necessitating a decrease of permanent employees.  Respondent mistakenly 
thought that the reduction of .36 FTE for school nurse services was due to a decline in 
average daily attendance.  In fact, the reduction of school nurse services was based upon the 
MCOE’s decision to reduce PKS, that of a school nurse. 

 
14. 

 
16. 

Respondent made no other assertions at hearing. 

15. 

The MCOE’s decision to reduce respondent’s services was due solely to the 

financial circumstances and needs of the MCOE. 

Superintendent Adler correctly identified respondent as the certificated 

employee providing the particular kinds of services that Superintendent Adler directed be 
reduced.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 
which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 

2. 

1. 

3. 

The MCOE may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 

The service identified in the PKS Resolution is a particular kind of service that 

 
 
44949 and 44955 were met. 
 
 
can be reduced or discontinued under section 44955.  Superintendent Adler’s decision to 
reduce or discontinue the identified service was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of her discretion. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 
 
 
anticipation of receiving less money from the State for the next school year are appropriate 
bases for a reduction in services under section 44955.  As stated in San Jose Teachers Assn v. 
Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the reduction of particular kinds of services on 
the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that section, and, “in fact, when 
adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in certificated staff, section 44955 is the 

An existing budget shortfall, and expected decline in enrollment and the 

4. 

 

 

3 

only statutory authority available to school districts to effectuate that reduction.”  The MCOE 
must be solvent to provide educational services, and cost savings are necessary to resolve its 
financial circumstances.  The Superintendent’s decision was a proper exercise of her 
discretion. 
 
 
Cause exists to reduce .36 FTE of the school nurse position.  Cause for the 
reduction of nursing services relates solely to the welfare of the MCOE’s schools and pupils 
within the meaning of section 44949. 
 
 

5. 

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice shall be given to respondent Diana Todd that her services will be reduced for 

 
 
the 2015-2016 school year by .36 FTE because of the reduction and discontinuance of 
particular kinds of services. 
 

 

 
Dated: April 17, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

________________/s/___________________ 
DANETTE C. BROWN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

4 

