 

 

 

 

BEFORE THE  
RIVERSIDE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS  
RIVERSIDE COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
OAH No. 2015040007 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the District Statement of 
Reduction in Force Proceedings Against: 
 
Three Certificated Employees, 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Carlos Perez, Attorney at Law, of Reich, Adell & Cvitan, APC, represented 

Todd M. Robbins, Attorney at Law, of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

Beth Faber Jacobs, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
State of California, heard this matter on April 20, 2014, in Riverside, California. 
 
 
APC, represented the Riverside County Office of Education. 
 
 
respondent Richard Slocum. 
 
 
Tuyen. 
 
 
served on Ashley Bingham, Barbara Fragoso, Ramona Godfrey, Robert Hernandez, Julian 
Kiler, Thomas Marason, Robert Oliver, Beverly Pope, and Brandy Reeves.   
 
 
 
  

There was no appearance by or on behalf of respondents Kyndal Hays or Barbara 

Prior to the hearing, the County Office of Education rescinded the layoff notices 

The matter was submitted on April 23, 2015. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Kenneth M. Young is the Riverside County Superintendent of Schools of the 

Riverside County Office of Education (RCOE).   

Respondents are certificated employees employed by the RCOE. 

1. 

 
2. 
 

1 

 

 

3. 

On March 4, 2015, Superintendent Young issued and adopted Resolution No. 

11-15, which determined that it was necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees.  The Resolution concluded that due to financial considerations, the following 
particular kinds of services, which reflect 24.1325 full time equivalent (FTE) positions, must 
be reduced or discontinued no later than the beginning of the 2015-2016 school year:   

STUDENT PROGRAMS AND SERVICES TEACHING SERVICES 

CAREER TECHNICAL EDUCATION TEACHING SERVICES 

 

 

Teacher, Correctional Ed./Adult Jail 
Program (non-SAI) 

Teacher, Adult Education (non-SAI) 

Instructor, Culinary Arts 
Instructor, Medical Assist. - Admin & 
Clerical 

Instructor, Automotive Tech. 

Instructor, Retail Sales and Marketing 

Instructor, Retail Merchandising 

Instructor, Construction Tech. 

Instructor, Printing Occupations 

Instructor, Childcare Occupations 

Instructor, Medical Front Office 

Instructor, Intro. To Banking and Finance 

Instructor, Nursing Assistant Occupations 

Instructor, Medical Assistant Clinical, 
Medical Assisting Admin. 

Instructor, Emergency Medical Technician 
Instructor, Office Occupations 

Instructor, Sports Medicine 

Instructor, Plant & Soil/Hort./Intro. To 
Conservation 
Instructor, Law Enforcement Occupations 
Instructor, Graphic Design and 
Photography 

2 

1.5 

0.77 

0.375 

3 

1 

3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 
1 

1 

1 
1 

1 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 
F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

F.T.E. 

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

24.1325 

Instructor, Medical Assisting 

0.4875 

 

 

 

 
7. 

 

 

 

 
8. 

 
9. 

4. 

The services that the RCOE proposed to reduce were “particular kinds of 

services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955.  
 
5. 

Resolution 11-15 directed the superintendent’s designee to initiate layoff 

procedures, identify the employees whose services would not be required for the 2015-2016 
school year as a result of the reduction of these particular kinds of services, and send 
appropriate notices to those certificated employees 

6. 

On March 4, 2015, Superintendent Young designated Steven A. Hovey, Chief 

Personnel Officer, Division of Personnel Services, to act on his behalf to implement the 
reduction in force proceedings required under Resolution No. 11-15. 

Implementation of Resolution No. 11-15 

Under Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c), school districts 

must retain senior employees over more junior employees and retain permanent employees over 
temporary employees.  Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), provides an exception 
and permits a school district to deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of 
seniority for either of the following reasons: 

(1) 

The district demonstrates a specific need for 
personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or to 
provide services authorized by a services credential with a 
specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for a 
school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special 
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of 
study or to provide those services, which others with more 
seniority do not possess. 

(2) 

For purposes of maintaining or achieving 

compliance with constitutional requirements related to equal 
protection of the laws. 

Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), above, the RCOE 

resolved to deviate from terminating employees in the order of seniority.  The superintendent 
identified the courses of study that created a specific need for personnel.   

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 

continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  
(Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.)  The RCOE 
implemented a bump analysis to identify the employees who could bump into a position 
being held by a junior employee.  The RCOE may move a junior employee upward from the 
bottom of a seniority list, “skipping” over more senior employees, so long as the junior 

3 

 

 

employee is certificated and competent to render specified services that the more senior 
employee is not competent to render and the more junior employee is retained to render those 
services.  (Alexander v. Board of Trustees of the Delano Joint Union High School District 
(1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 572-573.)   

Resolution 11-15 included “competency” criteria for the purposes of 

“bumping and reemployment,” which provided: 

 
10. 

 

That “competency” as described in Education Code 

D. 
section 44955(b) for the purposes of bumping shall necessarily 
include (1) possession of a valid credential in the relevant 
subject matter area, (2) possession of both a special education 
credential and a single subject or multiple subject credential to 
bump into a Specialized Academic Instruction position, (3) 
“highly qualified” status under the No Child Left Behind Act (if 
required by the position), (4) an appropriate EL authorization (if 
required by the position), (5) possession of either a multiple 
subject credential or a single subject credential in Math, 
Science, English, or completed security clearance (if required by 
the position) and (7) for Career Technical Education Employees, 
a valid credential in the relevant Career Technical Education 
Industry Sector, and the necessary experience as required by the 
job description. 
 

 

11.  On March 10, 2015, Chief Personnel Officer Hovey made and filed the RCOE 

Notice of District Statement of Reduction in Force. 

 

The Reduction in Force and Issuance of Preliminary Layoff Notices 
 

12. 

Chief Personnel Officer Hovey and Maribel Escobar, the RCOE Director of 

Classified Personnel, determined which employees were subject to Resolution No. 11-15 and 
if any of the employees whose positions were being eliminated had bumping rights.  Chief 
Personnel Officer Hovey and Director Escobar considered all known positive attrition 
including resignations, retirements and probationary non-reelects.   

 
13.  On March 10, 2015, Chief Personnel Officer Hovey made and filed the RCOE 
Notice of District Statement of Reduction in Force to be served on the most junior employees 
holding positions that were subject to reduction and elimination. 

 
14. 

Between March 10, 2015 and March 12, 2015, RCOE personally served the 

following certificated employees with written notice that their services would not be required 
by the RCOE for the 2015-2016 school year:  Ashley Bingham; Barbara Fragoso; Ramona 
Godfrey; Kyndal Hays; Robert Hernandez; Julian Kiler; Thomas Marason; Robert Oliver; 
Beverly Pope; Brandy Reeves; Richard Slocum; and Barbara Tuyen.  These employees were 
served with layoff packets that included the following documents:  Notice of 

4 

 

 

Recommendation that Services Will Not Be Required; Resolution No. 11-15; Notice of 
District Statement of Reduction in Force; the District Statement of Reduction in Force; a 
blank “Request for Hearing and Notice of Participation” form; and relevant sections of the 
California Education Code and California Government Code.  The layoff packets identified 
the reasons for the recommended reduction in force, advised the certificated employee of his 
or her right to a hearing, and explained that, if the employee wanted to participate in a 
hearing, he or she must send a written request for a hearing by March 25, 2015, or the 
employee’s right to a hearing would be deemed waived.   

 
15.  None of the twelve identified employees shared the same seniority date.  As a 

result, no tie-breaking criteria were used.    

 
16.  Of the twelve certificated employees given layoff notices, nine timely 
submitted a request for a hearing:  Barbara Fragoso; Kyndal Hays; Robert Hernandez; Julian 
Kiler; Robert Oliver; Beverly Pope; Brandy Reeves; Richard Slocum; and Barbara Tuyen.  
Ashley Bingham, Ramona Godfrey, and Thomas Marson did not request a hearing.   

In accordance with Government Code section 11509, on April 9, 2015, the 
RCOE served all respondents who requested a hearing with a Notice of Hearing, advising 
those respondents that a hearing had been set for April 20, 2015. 
 

18.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied. 
 

The Recission of Layoff Notices and the Hearing  

 
19.  On or before the hearing on April 20, 2015, the RCOE rescinded the layoff 

notices issued to the following certificated employees:  Ashley Bingham; Barbara Fragoso; 
Ramona Godfrey; Robert Hernandez; Julian Kiler; Thomas Marason; Robert Oliver; Beverly 
Pope; and Brandy Reeves.   

 
20.  When the record was opened on April 20, 2015, three certificated employees 

remained subject to the layoff:  Richard Slocum; Kyndal Hays; and Barbara Tuyen.  
Respondent Richard Slocum was represented by Carlos Perez, Attorney at Law, and was 
present.  He withdrew his request for a hearing on the record.   

The remaining respondents, Kyndal Hays and Barbara Tuyen, were not 

represented by counsel.  They timely requested a hearing but did not appear at the noticed 
hearing.  Mr. Robbins, as counsel for the RCOE, requested that the administrative law judge 
prepare a proposed default decision against respondents Kyndal Hays and Barbara Tuyen 
under the provisions of Government Code section 11520.  Mr. Perez, on behalf of respondent 
Richard Slocum, had no objection.  The matter was submitted.   

The exhibits in support of the layoff procedure were provided to the 

administrative law judge at the onset of the hearing but were not formally moved into 
evidence while the parties were on the record.  On April 23, 2015, the record was reopened, 

 
17. 

 
21. 

 
22. 

5 

 

 

 

 

and a telephonic proceeding was held.  Mr. Robbins appeared for the RCOE; Mr. Perez 
represented respondent Richard Slocum.   RCOE formally moved into evidence the exhibits 
in support of the layoff.  There was no objection to the introduction of the evidence.   

Additional Findings 

The RCOE established that it complied with Government Code sections 11505 
(regarding service of documents) and 11509 (regarding notice of the hearing) for respondents 
Richard Slocum, Kyndal Hays and Barbara Tuyen.  This matter proceeded as a default 
pursuant to Government Code section 11520 as to respondents Kyndal Hays and Barbara 
Tuyen. 
 

24. 

The RCOE’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of 
services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  
 

25. 

The RCOE’s reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services related 

to the welfare of the county office of education and its pupils.  The reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of 
certificated employees of the district as determined by the RCOE.   

The District properly issued the layoff notices to respondents Richard Slocum, 

Kyndal Hays, and Barbara Tuyen.    

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections were satisfied. 

Under Government Code section 11520, if a respondent fails to appear after 
timely filing a notice of participation, the agency involved may proceed with a default and 
take action.   
 
3. 

The RCOE may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a matter 

reserved to the discretion of the RCOE and is not subject to second-guessing in this 
proceeding.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District, supra, 
64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  The decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not be 

 

 
23. 

 
26. 

 

1. 

 
2. 

 
4. 

6 

 

 

fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal. 
App. 3d 627, 637.)   
 

5. 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the RCOE to 

reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The cause for the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to the welfare of its schools 
and their pupils.  
 

6. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), required the RCOE to make 

assignments in such a way as to protect seniority rights.  Employees must be retained to 
render any service their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.  Thus, when a 
senior teacher is certificated and competent to render a service a junior teacher is rendering, 
the district must retain the senior teacher.  The burden of proof is on the district to establish 
that it is justified in terminating the employment of any senior teacher.  (Evid. Code, § 500.)  

No employee with less seniority than respondents Kyndal Hays, Richard 

Slocum, or Barbara Tuyen is being retained to perform a service that any of these 
respondents are certificated and competent to render. 
 

8. 

Cause exists to give notice to respondents Kyndal Hays, Richard Slocum, and 

Barbara Tuyen that their services will not be required for the 2015-2016 school year. 

 
7. 

 

  

ORDER 
 
The RCOE may give notices to respondents Kyndal Hays, Richard Slocum, and 

 
Barbara Tuyen that their employment will be terminated at the close of the current school 
year and that their services will not be required for the 2015-2016 school year. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 30, 2015 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

____________/s/_______________ 
BETH FABER JACOBS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

7 

