BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
COMPTON  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  LOS  ANGELES 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoffs  Of: 

Certificated  Employees  of  the 
Compton  Unified  School  District, 

Respondents. 

  

Case  No.  2015030393 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  30,  2015,  in  Compton,  California. 

Kerrie 

Attorney 
Superintendent  of  the  Compton  Unified  School  District  (District). 

represented 

McNally, 

Law, 

at 

Darin 

Brawley 

(Brawley), 

Michael  R.  Feinberg,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Juana  Aguilera  (Aguilera),  Audra 
Anderson  (Anderson),  Michael  Armstrong  (Armstrong),  Francie  Ayala  (Ayala),  Vanessa 
Barkus  (Barkus),  Nancy  Bravo-Rius  (Bravo-Rius),  Aaron  Brock  (Brock),  Audra  Bronson 
(Bronson),  Pennie  Childs  (Childs),  Bridget  Cole-Ero  (Cole-Ero),  Alicia  Corrigan  (Corrigan), 
Sheryl  Croddy  (Croddy),  Rodney  Curry  (Curry),  Katherine  Diggs  (Diggs),  Alvaro  Enriquez 
(Enriquez),  Felecia  Fernandez  (Fernandez),  Ana  Gomez  (Gomez),  Jamica  Hale  (Hale),  Anesa 
Hayes  (Hayes),  Corry  Heard  (Heard),  Vianca  Hildreth  (Hildreth),  David  Holland  (Holland), 
Cristina  Jimenez-Burgos  (Jimenez-Burgos),  Sovichea  Kang  (Kang),  Lacey  Kent  (Kent), 
Amaris  Leiataua  (Leiataua),  Bruce  Luu  (Luu),  Erik  Madrigal  (E.  Madrigal),  Silvia  Madrigal  (S. 
Madrigal),  Edward  McGill  (McGill),  Michelle  McKinnon  (McKinnon),  Herman  Miranda 
(Miranda),  Mariellen  Paul  (Paul),  Larissa  Payan  (Payan),  Darleen  Perez  (Perez),  Lisa  Perkins 
(L.  Perkins),  Thea  Marie  Perkins  (T.  Perkins),  Kimberly  Ponce  (Ponce),  Ryan  Porter  (Porter), 
Gabriela  Ramirez  (Ramirez),  Tammy  Raphael  (Raphael),  Amy  Razo  (Razo),  Rosalie  Reinor- 
Machado  (Reinor-Machado),  Catalina  Silvestre  (Silvestre),  Nancy  Truong  (Truong),  Eric  Wells 
(Wells),  Kenya  Williams  (Williams),  Lajoni  Wilson  (Wilson),  Rachel  Yancy  (Yancy),  and  Gita 
Zubin  (Zubin),  who  are  collectively  referred  to  as  Respondents. 

Respondent  Ramon  R.  Zavala  (Zavala),  who  is  included  in  references  to  Respondents, 

represented  himself.

The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2015-2016  school  year. 
not 
Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for 
reemploying  them  for  the  2015-2016  school  year. 

a  determination  of  whether  cause 

exists 

for 

During  the  hearing,  District  rescinded  layoff  notices  issued  to  Respondents  Anderson, 
Bravo-Rius,  Curry,  Enriquez,  Fernandez,  Gomez,  Jimenez-Burgos,  Kent,  Paul,  Perez,  Raphael, 
Williams,  and  Yancy,  as  well  as  those  issued  to  Marie  Pierre  and  Richee  Holman. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at 

the  hearing,  and  the  matter  was 

submitted  for  decision. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 
capacity. 

Superintendent  Brawley  filed  the  Statements  of  Reduction  in  Force  in  his  official 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March  6,  2015,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board), 
following  the  recommendation  of  Superintendent  Brawley,  adopted  Resolution  Number  14/15- 
48,  reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the  2015-2016  school  year: 

Service 

FTE!  Reduction 

Elementary  and  Middle  School  Core  Teaching 
English  Teaching 
Social  Science  Teaching 
Physical  Education  Teaching 
Health  Teaching 
ROP”  Auto  Technician  Teaching 
ROP  Auto  Specialist  Teaching 
ROP  Computer  Applications  Teaching 
ROP  Office  Occupations  Teaching 
ROP  Graphic  Design  Teaching 

Total 

'  Full-time  equivalent  position. 

?  Regional  Occupational  Program.

25.0 
8.0 
13.0 
3.0 
2.0 
0.4 
0.2 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 

52.8 

4. 

Superintendent  Brawley  thereafter  notified  the  Governing  Board  that  he  had 
recommended  that  notice  be  provided  to  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2015-2016  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

On  or  about  March  11,  2015,  the  District  provided  notice  to  Respondents  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2015-2016  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

a. 

6. 

Respondents  Aguilera,  Anderson,  Armstrong,  Ayala,  Bravo-Rius,  Brock, 
Cole-Ero,  Corrigan,  Diggs,  Enriquez,  Gomez,  Heard,  Hildreth,  Holland,  Jimenez-Burgos, 
Kang,  Kent,  Leiataua,  Luu,  E.  Madrigal,  McGill,  McKinnon,  Miranda,  Paul,  Payan,  Andrew 
Pegan,  Perez,  L.  Perkins,  T.  Perkins,  Ponce,  Porter,  Ramirez,  Raphael,  Razo,  Reinor-Machado, 
Silvestre,  Wilson,  Yancy,  Zavala,  and  Zubin  thereafter  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine 
if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2015-2016  school  year. 

b. 

On  March  19,  2015,  Respondents’  Counsel  submitted  a  Joint  Request  for 

Hearing  on  behalf  of  all  Respondents. 

c. 

The  Joint  Request  for  Hearing  inadvertently  included  the  names  of  two 
District  administrators,  Marie  Pierre  and  Ramon  Zavala,  and  a  First  Amended  Joint  Request  for 
Hearing  was  filed  on  March  24,  2015,  without  the  two  names. 

d. 

District  argued  that  inclusion  of  the  two  administrators  in  the  Joint 
Request  for  Hearing  raises  questions  about  the  validity  of  the  requests  of  ten  Respondents  who 
did  not  file  individual  requests  for  hearing. 
This  argument  is  not  supported  by  any  evidence 
pertaining  to  the  ten  individuals  in  question  and  is  rejected. 

e. 

All  Respondents  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing. 

7. 

On  March  27,  2015,  the  District  issued  a  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  to 
each  Respondent,  and  served  it  and  other  documents  on  each  Respondent,  which  documents 
included  the  Governing  Board’s  Resolution  Number  14/15-48,  a  Statement  to  Respondent,  a 
Notice  of  Hearing,  and  a  blank  Notice  of  Participation  for  Respondents  to  use  to  contest  the 
Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force. 

a. 

8. 

Respondents  Aguilera,  Anderson,  Armstrong,  Ayala,  Bravo-Rius,  Brock, 
Bronson,  Childs,  Coie-Ero,  Corrigan,  Diggs,  Enriquez,  Fernandez,  Hayes,  Heard,  Hildreth, 
Holland,  Jimenez-Burgos,  Kang,  Kent,  Luu,  E.  Madrigal,  S.  Madrigal,  McGill,  McKinnon, 
Miranda,  Paul,  Andrew  Pegan,  Perez,  L.  Perkins,  T.  Perkins,  Ponce,  Porter,  Ramirez,  Raphael, 
Razo,  Reinor-Machado,  Silvestre,  Williams,  Wilson,  and  Zavala  thereafter  submitted  timely 
notices  of  participation.

b. 

On  April  2,  2015,  Counsel  for  Respondents  submitted  a  timely  Joint 

Notice  of  Participation  on  behalf  of  all  Respondents,  except  Truong  and  Zavala. 

c. 

All  Respondents  except  Respondent  Truong  filed  timely  notices  of 

participation. 

9. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

10. 

‘The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code’  section  44955. 

11. 

The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth 
in  factual  finding  number  3  primarily  because  of  a  shortfall  in  funding  due  to  the  loss  of  Federal 
funds  received  under  the  Quality  Education  Investment  Act. 
The  decision  to  reduce.  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a  proper  exercise  of 
the  District's  discretion. 

12. 

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 3 

is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  its  pupils,  in  the  context  of  the  loss  of  revenue  and  the  need 
to  continue  providing  services  to  students  in  the  District,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to 
decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

a. 

13.00 

Respondent  Diggs  started  working  for  the  District  on  August  28,  2002. 
Her  first  employment  contract,  signed  on  August  27,  2002  and  designated  as  an  “Offer  of 
Probationary  I  Contract,”  contained  the  following  provision:  “4.  You  are  employed  in 
a 
probationary  status.  You  must  serve  75%  of  the  number  of  days  of  the  school  year  to  advance  in 
status.”  (Exh.  D,  at  p.  1.)  She  received  a  similar  contract  the  following  year,  2003,  which  was 
styled  as  an  “Offer  of  Probationary  [I  Contract”  and  which  contained  the  same  probationary 
Status  language  as  the  first-year  contact.  Except  as  set  forth  in  factual  finding  13c  below,  no 
other  employment  contracts  were  presented  for  Respondent  Diggs.  Andrea  D.  Credille,  Senior 
Director,  Certificated  Personnel,  testified  without  contradiction  that  a  search  of  District  records 
did 
not  reveal  that  Respondent  Diggs  had  ever  been  tendered  an  employment  coniract 
designating  her  as  a  permanent  employee.  Respondent  Diggs  did  not  present  an  employment 
contract  designating  her  as  a  permanent  employee  or  present  any  other  evidence  establishing 
her  permanent  status. 

b. 

Respondent  Diggs  was  retained  to  teach  for  the  2004-2005  school  year, 
and  argues  that  she  became  a  permanent  employee  by  virtue  of  such  retention  after  two  years  as 
a  probationary  employee. 

>  Unless  otherwise  noted,  all  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.

Cc. 

On  August  13,  2014,  Respondent  Diggs  signed  a  contract  designated  as 
“Offer  of  Probationary  0  Contract.”  She  testified  that  she  did  not  intend  to  waive  her  rights  to  a 
permanent  position  by  signing  the  contract,  but  noted  that  she  had  been  laid  off  and  thought  she 
had  to  sign  this  contract. 

d. 

Respondent  Diggs  holds  a  clear  designated  subjects  (Office  Occupations 
and  Computer  Applications)  credential,  which  she  characterized  as  a  vocational  credential.  She 
has  primarily  taught  vocational  classes,  including  computer  applications  and  office  occupations, 
but  has  also  taught,  last  time  during  the  2007-2008  school  year,  computer  literacy,  a  general 
curriculum  class.  Some  of  the  computer  vocational  classes  she  teaches  can  be  used  to  fulfill  the 
District’s  computer  literacy  graduation  requirement. 
During  the  2014-2015  school  year,  she 
taught  two  periods  of  basic  business,  one  period  of  computer  applications,  one  period  of 
elementary  accounting,  and  one  period  of  computer  applications  at  Compton  High  School.  All 
of  these  classes  are  vocational  classes  offered  as  part  of  the  District’s  occupational  program. 

€. 

The  District  maintains  that  Respondent  Diggs  cannot  attain  permanent 
status  because  of  the  nature  of  her  credential  and  retained  a  more  senior  probationary  employee, 
Lucy  Streets  (Streets),  to  teach  any  remaining  office  and  computer  applications  vocational 
office  occupations  and  computer 
classes. 
applications  and  has  a  seniority  date  of  June  1,  1998. 

clear  vocational  credential 

Streets  holds  a 

in 

a. 

14. 

Respondent  Holland  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  6,  2007,  and  holds  a 
clear  designated  subject  (auto  mechanics  and  general  contracting)  credential.  He  teaches  four 
periods  of  auto  technology  and  one  period  of  auto  specialist  at  Centennial  High  School. 
In 
order  to  ensure  students’  safety  and  to  allow  proper  supervision,  classes  are  limited  to  20  to  25 
His  classes  are  popular,  and  there  is  usually  a 
students,  depending  on  the  level  of  the  class. 
waiting  list. 

b. 

As  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  the  District  is  reducing  .4  FTE  of 
“ROP  Auto  Technician  Teaching”  and  .2  FTE  of  “ROP  Auto  Specialist  Teaching,”  and  plans  to 
retain  Respondent  Holland  at 
.4  FTE.  Respondent  Holland  testified  that  the  funding  for  the 
auto  technician  classes  no  longer  comes  from  ROP,  but  comes  from  another  vocational 
education  funding  source,  Career  Technical  Education,  or  CTE. 

c. 

Respondent  Holland  argues  that  the  notice  of  layoff  is  defective  because 
This  argument  is  not  persuasive  because  the  Governing 
it  misstates  the  source  of  funding. 
Board’s  resolution  clearly  identifies  the  services  being  reduced,  auto  technician  teaching  and 
auto  specialist  teaching,  and  Respondent  has  received  proper  notice  of  the  intended  reduction 
and  was  able  to  present  evidence  on  his  behalf. 

15. 

Respondent  E.  Madrigal  has a  seniority  date  of  September  17,  2010.  He 
holds  a  single  subject  (Social  Science)  credential  and  teaches  three  periods  of  Social  Science

a. 

classes  at  Dominguez  High  School  (Dominguez),  and  has  a  preparation  period.  He  is  also  the 
coach  of  the  varsity  baseball  team  and  has  duties  associated  with  his  coaching  assignment. 

b. 

the 

Respondent  E.  Madrigal  is 

athletic  director  at  Dominguez,  an 
assignment  that  must  be  fulfilled  by  a  certificated  employee  with  teaching  duties.  He  receives 
two  periods  to  discharge  the  athletic  director  duties.  The  job  is  very  demanding  and  typically 
consumes  the  two  allotted  periods,  plus  the  preparation  period  and  time  after  school.  As  the 
athletic  director,  Respondent  E.  Madrigal  is  responsible  for  providing  all  logistical  support  for 
high  school  athletic  competition,  including  scheduling  games,  ensuring  transportation  to  away 
games,  procuring  referees  and  security  for  home  games,  screening  coaches  and  students  for 
eligibility,  attending  league  meetings,  and  preparing  and  submitting  budgets. 
Local  school 
administration  chooses  the  athletic  director  from  those  who  apply,  and  the  person  occupying  the 
position  receives  a  stipend  in  addition  to  the  regular  certificated  employee  pay. 

Cc. 

The  athletic  director  position  was  not  reduced  in  the  layoff,  but  is  not  a 
stand-alone  assignment  and  must  be  performed  by  a  District  employee  otherwise  certificated 
and  competent  to  discharge  teaching  duties.  Unless  Respondent  E.  Madrigal  can  demonstrate 
that  he  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render  a  service  that  a  junior  employee  was  retained  to 
perform,  he  cannot  remain  employed  as a  certificated  employee.  He  was  unable  to  make  the 
requisite  showing  and  does  not  have  the  prerequisite  qualification  to  remain  in  the  athletic 
director  position. 

16. 

The  District  has  taken  into  account  all  positively  assured  attrition  in  determining 

the  need  to  layoff  certificated  employees. 

17. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  9. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  3 
and  10. 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  which  cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers  1  through  24.

4. 

Section  44955  directs  that  certificated  permanent  and  probationary  employees 
are  to  be  laid  off  by  inverse  order  of  seniority,  consistent  with  their  qualifications  and  status. 
Thus,  subdivision  (b),  provides,  in  pertinent  part:  “Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the 
services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.” 

5. 

Respondent  Diggs  argues  that  she  is  a  permanent  employee  and  that  by  virtue  of 
that  status  she  can  bump  a  more  senior  employee,  Streets,  who  is 
a  probationary  employee. 
However,  as  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  13,  she  did  not  present  evidence  sufficient  to 
establish  that  she  is  a  permanent  employee. 

Moreover,  as 

the  District  correctly  concluded,  she  cannot  attain  permanent  status 
because  of  the  nature  of  her  credential  and  assignment.  As  section  44910  provides,  “Service  by 
a  person  as  an  instructor  in  classes  conducted  at  regional  occupational  centers  or  programs,  as 
authorized  pursuant  to  Section  52301,  shall  not  be  included  in  computing  the  service  required 
as  a  prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a  permanent  employee  of  a 
school  district.  [1] 
This  section  shall  not  be  construed  to  apply  to  any  regularly  credentialed 
teacher  who  has  been  employed  to  teach  in  the  regular  educational  programs  of  the  school 
district  and  subsequently  assigned  as  an  instructor  in  regional  occupational  centers  or  programs, 
nor  shall  it  affect  the  status  of  regional  occupational  center  teachers  classified  as  permanent  or 
probationary  at  the  time  this  section  becomes  effective.” 

In  addition,  were  Respondent’s  argument  to 

then  Sweets,  a  certificated 
employee  with  the  same  type  of  credential  and  assignment  as  Respondent  Diggs,  but  with  more 
seniority,  would  also  be  a  permanent  employee,  and  Respondent  Diggs  would  not  be  able  to 
bump  her. 

prevail, 

6. 

Respondent  Holland  is  the  most  junior  certificated  employee  performing  services 

being  reduced  or  discontinued,  vocational  auto  technician  and  auto  specialist  teaching. 

7. 

Respondent  E.  Madrigal  does  not  have  sufficient  seniority  to  retain  a  certificated 

position  that  would  enable  him  to  continue  to  perform  the  athletic  director  duties. 

8. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondents  Aguilera,  Armstrong, 
Ayala,  Barkus,  Brock,  Bronson,  Childs,  Cole-Ero,  Corrigan,  Croddy,  Diggs,  Hale,  Hayes, 
Heard,  Hildreth,  Holland  (.6  FTE),  Kang,  Leiataua,  Luu,  E.  Madrigal,  S.  Madrigal,  McGill, 
McKinnon,  Miranda,  Andrew  Pagan,  Payan,  L.  Perkins,  T.  Perkins,  Ponce,  Porter,  Ramirez, 
Razo,  Reinor-Machado,  Silvestre,  Truong,  Wells,  Wilson,  Zavala,  and  Zubin,  by  reason  of 
factual  finding  numbers  1  through  17,  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  1  through  7.

1. 

The  Accusation  is  sustained. 

ORDER 

2. 

District  may  notify  Respondents  Aguilera,  Armstrong,  Ayala,  Barkus,  Brock, 
Bronson,  Childs,  Cole-Ero,  Corrigan,  Croddy,  Diggs,  Hale,  Hayes,  Heard,  Hildreth,  Holland  (.6 
FTE),  Kang,  Leiataua,  Luu,  E.  Madrigal,  S.  Madrigal,  McGill,  McKinnon,  Miranda,  Andrew 
Perkins,  Ponce,  Porter,  Ramirez,  Razo,  Reinor-Machado, 
Pagan,  Payan,  L. 
Silvestre,  Truong,  Wells,  Wilson,  Zavala,  and  Zubin,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
during  the  2015-2016  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Perkins,  T. 

DATED:  Sa  Ls    LD.  REYES 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

