BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
PLANADA ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF MERCED, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the District Statement of 
Reduction in Force of:

SHARON CHEN,

 Respondent.

OAH No. 2016031279

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Erin R. Koch-Goodman, Administrative Law Judge, 

Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 27, 2016, in Merced, 
California.

Planada Elementary School District was represented by Lawrence Schoenke,
Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, Pleasanton, California.

Respondent Sharon Chen was represented by Michael Hersh, Staff Attorney, 
Department of Legal Services, California Teachers Association, Santa Fe Springs, California.

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for 

decision on April 27, 2016.

Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

José L. González is the Superintendent of the Planada Elementary School 

District (District).  The actions of Superintendent González, and those of the District’s staff 
and Board of Trustees (Board), were taken solely in their official capacities.

2.

On March 11, 2016, Superintendent González recommended that the Board 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) no later than the end of the 2015-
2016 school year in the amount of 1.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) position.  Thereafter, the 
Board adopted Resolution No. 2016.05, entitled “Resolution of the Governing Board of 
Planada Elementary School District Regarding the Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular 

1

Kinds of Services (Certified Layoff)” (Resolution), which resolved to reduce or discontinue 
PKS in the amount of 1.0 FTE.  The Resolution authorized Superintendent González to take 
action to reduce or discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2016-2017 
school year:

Particular Kinds of Services

FTE

Computer Literacy Teacher

1.0 FTE

Total FTE

 

1.0 FTE

3.

The Board directed Superintendent González to send appropriate notices to all 
employees whose services would be terminated as a result of the Board’s action to reduce or 
discontinue PKS.  On March 11, 2016, Superintendent González served respondent written 
notice, entitled “Notice of Recommendation That Your Services Will Not be Required For 
the Ensuing School Year (2016-2017)” (Notice), pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 
and 44955, of his recommendation to the Board that respondent’s services be terminated at 
the close of the 2015-2016 school year.  A copy of the Resolution was served with the 
Notice.

4.

On March 18, 2016, respondent timely filed a Request for Hearing and Notice 
of Participation.  On April 5, 2016, Superintendent González served respondent with, among 
other things, the District Statement of Reduction in Force and a Notice of Hearing for 
Wednesday, April 27, 2016, at 1:00 p.m.  Jurisdiction for the subject proceedings exists 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.

Cause for Reduction or Discontinuance of Services

5.

The District has two schools, an elementary (K-5) and a middle school (6-8), 

providing services to 765 students in kindergarten through eighth grade.  The District 
employs 39 certificated employees.  Respondent is a certificated, permanent employee of the 
District.  Since 2004, respondent has taught Computer Literacy to students in the District in a 
computer lab setting. Each school had one computer lab.

6.

In the last few years, the District has transitioned its curriculum from a 

decentralized, single subject teaching, to a “common core,” general education curriculum.  In 
addition, the District has embedded technology into the classroom, with a computer device 
for each student.  Initially, the District had limited technological infrastructure and it could 
only sustain one centralized cart of computer devices for a teacher to check-out.  Now, with 
improvements to technology infrastructure and bandwidth, the District can sustain 350 
computer devices at the middle school alone.  Students are now learning core subjects using 
a personal computer device, and the need for a separate Computer Literacy class is obsolete.  
Given the above, the reduction or discontinuances of services are in the interest of the 
District’s schools and its pupils.

2

7.

The services set forth in the Resolution are “particular kinds of services” that 
may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.  The Resolution does 
not reduce services below the mandated levels.  There was no evidence that the Board’s 
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was arbitrary or capricious.  The 
reduction or elimination of the services set forth in the Resolution constituted a proper 
exercise of the Board’s discretion, within the meaning of section 44955.

Respondent’s Credentials and Seniority 

8.

Respondent began teaching for the District on August 11, 2004.  She has a

clear Single Subject (SS) credential in Business, Introduction to English, and Mandarin.  She 
is Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Development (CLAD) certified and she has an
Administrative Certificate of Eligibility.  Respondent has only ever taught Computer 
Literacy for the District.

9.

Respondent is senior to 24 teachers in the District.  Of those teachers, 20 

junior teachers have Multiple Subject (MS) credentials and are teaching multi-subject 
general education to students.  There are two junior teachers with Special Education 
certifications who are teaching special education classes.  The remaining two junior teachers 
are Christopher Busch, hired on August 10, 2006, with a clear SS credential in Physical 
Education, Administrative Certificate of Eligibility, and CLAD, and Iida Lopez, hired on 
August 11, 2004, with a clear SS credential in Social Science and English, and an English 
Learner Authorization (CLAD equivalent).  Busch is now Principal of Cesar Chavez Middle 
School, an administrative position, and Lopez teaches in a general education setting in two 
core subjects.

10.

A teacher with more seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment 

than a junior teacher.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to a 
position held by a junior teacher if the senior teacher is properly credentialed and competent.
(Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)  The displacement of a junior teacher is known as 
“bumping.”  In general, the District has an affirmative obligation to reassign senior teachers 
who are losing their positions into positions held by junior teachers if the senior teacher has 
both the credentials and competence to occupy such positions.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. 
(c).)

Displacement Rights – Bumping Criteria

11.

In the Resolution, the Board established criteria for respondent to displace or 

“bump” a junior teacher, so long as respondent is certificated and competent to render the 
services of the junior teacher.  The Resolution provides in relevant part:

That for purposes of this Resolution and all related proceedings 
and actions “competency” as described in Education Code 
sections 44955(b), 44956, and 44957, for the purposes of 
displacement (“bumping”) and rehire rights, shall necessarily 

3

include: (1) possession of a valid credential; (2) the appropriate 
English language authorization; (3) compliance with and/or 
Highly Qualified Status under federal and state law in the 
relevant subject matter area; and (4) at least one year of actual 
teaching experience in a subject matter area in the general 
education setting.

Superintendent González drafted and recommended the bumping criteria based upon 

the District’s needs and a teacher’s experience.  

12.

Superintendent González acknowledged that the Master Schedule for 2016-
2017 is still being worked on, because the Master Schedule is driven by the Local Control 
Accountability Plan (LCAP), which will be finalized in June, following public input.  At this 
time, Superintendent González does not believe there is a place for respondent in the Master 
Schedule, because she is not certificated and competent to render the services being 
performed by any teacher with less seniority who is being retained.

13.

Respondent contends she is certificated and capable of teaching the English 

classes taught by junior teachers Marissa Luna, Michelle Gray, Kathlene Wilson, and 
Alejandra Alvarez.  In addition, respondent asserts that she functionally taught English while 
she taught Computer Literacy.  Superintendent González provided the following information:  
Luna will teach second grade in 2016-2017, Wilson and Alvarez will teach seventh and 
eighth grade in 2016-2017, and Gray has not yet been assigned for 2016-2017, but she will 
be used to teach multiple subjects in a general education setting.

Discussion

14.

The District is no longer offering Computer Literacy as a course for students, 

because computer devices are now integrated into the classroom.  Respondent is the only 
teacher to have provided instruction for the Computer Literacy class at the District.  Because 
Computer Literacy is no longer necessary, the reduction of respondent’s position is 
appropriate.

15.

However, respondent has the ability to “bump” a junior teacher from a 

position that respondent is certificated and competent to teach.  The District has set 
competency criteria to include certification and at least one year of teaching experience in a 
subject matter area in a general education setting.  The District’s competency criteria are 
reasonable.  Here, respondent is certificated to teach SS English, Business and Mandarin.  
However, respondent has never taught English, Business, or Mandarin in a general education 
setting; having only ever taught Computer Literacy for the District.  Therefore, respondent 
does not meet the requirements of the District’s competency criteria and cannot bump a more 
junior teacher.

4

16.

The District has established cause to give notice to respondent that her services 

will be reduced and will not be required for the 2016-2017 school year because of the 
reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The fundamental principle of a particular kinds of services layoff is that 

permanent teachers must be laid off in inverse of their seniority.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subds. 
(b) & (c).)  As set forth in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b):

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated . . . while any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less 
seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.

2.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  The burden is on the District to demonstrate that the reduction or elimination of 
the particular kinds of services is reasonable and that the District carefully considered its 
needs before laying off any certificated employee.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers 
Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 807-808.)  Once the District makes the 
initial determination, the burden shifts to the certificated employee asserting the right to 
bump the junior employee to prove that the former is certificated and competent to perform 
the service for which the latter is being retained.  (Moreland Teachers Association v. Kurze
(1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 656.)  Here, the District’s competency criteria were reasonable 
(Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565-7.) and 
respondent does not meet the criteria.

3.

Legal cause exists to reduce or discontinue 1.0 FTE of particular kinds of 

services offered by the District as set forth in detail in the Factual Findings.  The Board’s 
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, 
and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of 
services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning 
of Education Code section 44949.

4.

As set forth in Factual Findings 8 through 17, no permanent or probationary 

teacher with less seniority is being retained to render a service for which respondent is 
certificated and competent to teach.  Cause exists to give notice to respondent that her 
services will be reduced and will not be required for the 2016-2017 school year because of 
the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services.

5

RECOMMENDATIONS

Notice may be given to respondent Sharon Chen that her services will be reduced or 

will not be required for the 2016-2017 school year.

DATED:  April 29, 2016

__________________________________
ERIN R. KOCH-GOODMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
CASCADE UNION ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT
SHASTA COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction 
in Force Against:

STEPHANIE GOSLING,

OAH No. 2016040044

 Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Tiffany L. King, State of 
California, Office of Administrative Hearings on April 27, 2016, in Anderson, California.

Thomas E. Gauthier, Attorney at Law, Lozano Smith, appeared on behalf of the 

Cascade Union Elementary School District.

Lesley Beth Curtis, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp, Curtis & Price, LLP, appeared on 

behalf of respondent Stephanie Gosling.

Testimony and documentary evidence were received, and oral arguments were made.  

The record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 27, 2016.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Baljinder Dhillon, Ed.D., is the Superintendent of the Cascade Union 

Elementary School District (District).  The actions of Superintendent Dhillon, and those of 
the District’s staff and the District’s Governing Board (Board), were taken solely in their 
official capacities.

2.
District.

Stephanie Gosling (respondent) is a certificated permanent employee of the 

3.

On February 10, 2016, the Board adopted Resolution No. 13 (Resolution).  
The Resolution was based on a recommendation from Superintendent Dhillon to reduce or 
eliminate particular kinds of services (PKS) of the District, affecting 4.85 full time 
equivalent (FTE) certificated positions for the 2016-2017 school year.  

1

