BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
ST. HELENA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
NAPA COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the District Statement of 
Reduction in Force Against Certificated 
Employee:

ELIZABETH “LIBBY” STETSON.

 

 Respondent.

OAH No. 2016031245

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Perry O. Johnson, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

of California, heard this matter on April 27, 2016, in St. Helena, California.

Attorneys at Law Frank Zotter, Jr., of School and College Legal Services of 

California, represented the Marylou Wilson, Ed.D., Superintendent, St. Helena Unified 
School District (the district).

Attorney at Law Sara H. Sandford-Smith of the law office of Beeson, Tayer & 

Bodine, APC, represented respondent Elizabeth “Libby” Stetson.

On April 27, 2016, the parties submitted the matter for decision.  

The sole issue to be decided is whether the district may retain two teachers who are 

junior to respondent on the rationale that those employees possess special training and 
experience necessary to teach a course of study that respondent does not possess. 

ISSUE

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Marylou Wilson, Superintendent for the district made and filed the district’s 

Statement of Reduction in Force, dated March 10, 2016, while acting in her official capacity. 

2.
district. 

Elizabeth “Libby” Stetson (respondent) is a certificated employee of the 

Background

3.

On March 10, 2016, the district’s Governing Board (the board) adopted 

Resolution No. 15-26, which determined that it would be necessary to reduce or discontinue 
a particular kind of service at the end of the current school year due to staffing and financial 
considerations.  The board determined that the following particular kind of service, which 
reflects one full time equivalent (FTE) positions, must be reduced or discontinued for the 
ensuing school year:  

English

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS

1.00

1.00

F.T.E.

F.T.E.

4.

5.

The service listed in Finding Number 3 is a particular kind of service that may 

be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.

Resolution No. 15-26 directed the district’s superintendent or her designee to 

initiate and pursue procedures necessary not to reemploy the employee whose services would 
not be required after the 2015-2016 school year as a result of the elimination of the particular 
kind of service, namely 1.0 F.T.E. English.

6.

Approximately two months before the board adopted Resolution No. 15-26, the 

district’s governing body adopted Resolution No. 15-23, which was dated January 21, 2016.  
That board resolution’s formal preamble includes four qualifying or introductory statements 
that: (i) the district “requires certificated personnel with appropriate credentials, certificates, 
training and experience to meet the need of the students and the [d]istrict”; (ii) the district 
“requires certificated personnel who are competent to teach the particular kinds of 
instructional services offered by the district in grades TK [kindergarten] through [high 
school’s grade] 12; (iii) the district “has determined that successful experiences teaching a 
particular instructional service demonstrates competence in that service”; and, (iv) the board 
“desires to establish objective criteria to make effective, fair, and equitable employment 
decisions.” 

Resolution No. 15-23 provides that, under the authority of Education Code section 
44955, subdivision (d),1 “a more junior certificated employee may be ‘skipped’ and a more 

 

 

1 Under Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (c), school districts must 

retain senior employees over more junior employees and retain permanent employees over 
temporary employees.  Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), provides an exception 
that permits a district to deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority 
for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach 
a specific course or course of study, or to provide services 

2

senior certificated employee laid off if the more junior employee possesses the following 
training and experience which a more senior employee does not:

By March 1, 2016, possesses credentials or certificates valid through the 2016-17 

“1.
school year which authorize the instruction of English Learners (BCLAD, CLAD, or 
SDAIE);

By March 1, 2016, possesses a credential or certificate valid through the 2016-17 

“2.
school year which authorizes the instruction of students in the particular service 
provided by the more junior employee; and 

Has experience teaching at least two (2) years within the past three (3) years in 

“3.
the particular service being provided by the more junior employee.”

As part of Resolution No. 15-23, dated January 21, 2016, the board included a page 

pertaining to “criteria for ‘skipping’.”  The subject page for the skipping criteria includes the 
results of the district’s analysis of the criteria as between three English teachers as follows:

Name
Dana Simon
Elizabeth Ganshorn
Elizabeth Stetson

Yes
Yes
Yes

Criteria 1 Met Criteria 2 Met Criteria 3 Met  All Criteria Met

Yes 
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

By application of the criteria of Resolution No. 15-23, the board seeks to establish that 
the district has lawfully complied with the exception that permits a district to deviate from the 
law that requires a district to terminate a certificated employee in order of seniority so that a 
teacher having an earlier first date of paid service to a school district is retained when more 
junior teachers are not reemployed for the following school year.  

General Overview of the Execution of the Layoff That Resulted from Board Resolutions 
15-23 and 15-26

7.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied.

 

 

 

 

authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either 
pupil personnel services or health for a school nurse, and that the 
certificated employee has special training and experience necessary 
to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, 
which others with more seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 
constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws.

3

8.

On approximately March 11, 2016, the district served upon one certificated 

employee, namely respondent: a letter titled “Notice of Reduction or Discontinuance of 
Particular Kinds (sic) of Service”; Resolution No. 15-26, the district’s “Statement of 
Reduction in Force”; exhibit “B” that reflected respondent’s name only; and, the district’s a
blank “Request for Hearing” form, which collectively may be referred to as “layoff packet”.

The layoff packet identified the claimed reason for the recommended reduction in 
force, advised the certificated employee of her right to a hearing, and explained that if the 
employee wanted to participate in a hearing, she was required to send the district a written 
request for a hearing by April 12, 2016, or the employee’s right to a hearing would be 
deemed waived.  

9.

As the sole employee to whom the layoff notice was issued, respondent timely 

submitted to the district a completed “Request for Hearing,” dated March 11, 2016.”

10.

On April 14, 2016, the district sent by U.S. mail to respondent: the district’s 
“Statement of Reduction of Force”; “Statement to Respondent”; a blank form titled “Notice 
of Participation in Reduction in Force Hearing”; the “Notice of Hearing” that set the date, 
time, and place for the hearing in this matter; and related relevant sections of the California 
Education Code and California Government Code 

11.

On April 19, 2016, respondent’s attorney filed with the district a Notice of 
Participation that requested a hearing.  The document further included an objection to the 
Statement of Reduction in Force “on the ground that it does not state acts or omissions on 
which [the district] may proceed.”  (Gov. Code § 11506, subd. (a)(2).) And, the Notice of 
Participation further objected to “the Statement of Reduction of Force on the ground that the 
proposed reduction-in-force does not comply with Education Code [section] 44955.”

District’s Evidence

hearing of this matter.

12.

Assistant Superintendent Cynthia Toews, Ed.D., offered evidence at the 

Dr. Toews assumed her district position, in the capacity of Assistant Superintendent, 

as head of district’s Human Resources Department during 2010. 

Dr. Toews was designated by the district’s superintendent to execute the board’s 

Resolution 15-26, which specifically declared that for the ensuing school year, the district 
would eliminate the equivalent of one F.T.E. English certificated employee (teacher) 
position.  

Dr. Toews provided the board’s rationale for the exercise of its discretion, pursuant to 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).  The board purportedly identified the 
course of study as one creating a specific need for personnel at a time of decreased financial 
resources.  The board supposedly found a compelling need to employ and retain certificated 

4

employees for positions as Common Core English teachers as those persons who possess the 
necessary training and experience to best serve school students.

The California state law regarding Common Core Standards was proposed as early as 
1997 and enacted in 2010 as a comprehensive scheme for crafting instructional standards and 
curriculum for students entering the age of high technology.  Although proposed by the state 
Department of Education some time ago, several years elapsed before the district began to put 
in place its plan to implement the Common Core Standards and curriculum.  And, only during 
the last school year (2014-2015) has the full implementation of the standardized consortium 
approved assessment Common Core tests been administered to students at the high school level. 

Since becoming the district’s Assistant Superintendent, who manages human 
resources matters, Dr. Toews has seen the advent and implementation of the Common Core 
system2 of standards and curriculum.  Dr. Toews testified regarding the district’s 

2  What is the Common Core?

 

 

The Common Core is a set of curriculum standards in math and English 
language arts (ELA).  The standards set guidelines for what every 
student should know at every grade so that they’ll be on track and fully 
prepared for college by the time they graduate high school.

So, for instance, the Common Core tells schools that one of the things 
students should be able to do by the end of second grade is add single 
digit numbers in their heads.  By 11th grade, students should be able to 
“demonstrate knowledge of eighteenth-, nineteenth- and early-twentieth-
century foundational works of American literature.”

The Common Core provides a destination, but teachers and schools still 
decide how to get there: They create the curriculum, pick the projects, 
assign the homework, and determine the best way is for a student to 
move from point A to point B.

Teachers often say that the old California state standards were “a mile 
wide and an inch deep.” The Common Core includes fewer topics than 
the old standards; but teachers will go deeper into each one to make sure 
students really understand the ideas and concepts and can apply them.

Where did the Common Core come from?

A simple but urgent truth: too many students graduate from high 
school and aren’t ready for college.  Many don’t make it to college at 
all.  Others start college classes and can’t handle the work or have to 
take remedial classes that cost them time and money and can be a 
huge obstacle on the road to a college degree.

5

determination for reducing the particular kind of services, namely one full time equivalent 
English teacher’s position.  According to Dr. Toews, the district is experiencing a reduction 
of students in the district so that the number of English teachers must be reduced by one 
FTE.  More importantly, in the district’s view, the future underpinning for instruction in 
English is to be grounded on the federal and state directives for implementation of Common 
Core instruction.  In addition, because of the curriculum change brought about by reason of
the implementation of Common Core Standards, the teaching of English is moving to an 
integrated approach of instruction.  The requirements of the Common Core Standards led to a 
district goal of ensuring a sufficient number of teachers who were highly qualified to teach 
Common Core English.  As a result, respondent, who was perceived to lack sufficient 
Common Core orientation and training has been slated to be skipped by two teachers who are 
junior to respondent.   

Under the Common Core standards and curriculum, in the realm of English Language 

Arts, a student is to: be challenged to use evidence from text to support the student’s 
argument; read more complex text and learn to dissect the text when comprehension is not 
immediately attained; and, read a mix of fiction and non-fiction that may be integrated into 
science and social studies. 

In the consideration and analysis of the district, two junior teachers (Ms. Ganshorn 
and Ms. Simon) have undergone training in Common Core standards by reason of having 
classroom assignments teaching Common Core curriculum at the high school level and 
middle school level.  And, supposedly they have shown proficiency in teaching the 
curriculum for English under the Common Core system.  Because respondent was given a 
“special assignment” at the elementary school level to teach, among other things, drama 
classes, she was not afforded the opportunity for exposure to the nature and extent of training 
 

 

 

 

In response, educators from across the country came together to 
develop standards that would prepare students for the demands of 
college.  The Common Core standards have been over ten years in 
the making. They draw on input from top colleges and universities, 
business leaders, and other countries and on the best research about 
how students learn.

California adopted the Common Core standards in 2010, with the 
full support of public university system, the California Teachers 
Association and hundreds of local community groups.  Most other 
states in the country have also adopted the standards.
[¶] . . . . [¶]
In general, the Common Core puts more emphasis on critical 
thinking, on explaining why the answer is right,ˇunderstandingˇ
whyˇitˇmatters,ˇandˇapplyingˇitˇtoˇrealˇworldˇchallenges.

(www.innovateschools.com)

6

in Common Core standards, strategies and curriculum styles as given to the junior teachers, 
Ms. Ganshorn and Ms. Simon. 

13.

The district considered all positively assured attrition in determining the actual 

single final layoff notice that needed to be delivered to the affected certificated employee.

Teachers Whom the District Proposes to Skip Respondent

14.

The district contemplates skipping two teachers who have first dates of paid 

services years after respondent began performing services as an English teacher for the 
students of the district.  Even though the two teachers are junior in seniority to respondent, 
the district contends each of those teachers possesses special training, experience, or skill 
that warrants the district to retain their services for the ensuing school year while respondent 
is discharged.  As set forth below, the district’s contention is neither compelling nor 
supported by the facts or the law.   

15.
provide testimony.  

Neither Ms. Ganshorn nor Ms. Simon came to the hearing of this matter to 

16.

The district provided its “Certificated Seniority List with Credentials” as the 

only documentary proof regarding the experience and training of the subject two junior 
teachers who the district seeks to skip respondent, while she is to be nonreemployed.  Dr. 
Toews did offer some testimony regarding the claimed “special experience and training” that 
warrants retention of the junior teachers over respondent.  But, the testimony was insufficient 
to sustain the district’s proposed action to non-reemploy respondent for the ensuing school 
year. 

By reason of the respective assignments of the two junior teachers (high school 

English classroom and middle school (grade 7) English classroom), the junior teachers had 
the opportunity to partake in traditional instruction of English courses within the context of 
Common Core standards.  Those teachers “worked on bench marks” of the Common Core 
Standards and they were part of the teachers designated by the district to share in the 
training.  (But, Dr. Toews acknowledged during her testimony that at the district’s expense 
respondent received “some” training in Common Core standards and curriculum to include 
an “instructional model” that incorporates some strategies of Common Core called the 
“gradual release of responsibilities.”  Also, respondent has received “some” training in the 
“OARS” (Online Assessment Reporting System) program, which is a data storage program 
and computerized quizzes and tests for the assessments systems (test comparisons) under 
Common Core.  (OARS facilities the collection, reporting, and analysis of periodic 
assessments so as to help districts meet California and federal government testing and 
reporting requirements.)  But, respondent has not received training in another phase of the 
Common Core system called “AVID” (advancement via individual determination) in
English.  The district hired a PIVOT, which is a company that worked with district teachers 
was part of trainings on Common Core “close reading” aspects.  And, Dr. Toews stated that 

7

respondent has been exposed to training and courses for general Common Core standards 
and curriculum, but not to the extent enjoyed by Ms. Ganshorn and Ms. Simon.

a.

Ms. Elizabeth Ganshorn

17. Ms. Elizabeth Ganshorn has a first date of paid service to the district of August 

17, 2009.  She holds a single subject credential in English.  A CLAD certificate has been 
issued to her.  

Ms. Ganshorn is a permanent employee of the district.  For the current school year, 

she has a teaching assignment at St. Helena High School.  

Ms. Ganshorn holds an administrator’s credential.  

Dr. Toews could not explain the reason that Ms. Ganshorn was able to hold the full 

time teacher position to teach English at the high school level as opposed to respondent 
gaining the position during the 2011-2012 school year, even though respondent has at least 
three years seniority as an English teacher in the district.  All that Dr. Toews perceived for 
respondent’s exclusion from the high school teaching position was that the district had not 
received a written request from respondent seeking to perform services as a full-time English 
teacher. 

b.

Ms. Dana Simon 

18.

On August 16, 2010, is the first date of paid service by Ms. Dana Simon to the 

district.  Ms. Simon possesses a single subject credential in English (Examination), and she 
holds a CLAD certificate.

Ms. Simon is a permanent employee of the district.  For the 2015-2016 school year, 
Ms. Simon holds a teaching assignment at the Robert Lewis Stevenson Middle School for 
English grade seven.  

The district, according to Dr. Toews, has a record that Ms. Simon possesses a subject 
area “Master’s Degree” in English.  That degree indicates a higher level of education for Ms. 
Simon than respondent has attained.  But, the possession of a Master’s Degree3 is not part of 
the criteria for skipping privileges for the district to retain Ms. Simon, who is junior to 
respondent. 

 

 

3  The district has a program for “advanced placement” that permits a high school 

student, who is taught by a Master’s Degree holding teacher in a particularized subject area, 
to earn community college level credits within the confines of the high school so as to enable 
the advanced placement high school student to move more easily into a four-year university.  
But, Ms. Simon is not teaching at the high school level and her middle school English class 
student were not shown to be eligible for advance placement enrollment at Napa Community 
College.

8

Challenges Made by Respondent and Her Evidence

19.

Respondent challenges the district’s issuance of a layoff notice to her.  She 

contends that that the district impermissibly proposes to retain two employees with less 
seniority to render a service that she is certificated and competent to teach.  And, she 
contends that the board’s “skipping” criteria is too narrowly drawn for it to be lawful.  That 
paragraph numbered 3 to the subject board resolution arbitrarily and capriciously impacts 
her, and, is, therefore, invalid.  Respondent’s contentions are compelling and persuasive.

20.
(CLAD).  

Respondent has a single subject credential in English and a certificate in    

Respondent has ten years experience as a teacher with the district as her first date of 
paid service is August 14, 2006.  For her first four school years with the district (2006-2007, 
2007-2008, 2009-2009 and 2009-2010), respondent taught English at the Grade Nine level.  

21.

Beginning her second year (2007-2008) with the district, respondent received 

assignments teaching photography.  She taught photography for seven school years.  Her 
second year through fourth year with the district involved her splitting teaching assignments 
between English as grade nine classrooms and photography classrooms.

22.

For various, non-consecutive school years  (2007-2008, 2010-2011, 2012-
2013), respondent demonstrated flexibility by teaching English Language Development 
(ELD) to students from families having limited English proficiency.  

She has taught distinct classes involved the use of written English in classes such as  
“Yearbook” (2012-2013 and 2013-2014), “World Cultures” (2010-2011), and “Independent 
Study” (2011-2012). 

For the three preceding school years (2011-2012, 2012-2013, and 2013-2014) relative 

to the current school year, respondent taught “Skills English,” also called “sheltered 
English,” which required her to co-teach, along with a credentialed Special Education 
teacher, students having learning impairments, developmental disabilities or special needs.  
And, approximately three school years in the past, respondent taught Independent Study 
students.  Those three school years were the last years that she taught at the district’s high 
school. 

Respondent consented to accepting special teaching assignments for the immediate 

last two school years (2014-2015 and 2015-2016) as the teacher of  “Art and Drama 
Enrichment.”  Those assignments were at the district’s elementary school locations for
Kindergarten through grade five.  Also, during the very last school year, respondent added a 
middle school drama class on Wednesdays to her teaching assignment.  And, during the 
current school year, respondent teaches “reading intervention” English lessons to very young 
children in Kindergarten. 

9

The Visual Arts and Drama4 assignment requires respondent to collaborate with other 

teacher to blend into Core Curriculum the subject of drama for middle school students.  As 
an English teacher, respondent has incorporated the art portion of the class into an English 
speaking facet or focus of the instruction.  (Dr. Toews confirmed that respondent’s 
assignments for the past two years in the Visual Arts and Drama program require possession 
by the teacher of an English credential.)  In this state, Drama courses are recognized as 
incorporating instruction in English into the lesson plans and curriculum.  

As part of the reading intervention classes as taught at the elementary school, 

respondent has worked with the middle school teachers to “break down assessments” to 
guide curriculum.  During the second semester, respondent interacted with the middle 
school’s reading specialist in taking on reading intervention of very young students who 
were reading at “below grade level” or “non-readers.” 

In the drama course, respondent worked along with the designated lead drama teacher 

to instruct the portion of the class dealing with “screen writing” for screen plays.  
Respondent’s objective was to foster good writing and dramatic play formatting for students 
to focus plot development, writing dialogue, outlining dramatic conflict, and formulating 
ultimate conflict resolution themes through coherent writing techniques.  Respondent has 
worked with videotaping student projects for placement on the teacher web-site (Haiku) 
platforms for collaborative teacher projects. 

23.

Respondent persuasively proclaimed at the hearing of this matter that she is 
“absolutely familiar” with the English language Common Core standards and curriculum.  
During the last school year (2009-2010) that she last taught three sections of English grade 
nine, respondent was given orientation regarding the district’s transition to Common Core at 
the high school level.  She participated in giving “dry run” English assessment tests,” which 
were not intended to “count” under the oversight of state or federal regulatory bodies.  
During the 2013-2014 school year when she taught at the high school, respondent was given 
insight into the Common Core doctrines of “close reading” and enabling students to handle 
“difficult informational text.”  Since that time, she had adopted the ideas of “close reading” 
into her teaching assignments of “photography,” “independent student,” “drama enrichment,”
and “yearbook,” which is a facet of journalism.  Respondent used Common Core strategies in 
content areas for her personal teacher development areas.  She has modeled and practiced the 
Common Core percepts of participating in collaborative groups for mutual “feed back” 
among teachers.  Further, respondent has scrupulously observed other teachers who execute 
the implementation of the Common Core rigors and challenges.  Over the years, regardless of 

 

 

4  “Drama” is by definition, “a composition in verse or prose intended to portray life 

or character or to tell a story usually involving conflicts and emotions through action and 
dialogue and typically designed for theatrical performance.”  (Webster’s Third New 
International Dictionary, Unabridged, (1968), p. 685.)  The instruction in drama necessarily 
involves the teaching of the English writing and speaking. 

10

the courses taught by her, and in particular with teaching during the past two school years, 
the Visual Arts and Drama classes, respondent points out that Common Core standards 
dictate specific areas for matching Common Core for English insofar as writing, speaking, 
and listening.  The Common Core percepts, which can be incorporated into any English 
language content area, have been used by respondent in fostering critical thinking through 
the enrichment of the learning experience so as to become problem solvers in all of her class 
assignments.  

24.

Dr. Toews testified regarding a current high school teacher in Integrated 
Science classes having initiated protests, including making speeches at board meeting, 
because of him being reassigned to middle school classes next year due to that teacher’s lack 
of teaching experience in particular subject areas.  Dr. Toews sought by analogy to compare 
respondent’s situation as an English teacher to the now protesting Science teacher.  The 
analogy was not persuasive.  First, Dr. Toews notes that the reassigned Science teacher had 
not taught for any school year classes in Biology, Chemistry, or Anatomy/Physiology.  But, 
respondent has worked eight years to ten years of teaching English and English-related 
classes for the district.  Second, the protesting Science teacher has a dispute with his 
reassignment from high school to middle school.  But, in respondent’s case, she is confronted 
with the loss of employment with the district.    

25.

Dr. Toews conveyed that the determination to subject respondent to layoff 

action was due in part to the Assistant Superintendent’s receipt of a report from the 
Superintendent that the chief administrator had visited the classroom taught by respondent.  
From that single visit, the Superintendent had concluded respondent had not shown use of 
the Common Core Standards and Curriculum component of the “gradual release of 
responsibility.”  But, the length of the visit by the Superintendent to judge respondent’s 
familiarity with Common Core Standards and Curriculum is not known.  And, Dr. Toews 
never personally made a visit to respondent’s classroom; and, hence, she has no direct, 
personal knowledge of whether respondent has taught English or Drama in accordance with 
Common Core precepts, dogma, or standards. 

26.

Respondent acknowledges that reading intervention classes does not necessary 
embrace Common Core directives because of the need to instill such basic skills in grasping 
the English language.  But, respondent emphatically declared during her testimony that 
Common Core curriculum standards have been integrated into her teaching drama to the 
middle school students who she has taught during the 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 school 
years.  

Respondent has received specific training in Common Core English teaching 

techniques.  On November 2 and 3, 2015, as well as on February 11, 2016, respondent 
participated in an intensive, three-day program a course by the California Assessment of 
Student Performance and Progress (CAASPP) offered in Santa Rosa.  Respondent learned 
practical strategies and best practices for the CAASPP system and she gained insight into the 
“Smarter Balanced” assessment testing and other Common Core facets such as “Interim 

11

Assessments.”  Respondent participated with the English Language Arts teachers for the 
CAASPP program.   

Also, on October 6, 2014, respondent received training at a program titled, “Powerful 

Arts Teaching and Learning in the Common Core.”  She was exposed to a presentation for 
“building artistic literacy through Common Core State Standards.”   

Further, over the past few years, respondent has taken other courses of advanced-level 

instruction for English teachers, including the courses “Academic Achievement of Long-
Term English Learners,” and “the Sonoma Leadership Network-Next Stops in the PLC 
Journey.”  Moreover, respondent has taken independent-study, online courses through the 
University of San Diego in the recent years of 2012 and 2011 

In the immediate year, respondent has participated in district-oriented haiku learning, 

which is a digital-related learning platform for grades K through 12.  

Respondent has no doubt that her experience, training, and knowledge provides with 

the ability to effectively implement teaching English at the high school level within the 
context of the Common Core directives.  Respondent has the repertoire of skills to teach 
English at the high school level within the district’s current objectives.  

27. With regard to the rationale of the board in selecting Criteria for Competency 
that may enable the district to skip junior teachers so that they are retained while respondent 
will not be reemployed, Dr. Toews was not persuasive.  The paramount factor in selecting 
other teachers is the narrowly prescribed criterion that an otherwise credentialed teacher must 
have had “experience teaching at least two (2) years within the past three (3) years in the 
particular service being provided by the more junior employee.”  Dr. Toews advanced that 
the two junior teachers have had immediate supervisors (administrators) who had assured 
that those two individuals have been thoroughly exposed to each and every training program, 
strategy formulation, and assessments measuring techniques for which the district has paid 
outside professionals to expose those persons.  Respondent, however, has had “some” 
training in Common Core Standards and curriculum; but, because of her “special 
assignment” over the past two years in teaching Visual Arts and Drama, respondent has not 
received the same level of training in the array of Common Core training as the two junior 
teachers.  

But, the logic for the narrow criterion is not persuasive.  During her testimony Dr. 

Toews conveyed that the district does not “believe” that respondent can be as “effective” as 
an English teacher under the Common Core Standards and curriculum.  Yet, she 
acknowledged that over the past two years, respondent has received some training in 
Common Core Standards.  And, Dr. Toews admitted that for the past two years at the 
elementary school (TK - 8) level, the district has not fully adopted Common Core standards 
and curriculum and the district has “held off” implementation because “there were too many 
initiatives going on.”  Hence, district senior administrators do not contemplate the adoption 
of Common Core at the elementary level until the coming school year, 2016-2017.  Also, 

12

even for grades 6, 7, and 8, only next year will the district have full use of Common Core 
“materials” for full implementation of the consortium’s Standards and curriculum.  And, in 
particular the TK-5, teachers at those elementary school levels have not had the full exposure 
to Common Core Standards and curriculum.      

28.

Dr. Toews was not persuasive that paragraph number 3 of the skipping 

criterion in Resolution No. 15-23, dated January 21, 2016, was intended objectively to apply 
to all subject areas, including both Science and English.  In January 2016, that is two months 
before the layoff, the district specially focused on respondent by name and set out a 
conclusion that respondent when compared to two junior teachers, including an employee 
holding an administrator’s credential, could not meet the narrowly drawn paragraph 
numbered three criterion.  

29.

Dr. Toews acknowledged that approximately two years ago when respondent 

was directed into the special assignments to teach “Visual Arts and Drama,” rather than 
being given an assignment to teach a class in English at either the middle school level or high 
school level where two junior teachers were in place, respondent voiced concern of the 
probable disadvantage to her career by taking the special assignment placement.  Despite 
respondent’s transfer into the position, which took her out of a defined English class, Dr. 
Toews gave respondent assurance that the transfer was grounded on the best interests of the 
district.  Accordingly, respondent suffered to her detriment by not adamantly exercising her 
seniority right to demand the district to give her an assignment in an English class at either 
the middle school level or high school level.  Later in Assistant Superintendent’s testimony, 
when asked the reason for respondent’s special assignments as opposed to acquiring 
assignments in an English class, Dr. Toews unpersuasively asserted that going back two 
years that as the Assistant Superintendent for human resources, she was not aware that the 
district had received from respondent any written demand letter seeking assignment in an 
English classroom.  

30.

Dr. Toews’ testimony that Ms. Ganshorn and Ms. Simon had “greater breadth” 

in the areas that they may teach, the Assistant Superintendent’s testimony was equivocal, at 
best, for the reasons stated above.   

31.

In arguments, the district suggests that it is appropriate to retain Ms. Ganshorn 
and Ms. Simon, more junior teachers, over respondent, a more senior certificated employee, 
because Ms. Ganshorn and Ms. Simon would have greater “versatility” in teaching next year 
in respective high school and middle school English classes.  To support this position the 
district seems to rely on the language in Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 
Cal.App.4th 127, 131.  But, Bledsoe does not assist the district on this issue.  With respect to 
the issue of “versatility,” the court in Bledsoe discussed the determination of seniority among 
two individuals who shared the same seniority date and concluded that an employee having a 
more “versatile” credential in an area “where the district anticipated needing to move 
teachers” had seniority over the other with the same seniority date.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified 
School District, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 133.)  The “versatility” comment in Bledsoe is 

13

not on point because respondent and Ms. Ganshorn/Ms. Simon do not share the same 
seniority date; respondent is senior to both Ms. Ganshorn and Ms. Simon.  

Bledsoe also addressed skipping - where a more junior teacher is retained over a more 

senior certificated teacher.  In Bledsoe, the district articulated a specific need for teachers to 
teach in a community day school, which required special training and experience to perform 
those duties.  Mr. Bledsoe was skipped over by two junior certificated employees who were 
retained by the district to teach at the community day school.  The court upheld the skipping, 
emphasizing a litany of distinctions between Mr. Bledsoe’s experience and that of the more 
junior employees who were retained to teach at the community day school.  It concluded that 
“the evidence supports the finding that Bledsoe does not possess the special training and 
experience that [the more junior, retained teachers] possess,” for teaching in that program.  
(Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 142.)  The court 
emphasized two required components that permit skipping under Education Code, section 
44955, subdivision (d)(1):  “a district must not only establish a specific need for personnel to 
teach a specific course of study, but establish that the certificated employee it proposes to retain 
‘has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to 
provide those services.”  (Bledsoe, supra, at p. 138.)  

In order to retain Ms. Ganshorn and Ms. Simon over respondent, the district must 

establish that no junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 
a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render – that Ms. Ganshorn and Ms. 
Simon although junior to respondent, are to be retained to perform services that respondent is 
not competent to perform.  Respondent is certificated and competent to teach English to 
middle school and high school students.  She has greater seniority than both Ms. Ganshorn
and Ms. Simon.  The layoff notice issued to respondent cannot be sustained, and the 
proposed layoff affecting respondent must be dismissed.

Ultimate Factual Finding 

32.

The board’s Resolution No. 15-26 that proposes to reduce or discontinue the 
particular kind of service, which adversely impacts respondent, was arbitrary or capricious.  
The district’s formulation and execution of skipping criteria under Resolution No. 15-23, 
which adversely impacts respondent, constituted an improper exercise of board discretion. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied.

14

Background and Controlling Authority

2.

The Education Code contains an extensive network of statutes governing the 

employment rights of public school teachers.  “The purpose of the tenure law is to give 
employment security to teachers while protecting the community from ineffective teachers.” 
(Curtis v. San Mateo Junior College Dist. (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 161,165.) “A school 
district may not avoid the purposes of the tenure law by use of a subterfuge.”  (Mitchell v. 
Board of Trustees (1935) 5 Cal.App.2d 64, 68.  “Thus, administrative practices that 
circumvent valid expectations of reemployment created by the tenure statutes are not 
permitted.”  (Santa Barbara Federation of Teachers v. Santa Barbara High School Dist. 
(1977) 76 Cal.App.3d 223, 230.)  The requirement of seniority-based layoffs under 
Education Code section 44955 dates back to the 1930’s.  School Code 5.711 was enacted and 
amended in 1935 and required, when layoffs were implemented that, “employees shall be 
dismissed in the inverse of the order in which they were employed.”  (Statutes of 1935, 
Chapter 690; See also Chambers v. Bd. of Trustees of City of Madera School Dist. (1940), 38 
Cal.App.2d 561, 566.)  

3.

The Education Code permits school districts to implement layoffs of 

certificated employees to effect a reduction or discontinuance of a particular kind of service 
and layoffs must proceed in accordance with the criteria set forth in section 44955 and the 
procedures prescribed by section 44949.  The District is statutorily authorized to reduce 
teaching staff and is required to proceed according to seniority principles.  The statute 
specifically protects tenure rights and seniority.  Teachers must be laid off, rehired, assigned, 
and reassigned based on their seniority.  (See Ed. Code, §§ 44955, 44956, 44957.)  
Accordingly, section 44955 prohibits the layoff of a senior employee, if a junior employee is 
retained to perform a service that the senior employee is credentialed and competent to 
render.  

4.

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 

5.

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a matter 

reserved for the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this proceeding.  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District, supra, 64 Cal.App.3d 
167.)  But, a school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not be 
fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal. 
App. 3d 627, 637.)  

6.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), requires districts to make 
assignments in such a way as to protect seniority rights.  Employees must be retained to 
render any service their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.  Thus when a 

15

senior teacher is certificated and competent to render a service a junior teacher is rendering, 
the district must retain the senior teacher.  The burden of proof is on the district to establish 
that it is justified in terminating the employment of any senior teacher.  (Evid. Code, § 500.) 

Seniority and Skipping of Junior Teachers 

7.

The seniority rule is not absolute, and a junior teacher with a needed 

credential or skills may be retained even if a more senior teacher is terminated.  Such 
“skipping” is recognized by statute and appellate law.  (See Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1); 
Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127; Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of the Santa Clara Unified School 
District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831).  

8.

Education Code, section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), authorizes a district to 

deviate from issuing certificated employee terminations in order of seniority for the 
following pertinent reason: 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course or course of study, or to provide services authorized by a services 
credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for 
a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training and 
experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide 
those services, which others with more seniority do not possess.

(Emphasis added.)

Common Core Standards and Curriculum that Bears Disposition of this Controversy

9.

The district’s argument in support of retaining two junior teachers by skipping 

while not reemploying respondent is that each of those individuals has received training 
regarding Common Core Standards and Curriculum, and that those teacher have had taught 
English “at least two (2) years within the past three (3) years in the particular service being 
provided by the more junior teachers.”  To gain an appreciation of the districts’ argument 
requires review of California Assessment of Student Performance and Progress that 
embraces the Common Core. 

The advent of Common Core system dates back to Education Code section 60605, 

with creation of the Commission for the Establishment of Academic Content and 
Performance Standards.  The statute required the state board of education no later than 
January 1, 1998 to “adopt statewide academically rigorous content standards, pursuant to the 
recommendations of the Commission for the Establishment of Academic Content and 
Performance Standards, in the core curriculum areas of reading, writing, and mathematics to 
serve as the basis for assessing the academic achievement of individual pupils and of 
schools, school districts, and the California educational system.”  (Ed. Code, § 60605) 

16

The underpinning of the law required “the state performance standards shall be 
established against specific grade level benchmarks of academic achievement for each 
subject area tested and shall be based on the knowledge and skills that pupils will need in 
order to succeed in the information-based, global economy of the 21st century.” (Id.)

The law made clear that “the standards adopted pursuant to this section shall be for 

the purpose of guiding state decisions regarding the development, adoption, and approval of 
assessment instruments pursuant to this chapter and does not mandate any actions or 
activities by school districts.”

The statute became inoperative on July 1, 2011. 

Effective January 1, 2012, Education Code section 60604.5 reauthorized the statewide 

pupil assessment program deemed the Common Core Standards.  

The law was aimed as directing the State Superintendent of Education to oversee 

shifting to the Common Core standards so as to meet directives that included: 

(1) Aligning the assessments to the standards adopted or revised 
pursuant to Section 60605.8.

(2) Implementing and incorporating any common assessments aligned 
with the common set of standards developed by the Common Core State 
Standards Initiative consortium or other interstate collaboration in which 
the state participates.

(3) Conforming to the assessment requirements of any reauthorization of 
the federal Elementary and Secondary Education Act (20 U.S.C. Sec. 
6301 et seq.) or any other federal law that effectively replaces that act.

(4) Enabling the valid, reliable, and fair measurement of achievement at 
a point in time and over time for groups and subgroups of pupils, and for 
individual pupils.

(5) Allowing the comparison from one year to the next of an individual 
pupil's scale scores in each content area tested, so as to reflect the 
growth in that pupil's actual scores over time.

(6) Enabling and including the valid, reliable, and fair measurement of 
achievement of all pupils, including pupils with disabilities and English 
learners.

(7) Providing for the assessment of English learners using primary 
language assessments.

17

(8) Ensuring that no aspect of the system creates any bias with respect to 
race, ethnicity, culture, religion, gender, or sexual orientation.

(9) Incorporating a variety of item types and formats, including, but not 
limited to, open-ended responses and performance-based tasks.

(10) Generating multiple measures of pupil achievement, which, when 
combined with other measures, can be used to determine the 
effectiveness of instruction and the extent of learning.

(11) Including the assessment of science and history-social science in all 
grade levels at or above grade 4.

(12) Assessing a pupil's understanding of and ability to use the 
technology necessary for success in the 21st century classroom and 
workplace.

(13) Providing for both formative and interim assessments, as those 
terms are defined in this chapter, in order to provide timely feedback for 
purposes of continually adjusting instruction to improve learning.

(14) Making use of test administration and scoring technologies that will 
allow the return of test results to parents and teachers as soon as is 
possible in order to support instructional improvement.

(15) Minimizing testing time while not jeopardizing the validity, 
reliability, fairness, or instructional usefulness of the assessment results.

(16) Including options for diagnostic assessments for pupils in grade 2.

(Ed. Code, § 60604.5)

Further understanding of the law that brings into play Common Core standards and 

curricular can be gleaned from the set of definitions set out in Education Code section 60603.  
Those definitions demonstrate the assessments (computer-oriented testing) of students are 
paramount to Common Core.  Those definitions include: 

“Achievement test” means any summative standardized test that 
measures the level of performance that a pupil has achieved on 
state-adopted content standards.

“California Assessment of Student Performance and Progress 
(CAASPP)” means the comprehensive assessment system, 
inclusive of consortium-developed assessments, that has the 
primary purpose of modeling and promoting high-quality 

18

teaching and instruction using a variety of assessment approaches 
and item types.

“Census administration” means a test administration in which all 
pupils take comparable assessments of the same content and 
where results of individual performance are appropriate and 
meaningful to parents, pupils, and teachers.

“Computer-adaptive assessment” means a computer-based test 
that utilizes a computer program to adjust the difficulty of test 
items throughout a testing session based on a test taker's 
responses to previous test items during that testing session.

“Computer-based assessment” means a test administered using 
an electronic computing device.

“Consortium” means a multistate collaborative organized to 
develop a comprehensive system of assessments or formative
tools such as described in Section 60605.7.

“Constructed-response questions” means a type of assessment 
item that requires pupils to construct their own answers.

“Content standards” means the specific academic knowledge, 
skills, and abilities that all public schools in this state are 
expected to teach, and all pupils are expected to learn, in reading, 
writing, mathematics, history-social science, foreign languages, 
visual and performing arts, and science, at each grade level 
tested.

“Diagnostic assessment” means an assessment of particular 
knowledge or skills a pupil has or has not yet achieved for the 
purpose of informing instruction and making placement 
decisions.

“End of course examination” means a comprehensive and 
challenging assessment of pupil achievement in a particular 
subject area or discipline.

“Field test” means an assessment or assessment items 
administered to a representative sample of a population to ensure 
that the test or item produces results that are valid, reliable, and 
fair.

19

“Formative assessment tools” means assessment tools and 
processes that are embedded in instruction and used by teachers 
and pupils to provide timely feedback for purposes of adjusting 
instruction to improve learning.

“High-quality assessment” means an assessment designed to 
measure a pupil’s knowledge of, understanding of, and ability to 
apply, critical concepts through the use of a variety of item types 
and formats, including, but not necessarily limited to, items that 
allow for constructed responses and items that require the 
completion of performance tasks. A high-quality assessment 
should have the following characteristics:

(1) Enable measurement of pupil achievement and pupil growth 
to the extent feasible.
(2) Be of high technical quality by being valid, reliable, fair, and 
aligned to standards.
(3) Incorporate technology where appropriate.
(4) Include the assessment of pupils with disabilities and English 
learners.
(5) Use, to the extent feasible, universal design principles, as 
defined in Section 3 of the federal Assistive Technology Act of 
1998 (29 U.S.C. Sec. 3002) in its development and 
administration.

“Interim assessment” means an assessment that is designed to be 
given at regular intervals throughout the school year to evaluate a 
pupil's knowledge and skills relative to a specific set of academic 
standards, and produces results that can be aggregated by course, 
grade level, school, or local educational agency in order to 
inform teachers and administrators at the pupil, classroom, 
school, and local educational agency levels.

“Performance standards” are standards that define various levels 
of competence at each grade level in each of the curriculum areas 
for which content standards are established. Performance 
standards gauge the degree to which a pupil has met the content 
standards and the degree to which a school or school district has 
met the content standards.

“Performance tasks” are a collection of questions or activities 
that relate to a single scenario that include pupil interaction with 
stimulus. Performance tasks are a means to assess more complex 
skills such as writing, research, and analysis.

20

“Personally identifiable information” includes a pupil's name and 
other direct personal identifiers, such as the pupil's identification 
number. Personally identifiable information also includes 
indirect identifiers, such as the pupil's address and personal 
characteristics, or other information that would make the pupil's 
identity easily traceable through the use of a single or multiple 
data sources, including publicly available information.

“State-determined assessment calendar” means the scheduling of 
assessments, exclusive of those subject area assessments listed in 
subdivision (b) of Section 60640, over several years on a 
predetermined schedule. Content areas and grades shall only be 
assessed after being publicly announced at least two school years 
in advance of the assessment.

“Summative assessment” means an assessment designed to be 
given near the end of the school year to evaluate a pupil's 
knowledge and skills relative to a specific set of academic 
standards.

A clear inference that may be formulated is that Common Core is grounded upon the 
administration of assessments and computer-driven testing.  The district offered no evidence 
that respondent lacks the training and experience to competently administer and oversee 
testing sessions that are created by computer corporations as authorized by state-level and 
federal government regulators.  And, by her expansive teaching career, including the work 
performed in the last three years of teaching English in challenging classroom settings 
establish that she has the training and experience demonstrating her competent to teach 
students in English classroom settings.

Individual Skipping Analysis

10.

The process of skipping should be conducted on a case-by-case basis, where:  
1) the District establishes that a particular assignment requires a teacher with special training 
and experience, 2) the district establishes that the skipped junior teacher has the necessary 
training and experience, and 3) the district establishes that the individual senior teachers do 
not have the necessary training and experience for that assignment.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, 
subd. (d)(1).)  The analysis by the district insofar as respondent was not comprehensive.  
And, the lack of detailed documentations in the record for this matter of the precise training 
and experience of the two junior teachers for completion of the administrative adjudication 
“audit” that is contemplated under the hearing process relating to Education Codes sections 
44955, 44956 and 44957 cannot be executed.  

 
The District’s proposed skip was premised in part on its belief that respondent simply 

does not possess the breadth, depth and intensity of training possessed by the proposed 
skipped employees.  The District contends that the skipped employees received training that 

21

was specifically targeted, developed, and aligned with the objective of the Common Core 
Standards and curriculum.  This contention largely relates to preference, not necessity.        

11.

The District’s competency criteria, when applied to the single position of 

English teaching at least two years within the past three school years is too narrowly defined.  
Respondent’s multiple subject credential may bump into positions held by the junior teacher 
assigned to teaching high school English notwithstanding the respondent not having taught in 
the specific course for the approximately three preceding school years.   

Too Narrowly Drawn Skipping Criteria by the District 

12. 

In the context of this matter that impacts respondent, who has been an English 
teacher at the district for ten school years, the Skipping Criteria in board Resolution 15-23 is 
too narrowly drawn.  

Respondent offered at the hearing of this matter two Office of Administrative 
Hearings’ Proposed Decisions (Winters Joint Unified School District, OAH No. 2011020721 
and Natomas Unified School District, OAH No. 2011020722).  Although those proposed 
decisions by other administrative law judges lack precedential or binding effect; those 
proposed decisions are persuasive.  

Each of the decisions determine skipping criteria for the respective school district as 

being too narrowing drawn and therefore not meeting the requirement of Education Code 
section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).  The proposed decisions were grounded upon the 
statement of law in Duax v. Kern Community College Dist. supra, 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 564-
565.  As applicable to this matter is the principle that “a board’s definition of competency is 
reasonable when it considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with 
layoff.”  In this matter, the board’s consideration of respondent’s skills, qualifications, and 
experience as an English teacher as amassed over ten years was inexact and arbitrary, the 
application of the Skipping Criteria paragraph numbered three of board Resolution 15-23 
cannot be sustained.  

ORDER

1.

2.

As to respondent Elizabeth “Libby” Stetson, the district’s Statement of 

Reduction in Force is not sustained.  

The district shall not give a layoff notice to Elizabeth “Libby” Stetson.  The 

Statement of Reduction in Force is dismissed as to Ms. Stetson.

DATED:  May 6, 2014

 

__________________________
PERRY O. JOHNSON
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

22

