BEFORE THE
STATE ADMINISTRATOR
INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction
in Force Against:

OAH No. 2016030792

THE CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF 
THE INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT NAMED IN THE APPENDIX,

 

 

  Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Eric Sawyer, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 20, 2016, in Inglewood. The record 
was closed and the matter was submitted for decision at the conclusion of the hearing.

Sharon J. Ormond, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented the 

Inglewood Unified School District (District).

Marianne Reinhold, Esq., and Chuong Nguyen, Esq., Reich, Adell & Cvitan,
represented the respondents named in the Appendix, except for Robert Anyiam, who did not 
ask to be represented and did not appear at the hearing.

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The District is currently under the authority of a State Administrator, Dr. 

Vincent C. Matthews, who was appointed by the California Superintendent of Public 
Instruction, and has assumed all legal rights, duties and powers of the District’s Board of 
Education, in accordance with Education Code section 41326.1

2.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise noted.

 

 

3.

As described in more detail below, the State Administrator resolved to reduce
and eliminate particular kinds of services totaling 36.40 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions 
and directed District staff to proceed to layoff certificated staff pursuant to sections 44949 
and 44955.

4.

On or before March 15, 2016, District staff gave written notice to 28 

certificated District employees, including respondents, advising them it had been 
recommended to the State Administrator that notice be given to them that their services will
not be required for the 2016-2017 school year.  Respondents timely requested a hearing to 
determine if there is cause for not employing them next school year.

5.

The Statement of Reduction in Force was made and filed by Nora Roque in 
her official capacity as the District’s Executive Director, Human Resources, alleging cause 
exists to not reemploy respondents for the following school year.  Respondents timely 
submitted Notices of Participation, which contained requests for a hearing to contest the 
proposed layoffs, or were deemed by the District as having done so.  Respondents were 
provided all required documents in a timely manner.

The Layoff Resolution

6.

On March 9, 2016, the State Administrator adopted Resolution No. 16/2015-

2016 (the Resolution), which provides for the reduction or elimination of the following
particular kinds of services:

Services

 

FTE Positions

 

Eliminate Executive Director of School Improvement Grant
Eliminate Instructional Coach – Math (SIG)
Eliminate Instructional Coach – ELA (SIG)
Eliminate Instructional Coach – Professional Development
Reduce K-6 Elementary Teaching Services
Eliminate Read 180 Teaching Services
Reduce 7-8 Study Skills Teaching Services
Reduce 7-8 English Teaching Services
Reduce 7-8 Social Science Teaching Services
Reduce 7-8 Math Teaching Services
Reduce 7-8 Art Teaching Services
Reduce 7-8 Computer Teaching Services
Reduce 7-8 Music Teaching Services
Reduce 9-12 English Teaching Services
Reduce 9-12 Social Studies Teaching Services
Reduce 9-12 Math Teaching Services
Reduce 9-12 Physical Education Teaching Services
 
Reduce 9-12 Dance History Teaching Services
 
Reduce 9-12 Psychology Teaching Services

1.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
6.00
3.80
 .20
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
3.80
2.60
 .40
 .40

2

Reduce 9-12 Robotics Teaching Services

 

 .20

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reductions
 

 

==========
36.40 FTE positions

7.

It was established by Executive Director Roque’s testimony that the Resolution
was required by the District’s current financial difficulties, including that the District must pay 
back the $55 million loan it received from the State which prompted the District being placed 
under the authority of the State Administrator.  The annual loan payments are approximately 
$1.8 million. In addition, approximately 85 percent of the District’s current budget is related to 
staff compensation and benefits.

The services or programs set forth in Factual Finding 6 are particular kinds of 

services which may be reduced or eliminated within the meaning of section 44955.

The State Administrator’s determination to reduce or eliminate those services 

or programs was within his sound discretion and was not proven to be arbitrary or capricious. 
Services will not be reduced below mandated levels.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
services is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to 
decrease the number of certificated employees.

8.

9.

The Seniority List and Layoffs

10.

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

dates, current assignments and locations, credentials, and authorizations.  The seniority list 
was based on information from the District’s human resources records, as well as information 
from the Los Angeles County Office of Education and credentialing records of the California 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing.

11.

The Resolution defined that “competency,” for purposes of bumping as 

described in section 44955, includes: (1) possession of a valid clear or preliminary credential 
in the subject(s) or grade level to which the employee will be assigned at the beginning of 
the 2016-2017 school year; (2) “highly qualified” status under the No Child Left Behind 
Act; (3) appropriate full (not emergency) EL authorization (if required by the position); (4) 
in the case of displacing junior employees teaching in a departmentalized setting, single 
subject credential(s) or subject matter authorization in that subject area; and (5) any training 
and experience necessary to meet the job requirements of specialized positions (such as Dual 
Immersion Teachers or Opportunity Teachers). This definition of competency was not 
challenged by respondents.

12.

Attached to the Resolution are criteria to be used in determining the order of 
termination of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the 
same date.  The State Administrator resolved that such criteria would best serve the needs of 
the District and its pupils.  Although the tie-breaking criteria was used in developing the 
seniority list and impacted some respondents, no challenge was made to the tie-breaking 
criteria and it otherwise appeared to be reasonably related to the welfare of District pupils.

3

13.

In the Resolution, the State Administrator also articulated a specific need to 

hire and retain teachers who possess special training and experience to teach classes in the Dual 
Immersion program and to provide counseling services.  Therefore, Ms. Roque was authorized to 
deviate from terminating certificated employees in order of seniority (skipping) in instances 
where the less senior employee possesses special training and experience to teach classes in the 
Dual Immersion program or to provide counseling services and will be assigned to do so in the 
2016-2017 school year.

14.

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the least 
senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced or eliminated.  The 
District then determined whether those least senior employees held credentials in another 
area and were entitled to bump other employees with less seniority.  In determining who 
would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of 
reductions not covered by known vacancies and determined the impact on incumbent staff in 
inverse order of seniority.

15.

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations, and

retirements in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered.

16.

A.  Respondents argue one of the District’s bumping decisions resulted in 

layoffs impacting more senior teachers than was necessary.  Specifically, respondents point 
to a series of bumps related to Denise Gardner, who taught a .60 FTE position in PE and a 
.40 FTE position in Dance History.  Both of those assignments were eliminated by the 
Resolution.  Because she has a PE credential and enough seniority, the District bumped Ms. 
Gardner into a PE position held by a less senior teacher, who was then laid off.  Respondents 
argue because Ms. Gardner has a PPS counseling credential, she is competent to bump into a 
counselor position held by a less senior employee.  For that reason, they contend bumping 
Ms. Gardner into a position held by the least senior counselor would have resulted, in the 
aggregate, with less senior counselor(s) being laid off and more senior PE teacher(s) being 
retained.

B.  Respondents’ argument is not convincing.  There is no law requiring a 

school district to minimize the aggregate overall seniority of those impacted by layoffs.  The 
law simply requires no junior teacher be retained for a subject or service which a laid off 
employee is credentialed and competent to teach or render.  School districts have authority 
and discretion to “make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that employees 
shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to 
render.”  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (c).)  In this case, the District correctly points out that no
respondent is credentialed and competent to perform any assignment held by less senior 
employees being retained.

///

///

4

C.  In addition, the State Administrator specifically decided to skip counselors 

from the layoff process, as articulated in the Resolution.  Bumping Ms. Gardner into a PE 
assignment rather than a counselor position was consistent with the Resolution and 
permissible by the law allowing districts “to deviate from terminating a certificated employee 
in order of seniority . . . [when] the district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to . . . 
provide services authorized by a services credential with a specialization in . . . pupil 
personnel services . . ., which others with more seniority do not possess.”  (Ed. Code, § 
44955, subd. (d)(1).)  Respondents contend if sparing counselors was important enough to 
create a skipping provision, Ms. Gardner should have been bumped into a counselor position 
instead.  However, this situation is unique, since Ms. Gardner’s credentials were such that 
she could have, technically, bumped either a less senior PE teacher or counselor.  Under the 
circumstances, it was reasonable for the District to honor the Resolution by skipping over all 
the counselors, whose positions were not reduced or eliminated, and instead allow Ms. 
Gardner to bump a less senior teacher whose assignment was being reduced.  In fact, to do 
otherwise would have been tantamount to disregarding the Resolution’s skipping provision 
and inviting arbitrary and capricious decision-making.

Individual Challenges

17.

A. Deirdre Grimes.  Ms. Grimes teaches 7/8 grade computer classes at Crozier 
Middle School.  She testified there will only be four business teachers in the entire District if 
she is laid off.  She fears that, in this digital age, eliminating her position will mean students 
in the District will not have exposure to digital technology (including computers) until they 
reach high school.

B. Denisha Williams.  Ms. Williams teaches 8th grade algebra at the La Tijera 

Academy of Excellence Charter School.  She recently obtained unique technology training,
which was funded by the State.  She testified that if she is laid off all the training she recently 
received will go to waste and that the remaining teacher at her school site will not be able to 
implement it.

C. The arguments made by Ms. Grimes and Ms. Williams, while sympathetic, 

are not cause to rescind their layoff notices.  The District has discretion to perform its 
assignments and reassignments as it deems appropriate, so long as it acts in good faith.2 The 
State Administrator has discretion to determine whether and how the technology, computer 

 

 

2 School districts have discretion to define positions in the manner which they will be 
taught as long as it is done in good faith.  (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District
(2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334.)  A governing board has the discretion to determine to reduce 
services by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.  (Rutherford v. Board of 
Administrators (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)  In determining whether the decision of 
a governing board is reasonable or in good faith, its action is measured by the standard set by 
reason and reasonable people, bearing in mind that such a standard may permit a difference 
of opinion on the same subject.  (Campbell v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.)

5

and math needs of the District’s students will be met.  No evidence presented indicates the 
District or the State Administrator have acted in bad faith.

18.

John Schubert.  Mr. Schubert does not challenge the District’s layoff 

decisions.  Rather he testified about the District’s need to better promote its ability to teach 
pupils residing within the District who may be tempted to attend a charter school.

19.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services 

that a more senior employee subject to layoff is certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The party asserting a claim or making charges in an administrative hearing 
generally has the burden of proof.  (Brown v. City of Los Angeles (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th 
155.)  As no other law or statute requires otherwise, the standard of proof in this case 
requires proof by a preponderance of the evidence.  (Evid. Code, § 115.) Therefore, the 
District bears the burden of establishing cause to affirm the proposed layoff decisions by a 
preponderance of the evidence.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements of sections 44949 and 44955 were 

met. (Factual Findings 1-5.)

2.

3.

The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services that 

may be reduced or eliminated pursuant to section 44955.  The State Administrator’s decision 
to reduce or eliminate the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of his discretion.  Services will not be reduced below mandated levels.  
Cause for the reduction or elimination of those particular services relates solely to the 
welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.  (Factual 
Findings 6-9.)

4.

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due 

to the reduction and elimination of particular kinds of services.  (Factual Findings 1-9.)

5.

Taking into account the above findings and conclusions, no junior certificated 
employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services that a more senior employee subject 
to layoff is certificated and competent to render.  (Factual Findings 1-19.)

///

///

///

///

6

ORDER

The Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained against respondents.  The District

may give a final notice of layoff to all respondents.  Notice shall be given to respondents that 
their services will not be required for the 2016-2017 school year, and such notice shall be 
given in inverse order of seniority.

Dated: April 25, 2016

________________________________
ERIC SAWYER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearing

7

Appendix: The Respondents

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Alaniz, Robert M.

Anyiam, Robert

Avila, Nancy

Ebs, Diane

Grimes, Deirdre

Lopez, Lourdes

O’Kain, Timothy

Ortolano, Jr., Ralph

Schubert, John

10. Wade, Christopher

11. Williams, Denisha

8

