BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
METROPOLITAN EDUCATION DISTRICT 
SANTA CLARA COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2016031050 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction 
in Force of certificated employees Peggy 
Nutz and Alice Rodriguez,  
 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

 

 

 
PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Administrative Law Judge Jill Schlichtmann, State of California, Office of 

Adam J. Fiss, Littler Mendelson, P.C., represented the Metropolitan Education 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 20, 2016, in San Jose, California. 
 
 
District. 
 
 
Alice Rodriguez. 
 
 
 
 

 
The matter was submitted for decision on April 20, 2016.     

Christopher E. Schumb, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Peggy Nutz and 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 

1. 

Alyssa Lynch made and filed the Statement in Reduction in Force in her 

official capacity as the superintendent of the Metropolitan Education District (District).  The 
District offers a Regional Occupational Program (ROP) that provides career technical 
education (CTE) classes to high school students from nearby, participating high schools.     
 

2. 

On March 14, 2016, the governing board of the District adopted Resolution 

No. 08-03-14-16 (PKS Resolution), reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of services for 
the 2016-2017 school year, and directing Superintendent Lynch to send appropriate notices 
to all employees affected by the reduction or elimination of services.1     
                                                 

1 On March 9, 2016, the governing board adopted tie breaking criteria in Resolution 
No. 08-03-09-16.  The tie breaking criteria were not used because there were no employees 
notified of layoff who became employed on the same date. 

The PKS Resolution identified the services to be reduced no later than the beginning 

of the 2016-2017 school year as: 
 

Teacher, Office Careers – Public Services   
   
Teacher, Legal Careers 
 
   
Teacher, Business Entrepreneurship 

 

0.5 FTE2 
1.0 FTE3 
0.5 FTE 

Office Careers, Legal Careers and Business Entrepreneurship are three-hour courses 

 
 
that have been offered in the morning and in the afternoon.  As a result of the reduction in 
force identified in the PKS Resolution, the District will offer one three-hour course in each of 
these subjects next year.    
 

 
The services set forth in the governing board’s PKS Resolution are particular 

 
3. 

  

 

kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955.  No service is being reduced below a mandated level. 

 
4. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), when a governing 

board reduces particular kinds of services resulting in a decrease in the number of 
certificated, permanent employees, the services of a permanent employee may not be 
terminated if another employee with less seniority is retained to render a service that the 
more senior employee is “certificated and competent to render.”   
 
  
In the PKS Resolution, the Board defined competence to identify employees who 
have a right to “bump” into the position of a less senior employee pursuant to Education 
Code section 44955, subdivision (b).  The Board defined competence as follows: 
 

a)  Possession of a current valid credential to teach the assigned 

subject matter; 

 
b)  Experience teaching the subject for at least one year or the 

equivalent of one year during the past 10 years; and 

 
c)  An employee must have all appropriate certifications, as 
determined by the District and state law, to hold the 
position (e.g., ASE Certification (automotive), EL 
Certification, CLAD, registered nursing license). 

5. 

Before the governing board adopted the PKS Resolution, it was notified of the 

resignation of one certificated employee.  The governing board considered this information 

                                                 

2 Full-Time Equivalent. 
 
3 The District subsequently decided to effectuate only a 0.5 FTE in the Legal Careers 

 

 

course. 

2 

in determining the necessary reduction of services for the 2016-2017 school year. 
 

6. 

On March 15, 2016, Superintendent Lynch served three employees written 

notice of her recommendation that their full-time services would not be required for the 
ensuing school year: Mark Adams, Peggy Nutz and Alice Rodriguez.  Each notice set forth 
the reasons for the recommendation.   
 

7. 

Adams did not request a hearing to determine whether cause existed for the 
reduction of his services.  Adams teaches the Legal Careers course.  Because the District is 
effectuating a 0.5 FTE reduction of the course, Adams’s full-time position is being reduced 
to 0.5 FTE.  He is being retained to continue teaching one Legal Careers class. 
 

8. 

Respondents Nutz and Rodriguez timely requested a hearing to determine if 
there was cause for the reduction of their services for the ensuing year.  The District timely 
served respondents with a packet which included a statement to respondents, the statement of 
reduction in force, copies of appropriate Education and Government Code sections, a notice 
of defense and a notice of hearing.  Respondents Nutz and Rodriguez each filed a timely 
notice of defense.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.   
 
Basis for PKS Resolution 
 

9. 

Marie dela Cruz, the District’s Chief Business Officer and Interim/Acting 

Human Resources Director, testified at hearing.  She was involved in the layoff process and 
the preparation of the governing board resolutions.  The District ties its classes to the current 
labor market, and the tools and education students need in order to succeed in that market.  
The District constantly reviews and evaluates its course offerings based on viability and 
student interest.  This year, the superintendent, principal and dela Cruz met and determined 
that reducing the services identified in the PKS Resolution met the needs of the students.  
The cause for the reduction in particular kinds of services relates to the welfare of the schools 
and the pupils thereof. 
 

10. 

In order to effectuate the reduction in force, dela Cruz met with management 

and human resources staff members to discuss the competency criteria.  She reviewed the 
competency criteria used in the District’s prior layoff proceedings.  Dela Cruz considered the 
previous criteria to emphasize teaching skills and subject matter experience and to meet the 
needs of the students.  CTE and ROP classes cover a broad range of subject matter; the 
District seeks to assign teachers to courses for which they have the necessary skills and 
experience.  Dela Cruz and the other staff members recommended that the governing board 
adopt the competency criteria set forth in Factual Finding 4, which had been adopted and 
implemented by the District in prior years.   

 
11.  After the PKS Resolution, including the competency criteria, was adopted, 

dela Cruz applied the criteria to the three employees whose courses were being reduced 
(Nutz, Rodriguez and Adams) to determine whether they could be retained full-time by 
filling a position of a less senior employee.   

 

3 

Nutz Layoff 
 

12. 

Peggy Nutz is a certificated employee of the District who was hired in 

November 2000.  She holds a designated subject career technical education credential, and a 
designated subject supervision and coordination credential, in the Finance and Business 
pathway and the Marketing, Sales and Services pathway.  Respondent Nutz also holds a 
pupil personnel services (PPS) credential and an administrative services credential.  The PPS 
credential authorizes her to provide school services as a counselor in grades 12 and below.   
 

13. 

The PKS Resolution reduces the course offerings in the 2016-2017 school year 

to one Business Entrepreneurship course, which equates to a 0.5 FTE.  Respondent Nutz 
taught two Business Entrepreneurship courses this year, providing her with a 1.0 FTE 
position.   

 
Dela Cruz reviewed respondent Nutz’s credentials and the classes she has taught in 
  
the past 10 years to determine whether she was eligible to bump into a position held by an 
employee with less seniority.  In the last 10 years, respondent Nutz has been assigned to 
teach: 1) Office Assistant; 2) Microsoft Office XP; 3) Small Business Management; and,     
4) Business Entrepreneurship.   
 

14.  After reviewing the subjects that respondent Nutz had taught in the past 10 

years and the classes being offered in the 2016-2017 school year, dela Cruz determined that 
there was no certificated employee with less seniority who was being retained to perform 
services which she is certificated and competent to render pursuant to the District’s 
competency criteria.   
 
Rodriguez Layoff 
 

15.  Alice Rodriguez has been a certificated employee of the District since at least 
1998.4  She holds a designated subject career technical education credential, and a designated 
subject vocational education credential, in the Finance and Business pathway, the Marketing, 
Sales and Services pathway and Business Office Occupations pathway. 
 

16. 

The PKS Resolution reduces the course offerings in the 2016-2017 school year 

to one Office Careers – Public Services course, which equates to a 0.5 FTE.  Respondent 
Rodriguez has taught two Office Careers or Office Assistant courses, providing her with a 
1.0 FTE position.   
 
Dela Cruz reviewed respondent Rodriguez’s credential and the subjects she had 
  
taught in the past 10 years to determine whether she was eligible to bump into a more junior 
employee’s position.  In the last 10 years, respondent Rodriguez has been assigned to teach: 

                                                 

4 The District’s seniority list states that her seniority date is July 1, 1998; however, 

Rodriguez testified that she had been hired by the District in 1994.   

 

4 

1) Office Assistant; and 2) Office Careers – Public Services.        
 

17.  After reviewing the courses that respondent Rodriguez had taught in the past 

10 years and the classes being offered in the 2016-2017 school year, dela Cruz concluded 
there was no certificated employee with less seniority than respondent Rodriguez who was 
being retained to perform services which she is certificated and competent to render pursuant 
to the District’s competency criteria.   
 
Mark Adams 
 

18.  After reviewing the courses that Mark Adams taught in the past 10 years 

against the classes being offered in the 2016-2017 school year, dela Cruz concluded there 
was no certificated employee with less seniority than Adams who was being retained to 
perform services which he is certificated and competent to render under the District’s 
competency criteria.  Adams has been retained to teach the Legal Careers course at 0.5 FTE. 
 
Respondent Rodriguez’s Evidence and Contentions 
 

19. 

Respondent Rodriguez has been teaching for 22 years.  Before she was hired 

by the District, she worked for nine months as a legal assistant.  Respondent Rodriguez has a 
master’s degree in public administration.  

 
20. 

 
21. 

Respondent Rodriguez also teaches as an adjunct professor at Evergreen 

Valley College.  She teaches classes in medical terminology, medical office practices and 
business.  Over the summer, respondent Rodriguez teaches computer applications at 
Presentation High School.   

In March 2015, the principal asked respondent Rodriguez if she would update 
her course so it would satisfy the “a through g” subject requirements for students applying to 
the University of California.  Respondent Rodriguez agreed and implemented key 
assignments so that the class would satisfy the “a through g” requirements.   
 

22. 

Respondent Rodriguez asserts that she is competent to assume the 0.5 FTE 
teaching the Legal Careers course taught by Adams, who has less seniority.  She concedes 
that she has not been assigned to teach the Legal Careers course in the past 10 years; 
nevertheless, she believes she is competent to teach the course.  Respondent Rodriguez notes 
that in the past when she has been assigned to teach a different class, she was not required to 
have taught the class before.  Respondent Rodriguez asserts that she has incorporated a legal 
careers component in her Office Careers – Public Services course.  She estimates that she 
spent 51 percent of her class time discussing legal careers this year.  No syllabus confirming 
this assertion, or comparing it to the Legal Careers syllabus was offered in evidence.  
Respondent Rodriguez contends that she meets the District’s competency criteria based on 
her work as a legal assistant, her credential and the amount of time she has spent teaching a 
legal component in her classes over the years.  
 

 

5 

23. 

Respondent Rodriguez also asserts that she is competent to teach the Business 

Entrepreneurship class taught by respondent Nutz, who has less seniority.  Although she 
concedes that she has not taught the Business Entrepreneurship course in the past 10 years, 
respondent Rodriguez’s credential would allow her to teach the class, and she feels qualified 
to do so. 
 

24. 

Respondent Rodriguez contends that the second prong of the competency 

requirement should be interpreted to apply to a subject matter, not to a course assignment.    
 
Respondent Nutz’s Evidence and Contentions 
 

25. 

Respondent Nutz has a business management degree and a master’s of 

education, counseling degree from San Jose State University.  She earned her PPS credential 
in 2014.  Respondent Nutz wrote her master’s thesis on the needs of special education 
children and has taught District staff members about the tools available for handling special 
needs children.  To earn her master’s degree, respondent Nutz performed 600 hours of 
counseling, including 200 hours with the Santa Clara County Foundry School, working with 
youth in difficult life situations.   
 

26. 

Respondent Nutz has received the following awards: 1) the superintendent’s 

award for outstanding performance dated January 21, 2009; 2) the superintendent’s award for 
outstanding performance dated April 21, 2010; 3) the superintendent’s award for outstanding 
performance dated February 16, 2011; 4) the Central County Occupational Center (CCOC) 
teacher of the month award in January 2009; 5) the CCOC teacher of the month award in 
October 2009; 6) the CCOC teacher of the month award in February 2011; and, 7) the CCOC 
teacher of the month award in January 2013. 

 
27. 

Respondent Nutz presented letters of recommendation from Sara Crowder, 

Assistant Principal at the District; Peter J. Vrabel, Assistant Principal at the District; Jessica 
Baker, co-founder and chief operating officer of The Respect Institute; Marianne Cartan, 
Director at the District; Chantu Nguyen, Academic Counselor at Andrew Hill High School; 
and Leota Kuzma, a counselor at the District.  These individuals uniformly praise respondent 
Nutz’s excellent teaching and communication skills, her passion for her students’ success, 
her experience with counseling and motivating her students, and her tireless efforts as a 
leader on campus.   
 

28. 

Respondent Nutz has reviewed the job description for the District’s counseling 

position and contends that she is competent to assume the position.  The District employs a 
full-time counselor with less seniority than respondent Nutz.  Respondent Nutz has spent a 
significant amount of time counseling the students in her classes.  She believes that between 
the counseling work she performed while earning her master’s degree and PPS credential, 
and the time she has spent informally counseling her students, she has met the District’s 
competency criteria.   
 

 

6 

29. 

In the alternative, respondent Nutz contends that she is competent by virtue of 

her credential and overall experience to teach Adams’s Legal Careers course.  Respondent 
Nutz has more seniority than Adams.  
  
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
1. 

 
Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education code sections 44949 and 

44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.  
 

2. 

 The services referenced in the PKS Resolution set forth in Factual Finding 3 

are the kind which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes 
and case law.  (See Ed. Code, § 44955; Campbell Elem. Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 
76 Cal.App.3d 796, Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  The 
decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but rather a 
proper exercise of the District’s discretion.   

 
3. 

Respondents challenge the validity of the District’s competency criteria, which 

require the senior employee to have experience teaching the subject for at least one year, or 
the equivalent of one year, during the past 10 years.  Respondents contend that they are 
competent to teach courses being taught by employees with less seniority, and that therefore 
District’s criteria are arbitrary and capricious, and invalid.  
 

4. 

The governing board has broad discretion to establish standards of competency 

for the purpose of exercising bumping rights.  (Duax v. Kern Community College Dist. 
(1987) 198 Cal.App.3d 555, 564-567.)  Whether the board has acted arbitrarily and 
capriciously “‘is measured by the standard set by reason and reasonable people, bearing in 
mind that such a standard may permit a difference of opinion on the same subject.’”  
(Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.)  
 

5. 

The fundamental requirement of competency criteria is that they must relate to 

the skills and qualifications to teach.  (Duax v. Kern Community College Dist., supra, 198 
Cal.App.3d at pp. 556-557.)  In Duax, the governing board adopted a competency standard 
that prohibited a senior employee from exercising bumping rights unless he or she could 
demonstrate one full year of teaching in the junior employee’s subject area within the last 10 
years.  The district’s assistant chancellor testified that he recommended that standard to 
emphasize tasks important to teaching, such as teaching skills, development of course 
material, interaction with students, knowledge of student abilities, and evaluation of student 
work.  The court held that the district’s standard clearly related to the skills and qualifications 
to teach and, “since it requires only one year of teaching in the last ten, not one in the last 
two or three, we are not persuaded that it too narrowly defines competency.”  (Id. at p. 567.)  
Thus, a district is permitted to establish a standard of competency that includes prior teaching 
experience in the relevant subject area.   
 
 

 

7 

Here, the District’s governing board adopted competency criteria that are nearly 

  
identical to the criteria approved in Duax.  Because the criteria relate to the skills and 
qualifications to teach and have not been shown to be arbitrary and capricious, the issue is 
whether the District properly applied the criteria.  (Factual Findings 4, and 9 through 11.) 
 

6. 

Respondent Rodriguez has had a long and successful career teaching Office 

Assistant and Office Careers courses at the District.  She has adjusted her curriculum to meet 
the needs of her students over the years.  Respondent Rodriguez’s credential would allow her 
to teach the Legal Careers course.  However, the evidence did not establish that she met the 
second prong of the District’s competency criteria, in that she has not taught the Legal 
Careers course in the past 10 years.  Thus, no certificated employee with less seniority than 
respondent Rodriguez is being retained to render services which respondent Rodriguez is 
certificated and competent to perform pursuant to the District’s competency criteria.  
(Factual Findings 9 through 11, 15 through 17, and 19 through 24.)  As a result, respondent 
Rodriguez’s layoff of 0.5 FTE must be upheld. 

 
7. 

Respondent Nutz has also had a lengthy and successful career at the District.  
She has furthered her education and now has a PPS credential.  By all accounts, respondent 
Nutz is a highly competent and respected teacher.  However, respondent Nutz has neither 
taught the Legal Careers course nor been assigned as a counselor for one year within the past 
10 years.  Therefore, no certificated employee with less seniority than respondent Nutz is 
being retained to render services which respondent Nutz is certificated and competent to 
perform under the District’s competency criteria.  (Factual Findings 9 through 14 and 25 
through 29.)  Therefore, respondent Nutz’s layoff of 0.5 FTE must be upheld.   
 

8. 

In accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, cause exists for 

reduction of particular kinds of services of the District, beginning no later than the 
commencement of the 2016-2017 school year, as follows: 1) teacher, 0.5 FTE position in 
Office Careers – Public Services; 2) teacher, 0.5 FTE position in Legal Careers; and,           
3) teacher, 0.5 FTE position in Business Entrepreneurship.  The cause relates solely to the 
welfare of the school and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 
44949.  (Factual Findings 2, 3 and 9.)   
 

9. 

Notice may be given to respondents Rodriguez and Nutz that their services 

will be reduced from 1.0 FTE to 0.5 FTE for the ensuing school year.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

8 

Notice may be given to respondents Nutz and Rodriguez that their services will be 

ORDER 

 

reduced for the 2016-2017 school year. 
 
 
DATED: April 27, 2016 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
JILL SCHLICHTMANN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

9 

