BEFORE THE 
LOS ANGELES COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE 
LOS ANGELES COUNTY OFFICE OF 
EDUCATION

  OAH No. 2016030341

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Julie Cabos-Owen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office 

of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 13, 2016, in Downey, California.  
Los Angeles County Office of Education (LACOE) was represented by Jennifer A. 
Chamberlain, Deputy General Counsel.  Carlos Perez, with Reich, Adell & Cvitan, 
represented all Respondents appearing at the hearing, who are identified as follows:1  
Raymond Alcala; Giovanni Boskovich; John C. Clayton; Gary S. Di Pierro; Michelle Dong; 
Carol Ann Eadens; Robert A. Earl (rescinded); David O. Ejimole; Linda Engholm; Karen L.
Epport; Jane Weddington Flagg; Valeria Garcia (rescinded); Kathryn Kaatz George; Laura 
Gottlieb; Danny Hong; Mary C. Hubbell; Patricia M. Jacobs; Annika Jacobsen; Diane D.
Jimenez; Maria C. Kawashima; Kyle S. Kelley; Amy L. Kutis; Beatrice B. Lambert; De Ana 
Lizardo; Susie C. Lochhead; Tamara A. Lopez; Cecilia L. Lowenthal; Kathy Magana 
Gomez; Katrina Gillard O’Connor; Vivian Okoro; Martin Navaroli; Jude C. Okwuokei; 
Raymond Olivas; Felicia Mercado Perez; Roshawn Perkins; Regina C. Ravare; Jessica V.
Reed; Brandon Rivas; Jenifer C. Roberts; Jeannie Robinson; John Rodriguez; Toni 
Salisbury; Dyanelle Sanford; Patricia Lynn Scepan; Wendy Tsukamoto; Judy Warner; Paul 
Wecker; Jane Weddington; Karla Vanessa Williams; and Gayle Woods.  

Oral and documentary evidence was received.  After testimony concluded on April 

13, 2016, the matter was continued until April 22, 2016, for the submission of closing briefs. 
Pursuant to Education Code sections 44949, subdivision (c), and 44955, subdivision (c), the 
continuance extended the deadline for submission of the proposed decision until May 16, 
2016.

 

 

1 Respondents’ counsel identified his clients to be those Respondents listed in Exhibit 
106, except for those whose names had a handwritten check mark next to them.  Two of the 
listed clients, Mr. Earl and Ms. Garcia, had notations next to their names that their layoff 
notices had been rescinded.  Testimony at the hearing confirmed the rescissions.  

LACOE’s Closing Brief was marked as Exhibit 30 and was lodged.  Respondents’ 
Closing Brief was marked as Exhibit 107 and was lodged.  The record was closed, and the 
matter was submitted for decision on April 22, 2016.  

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

1.

Darren McDuffie, Ed.D., Chief Human Resources Officer of the Los Angeles 
County Superintendent of Schools, filed the Statement of Reduction in Force in his official 
capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of LACOE.

2.

3.

On March 8, 2016, Arturo Delgado, Ed.D., the Los Angeles County 

Superintendent of Schools (Superintendent) adopted Resolution No. 1-S to reduce and 
discontinue particular kinds of services for the 2016-2017 school year, thereby reducing or 
eliminating 145 full time equivalent (FTE) positions.

4.

The Superintendent further determined it necessary, by reason of the 

reductions or discontinuances in particular kinds of services, to decrease the number of 
certificated employees for the 2016-2017 school year by a corresponding number of FTE 
positions, and directed Dr. McDuffie or his designees to take all actions necessary and proper 
to accomplish the purposes of Resolution No. 1-S and to notify the appropriate employees of 
a recommendation not to reemploy them in accordance with Education Code sections 44949 
and 44955.

5.

In accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, on March 10, 

2016, Dr. McDuffie gave the Superintendent notice of a recommendation that notices be 
given to Respondents that their services would not be required for the following school year
due to reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services enumerated in Resolution 
No. 1-S.  

6.

On or before March 15, 2016, under Resolution No. 1-S and the provisions of 

sections 44949 and 44955, Dr. McDuffie gave written notice to Respondents that he had 
recommended to the Superintendent that notice be given to them that their services would not 
be required for the 2016-2017 school year.  Respondents were provided with all required 
documents. Respondents requested a hearing to determine whether there is cause for not 
employing them for the 2016-2017 school year. 

7(a). Some certificated employees had provided services while holding a 

provisional credential and were non-reelected for that reason under Superintendent’s 
Resolution No. 4-S, independent of this layoff process.  LACOE notified those certificated 
employees as a precaution so that they could participate and exercise any claimed rights in 
this matter.

2

7(b). Some certificated employees provided services under temporary contract with 
LACOE and were non-reelected for that reason under Superintendent’s Resolution No. 2-S, 
independent of this layoff process.  LACOE notified those employees as a precaution, so that 
they could participate and exercise any claimed rights in this matter.

Reduction and Elimination of Particular Kinds of Services

8.

Resolution No. 1-S provides for the reduction or elimination of the following 

particular kinds of services:

EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS

A.

Division of Student Programs

FTE

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Principal on Special Assignment
Senior Program Specialist
Counselors
Teacher CCS
Teacher JCS
Teacher SDC
Literacy Specialist
Resource Specialist
Pregnant Minor

1.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
 24.0
5.0
1.0
1.0
2.0
Subtotal      40.0

EDUCATIONAL SERVICES

A.

Division of Accountability, Support and Monitoring

FTE

B.

Division of Curriculum and Instructional Services

FTE

1.
2.

Project Director III
Coordinator II

1.
2.
3.

Project Director III
Consultant II
Senior Program Specialist

 1.0
2.0
3.0

Subtotal

3.0
7.0
1.0
Subtotal       11.0

///
///
///
///
///

3

C.

Division of Special Education

FTE

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

SELPA Director III
Teacher APE
Teacher DHH
Teacher ED
Teacher ID DH
Teacher LSS
Teacher VH

1.0
7.0
2.0
8.0
3.0
 69.0
1.0
Subtotal       91.0

TOTAL    145.0

9.

The services identified in Resolution No. 1-S are particular kinds of services 

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  
(See also Legal Conclusion 2.)

10.

Specifically, speech and language pathology services and adapted physical 

education services were reduced because school districts for which LACOE had been 
providing such services had given LACOE notice that they were taking back those positions 
and directly providing speech and language pathology and adaptive physical education 
services to their students.    

11.

The decision to reduce or discontinue the identified particular kinds of services 

was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and constituted a proper exercise of discretion.  (See 
also Legal Conclusion 3.)

12.

The reduction or elimination of the identified particular kinds of services 
relates solely to the welfare of LACOE and its students. (See also Legal Conclusion 4.)

13.

LACOE properly considered all known attrition in determining the number of 

layoff notices to be served on its employees as of March 15, 2016.

14.

There was no evidence that reduction or elimination of the 145 FTE positions 

would reduce services below mandated levels.  (See also Legal Conclusion 5.)

15(a). LACOE maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority dates, 

current assignments and locations, credentials, and authorizations. 

15(b). Except as indicted in Factual Findings 34 and 35, the information on the 

seniority list is accurate.

15(c). Using the information on the seniority list, LACOE identified the most junior 

employees working in a particular kind of service being reduced or discontinued and 
determined which employees would receive layoff notices.

4

16.

The Superintendent adopted criteria to be used in determining the order of 

termination of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to LACOE in a 
probationary position on the same date. The order of termination of those employees was
determined by applying tiebreaker criteria set forth in Resolution No. 3-S. The 
Superintendent determined that such criteria best served the needs of the programs 
administered by LACOE and of its students.

17.

Respondents did not challenge the tiebreaker criteria.

Skipping

18.

The Superintendent established criteria to retain certificated staff in particular 
kinds of services, regardless of seniority, who have special training and experience necessary 
to teach a course or course of study, which was determined by meeting criteria set forth in 
Resolution No. 5-S as follows:

Probationary or permanent certificated employees who 

a.
have experience teaching and specialized training in the Road to 
Success Academy’s customized curriculum for female 
incarcerated high school students.

Probationary or permanent certificated employees who 
b.
have experience teaching and specialized training in the Civic 
Democracy Initiative customized curriculum for female 
incarcerated high school students.

Probationary or permanent certificated employees who 

c.
are currently assigned to Challenger Memorial Youth Center 
and have received specialized training and have experience in 
the facility wide implementation of the Positive Behavior 
Interventions and Supports (PBIS) pursuant to the requirements 
of the Casey A. Court Order and Settlement Agreement section 
5.

Probationary or permanent certificated employees who 

d.
are currently assigned to the Challenger Memorial Youth Center 
and have received specialized training and are experienced in 
the facility wide implementation of the Advance Path program 
and/or other specialized programs/courses of study pursuant to 
the requirements of the Casey A. court order and Settlement 
Agreement.

e.
Pursuant to (d)(2), and as a separate ground, 
probationary or permanent certificated employees who are 
currently assigned to Challenger Memorial Youth Center whose 
assignment is necessary to maintain and achieve compliance 

5

with constitutional requirements relating to equal protection, 
consistent with the Casey A. Court Order and Settlement 
Agreement.

19.

LACOE is the local educational agency charged with providing educational 

services to students in juvenile halls and probation camps in Los Angeles County.  

20.

The Challenger Memorial Youth Center (Challenger) is a camp operated by 
the Los Angeles County Probation Department serving male juvenile offenders.  LACOE 
operates Christa McAuliffe High School (McAuliffe), which provides educational services to 
the Challenger residents.  

21.

The Road to Success Academy at Camp Scott Scudder (RTSA at Scudder) is 

an all-girls school comprised of female juvenile offenders.  The camp is operated by the 
Probation Department, and RTSA at Scudder is operated by LACOE.  

The Challenger/McAuliffe Training & Experience

22.

LACOE was party to a federal court class-action lawsuit entitled Casey A., 

et al., v. Delgado, et al., case no. CV10-00192GHK(FMO) (C.D. Cal.).  The lawsuit 
alleged that the rehabilitative and educational programs at Challenger/McAuliffe were 
constitutionally deficient.  LACOE entered into a settlement agreement, which was
enforced by order of the federal district court.  Respondents were not parties to that 
litigation, and were not involved in the settlement.

23.

The settlement agreement required implementation of a detailed action and

compliance plan to address 13 areas of reform (Leadership, Administration, and 
Management; Data Management; Instruction; Literacy; Positive Behavior Support; Special 
Education; Career and Technical Education; Special Activities; Transition and Aftercare; 
Partnerships; Safety and Crisis Training; Discipline and Special Housing Unit; and 
Sustainability and Quality Assurance).  The settlement agreement also required ongoing 
monitoring by a Technical, Compliance, and Advisory Team (TCA Team) and periodic 
reporting by that TCA Team to the district court to certify that McAuliffe staff was receiving 
continuous training and consistently implementing the detailed action plan. 

24. McAuliffe staff has received extensive training and obtained experience 

offered in specialized areas and unique programs to ensure compliance with the settlement 
agreement.  The action plan also required implementation of Positive Behavior Intervention 
Support (PBIS) to ensure the student population at McAuliffe would receive appropriate 
educational support.  PBIS, which focuses on productively responding to negative behaviors, 
is implemented systemically and comprehensively as a component of the educational 
program at McAuliffe.  The specialized training of McAuliffe staff affects the delivery of 
instruction to students by offering systemic incorporation of PBIS. 

6

25. McAuliffe staff is currently working at the Tier I level in the PBIS training 
process. McAuliffe is one of only two LACOE sites working on PBIS Tier I training, and 
training with PBIS experts.  (RTSA at Scudder is the other site.)  

26(a). Some PBIS training and curriculum is offered at other LACOE sites, but it is 

not implemented comprehensively in the same intensive manner as at McAuliffe. No 
Respondent offered testimony of comparable training or experience implementing PBIS.

26(b). Respondents presented testimony of witnesses who asserted that, with the 
passage of Assembly Bill 420 (AB 420), which aims to have schools avoid suspension or 
expulsion of students when dealing with problem behaviors, all teachers are undergoing 
some training in positive behavior intervention.  However, the evidence established that 
PBIS training at McAuliffe is more structured than the AB 420 behavior intervention being 
introduced and implemented at other LACOE sites.  

27.

Respondents not assigned to McAuliffe do not possess the same training and 

experience as those certificated employees assigned to McAuliffe.

28.  Peter Leone, Ph.D., a member of the TCA Team charged with monitoring the 
implementation of the settlement agreement, testified credibly at the hearing.  Dr. Leone 
opined that it is critical for McAuliffe staff to be highly trained because “it is no ordinary 
school,” but also involves the probation setting and mental health issues.  Working in such an 
environment requires special skills and ongoing training.  In the years following 
implementation of the settlement agreement, McAuliffe has continued to improve and has 
complied with the action plan, which Dr. Leone attributed to the positive impact of trained 
staff.  Dr. Leone’s last formal report as monitor occurred in April of 2015, after which the 
Casey settlement terms concluded.  However, Dr. Leone visited McAuliffe in March of 
2016, under a consultation contract with LACOE, to ensure that McAuliffe’s reforms are 
sustained.  Improvements have continued.

The RTSA at Scudder Training & Experience

29.

RTSA at Scudder is similar to McAuliffe in that the student population 

requires specialized education unique to the juvenile justice system.  Based on RTSA at 
Scudder students’ specialized needs, LACOE developed a thematic, interdisciplinary,
project-based curriculum with content and support specific to the juvenile justice system
population.  The RTSA program is an extremely different program, incomparable to any 
other program in the nation, because it joins all three approaches, incorporating social-
emotional themes through interdisciplinary content and project-based learning.  

30.

RTSA at Scudder was the pilot program for this unique course of study.  The 
RTSA program was subsequently introduced at all LACOE sites which are at various stages 
of training and implementation.  While some of the specialized training and curriculum from 
RTSA at Scudder are now available at other LACOE sites, the other sites have not yet
systemically integrated the RTSA program into their course of study.  RTSA at Scudder also 

7

differs from the fledgling RTSA programs at other LACOE sites in that RTSA at Scudder is 
in its sixth year of implementation, has been fully certified for a year, and all staff at Scudder 
have been fully trained.2  Within LACOE, only the staff at RTSA at Scudder has been fully 
trained and is currently experienced at implementing the course of study at that site.

31.

RTSA at Scudder is one of only two LACOE sites working on PBIS Tier I 

training, and training with PBIS experts.  (McAuliffe is the other site.)    

32.

RTSA is also the only LACOE site chosen to implement the California 

Democracy School Civic Learning Initiative (California Civic Democracy Initiative).  This
grant-funded program systemically incorporates civics in the curriculum provided at RTSA.
RTSA’s California Civic Democracy Initiative training has been ongoing for three years, 
including summer training and an on-site consultant monthly to work with staff.3  After three 
years of training and implementation, RTSA is on track to be certified as a Civic Democracy 
School. 

33.

Untrained senior staff members not assigned to RTSA at Scudder do not 

possess the same training and experience as staff members at RTSA. 

Respondents Seeking to Change their Seniority Date

34.

At the hearing, Respondent Diane Jimenez’s seniority date on the seniority list 

(initially set forth as July 1, 2000) was changed to September 1, 1999.  The correction was 
made because she was credited for the time she served on a provisional certificate.  Despite 
the changed seniority date, Respondent Jimenez remained subject to layoff.  

///
///
///
///
///
///
///
///
///
///
///

 

 

2 Two staff members retained at Scudder, Bea Rulli (#397) and Charlie Phelps (#265), 

have been fully trained in the RTSA program.

3 California Civic Democracy Initiative training, including summer training, has been 

attended by RTSA staff members Rulli and Phelps.

8

35(a). Respondent Maria Kawashima (#241) contested her listed seniority date of 

September 1, 2003.  Respondent Kawashima was hired on September 5, 1997, under a 
variable term waiver while working on her credential.4  She served under a variable term 
waiver from September 5, 1997, until December 2004, when she received her permanent 
credential.  Respondent Kawashima believes that September 5, 1997 is her correct seniority 
date because she served continuously without any break in service since that date.  On cross 
examination, Respondent Kawashima recalled receiving a notice of non-reelection in 2003, 
at the end of the 2002-2003 school year.  However, the evidence did not establish that this 
notice of non-reelection caused a break in her service since Respondent Kawashima returned 
in the Fall of 2003 for the 2003-2004 school year.  

35(b). Respondent Kawashima’s employment contracts were not presented in 

evidence, and LACOE’s employment classification for her under those contracts was not 
established.  Instead, LACOE points to Respondent Kawashima’s variable term waiver and 
asserts that she was a temporary employee from 1997 through 2003.  Although a variable 
term waiver is less than a full credential, this addresses Respondent Kawashima’s credential 
status and does not address her status or classification as an employee.5  It is improper for 
LACOE to classify Respondent Kawashima as temporary simply because she had less than a 
full credential.6  LACOE incorrectly cites Education Code section 44911 as a basis to 
discredit Respondent Kawashima’s assertion of a prior seniority date.  LACOE argued, 
“California Education Code § 44911 states that ‘service by a person under a provisional 
credential shall not be included in computing the service required as a prerequisite to 
attainment of, or eligibility to, classification as a permanent employee of a school district.’  
Thus, Ms. Kawashima's employment under variable-term waivers from 1997 to 2003 does 
not entitle her to service time credit when computing her eligibility as a permanent employee 
of LACOE.”  (LACOE’s Closing Brief, p. 9.)  This argument does not establish Respondent 
Kawashima’s temporary status from 1997 through 2003.  A similar argument (that 
provisionally credentialed employees were not truly probationary due to Education Code 
section 44911) was considered by the Court in California Teachers Assn. v. Vallejo City 
Unified School Dist. (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135, and the Court found that argument 
unpersuasive, instead holding that teachers with emergency permits can be classified as 
probationary employees.  (Id. at pp. 148-149.)  

 

 

4 A Variable Term Waiver is a document issued by the California Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing for employers who meet the waiver criteria when a fully credentialed 
teacher is not available for the assignment. It allows the employer to fill the assignment while 
searching for a fully credentialed teacher in the subject area of the assignment and gives the 
employee/waiver holder additional time to complete requirements.

5 (California Teachers Assn. v. Vallejo City Unified School Dist. (2007) 149 

Cal.App.4th 135, 148-150.)

6  (Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Bakersfield City School District (2006) 

145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1282-1283.)  

9

35(c). In its Closing Brief, LACOE also asserted, “Based on the temporary nature of 

the variable-term waiver and need for fully credentialed employees, Ms. Kawashima was 
dismissed for cause at the end of each school year from 1997 to 2003.”  There was no 
evidence that Respondent Kawashima was ever dismissed for cause as opposed to being 
subject to release/non-reelection due to layoff.  Moreover, LACOE presented no evidence to 
establish any non-reelection during Respondent Kawashima’s employment with LACOE, 
other than her admission to receiving a notice of non-reelection in 2003.  LACOE did not 
establish that, as of that date, Respondent Kawashima was properly classified as a temporary 
employee.  The District did not establish that at any point after September 5, 1997, and prior 
to September 1, 2003, Respondent Kawashima was properly classified as a temporary 
employee.7  By default, Respondent Kawashima is presumed to have been serving as a 
probationary employee since September 5, 1997.8  Consequently, her seniority date for 
purposes of layoff should be adjusted to her first date of paid probationary service, which 
was September 5, 1997.9

Speech and Language Pathologists

36(a). A large number of speech and language pathologists received notices that that 

their services would not be required for the 2016-2017 school year.  Several testified at the 
hearing, including Kathy Magana-Gomez (#166; seniority date 2/8/99), Karen Epport (#320; 
seniority date 9/17/07), Toni Salisbury (#339; seniority date 9/1/08), Beatrice Lambert 
(#294; seniority date 9/7/06), Maria Kawashima (#241; seniority date 9/1/03), Patricia Jacobs 
(#175; seniority date 9/1/99), and Mary Hubbell (#254; seniority date 9/1/04).   

 

 

7  “Even if an employee agrees in writing to be hired as a temporary employee, such a 

written agreement is not determinative unless the classification is authorized by statute.  A 
school district may not classify a person as a temporary employee unless the position in 
which he or she is employed is ‘a position the law defines as temporary.’” (Stockton 
Teachers Assn. v. Stockton Unified School Dist. (2012) 204 Cal.App.4th 446, 457 (citing 
Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006) 145 
Cal.App.4th 1260, 1277).)  As pointed out in Stockton, the Education Code specifically 
authorizes a temporary classification in only a few instances.  (Id. at p. 456.)  

8  “If a teacher does not satisfy the statutory grounds for a temporary classification, 
the default or catch-all provision of [Education Code] section 44915 mandates the district 
classify the teacher as a probationary employee.”  (Vasquez v. Happy Valley Union School 
Dist. (2008) 159 Cal.App.4th 969, 983 (citing California Teachers Assn. v. Vallejo City 
Unified School Dist. (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 135, and Bakersfield, supra.); see also, 
Kavanaugh v. West Sonoma County Union High School Dist. (2003) 29 Cal.4th 911, 916-
917.)

9 An employee’s employment date is the date in which the employee first rendered 

paid service in a probationary position.  (Ed. Code, § 44845.)

10

36(b). Many of the speech and language pathologists who testified believed that the 

layoff of so many speech and language pathologists would impact the students who had been 
receiving their services.  However, as set forth in Factual Findings 10, 11, 12, and 14 above, 
the reduction of such services was related to districts’ “take back” of these services, and there 
was no evidence that reduction of the positions would reduce services below mandated 
levels.  

36(c). LACOE’s speech and language pathology assignments are generalized and do 
not distinguish between various specialized areas of that field.  The collective testimonies of 
several speech and language pathologists revealed that although speech and language 
pathologists are general practitioners by credential, most of them work in specialized areas 
for which they have self-qualified through additional education and experience (e.g.,
alternative augmentative communication).  The witnesses noted that senior speech and 
language pathologists who are retained after this layoff may have to fill positions in 
specialized areas in which they have little experience.  Nevertheless, their testimonies did not 
establish that any of the retained senior speech and language pathologists were not 
certificated and competent to render the speech and language pathology services for which 
they were retained.  The collective testimonies also failed to establish that any of the junior 
speech and language pathologists identified for layoff should be skipped pursuant to any of 
the Superintendent’s skipping criteria.  

Individual Respondents’ Assertions

37.

Respondent Magana-Gomez is a speech and language pathologist who serves 
in the auditory-oral program.10  This program prepares children through fifth grade to either 
be subsequently mainstreamed into general education or placed in the total communication 
program which requires fluency in sign language.  Respondent Magana-Gomez noted that 
Samantha Fogel, who is more senior to her, was being retained as a speech and language 
pathologist.  Respondent Magana-Gomez also noted that Ms. Fogel is a total communication 
speech pathologist, fluent in sign language, who may have some experience in auditory-oral 
therapy but not as much as Respondent Magana-Gomez.  She conceded that LACOE does 
not have a separate job assignment for auditory-oral therapists.  Respondent Magana-Gomez 
did not establish that any junior certificated employee is being retained to perform services 
that she is certificated and competent to render and that she should bump into any 
assignment.  Respondent Magana-Gomez also did not establish that she should be skipped 
pursuant to the Superintendent’s skipping criteria.  

38.

Respondent Gary DiPierro (#335; seniority date 9/1/08) is an Adapted 

Physical Education (APE) specialist who is subject to layoff.  He asserted that Tonya Moore 
(#340; seniority date 9/1/08) should not be retained over him.  However, the evidence 

 

 

10 The general findings in Factual Finding 36 apply to Respondent Magana-Gomez as 

well.  However, her individual claims are addressed here since she challenged the retention 
of a specific speech and language pathologist in relation her layoff.

11

established that, based on tiebreaker criteria, Ms. Moore was assigned to a position of lesser 
seniority than Respondent DiPierro and that she was being laid off as well.  Respondent 
DiPierro did not establish that any junior certificated employee is being retained to perform 
services that he is certificated and competent to render and that he should bump into any 
assignment.  Respondent DiPierro also did not establish that he should be skipped pursuant 
to the Superintendent’s skipping criteria.  

39.

Respondent Ray Alcala (#271; seniority date 9/7/05) is physical education

teacher who is subject to layoff.  He teaches physical education to LACOE students on the 
host campus of California State University, Los Angeles.  He asserted that his assignment is 
unique in that he has incorporated new technology (including fitness software) and involves 
knowing how to collaborate with the university classes and programs which use the same 
facilities.  Respondent Alcala did not establish that any junior certificated employee is being 
retained to perform services that he is certificated and competent to render and that he should 
bump into any assignment.  Respondent Alcala also did not establish that he should be 
skipped pursuant to the Superintendent’s skipping criteria.  

40(a). Respondent Patricia Scepan (#220; seniority date 2/18/02) holds a multiple 

subject credential and teaches at the Barry J. Nidorf Compound School, which is a juvenile 
court school (JCS).  Respondent Scepan believes she should bump into the literacy specialist 
position held by Laura Macias (#285; seniority date 7/24/06) at the Glenn Rockey Camp.  
The literary specialist position requires a reading certificate as well as a teaching credential.  
Respondent Scepan acknowledged that Ms. Macias holds a reading certificate, which 
Respondent Scepan does not have.  

40(b). However, Respondent Scepan asserted that Ms. Macias is not working in a 

literary specialist position and that she only serves four morning hours in a multiple subject 
classroom and then teaches Reading 180 (a reading intervention program). It was unclear 
from Respondent Scepan’s testimony how she had obtained her information regarding the 
duties Ms. Macias is performing; Ms. Macias did not testify to verify or deny Respondent 
Scepan’s assertions.  Respondent Scepan feels she can fill Ms. Macias’ job assignment 
because she believes she has more years of experience teaching and that only a small amount 
of training is needed to teach Reading 180.  Dr. Sarah Niemann, Coordinator III with the 
Supervisor’s Human Resources Department, confirmed that Ms. Macias was assigned and 
being retained as a literary specialist.  The evidence did not establish that Ms. Macias was 
not performing any duties as a literary specialist, even if she was performing additional 
duties such a teaching Reading 180.  

40(c). Respondent Scepan did not establish that Ms. Macias is being retained to

perform services that Respondent Scepan is certificated and competent to render and that 
Respondent Scepan should bump into Ms. Macias’ assignment.  

41(a). Respondent Martin Navaroli (#255; seniority date 9/1/04) is a teacher at I-Poly 

on the campus of California State Polytechnic University, in Pomona.  He has a single 
subject credential in Social Science.   He believes that his training surpasses that of Mr. 

12

Phelps and Ms. Rulli, who are assigned to RTSA at Scudder and have the training and 
experience discussed in Factual Findings 29 through 33.  Respondent Navaroli has 
completed training which included attending Constitutional Heritage for 21st Century 
Citizens in 2008 and has presented at the American History Weekend Institute series and the 
American History Convention in 2009.  Respondent Navaroli has also worked on problem-
based learning (PBL) since 2004, was a collaborator in 2009-2011 at I-Poly’s PBL 
workshops, and helped create curriculum for LACOE to teach PBL.  He asserted that his 
trainings were “where RTSA came out of,” and that “the trainer is being bypassed by the 
students he taught.”  However, Respondent Navaroli admitted that he never attended 
trainings under the RTSA title and did not receive any training under the California 
Democracy Initiative title.  He is aware that PBL is only one component of RTSA but asserts 
that he has experience with the social-emotional component; he teaches high school “where 
social and emotional issues are going on at all times.”  Respondent Navaroli did not establish 
that he possesses the same training and experience as staff members at RTSA. 

41(b). Respondent Navaroli did not establish that any junior certificated employee is 
being retained to perform services that he is certificated and competent to render and that he 
should bump into any assignment.  Respondent Navaroli also did not establish that he should 
be skipped pursuant to the Superintendent’s skipping criteria.  

42.

Taking into account the changes described above, no junior certificated 

employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services that a more senior employee is 
certificated and competent to render.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 

44949 and 44955 were met.  

The services identified in Resolution No. 1-S are particular kinds of services 

which may be reduced or discontinued pursuant to Education Code section 44955.

The decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither 

arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of the Board’s discretion.  

Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare 

of LACOE and its students within the meaning of Education Code sections 44955.  

Services will not be reduced below mandated levels.  

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of LACOE due to 

the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

///

13

7.

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: 

[T]he services of no permanent employee may be terminated . . . while 
any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, 
is retained to render a service which said permanent employee is 
certificated and competent to render.  

8(a). Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), allows the District to 

deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority, if the District 
demonstrates that there is a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of 
study, and that the certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to 
teach that course or course of study which others with more seniority do not possess.    

8(b).

In this case, LACOE demonstrated a specific need for certificated personnel at 

McAuliffe and RTSA at Scudder to deliver unique courses of study utilizing the 
methodologies in which they have been extensively trained and have developed a special 
degree of experience. The special training and experience of the McAuliffe and RTSA at 
Scudder staff is integral to delivery of the unique courses of study offered at those two sites.  
Consequently, the Superintendent’s skipping criteria for McAuliffe and RTSA were 
appropriate because the skipped personnel possess special training and experience to teach 
the unique courses of study at those sites which more senior LACOE personnel do not 
possess. 

9(a). Cause was established to adjust the seniority dates of the following 
Respondents:  Respondent Diane Jimenez, whose seniority date was adjusted from July 1, 
2000, to September 1, 1999; and Respondent Maria Kawashima, whose seniority date was 
adjusted from September 2, 2003, to September 5, 1997.  

9(b). The evidence established that despite the changed seniority date, Respondent 

Jimenez remains subject to layoff.  However, LACOE shall be ordered to determine if the 
adjusted seniority date of Respondent Kawashima will no longer subject her to layoff, and if 
so, the Statement of Reduction in Force against her shall be dismissed. 

10.

Prior to or during the hearing, LACOE rescinded the preliminary layoff 
notices issued to Respondents Robert A. Earl and Valeria Garcia.  The Statements of 
Reduction in Force against them will be dismissed. 

11.

Except as set forth in the Legal Conclusions above and the resulting orders 

below, no junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services that a 
more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.  

12.

Cause exists within the meaning of Education Code section 44955 for 

terminating or reducing the remaining Respondents’ employment for the 2016-2017 school 
year, as set forth in Factual Findings 1 through 42, and Legal Conclusions 1 through 11.    

14

ORDERS

1.

The Statements of Reduction in Force against respondents Robert A. Earl and 
Valeria Garcia are dismissed.  LACOE shall not issue those Respondents final layoff notices 
for the 2016-2017 school year.

2(a). LACOE’s seniority dates for the following Respondents shall be adjusted:  

Respondent Diane Jimenez - seniority date adjusted from July 1, 2000, to September 1, 1999; 
and Respondent Maria Kawashima - seniority date adjusted from September 2, 2003, to 
September 5, 1997.  

2(b). LACOE shall determine whether Respondent Kawashima is no longer subject 
to layoff given her adjusted seniority date.  If she is no longer subject to layoff, the Statement 
of Reduction in force against her shall be dismissed, and LACOE shall not issue Respondent 
Kawashima a final layoff notice for the 2016-2017 school year.

3.

The Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained against the remaining 

Respondents who have not yet had their layoff notices rescinded.  LACOE may issue final 
notices of layoff to those Respondents.  Notice shall be given to those Respondents that their 
services will not be required for the 2016-2017 school year, and such notice shall be given in 
inverse order of seniority.

Dated: April 29, 2016

____________________________
JULIE CABOS-OWEN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

15

