BEFORE THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SISKIYOU JOINT COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SISKIYOU
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Teacher Reduction in Force of
the Siskiyou Joint Community College District 
regarding:

OAH No. 2016031085

JUAN ROBERTO MAZARIEGOS,

 Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Stephen J. Smith, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) State of 

California, Office of Administrative Hearings, on April 26, 2016, in Weed, California, and 
June 13, 2016, in Sacramento, California.

Eileen O’Hare-Anderson, Attorney at Law, Liebert Cassidy Whitmore, represented 

the Siskiyou Joint Community College District (District).

Michael McCallum, Attorney at Law, represented Juan Roberto Mazariegos

(respondent), who was present.

Evidence and testimony were received, and the record was held open for the receipt 
of written closing arguments and points and authorities.  Simultaneous opening arguments 
and points and authorities were received May 20, 2016.  

The parties stipulated in writing on April 30, 2016 and May 4, 2016, that the 

Proposed Decision will be due on or before June 30, 2016, and that the matter must be 
considered and acted upon by the Governing Board at its July, 2016, regularly scheduled 
meeting.  The stipulation also confirmed that the statutory May 15, 2016, deadline for a Final 
Decision in the matter had been continued by agreement of the parties, in response to 
agreeing to respondent’s earlier motion for a continuance, granted on April 11, 2016. 

Counsel for the District moved in writing on May 20, 2016, to reopen the evidentiary 

portion of the hearing and augment the record by adding a document.  The document is an 
Instructional Service Agreement (ISA) between the District and the Farmworker Institute for 

1

Education and Leadership Development (FIELD).  The motion and how to deal with the ISA
was discussed at telephonic Trial Status Conferences (TSCs) on June 1 and 6, 2016.  

The parties agreed, and the ALJ issued an Order confirming, that the previous Order 

on the record of April 26, 2016, closing the taking of the evidence, was set aside and vacated.  
The evidence was reopened, and further evidence was received June 13, 2016, in 
Sacramento, California, by agreement of the parties.  All parties appeared.  A copy of the 
Siskiyou County Superior Court’s (Superior Court) Tentative Ruling and Tentative 
Statement of Decision in the matter of the appellate review via writ of mandamus of the 2015 
layoff decision proceedings recently filed in the Superior Court was also submitted.

The parties submitted simultaneous final closing arguments and points and authorities 

pursuant to a scheduling Order of the ALJ made on June 13, 2016, at the close of the 
evidentiary hearing.  Final closing arguments were received on June 20, 2016.  The record 
closed and the matter was submitted for Decision on June 20, 2016. 

Counsel for respondent moved to reopen the record on June 23, 2016, on the basis 
that the Siskiyou County Superior Court entered its Final Statement of Decision on First 
Amended Petition for Writ of Mandate on June 21, 2016, and this Final Decision of the 
Superior Court had just been served on the parties.  Counsel’s grounds for reopening the 
record was the fact that the Superior Court’s decision was now final, as opposed to tentative, 
and the court’s ruling on the bumping rights issue relating to the Critical Skills lab, EDUC 
670 (below) was different than that in the court’s Tentative Statement of Decision and 
Tentative Ruling relied upon by the parties and the ALJ in the June 13, 2016 proceedings.  
The Tentative Statement of Decision and Tentative Ruling was marked as an exhibit and was 
added to the record during those June 13 proceedings.  

The matter of respondent’s Motion to Reopen the Record was considered at a 
telephonic conference between the ALJ and counsel for the parties on June 27, 2016.  The 
Motion to Reopen the Record was GRANTED, for the limited purpose of receiving the 
Superior Court’s Final Decision, which was marked as an Exhibit and stipulated to be 
received as evidence and added to the record.  Also marked and received were counsel for 
respondent’s motion and argument, and the District’s written reply.  Oral argument of the 
parties was heard regarding the applicability of the changes in the Final Decision to the 
pending issues in this matter, and for consideration of the Superior Court’s somewhat revised 
findings and conclusions with respect to the EDUC 670 Critical Skills lab bumping issue.  

Following receipt of the Superior Court’s Final Decision in evidence, and the parties’

arguments, the record was again closed on June 27, 2016, and the matter was again submitted 
for Decision.

2

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Scotty Thomason is the President and Superintendent (the Superintendent) of 
the District.  On February 17, 2016, Superintendent Thomason gave notice to the District’s 
Board of Trustees (Governing Board) of his recommendation that the equivalent of 1.0 full-
time equivalent (FTE) of Spanish Instructor services be eliminated, or as much of that 1.0 
FTE position as may remain at the end of the 2015-2016 academic year.  The Superintendent 
advised the Board in the same notice that, due to the reduction or discontinuation of those 
services, it will be necessary to decrease the number of academic employees of the District 
by the equivalent of one 175 day instructor, or as much of that position as may remain at the 
end of the 2015-2016 academic year, for the ensuing 2016-2017 academic year.  The 
Superintendent requested the Board’s authorization to direct him or his designee to initiate 
procedures necessary to not reemploy the equivalent of 1.0 FTE, 175 day instructor 
equivalent academic employees of the District, or as much of that position as may remain at 
the end of the 2015-2016 school year, due to the reduction or discontinuation of those 
services.  

2.

On March 1, 2016, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2015-16-02, 

regarding the “Reduction or Discontinuance of Certain Particular Kinds of Services for the 
2016-2017 School Year” (PKS Resolution).  Pursuant to the PKS Resolution, the Governing 
Board determined that it was necessary and in the best interests of the District to reduce or 
eliminate the number of Spanish courses the District will offer in the 2016-2017 school year,
no later than the beginning of the 2016-2017 school year.  In order to effectuate the 
Resolution, it was necessary to reduce an equivalent number of District academic employees 
no later than the beginning of the 2016-2017 academic year.  The PKS Resolution directed 
the District President/Superintendent or his designee to initiate and pursue procedures 
necessary to not reemploy the equivalent of 1.0 FTE academic employee (175-Day Spanish 
Instructor) of the District in accordance with Education Code sections 87740 and 87743.1  

3.

On March 2, 2016, respondent was served with A Notice of Reduction or 

Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of Service (Preliminary Notice), pursuant to Education 
Code sections 87740 and 87743.  The Preliminary Notice advised respondent that the
Superintendent made a recommendation to the Board regarding the reduction/discontinuance 
of 1.0 FTE of PKS, or whatever remained of that 1.0 FTE after the 2015 layoff, and that 
respondent had been identified as a District employee whose services would no longer be 
required in the upcoming school year, due to the reduction or elimination of the PKS.  The 
Preliminary Notice informed respondent of his right to request a hearing, and enclosed a 
copy of the PKS Resolution, sections 87740 and 87743, and a blank request for hearing form.  
In response to the Preliminary Notice, respondent filed a Request for Participation (a Request 
for Hearing) on March 4, 2016.  

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise indicated.  

 

 

3

Layoff 2015 and Writ Proceedings

4.

The District took action in 2015 to lay off respondent by discontinuing or 

eliminating the particular kind of service, 1.0 FTE of 175 hour Spanish instruction, position 
that respondent then provided as a District certificated employee.  All procedural 
prerequisites were met, and respondent requested an evidentiary hearing such as this one.  
That evidentiary hearing took place on April 13, 2015 before ALJ Karl Engeman.    

5.

Judge Engeman issued a Proposed Decision, in which he sustained 0.7 FTE of 
the layoff, but found that because the evidence revealed that the District intended to continue 
providing some Spanish instruction in the upcoming 2015-2016 school year in the amount of 
.3 FTE, and that respondent was the only Spanish instructor employed by the District, that 
the layoff failed with respect to that .3 FTE.  Judge Engeman ruled that as a result, 
respondent should be retained in that amount (.3 FTE) to teach those Spanish courses 
expected to be offered again in the upcoming school year. Specifically, Judge Engeman 
found in the subtitled portion of his decision “Sufficiency of the PKS Reduction:  

Respondent is the District’s only Spanish Instructor.  In the fall 
of this school year2, he taught a combined Spanish III and IV 
course (Intermediate Spanish) and a Spanish I course 
(Elementary Spanish).  This semester3, he has been teaching two 
“on-line” Spanish I courses and a face-to-face Spanish II 
(second semester of Elementary Spanish) course.  The District 
administration determined to reduce the Spanish offerings 
because of the small number of students enrolled in the classes.  
This was part of an overall survey of courses to assess the cost-
effectiveness of the curriculum.  There are only four Spanish 
majors enrolled in the college, and District will find alternatives, 
such as on-line courses at other institutions, to help them 
complete their required community college course work for a 
Spanish degree. 

Despite the Governing Board’s Resolution reciting the 
elimination of 1.0 Full-Time Equivalent Faculty (FTEF), 
District has scheduled respondent to teach an on-line Spanish 
course (Spanish I) in the fall of the 2015-2016 school year, and 
another (Spanish II) in the spring.  Thus, the actual PKS 
reduction is approximately .7 FTEF of Spanish Instruction, with 
respondent retaining approximately .3 FTEF of his position.  

2 School year 2014-2015.

 

 

3 Spring 2015

4

6.

The District requested reconsideration, which was opposed by respondent.  

Judge Engeman denied the District’s request for reconsideration on May 5, 2015.  

7.

The District gave respondent and his counsel notice that the District scheduled 
a special Board meeting for May 12, 2015, to consider Judge Engeman’s Proposed Decision,
and to take any action allowable, pursuant to Government Code section 11517, subdivision 
(c), including the taking of additional evidence.  Respondent’s counsel objected and made a 
special appearance at the Board’s special meeting.  Counsel objected to the lack of notice and 
the lack of subject matter jurisdiction to take additional evidence.

8.

The Board allowed counsel to make a special appearance at the special 

meeting to contest jurisdiction.  The Board overruled counsel’s objections, and proceeded to 
take additional evidence in the form of additional testimony.  Following the receipt of the 
additional evidence, the Board voted unanimously to modify Judge Engeman’s Proposed 
Decision from a .7 FTE layoff to a 1.0 FTE layoff.  

9.

The Board issued its Final Decision on May 14, 2015, notifying respondent 
that his services would not be required for the upcoming 2015-2016 academic year, due to 
the discontinuation of his entire 1.0 FTE position.

10.

Respondent, through counsel, filed a Petition for a Writ of Mandate (Petition) 
in the Siskiyou County Superior Court (Superior Court), challenging the Board’s action, on 
June 5, 2015.  The Petition was amended on June 24, 2015.  The Petition was still pending 
and undecided at the time of these proceedings.  

11.

The District recalled respondent to teach .33 FTE Spanish in school year 2015-

2016, as a precaution, and due to the pendency of the Petition proceedings.  Respondent
taught Spanish I in the fall semester of 2015, and Spanish II in the spring semester of 2016.  

12.

The Superior Court issued its Tentative Decision and Proposed Statement of 

Decision in the Petition for the Writ matter on May 24, 2016.  Notice was given of the 
Tentative Decision and Proposed Statement of Decision to all parties on May 25, 2016, well 
after the first and main session of the evidentiary hearing in this matter.  

13.

Counsel for respondent filed a limited objection to the Proposed Statement of 

Decision on June 9, 2016.  Counsel objected to the court’s conclusion regarding whether 
apportionment was claimed by the District in 2014-2015 for the EDUC 670 Critical Skills 
courses.  Counsel objected to the court’s conclusion that the District claimed apportionment,
based upon counsel’s contention that the District failed to show that it claimed and received 
apportionment for the course.  Counsel contended that the court should modify its Statement 
of Decision to note that the District, “did not present evidence that apportionment was 
claimed for the 2014-2015 school year,” and, accordingly, that the court should conclude 
“that apportionment was not claimed for the 2014-2015 school year for the EDUC 670 
courses as a result.  All other findings and conclusions of the Superior Court (relevant 
portions below), including the court’s conclusion that notice to respondent the Board gave 

5

for the taking of additional evidence at the Board’s special meeting was satisfactory, and did 
not violate Government Code section 11517, subdivision (c) were affirmed.  

14.

Due to the pendency of the Petition proceedings throughout the entire period 

of time relevant to these 2016 layoff proceedings, these proceedings at issue here were
advanced as precautionary, due to the unresolved status of the 2015 layoff.

15.

At the continuation of this evidentiary hearing on June 13, 2016, the legal 

status and effect of the Petition proceedings and the findings and legal determinations of the 
Tentative Decision and Proposed Statement of Decision from the Superior Court were
discussed.  The parties agreed that the Superior Court’s decision regarding the 2015 lay off 
proceedings was final with respect to the .7 FTE discontinuation of Spanish found by Judge 
Engeman to have been appropriate.  The parties agreed the Superior Court affirmed the 
discontinuation of that .7 FTE of PKS, and that .7 FTE reduction upon respondent’s position 
as a District employee was final and effectuation of that reduction was appropriate.  The 
Superior Court found that the Board’s 2015 decision following its special meeting to
eliminate the remaining .3 FTE of respondent’s position was an abuse of the Board’s 
discretion, and ordered the reinstatement of Judge Engeman’s decision to that effect,

16.

Counsel for respondent’s one written objection to the Superior Court’s 

Tentative Decision and the Proposed Statement of Decision addressed only the contention 
that respondent is entitled to bump into an assignment in the Critical Skills Laboratory, 
District Course EDUC 670.  With respect to all other issues, and most important, with 
respect to the reduction of the .7 FTE Spanish instruction approved by the Superior Court, 
the parties agreed that the Superior Court’s decision is final and not subject to any further 
review.  

17.

As a result of the Superior Court’s decision, all that remains to be resolved in 
the instant proceedings is whether the District may eliminate the remaining .3 or .33 FTE of 
Spanish instruction that survived, and whether respondent may displace, i.e. “bump,” any 
junior employee being retained by the District to perform a service for which respondent is 
credentialed and qualified to provide.

18.

The District served respondent with an Accusation/District Statement of 

Reduction in Force, copies of relevant sections of the Education and Government Codes, and 
form Notice of Defense on March 29, 2016.  Respondent timely requested an evidentiary 
hearing on the propriety of the layoff.  This hearing resulted.

19.

The parties stipulated that all prehearing jurisdictional requisites required by 

the Education Code and the Government Code have been met.

Spanish Teaching

20.

The District intends to terminate what remained of Spanish teaching from 

2015 for the upcoming school year, 2016-2017, unlike 2015-2016, where approximately .3 

6

FTE of Spanish was intended to be continued.  The District’s then intended continuation of a
sequence of Spanish I for fall semester/Spanish II in spring, approximately .3 FTE, caused
the 2015-2016 layoff to fail to that extent.  

21.

The District believed at the time of the 2015-2016 layoff, in April 2015, that 

there would be sufficient enrollment, between face-to-face and online components, to run the 
Spanish I class in the fall of 2015.  It was not clear whether that was the case.  Once the 
Spanish I class was offered in the fall of 2015, the District wanted students who completed 
Spanish I in the fall to have the opportunity to complete the sequence by offering Spanish II
in the spring semester of 2016.  Spanish II was offered in spring 2016, and respondent taught 
it, albeit with a good deal less enrollment than the Spanish I class that preceded it in the fall.  

22.

The circumstances present in school year 2015-2016 regarding Spanish 

instruction no longer exist.  District administrators and HR personnel have determined that 
enrollment in District Spanish classes has continued to decline to the point where the District 
has decided that projected enrollment in Spanish I/Spanish II, if offered again in the 
upcoming school year, would be insufficient to make offering the classes a cost-effective 
proposition for the District.  The Board approved the determination.  

23.

Enrollment figures offered in evidence were somewhat ambiguous as to 

whether enrollment is declining or merely flat, but it is difficult to characterize 24 students 
for a single Spanish 1 class, and 18 for Spanish 2 as enrollment demand bursting at the 
seams.  Dr. South and another District HR witness both confirmed in their testimony that 
there was no specific enrollment number with respect to Spanish classes under which a class 
was clearly uneconomic, and over which running the class was a cost-effective proposition.  
Both confirmed that there were a number of complex factors involved in determining 
whether any given class could be run cost-effectively, and that the factors varied a good deal, 
depending on the class and the educational discipline.  

24.

A focus on enrollment statistics that appear to be at best flat, but clearly
declining over the previous several years, and demanding the District commit to a cost-
effectiveness breakeven point, only under which point the District is permitted to reduce or 
eliminate the class, ignores the larger and more salient question of whether the District may, 
in its discretion, decide to not offer Spanish instruction at all at COS.  In school year 2015-
2016, the District decided to offer a single beginning Spanish class and one follow-up class 
in Spanish II to permit the 24 or less students who were interested enough to enroll to 
actually complete a full year of Spanish.  The District has now decided that to offer the single 
to class sequence in the upcoming school year is not a cost-effective proposition, and thus 
has determined to eliminate even that minimal offering, and not offer Spanish at all.  

25.

There was no evidence that the District is mandated to offer Spanish by any 
state or federal requirement, or that the District was or is under any legal obligation of any 
sort to offer Spanish classes to its students, if it determined it did not wish to do so.  The 
District has decided, in an exercise of its discretion, not to offer any Spanish teaching in any 
modality, face-to-face or online, or hybrid, in the upcoming school year.  Since the District 

7

does not anticipate satisfactory and cost-effective enrollment of students who desire or 
require completion of the Spanish I-Spanish II sequence in the upcoming school year, the 
District has accordingly decided that the reason it chose to retain and offer those two courses 
in the 2015-2016 school year no longer exists.  

26.

The District has no Spanish majors, as the last few graduated in 2015-2016.  
The District does not offer a Spanish major and does not intend to offer a Spanish major in 
the future.  There was no evidence that any Spanish class is mandatory in order to satisfy 
transfer requirements to any four-year university from COS.  Offering Spanish is one of 
several discretionary elective foreign language alternatives available to those few District 
students who desire foreign language at COS, some, but not all of whom seeking to meet 
transfer requirements.  District witnesses testified without contradiction that almost all 
District incoming students arrive with their transfer foreign language requirements already 
completed, almost always from high school language classes.  There was no evidence that 
the District was required to exercise its discretion to offer Spanish, as opposed to any other 
foreign language, or American Sign Language (ASL), which the District has opted to 
continue to offer, despite what appeared to be slightly lower ASL enrollment than the 
previous Spanish I/Spanish II sequence.  There was no evidence that the District’s choice to 
continue to offer ASL and no longer offer Spanish was not an appropriate exercise of the 
District’s discretion.  

27.

Respondent was and is the only Spanish teacher in the District.  There will be 
no retained Spanish teaching, and no retained Spanish teacher for the upcoming school year
respondent can bump.

28.

The contention that the District’s exercise of its discretion to terminate all 

Spanish teaching in the District offered through COS was arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse 
of the District’s discretion was not proved.  The contention and its supporting claims in effect 
seek to compel the District to exercise its discretion in a certain fashion to preserve 
respondent’s position via preserving Spanish teaching.  The contention lacks factual and 
legal support.  Respondent’s contention that the District’s claim of declining enrollment is a 
subterfuge and is not supported by the evidence lacks support beyond speculation, argument 
and expression of opinion.  Respondent did not contend nor can he prove that, even if 
Spanish enrollment were slightly increasing, that the District was not within its lawful 
discretion to determine that continuing to offer Spanish classes in the future was not a cost-
effective proposition, especially when the District is not under any legal mandate to do so.  
The District’s determination to eliminate Spanish entirely is merely an expression of 
discretion regarding why one optional choice should not have been made over another.  
Respondent has no legal standing, nor is there any factual basis, for the imposition of his 
opinion on how the District should exercise its discretion, as long as the exercise of that 
discretion was not arbitrary, capricious or fraudulent.  None of that was proved here.  

29.

Offering Spanish to District students is entirely an optional proposition for the 

District, in the upcoming school year, as it was in 2015-2016.  It was not proved that the 
District is legally precluded from being able to terminate offering Spanish to its students.  

8

The weight of the persuasive and credible evidence offered in this matter on this point 
support the District’s contention that the decision to terminate all Spanish teaching services 
offered in the District was an appropriate exercise of the District’s discretion, and was in the 
best interests of the college and its students.

Bumping Rights

30.

Education Code section 87743, quoted in relevant part below, describes the 

causes for laying off tenured employees, including those noticed based on a reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of service.  The District’s authority to do so is limited by 
the sentence that reads:  

However, the services of no tenured employee may be 
terminated under this section while any probationary employee, 
or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a 
service in a faculty service area in which the records of the 
district maintained pursuant to Section 87743.5 reflect that the 
tenured employee possesses the minimum qualifications 
prescribed by the board of governors and is competent to serve 
under district competency criteria. (Emphasis added).

31.

Respondent has identified, in similar fashion as he did in the 2015-2016 layoff, 

certain positions to which he asserts his right to displace, or “bump,” as the practice is 
known, a more junior employee being retained to provide a service for which he is and 
credentialed and meets District minimum qualifications to teach.  Respondent claimed rights 
to bump as follows; (1) Positions held by various temporary part-time faculty members 
working in the District’s Critical Skills Lab providing services identified as EDUC 670; (2) 
The Men’s and/or Women’s Head Soccer Coach; (3) ESL and Basic Skills courses delivered 
through an ISA between the District and FIELD, and, (4), new in these proceedings, a rather 
vague claim that respondent can bump Mr. Reynolds from positions as Accreditation Liaison 
Officer, FIELD Coordinator and/or Program Review Chair.

1.

Critical Skills Lab EDUC 670

32.

The District offers a non-credit course, EDUC 670, Critical Skills Laboratory 

(Critical Skills).  Critical Skills was offered in 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 in the COS 
Academic Success Centers of the main Weed campus and, to a lesser extent, at the Yreka 
satellite campus.    

33.

Critical Skills is under District administrative review, as Dr. Scott mentioned 
in his testimony.  The District hopes to offer Critical Skills again in 2016-2017 school year,
and, to that end, published the course as expected to be offered in the COS Course Catalog 
for the upcoming school year.  But the staffing, enrollment and delivery of Critical Skills 
services is very much in flux, and even whether the services will be offered at all are yet 
undetermined.  Enrollment in Critical Skills and continuity of instruction varies wildly, and 

9

Dr. Scott said in his testimony was “waning.”  Enrollment variability in Critical Skills turns 
upon a number of variables, including the number of students at any given time who need the 
one or more of the assistance services offered, how long the student needs any given service
(continuity of any student receiving a service can be very short, as little as a few days), and 
the availability of subject-matter-qualified faculty to deliver any required service.  Critical 
Skills is very untraditional, in that it does not have an enrollment of students who start any 
given semester in the program and continue throughout the semester to the end.  Students 
come and go as they have need, enrollment figures can vary widely day to day, and staffing 
is awkward and difficult, all due to the inconsistency and uncommon method of delivery of 
the service.

34.

The issue of whether respondent was entitled to bump into EDUC 670 Critical 

Skills in school year 2015-2016 was fully litigated in the 2015 layoff proceedings, and was, 
with respect to the bump claim for 2015, a matter actually decided by the Superior Court in 
its now final Statement of Decision.  Evidence was taken on the issue of whether respondent 
could bump into any Critical Skills position expected to be offered in 2016-2017, largely
because the Superior Court had not yet ruled, and that issue with respect to 2015-2016 was 
still pending.  The Superior Court’s ruling on respondent’s contention he was entitled to
bump into EDUC 670 Critical Skills at the time of the 2015 layoff for the school year 2015-
2016 is detailed in the quoted portions of the Superior Court’s Statement of Decision 
regarding that issue quoted below.  That decision, however, binds only with respect to the 
2015 matter, and the facts and circumstances proved to have been extant for the 2015-2016 
school year.  Beyond that, the Superior Court’s Decision is not binding on these proceedings, 
although some of the court’s reasoning and legal conclusions provide guidance.  

Critical Skills in 2016

35.

Critical Skills assistance is and has been offered to provide tutoring and extra 

help for students in specific targeted subject matter areas, especially students new to the 
college environment.  The targeted assistance and additional tutoring areas are English 
(Reading and Writing), Mathematics, and Computer Skills and research.  Critical Skills is 
described District course descriptions as:

An open-entry, noncredit class offering access to individualized 
instruction provided by faculty and staff in the Academic 
Success Center.  This course provides students with 
supplementary instruction in critical skills such as computing, 
reading, writing, researching and mathematics that are necessary 
for success in courses in any discipline.  

36.

Students can enroll in Critical Skills at any time (open enrollment).  Students 

using Critical Skills services sign in on a computer in the Academic Success Center to 
confirm attendance on any day they receive Critical Skills services.  

10

37.

Historically, prior to school year 2014-2015, the District has staffed Critical 

Skills with temporary, part-time faculty (adjunct faculty) possessed of a Master’s degree (or 
equivalency) in one or more of the remedial subjects, i.e., English Reading and Writing, 
Mathematics, and Computer skills and research.  Subject matter specific instructor/tutors’ 
availability and schedules varied, depending on the individual instructor’s other conflicting 
obligations and the needs of students.  Instructor/tutors working in the Critical Skills program
were paid by the hour and at the laboratory rather than regular instruction rate, because 
Critical Skills service is a lab, rather than a conventional class.  The District also 
occasionally used student tutors and instructional aides to assist students in the Academic 
Success Centers.  The District limited the hours provided by instructor/tutors working in 
Critical Skills to maintain the instructors’ part–time status, and to avoid the expense of full-
time employee benefits such as health care.  

38.

No full-time tenured faculty provided services in Critical Skills lab before 

school year 2014-2015.  The Critical Skills laboratory was open for most of normal business 
hours from Monday through Friday while school is in session.  

39.

There was a change in staffing the Critical Skills lab during school year 2014-
2015.  At least three full-time faculty members were assigned to work in the Critical Skills 
lab at the main campus in Weed for periods of time, including respondent.  All were assigned 
to provide occasional staffing for the Critical Skills lab, due to low enrollment in their 
respective courses, in respondent’s case, low enrollment in some of his Spanish classes.  
Hours spent in the Critical Skills lab for full-time instructors, such as respondent, 
supplemented their regular teaching assignments in 2014-2015, in order to fill out full loads.  

40.

Respondent testified at the 2015 layoff hearing about his assignment, role and 

activities when he was assigned to the Critical Skills lab.  Respondent described his role 
when he was present at the Critical Skills lab as the “instructor of record,” with the 
responsibility of directing students to appropriate specialists, based on a student’s declared 
subject matter deficiencies and needs.  Judge Engeman’s decision reads skeptical of these 
claims (Factual Finding 44, below), but made no specific finding whether these claims had 
merit.  The Superior Court took respondent’s claims at face value.  Judge Engeman’s 2015 
layoff decision does not, however, reflect any claim by respondent, nor does the Superior 
Court’s Statement of Decision make any Factual Finding, that respondent provided or 
claimed to have provided any Spanish tutoring or services to any student in the Critical Skills 
lab in the 2014-2015 school year.

 
41.

In what proved to be rather important Factual Findings that unleased a tsunami

of ink spent on later arguments, Judge Engeman identified what proved to be a critical 
factual deficit: 

The evidence did not establish whether the District counts 
enrollment in the lab as part of its ‘apportionment,’ or 
entitlement to state funding based on full-time equivalent 
students.

11

Competencies for full-time faculty require faculty members to 
meet one of three criteria:  (1) satisfying the minimum 
qualifications established by the Board of Governors of the 
California Community Colleges; (2) Possession of a Community 
College teaching credential in the discipline; or (3) Equivalence 
in the discipline as established by the District’s Equivalency 
Committee and application for such equivalency submitted to 
Human Resources no later than February 15 of the academic 
year.4  

42.

The Superior Court, in its Tentative Statement of Decision, pointed out that

there exists a significant difference in whether minimum qualifications are required to 
provide a service in the Critical Skills lab, and that difference turns upon whether the District 
sought and received apportionment for services provided in the Critical Skills lab by a 
District employee, such as respondent.  The Superior Court compared, as did Judge 
Engeman, two regulations that may apply to govern whether minimum qualifications are 
required for the Critical Skills lab, depending upon whether the District did or did not seek 
and obtain that  apportionment for the instruction; California Code of Regulations, title 5, 
sections 53412 and 53415.  The Superior Court ultimately agreed with Judge Engeman’s 
Legal Conclusion that section 53415 governed the determination of whether a District 
employee meets minimum qualifications to perform services in the Critical Skills lab as it 
has been offered to students by the District, provided by District employees such as 
respondent, who had staffed the position as respondent did.  The court struggled with the 
ambiguity of the evidence from the 2015 layoff hearing regarding lack of clarity on the key 
factual triggering point; whether the District did or did not seek and obtain apportionment for 
the 2014-2015 school year, when respondent provided some of the services in the Critical 
Skills lab.  In fact, this ambiguity is the reason respondent’s attorney filed a limited objection 
to the Superior Court’s Tentative Ruling and Tentative Statement of Decision.  

43.

Judge Engeman set out the regulatory alternatives:

Minimum qualifications are defined by the Board of Governors 
of the California Community Colleges and described in 
regulations promulgated by the Chancellor’s Office.   

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 53415, reads: 

The minimum qualifications for service as a learning assistance 
or learning skills coordinator or instructor, or tutoring 
coordinator, shall be either (a) or (b) below:

4 Article 20, section 20.2 of the MOU.

 

 

12

(a) The minimum qualifications to teach any master’s level 
discipline in which learning assistance or tutoring is provided at 
the college where the coordinator is employed; or

(b) A master’s degree in education, educational psychology, or 
instructional psychology, or other master’s degree with 
emphasis in adult learning theory.

Minimum qualifications do not apply to tutoring or learning 
assistance for which no apportionment is claimed. (Emphasis 
added)

[¶] … [¶]

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 53412, 
subdivisions (a), (b) and (c) provides,:5

Except as provided elsewhere in this article, the minimum 
qualifications for service as a faculty member teaching a 
noncredit course shall be the same as the minimum 
qualifications for credit instruction in the appropriate discipline, 
or as follows:

(a) For an interdisciplinary noncredit basic skills course, a 
bachelor’s in any social science, humanities, mathematics, or 
natural science discipline or in liberal studies, as appropriate for 
the course.

(b) For a noncredit basic skills course in mathematics, a 
bachelor’s in mathematics.

(c) For a noncredit basic skills course in reading and/or writing, 
either:  a bachelor’s degree in English, literature, comparative 
literature, composition, linguistics, speech, creative writing, or 
journalism; or a bachelor's degree in any discipline and twelve 
semester units of coursework in teaching reading.

44.

Judge Engeman concluded in his 2015 layoff decision that:

Respondent did not function as a learning skills coordinator, 
learning skills instructor, or tutoring instructor in the Critical 
Skills lab.  Although respondent described his role in the course 
as the ‘instructor of record,’ he limited his responsibilities to 

5 The remaining subdivision relate to courses that are taught in the Critical Skills Lab. 

 

 

13

directing students to appropriate specialists.  The evidence did 
not clearly establish respondent’s designated role, if any, in the 
lab this school year.  As noted in the Factual Findings, he was 
observed in the lab working independently on a computer and 
not assisting students.  More importantly, it was not established 
that such a position even existed in the lab this year or will exist 
in the next academic year.  

45.

The Superior Court concluded on this point:

The court therefore finds that the weight of the evidence 
supports a finding that section 53415 is the applicable 
Regulation for determining minimum qualifications.

Having determined that the weight of the evidence supports a 
finding in this case that instructors in the Critical Skills lab are 
learning assistance or learning skills coordinators or instructors, 
and that section 53415 of the Code of Regulations applies, the 
next issue is whether petitioner meets minimum qualifications.

Regardless of the interpretation of section 53415, the regulation 
provides that ‘minimum qualifications do not apply to tutoring 
or learning assistance for which no apportionment is claimed.’  
(Citing California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 53415).  

46.

The Superior Court continued:

Apportionment is a means by which a college obtains funding 
and it is reasonable that they would want to claim 
apportionment where possible.  Whether or not apportionment 
was actually claimed for Education 670 in the past, it is 
undisputed that apportionment was claimed in the fall of 2015.  
Petitioner claims this is irrelevant because the only relevant 
inquiry is with regard to the circumstances and existence in the 
April/May 2015 timeframe.  However, the evidence as to the 
circumstances and the intentions of the District were not clearly 
delineated at the administrative hearing and there is insufficient 
evidence for this court to determine not only whether or not 
apportionment was claimed previously, but when the decision 
was made to claim apportionment for fall 2015.  Additionally, 
the one part of Regulation 53415 that is clear is that minimum 
qualifications do not apply if apportionment is not claimed.  As 
long as apportionment is not claimed, petitioner is entitled to 
bumping rights.  If apportionment is claimed he does not meet 

14

the minimum qualifications and is not entitled to bumping 
rights.

The court finds that even though employees with less seniority 
were assigned to Education 670 for the fall 2015 term, petitioner 
was not entitled to bumping rights because since apportionment 
was claimed, the minimum qualifications applied and he did not 
meet those minimum qualifications.6

47.

The District used Ms. Shipley and Mr. Cortese in staffing Critical Skills during

the 2015-2016 school year.  There were other staffers as well, including instructional aides, 
classified employees and temporary help who helped but who were not otherwise identified.  

48.

Respondent did not work in Critical Skills during 2015-2016, being limited to 
his two Spanish classes and a .33 FTE in that school year.  Very little evidence was presented 
in the 2015 hearing regarding the credentials, qualifications or status of either Ms. Shipley or 
Mr. Cortese.  Thus, it was not known then whether either or both met section 53415 
minimum qualifications for working in Critical Skills, or whether either or both were 
temporary or permanent employees.

49.

The Superior Court added to and revised its Tentative Statement of Decision,
and in its final Statement of Decision, found that neither Mr. Shipley nor Mr. Cortese were 
listed on the District Seniority List or Faculty Competence List, and that they were 
“described” as part-time faculty, which may reflect little more than an inference.  Ms. 
Shipley was described as having a three-part position, Instructor, Instructional Aide and 
Computer Tech.  

50.

The Superior Court found in its Final Statement of Decision on this point:

Based on the ambiguous and inconsistent testimony provided, 
the court is not able to determine if Ms. Shipley or Mr. Cortese 
were regular employees subject to being “bumped” by a more 
senior employee, or a temporary employees for which there 
would be no bumping rights.  This is, however an issue that the 
District was obligated to consider as part of the layoff process.

There was also insufficient evidence presented as to whether 
Ms. Shipley or Mr. Cortese met the minimum qualifications set 
forth in [citation] section 53415.  Presumably, since the District 
assigned them to the Critical Skills lab for the 2015-2016 school 
year and elected to claim apportionment for the lab, both met 
the minimum qualifications required by section 53415.  If they 

 

 

15-0699, May 24, 2016, pp. 13-14.

6 Tentative Statement of Decision, Siskiyou County Superior Court case no. SCCVPT 

15

did not meet the minimum qualifications, however, a different 
analysis would apply.

51.

The Superior Court in its Final Decision, remanded the matter to the District to 

determine whether, as of April 2, 2015, Ms. Shipley and/or Mr. Cortese were regular or 
temporary employees, and if they met the minimum qualifications set forth in section 53415.  
The Superior Court concluded that if either or both were temporary employees, that 
respondent would not have bumping rights, and if they were regular employees and one or 
both did not meet minimum qualifications, respondent may have rights to bump into their 
position.

52.

The Superior Court affirmed Judge Engeman’s finding that the District 

received apportionment for Critical Skills for Spring 2015 semester.  Dr. Scott confirmed in 
his testimony that the District has continued to seek and has received apportionment for each 
semester since Spring 2015, and will continue to do so, if Critical Skills is offered in the 
upcoming school year.  He testified receipt of apportionment is necessary to maintain the 
fiscal viability of the program.  Dr. Scott testified the District cannot not afford to operate 
Critical Skills without receipt of State apportionment funds.  

53.

There was no credible evidence that the District’s Critical Skills program has 

ever been offered as part of the Critical Skills services that provide specific instructional 
assistance or tutoring in any foreign language, such as Spanish.  Respondent made an
uncorroborated claim for the first time during the 2016 evidentiary hearing that he 
occasionally provided occasional Spanish tutoring to students who had come to the 
Academic Success Center to avail themselves of assistance through Critical Skills when he 
worked in the position during the 2014-2015 school year.  If respondent provided any such
tutoring help in Spanish, it was not part of the District’s official Critical Skills services 
program curriculum, or part of any of the identified subject matter supports provided by the 
District through the Critical Skills program.  If respondent actually provided Spanish tutoring 
or Spanish assistance as he claimed, that assistance was extra-curricular, and gratuitous.  
Respondent is not entitled to credit here for purposes of his entitlement to bump, based upon 
provision of extra-curricular services he may have provided, if in fact those services were 
actually provided.

Samantha Worthington

54.

Samantha Worthington provided some services in Critical Skills during the 
spring semester of school year 2015-2016.  She is identified as the assigned employee for 
Critical Skills in the District’s Course Listings publication for 2016-2017 school year.  

55.

There was no clear and reliable evidence that Ms. Worthington actually 
provided any instruction in 2015-2016 to students in any of the Critical Skills targeted 
instruction areas where minimum qualifications are required.  There was evidence that she 
served in an unknown amount as the coordinator of the program; the person who received 
students who presented to the Academic Success Center seeking Critical Skills tutoring or 

16

academic assistance.  Her role was to find out what help the student needed, and route the
student to the instructor who had the specialized expertise and met minimum skills to provide 
that tutoring, support or instruction, as the student needed.  

56.

There was no evidence that Ms. Worthington was a regular employee of the 
District at the time she performed that coordinator service.  There was no evidence that the 
coordination service was anything other than an administrative position not requiring any 
teacher credentials or qualifications at all.  Dr. Scott testified that he did not know what 
qualifications Ms. Worthington had, how much time she spent working in the Critical Skills 
lab in 2015-2016, or what the nature of her employment with the District was, other he 
believed she was part-time and temporary because her name cannot be found on the roster of 
District permanent employees, the District Seniority List, or the District’s Roster of 
Qualifications for regular faculty.  Ms. Worthington is not listed on the District Seniority List 
or the District Faculty Competencies List in evidence.

57.

One of respondent’s witnesses testified that he served as part of the academic 

faculty’s Equivalency Review Committee (ERC, see below), and that Ms. Worthington 
sought equivalency in English based on a communications degree.  The witness testified that 
Ms. Worthington’s request for English subject matter equivalency was denied by the ERC, 
and the President affirmed the denial.  Testimony did not place this action in time, thus it is 
not known whether Ms. Worthington sought equivalency and approval for minimum 
qualifications in English during the 2015-2016 school year.  There was no evidence whether 
Ms. Worthington would seek equivalency again, and try once more to meet minimum 
qualifications through equivalency in English for 2016-2017.  

58.

There was no evidence Ms. Worthington provided any English tutoring or 

assistance to any student in English in Critical Skills during 2015-2016 school year.  
However, it would be pointless for Ms. Worthington to seek equivalency in English in an 
effort to meet minimum qualifications in the Critical Skills lab, were the District not 
enforcing minimum qualifications requirements for instructors serving in the Critical Skills 
lab before assigning instructors to provide students tutoring or instruction in any of the given
target subject matter areas.

59.

Dr. Scott also testified that no final decision has been made whether Critical 

Skills would be offered in 2016-2017, or who might be assigned to work in Critical Skills, if 
it is offered.  Dr. Scott acknowledged that the District’s 2016-2017 Course Listing 
publication shows Critical Skills as a listed course offering for 2016-2017, and Ms. 
Worthington listed as the assigned person for Critical Skills.  Dr. Scott was quick to point out 
that both course listings show the course to be “TBA,” meaning, to be announced whether 
the District would offer a Critical Skills lab at all, or in some portion, and, if offered, how 
much would be offered.  He testified that these decisions will be made at a later time, after 
his review, based upon whether there appears to be sufficient student demand for the 
services.  Dr. Scott testified that the most current information he had received about Critical 
Skills was that, “student demand was waning” for Critical Skills assistance.  He testified that 

17

Critical Skills is, “on my list of things to evaluate,” for 2016-2017, to determine whether 
there is sufficient demand to offer the service.  

60.

If Critical Skills is offered in 2016-2017, it appears that unless Ms. 

Worthington is approved for equivalency in English by the ERC as meeting minimum 
qualifications as having satisfactory equivalency, she may not provide direct instruction in 
any of the targeted assistance areas offered in the service (she has no other subject matter 
minimum qualifications).  In this sense, Ms. Worthington stands in the same stead as 
respondent does, in that he does not meet minimum qualifications to provide instruction in 
Critical Skills either.  It not known whether Ms. Worthington can continue to serve in the 
capacity of the coordinator, or whether that position is purely an administrative slot. Dr. 
Scott thought that the coordinator position was a classified position, but he did not know with 
any degree of certainty.  Respondent served the capacity as coordinator as a load filler in 
2014-2015, the year that his Spanish classes were under-enrolled.  Dr. Scott testified no 
regular employee of the District will be used like respondent was that year again in the 
future, including 2016-2017, if Critical Skills is offered. 

61.

In sum, Ms. Worthington does not appear to be a permanent regular employee 

of the District.  Ms. Worthington is junior to respondent, in that it does not appear she has 
any District seniority at all.  Thus there was no evidence Ms. Worthington is an employee of 
the District that the District intends to retain to perform a service for which respondent is 
credentialed and meets minimum qualifications to provide.  There was no evidence that as of 
the evidentiary hearing in 2016, the District had made a firm decision to retain Ms. 
Worthington for the upcoming year.  There was thus no evidence that respondent has any 
right to bump into Critical Skills due to retention of Ms. Worthington, or any other junior 
employee of the District who the District intends to retain to provide service respondent is 
credentialed and meets minimum qualifications to provide.  If the position of Critical Skills 
coordinator is classified or administrative, as the evidence appears to suggest, there was no 
evidence that respondent can bump into such a position, or even that he would want to, 
assuming he could do so.

62.

If Ms. Worthington is rehired for the upcoming school year, what services she 

will provide, and the correlation, if any, to minimum qualifications, and whether she meets 
those, and her status as an employee will all need to be evaluated with respect to whether 
respondent’s potential reappointment rights might allow him to displace her.  But that is 
entirely speculative at the moment, and any firm decision about whether respondent can or 
cannot displace Ms. Worthington in 2016-2017 relies at this point in time upon a large body 
of assumptions, none of which are appropriate to make at this point, in the absence of a firm 
commitment by the District to run the course and its staffing, which does not exist at this 
time.

Shipley and Cortese

63.

Counsel for the District represented during the June 27, 2016, telephone 

conference to hear respondent’s motion to augment the record with the Superior Court’s 

18

Final Decision, that upon receipt of that Decision, she had instructed her client to investigate 
the credentials and status of both Mr. Shipley and Mr. Cortese.  Counsel represented that the 
results of the investigation were that both Mr. Shipley and Mr. Cortese met minimum 
qualifications in 2015-2016 school year, and that both were part-time, temporary instructors.  
As the Superior Court noted, the District’s records confirmed the fact that neither Ms. 
Shipley nor Mr. Cortese are listed on the District Seniority List or Faculty Competence Chart 
as regular employees of the District.

64. Whether Ms. Shipley and/or Mr. Cortese were regular or temporary 

employees, and whether respondent had a right to bump one or both for the 2015-2016 
school year, is not germane to this matter.  There is no evidence that either or both have been 
retained to work in Critical Skills during 2016-2017.  Neither Ms. Shipley nor Mr. Cortese
factored into the equation of whether respondent can bump into a Critical Skills lab position 
for 2016-2017.  

EDUC 670 In sum

65.

No Critical Skills assignments will be made or will exist for any full-time 

instructor in the upcoming school year.  The evidence was quite clear that the District will 
seek apportionment for any enrollment in the Critical Skills lab in the upcoming school year, 
regardless who provides the service, assuming a decision is made to offer Critical Skills.  
The District’s evidence from Dr. Scott’s testimony about apportionment in this instance fully 
removes any ambiguity about apportionment.  

66.

Under these circumstances, Regulation section 53415 governs, as confirmed

by the Superior Court, and under that regulation, respondent does not meet minimum 
qualifications to provide any service offered in the Critical Skills lab in the upcoming school 
year, assuming Critical Skills is offered.  Second, there does not appear to be a position in 
Critical Skills extant and to which the District has committed itself for the upcoming school 
year into which respondent can bump.  If the District offers Critical Skills in 2016-2017; and 
if it seeks apportionment for the enrollees, as it says it will do; and if staffs Critical Skills 
with any regular or non-temporary employees; and if any of those regular or non-temporary 
employees fail to meet minimum qualifications and/or deliver instruction within the Critical 
Skills course subject matter areas; and if any such employee is junior to respondent; then and 
only then will respondent likely have reappointment rights to that position.  That is a large 
number of “ifs,” and nothing is firm about Critical Skills or its staffing at this point.  There is 
simply nothing for respondent to bump into right now, and no person identified who is being 
retained to serve in Critical Skills respondent can bump.  There is no present remedy for 
available to respondent through a bump into EDUC 670.  

2.

Men’s and Women’s Head Soccer Coaches

67.

The District’s coaches are faculty members and the COS men’s and women’s
soccer teams in school year 2015-2016 were coached by the same full-time faculty member, 
Mr. Kephart.  Mr. Kephart had a mixed assignment in 2015-2016, because his position was 

19

one which combined soccer coaching with kinesiology teaching.  The women and men 
soccer teams compete only in the fall semester.  Men’s and women’s soccer are three unit, 
for-credit classes for which the District seeks apportionment.  There is no load-required 
soccer coaching activity of any significance in the spring semester.  

68. Mr. Kephart’s 1.0 FTE assignment could not be completed on the basis of 

soccer coaching alone.  Mr. Kephart teaches sections of kinesiology in the spring to fill out 
the 1.0 FTE position.  Men’s and women’s soccer coaching is a portion of a composite 
assignment that blends the active coaching in the fall with classroom kinesiology teaching 
predominately in the spring for the remainder of the assignment.

69.

Competence and qualification evaluations in the District are made through a 

tiered process that begins with the District’s Vice President for Human Resources (HR) Ms. 
Miller.  Ms. Miller testified that in certain instances, competence and qualifications of a 
candidate for a position are obvious, such as a candidate for a position with only a degree 
requirement and no additional minimum qualifications, and the candidate has the required 
degree.  Where the candidate obviously has the appropriate credential and the required 
minimum qualifications and experience, and Ms. Miller has no doubts or concerns that the 
qualifications possessed by the candidate and the qualifications required by the position line 
up seamlessly, Ms. Miller approves and certifies the candidate without further review.  An 
excellent example of this is respondent’s qualifications and competence to teach Spanish in 
the District, which requires either a Bachelor’s degree in Spanish and Spanish teaching 
experience, or a Master’s degree in Spanish.  It is obvious respondent meets those minimum 
competency and qualifications standards, and had he been seeking an open position in 
Spanish, Ms. Miller would have approved him without further review.  

70.

Nevertheless, there are many instances in which whether the candidate meets 

minimum qualifications is ambiguous or unclear, or in Ms. Miller’s opinion, the candidate 
does not meet the qualifications, and the candidate disputes the decision.  Ms. Miller’s 
practice is to refer all matters in which she has a question to a faculty disciplinary review by
the Faculty Equivalency Review Committee (ERC), a committee of tenured faculty members
with expertise in the subject matter area under review who evaluate whether an applicant’s 
claimed competence and qualifications do or do not meet District minimum standards.  The 
ERC conducts its review and produces a report containing its determination, which is subject 
to review by the President, who then makes a recommendation to the Board, which has the 
ultimate authority to approve or disapprove a candidate’s competence and qualifications.  
Ms. Miller testified that it is her practice to refer all matters of competence and qualifications 
in which she has any question or concern, or any lack of certainty, to the ERC.

71.

The District advertised for a part-time head soccer coach for both men’s and 
women’s teams on its website in the spring of 2015.  The advertisement solicited only for a 
position as the coach, and not for a mixed assignment including coaching and other teaching.  
The District was hoping to revive its suspended intercollegiate soccer program.  There was 
evidence the District previously fielded men’s and women’s soccer teams in the late 1990s, 
but suspended sponsoring intercollegiate soccer teams due to budgetary constraints.  The 

20

revived men’s and women’s soccer intercollegiate teams first took the field again in the fall 
of 2015, with Mr. Kephart the coach.  

72.

Respondent addressed a letter to the District’s Human Resources Department 

on April 5, 2015, received by the District HR Department on April 7, 2015, expressing his 
interest in applying for “the soccer position.”  Respondent’s letter did not acknowledge his 
awareness that the advertisement for the soccer coaching position was for a part-time 
position.  He recited his semi-professional experience as a soccer player in Guatemala for 
several years before emigrating to the United States and his participation on a pre-Olympic 
Guatemala soccer team training for the 1976 Olympics.  Respondent also noted that he took 
several soccer theory classes at Canãda College in Redwood City, California, in the fall of 
1987 and advanced soccer classes at CSU-Chico during the fall of 1989 and spring of 1990.  
He was a volunteer Assistant Coach of the District’s women’s soccer team during the 1997 
and 1998 seasons.

73.

An Administrative Assistant in the District HR Department replied to 

respondent’s letter by email on April 10, 2015.  The response thanked respondent for his 
interest in the part-time soccer coaching position, but advised him that the District “has 
decided to open a full-time tenure-track kinesiology instructor/head men’s and women’s 
soccer coach position.”  The email continued, advising respondent, “if you are interested in 
applying for the full-time position, please let me know and I will email you when the job 
announcement is finalized.”  The email continued by advising respondent that if he were 
interested in a part-time coaching position and would be interested in being considered for 
the assistant soccer coach for either men’s or women’s soccer, that respondent should let the 
author of the email know, and she will leave a part-time faculty position application and 
materials for him in the office for those positions that he could complete and submit.

74.

Respondent testified that he had no recollection of receiving the April 10, 

2015 reply email.  Respondent’s claim of nonreceipt of the email lacked credibility.  
Respondent’s failure to follow up on his letter strongly infers that he received the email and, 
discovering that he had been offered an opportunity to either apply for a full-time position 
for which he indisputably failed to meet the minimum qualifications, or for a part-time 
position for which he was required to submit a part-time position application.  He made no 
response to either alternative proposal, other than to belatedly blame the District in April 
2016 for; its failure to follow up on his email; its failure to evaluate his qualifications 
without him having submitted any collateral verification besides his own statements in his
letter; its failure to advise him that he needed to complete and submit an application with a 
resume and statement of qualifications in order to be actually considered an applicant for 
either position; and its failure to independently pursue a review of his qualifications before 
the faculty ERC without the necessity of producing for review collateral verification of his 
claims of qualifying experience.  

75.

Respondent contends that had he received a reply instructing him to apply for 
the position, he would have done so.  That claim lacks credibility and is excluded as entirely 
speculative, especially considering respondent’s long experience in teaching in the District, 

21

and the fact that this very issue was raised and discussed during the 2015 layoff proceedings.  
Further, the email advised that the position respondent inquired about in his letter was being 
delisted, so respondent could not have intended to apply for a position he was timely notified 
after his letter that no longer existed.  The fact is, respondent made no effort to follow up on 
his alleged interest to become either the men’s or women’s soccer coach, most probably 
because he did not meet the kinesiology requirements that compose the majority of the 
position.    

76.

At the time of the 2015 lay off, the District had not yet advertised for the full-
time blended soccer coaching/kinesiology position, but by the time of the instant layoff, the 
District had hired Mr. Kephart to coach both soccer teams and teach kinesiology to fill out a 
1.0 FTE.  It was not disputed, nor did respondent contend that, he meets minimum 
qualifications to teach kinesiology.

77. Ms. Miller testified that respondent did not submit an application to coach 
soccer for school year 2015-2016.  Ms. Miller testified credibly that an email expressing 
interest in applying for a position is not the equivalent of an application, which requires an 
attached resume and a detailed statement of qualifying experience, along with a formal 
District application for the position.  Proof of claimed qualifying experience is also required 
of the applicant.  As noted above, the position for which respondent expressed an interest 
was withdrawn.  

78. Ms. Miller testified all expressions of interest emails are responded to by the 

District’s HR office promptly, with instructions to the inquirer that if the applicant is 
genuinely interested in the position, a formal application, resume and statement of 
qualifications and experience must be submitted to the District’s HR office for consideration.  
That practice was followed here, as detailed above, and evidenced by the April 10, 2015, 
responsive email to respondent’s letter of interest in making the application.  Respondent 
acknowledged that he did not follow that process and submit an actual application to the 
District, seeking either the part-time position to which his letter expressed interest, or the 
later, reposted full-time blended position.  

79.

Respondent also contends that the District had a duty, as part of its duty to 

assign and reassign and conduct a bumping analysis before laying him off, to respond to his 
inquiry about the position.  Respondent claims this District duty extends to requiring the 
District to inform him what the deficiencies were in his letter of expression of interest in the 
position.  He also contends that the District, before it lays him off for a position he claims he 
is competent and qualified to fill, is under a duty to evaluate his qualifications and determine 
whether he meets District minimum qualifications for the position.  

80.

These contentions lack merit and seek to transfer responsibility for 

respondent’s lack of diligence in pursuing the position into a District duty.  Respondent’s 
lack of diligence appears to have correlated with his acquiring knowledge that the position 
required qualifications in kinesiology, and that he does not meet minimum qualifications for 
the majority of the newly revised and offered position.  Regardless of why respondent failed 

22

to follow up on the position, respondent’s lack of diligence at the time cannot be laid off 
upon the District as a duty deficit not satisfied which the District was required to resolve.  

81. Ms. Miller was (due to this issue being raised and fully litigated in the 2015 

layoff proceedings), and is, aware of respondent’s claimed experiential qualifications to 
coach the soccer team set forth just above.  She testified that had respondent filed an 
application for the position, with collateral verification of those claimed qualifications 
appended, his claim that his qualifications and experience met position minimum 
qualifications would have been referred to the faculty ERC to rule on whether his claimed 
experience met the minimum qualification equivalencies for the position.  She testified that 
she was in no position to rule upon respondent’s claimed athletic coaching experiences 
equivalencies, and that a faculty members with experience in athletic coaching on the ERC 
should be involved in making that determination.  Ms. Miller’s response was entirely 
reasonable under the circumstances.  

82.

Respondent’s claimed qualifications and experience to coach either men’s or 
women’s soccer have never been verified or evaluated by anyone at the District, particularly 
not the District’s faculty ERC, in no small part because respondent has never presented 
documentation of his claimed experience and qualifications, besides an old program, listing
him as a volunteer women’s soccer coach in 1998.  Respondent has never requested an ERC 
review for his claims of qualifying soccer coach experiences, largely because the manner in 
which an ERC review takes place is triggered when an applicant such as respondent for a 
position files an application and a question about qualifications arises, resulting in a referral 
to the ERC.  Respondent’s failure to follow this process is particularly telling because the 
entire process of the ERC review was discussed in detail and fully litigated during the April 
2015 evidentiary hearing.  

83.

Respondent’s contentions and claims appear to suggest that, despite 

respondent’s actual knowledge of how the District’s minimum qualifications ERC review 
process works, it is the District’s responsibility to seek and conduct that ERC review for him
before laying him off, even if, as here, he has not filed an application that would trigger the 
process.  Respondent’s contention seeks to relieve him of all responsibility for a rather 
palpable lack of diligence, at least one logical inference of which is a reflection of a lack of 
genuine desire to obtain a soccer coaching position.  

84.

Respondent’s slightly revised contentions and argument for this layoff hearing 

are two-pronged.  The first thrust is an effort to avoid that ERC review process entirely, by 
contending that the ALJ should substitute his own judgment for that of the ERC and make 
the determination “as a matter of law,” that respondent meets minimum qualifications for the 
position of soccer coach, presumably upon the strength of respondent self-serving statements 
in his letter and a copy of an old program.  Alternatively, respondent contends that the ALJ 
should remand the matter to the District, and order the District’s faculty ERC perform the 
review, and if applicant’s qualifications pass muster with the ERC, and are approved by the 
President and the Board, applicant must be retained to coach soccer, bumping out Mr. 
Kephart.  

23

85.

There are several considerable deficits with this contention.  Tempting as the 

offer might be, the ALJ simply does not have jurisdiction, authority or the desire to substitute 
his judgment for that of the ERC qualifications review process adopted by the District to 
have such decisions made through its own faculty review mechanism.  The ALJ here 
appreciates the vote of confidence, but defers, for the same reason Ms. Miller did.  Even if 
the ALJ were so inclined, respondent has provided little help; no supporting documentation 
or verification of any of his claimed experience beyond his own statements on a letter and his 
testimony to that effect.  It is inconceivable that the faculty ERC would make anything but a 
negative decision without additional documentation and verification.  

86.

Remanding the matter and ordering the faculty ERC to assess respondent’s 

claimed qualifications and experience, when respondent did not file an application and 
trigger and pursue that review process himself after the job was advertised, would reward 
respondent for his lack of diligence and failure to submit an application at the time that the 
current and revised position was advertised.  The ALJ is not convinced that he has the 
jurisdiction or authority to make such an order, or that the District would have a duty to 
follow it, if the ALJ were so inclined.  

87.

Respondent’s contentions seek to expand the District’s duty to not lay off 

respondent for any position for which he is credentialed and meets minimum qualifications 
far beyond reasonable boundaries.  Giving traction to respondent’s contentions would have 
the collateral effect of rewarding respondent for his lack of diligence in pursuing the position 
on his own, assuming that his interest in actually obtaining and occupying the position was 
genuine, and reflective of something other than a last grasp to preserve the remaining 
vestiges of his position upon realization that he was likely to be fully laid off, once all of the 
legal processes have been fully exhausted.  

Impermissible Partial Bump

88.

Lastly, assuming what respondent believes would occur at the end of such a 

process; that the ERC would conclude that his qualifications and experience are satisfactory, 
would result in respondent being eligible to obtain only a partial bump, in that he is 
indisputably not competent or qualified to teach the greater portion of the assignment. 
Respondent does not contend that he is qualified to teach the kinesiology portions of Mr. 
Kephart’s assignment, and that portion of the assignment is more than half the 1.0 FTE of the 
position.  A partial bump would require the District to break up the 1.0 FTE position Mr. 
Kephart now occupies into two pieces, and the District is not legally required to break apart 
an existing full-time position in order to permit a part-time employee such as respondent (he 
retained and taught only a .33 FTE in 2015-2016) being displaced to exercise a partial bump, 
regardless of seniority.7

   

7 Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal. App.4th 334, 342.

 

 

24

3.

FIELD ESL Program

89.

The District contracts through an Instructional Service Agreement (ISA) with 

The Farmworker Institute for Educational and Leadership Development (FIELD) for the 
provision of not-for-credit Basic Skills and English as a Second Language (ESL) instruction 
to farm workers in the Bakersfield College service area.  FIELD is an entity that recruits, 
hires, trains, assigns and oversees Basic Skills and ESL instructors, and organizes the 
delivery of Basic Skills and ESL instruction through its employees to farm workers.  

90.

The mutual obligations created by the ISA between the District and FIELD are 
complex and the legal relationships between the contracting parties created by the ISA are, at 
best, ambiguous.  These mutual obligations and the nature of the legal relationships created 
by the ISA contract were the subject matter of almost the entire proceeding in June 2016.  

91.

The District’s witness Dr. Scott testified that the District has three such ISAs 

in place.  He pointed out that ISA agreements are heavily regulated by Title 5 of the 
California Code of Regulations and the Chancellor of Community Colleges’ office.  ISAs are 
subject to strict limitations and terms, the most important of which are compliance with 
California Code of Regulations,, title 5, section 58058, subdivision (b) and, in this case, the 
consent of the college in whose service area the ISA’s contracted services are delivered by 
FIELD; Bakersfield College.  

92.

The legal status of a person delivering Basic Skills and ESL instruction to a 

farmworker under the ISA with FIELD is at issue because respondent contends he is 
competent and qualified to deliver the ESL and Basic Skills instructional services called for 
by the ISA, and that he is legally entitled to bump into one of those instructional positions.  
The District disputes the contention, pointing to the terms and provisions of the ISA, 
contending that the persons actually delivering instruction to the farm workers are, by the 
terms of the ISA contract, employees of FIELD.  The District contends it has no authority to 
compel FIELD to displace one of its employees delivering instruction under the ISA and 
require FIELD to employ respondent in one of those positions.  

93.

Respondent’s responsive contentions make clear that it is respondent’s belief 

that the terms of the ISA and the consent with Bakersfield College must yield to respondent’s 
right to retain a position for which he is competent and credentialed to teach, regardless of 
whether in so doing the ISA’s terms and the Bakersfield College consent must be revised or 
disregarded.  There is an enormous legal flaw in this claim, as detailed below.  

94.

Respondent contends the ALJ should order the District to compel FIELD to 

employ respondent as an ESL and Basic Skills instructor, while still remaining a District 
employee.  Implicit in the contention is that respondent does not want to be directly 
employed by FIELD as one of its instructors, confirmed by the fact that there is no evidence 
that respondent has ever made any attempt to contact FIELD or apply for a position with 
FIELD teaching ESL and Basic Skills to farm workers as part of FIELD’s ISA with the 
District.  

25

95.

Respondent’s contentions require disregard of key provisions of contractual 

arrangements the ISA created with FIELD.  It would also require violation of the contingent 
requirement of Bakersfield College’s required consent to the ISA agreement between the 
District and FIELD.  That consent is strictly limited, and is contingent upon FIELD’s
employees providing the instructional services to the farm workers.  The contingencies 
would be violated if the District provided a District-employed certificated teacher to deliver 
the ESL or Basic Skills instruction to the farm workers, as Bakersfield College has reserved
that right for itself and its own certificated teachers within its own Community College 
service area.  Violation of the contingencies and withdrawal of the Bakersfield College 
consent would cause the ISA to become invalid, and would result if respondent’s contentions
prevail here.

96.

The ISA at issue was executed by the Superintendent and the CEO of FIELD

on August 17, 2015 and August 28, 2015.  Paragraph 1 of the ISA provides that the ISA shall 
not take effect until after the District received written confirmation from the affected 
Community College District (in this instance, Bakersfield College) that the terms of section 
55301 of Title 5, California Code of Regulations, have been met to permit the District to 
establish courses outside of its boundaries.

97.

Paragraph 2 of the ISA details the “Instructional Services to be Provided” 

under the ISA by FIELD.  The preamble portion of Paragraph 2 provides:

FIELD will provide instructional and other services for Basic 
Skills and English as a Second Language programs as follows 
and as described below.  DISTRICT is responsible for the 
educational program described in this agreement.

98.

Paragraph 2, subdivision (c), subpart 1 provides, in part:

FIELD will provide the services of qualified instructors 

1.
as determined by DISTRICT, administrative supervision for that 
instruction, record-keeping and other administrative services 
pertaining to students enrolled in the classes and subject area 
experts as guest speakers.

99.

Paragraph 2, subdivision (c), subpart 5 of the ISA provides:

FIELD agrees that its employees who serve as instructors 

5.
under this Agreement are employees of FIELD, and shall be 
deemed employees of DISTRICT for sole purposes of, and in 
accordance with, section 58058, subdivision (b) of Title 5.  
FIELD agrees that its employees who serve as instructors under 
this Agreement shall receive no compensation or benefits from 
DISTRICT and may be terminated from their role as instructors 

26

by DISTRICT at any time for any reason whatsoever and 
without cause.

100.

Paragraph 2, subdivision (c), subpart 5 of the ISA further provides that,

“FIELD employees who serve as course instructors shall use District attendance and grading 
forms in recording attendance,” and shall ensure that “students who are enrolled in District 
courses are engaged in appropriate package educational activities and are held to an 
appropriate level of academic rigor.”

101.

Paragraph 2, subdivision (c), subpart 4 of the ISA provides:

4.
Prior to the commencement of instruction, each 
instructor of the referenced course(s) shall enter into a written 
agreement with DISTRICT in accordance with Title 5, section 
58058, subdivision (b) of the California Code of Regulations, a 
copy of which is attached as Attachment B, and is incorporated 
herein by reference.  FIELD has reviewed and approves the 
Instructor Agreement and is bound by any provisions of that 
agreement that require FIELD activities.  FIELD shall assure 
applicable provisions of Title 5 are followed in the conduct of 
the course(s).  DISTRICT has the primary right to control, 
direct, and evaluate the activities of the instructor (s) furnished 
by FIELD during the term of the contract.  DISTRICT shall 
furnish the instructors provided by FIELD with an orientation, 
Instructor’s Manuals, course outlines, curriculum materials, 
testing and grading rosters and procedures necessary to 
implement DISTRICT courses.

102.

Paragraph 2, subdivision (c), subpart 6 of the ISA provides in part that FIELD
shall ensure that its employees who serve as course instructors or who otherwise have access 
to student information, maintain the confidentiality of student education records in 
accordance with federal and state law.

103.

Paragraph 2, subdivision (c), subpart 7 of the ISA provides that, “FIELD shall 
ensure that its employees satisfy all applicable provisions of Title 5 of the California Code of 
Regulations that require the instructor to provide immediate supervision and control of 
students in the conduct of DISTRICT courses.”

104.

Paragraph 2, subdivision (b) of the ISA provides:

FIELD will provide outreach and recruitment, assessment, 
student follow-up and orientation services to students in the 
basic skills and English as a Second Language program covered 
by this Agreement.  DISTRICT will provide training for FIELD
staff in how to conduct assessment and will provide all 

27

necessary materials for the assessment process.  DISTRICT and 
FIELD will jointly conduct an orientation for the students 
involved in this program.  Nothing in this section or elsewhere 
in this Agreement requires DISTRICT employees to travel to 
any instructional site outside of DISTRICT boundaries.

105. An Addendum to the ISA was executed on a date not disclosed on the 
Addendum document, but after July 1, 2015 and before January 1, 2016, that modified the 
existing ISA, effective January 1, 2016, through the expiration date of the ISA of June 30, 
2016.  The Addendum allowed FIELD to offer more ESL classes to more students, and 
increased the level of reimbursement from the DISTRICT to FIELD at a rate for each 
“California Community College-eligible enhanced non-credit contact hour generated by 
enrollment in the Basic Skills and ESL classes.”  The Addendum required instructors 
employed by FIELD to keep detailed daily attendance records for all students.  The 
addendum increased the instructional reimbursement rate to FIELD for instruction delivered
by FIELD instructors to enrolled students in the Basic Skills and ESL courses.  It is 
reasonable to assume that FIELD does not pay its employees equal to or more than the 
reimbursement FIELD receives from the District per FTSE hour of instruction provided to 
enrollees.  The reimbursement rates to FIELD are contained on attachments to the ISA and 
the Addendum, are far beneath the District pay scales that are contained in the copy of the 
MOU between the District and its Teacher’s Association (Exhibit 17).

106. The President of Bakersfield College wrote a letter to Dr. South, then Dean of 

Student Learning of COS on January 13, 2016, regarding “Service Area Partnership.”  
President Christian’s letter accepted Dr. South’s offer to enter into partnership with FIELD 
within the Bakersfield College service area upon several specific and strict stipulations.  The 
President on behalf of Bakersfield College agreed in the letter to permit COS cataloged ESL 
and Basic Skills courses to be offered within the service area of Bakersfield College, but
limited the permissible courses to, “Only lower-level ESL courses will be offered, 
specifically only those similar to courses previously offered by Bakersfield College through 
FIELD (see appended list of courses).  Upper-level credit courses will be taught by 
Bakersfield College.”  

107. The Bakersfield College limited approval with its contingencies, and the ISA 
are both renewable.  It is “expected but not confirmed” that the District will renew the ISA 
and continue the contractual partnership with FIELD in the upcoming 2016-2017 school 
year, on the same terms as set forth in the ISA modified by the Addendum.  It was not 
disputed that the scope of the anticipated ISA instructional delivery partnership with FIELD 
for the upcoming school year is broad enough to provide a position for respondent, if he is 
otherwise eligible to bump into one of the FIELD-employed instructional positions.  It was 
also not disputed that respondent meets minimum qualifications to teach ESL and/or Basic 
Skills, or could attain that minimum qualification level within the first semester of being 
assigned to teach either or both of the courses.

28

108. Dr. Scott, who succeeded Dr. South as primarily responsible for the 
implementation and oversight of the ISA, testified at some length at the April hearing, and 
again in the June reopening hearing about the ISA, the Addendum, and the contingent 
approval agreement with Bakersfield College.  Dr. Scott testified that the courses offered by 
FIELD through the ISA are cataloged, advertised and enrollment and attendance tracked 
administratively by the District, because the District seeks apportionment for the enrollment
and must report attendance census in order to obtain apportionment disbursements.  Dr. 
South acknowledged that the District and FIELD share many administrative responsibilities 
and tasks in the ISI, and many duties are joint obligations of both parties.  The District is 
administratively responsible for the course content and for some administrative oversight to 
ensure that minimum requirements of Title 5 are being met in course content and delivery by 
FIELD instructors.  But the District does not provide the teachers or the teaching, and absent 
a right to treat FIELD employed instructors as at-will employees, subject to discharge for any 
reason, or no reason at all, the District is not involved in hiring or firing FIELD instructors.  

109. The District’s administrative oversight role under the ISA is to conduct two
meetings in Bakersfield to help FIELD-employed instructors make certain their syllabus, 
curricula, instructional materials and delivery “meets our standards,” i.e., compliance with 
Title 5 requirements essential to obtain apportionment.  These District employees also 
evaluate the FIELD instructors.  Persons that conduct these two meetings and evaluations are 
District full-time employees who go to Bakersfield for a few days and conduct the meetings
and perform the evaluations, and are paid for those services separately on a stipend, rather 
than as part of their District employment contract salaries.  

110. Dr. South pointed out that the ISA is a three party partnership contractual 

arrangement that hires a private contractor, FIELD, to actually deliver a nontraditional
instructional program to the farm workers located in another Community College’s service, 
with the District’s role being limited to record-keeping and administrative oversight to make 
certain what the FIELD employees deliver conforms to Title 5 standards.  The District 
receives apportionment for the enrollment on a complicated full-time-student-equivalent
(FTSE) standard, and from the apportionment the District receives, FIELD is paid at the rate 
stated in the ISA for each FTSE FIELD can document was actually delivered as instructional 
services provided by FIELD employees to the farmworker students.  

111. Dr. Scott pointed out that District employed instructors cannot provide the
ESL or Basic Skills services in their capacity as District-employed and paid instructors,
because the services are delivered in the Bakersfield College service area.  He testified
Bakersfield College would be required to consent to have District instructional personnel 
deliver the ESL and Basic Skills instruction, and the Bakersfield College President has 
strongly implied such consent will not be forthcoming because the existing consent and 
approval of the ISA specifically excludes anyone but FIELD-employed instructors from
delivering the services.  The specific limitation in the consent/permission letter reserving to 
Bakersfield College the right to deliver higher level ESL and Basic Skills services to 
Bakersfield College employed instructional personnel strongly implies that consent would be 
withdrawn if the District sought to use its own certificated employees to provide the 

29

instruction that the FIELD employed instructors now provide under the ISA.  Furthering that 
inference is the fact that in previous years, Bakersfield College was the party entering into 
the ISA with FIELD for provision of FIELD-employed instructors to teach ESL and Basic 
Skills within its own College service territory.

112. Dr. Scott pointed out that under the ISA, respondent can only teach in the ESL 

and/or Basic Skills instructional programs delivered by FIELD under the ISA if he first 
becomes employed by FIELD to deliver that instruction.  That employment is by no means a 
given.  FIELD is under no obligation to acknowledge a District claim that respondent should 
be able to bump into being a FIELD employee.  The ISA does not restrict FIELD’s right to 
recruit, hire and, by necessary implication, decline to hire, by application of FIELD’s own 
criteria, as long as those employees meet the minimum Title 5 requirements.  There is no 
evidence that respondent would be indisputably hired by FIELD, if he applied.  There is no 
provision in the ISA, the Addendum, or in law that requires FIELD to employ a District 
employee to provide services under the ISA where FIELD has contracted to employ and 
provide its own employees.  

113. Dr. Scott acknowledged that the District does have some administrative 
authority as part of making sure the minimum requirements of Title 5 are satisfied, to 
determine who FIELD hires to provide the instructional services.  He also acknowledged that 
the ISA requires the District to exercise oversight and supervision over the curriculum 
delivered in the manner in which it is offered.  Dr. Scott also acknowledged that the District 
retains some authority in the ISA to terminate any FIELD-employed instructor in the 
program at any time without cause.  Dr. Scott also acknowledged that there is nothing in the 
ISA that specifically prohibits a District instructional employee from teaching as an 
instructor in the FIELD delivered ESL program, as long as that person was employed by 
FIELD when delivering those services.  But he reiterated that a District employed instructor 
serving in this capacity would violate the ISA because it would vitiate the limited and 
restricted consent given by Bakersfield College for the District to operate the contract 
program within the Bakersfield College’s service area where the District would otherwise 
have no right to operate, through delivery of FIELD-employed instructors, rather than those 
of the District.  There was no dispute that the District could not operate the program directly, 
staff it and/or deliver instruction with District employed personnel in the Bakersfield College 
service area.  That is so whether that instruction is delivered by one District employed person 
or 100.   

114. Dr. South was not aware of any provision in the ISA that permits the District 

to require FIELD to employ a District employee as an instructor for FIELD, but still remain a 
District employee.  This question revealed the disingenuous nature of the claim; respondent 
seeks to force the District to force FIELD to enable him to provide ESL or Basic Skills 
services to the farm workers under the ISA, under the appearance, but avoiding the pay and 
benefit limitations of actually being a FIELD employee.  

115. There is no bump available for respondent into the FIELD-delivered 
instruction under the ISA, regardless of the number of FIELD employees actually delivering 

30

that instruction or anticipated to be doing so in the upcoming school year.  Education Code 
section 87743 limits respondent’s right to bump to displacing “any other employee with less 
seniority” of the District being retained.  The District does not employ any person delivering 
the ESL and Basic Skills instruction under the ISA, and despite the interweaving of 
responsibilities and relationships in the ISA, one aspect of the ISA that is clear is that 
FIELD-employed instructors providing ESL and Basic Skills services are not employed by 
the District in the sense that no FIELD-employed instructor performing under the ISA is paid 
by the District, nor do any receive District benefits, including the benefit of the protections of 
the MOU and the education code regarding status, tenure and layoff protection. In fact, ISA 
contains a provision that is the polar opposite of the status, tenure and layoff protections 
enjoyed by District employees such as respondent, a provision that makes the FIELD-
employed instructors at-will employees who can be terminated for any cause, or no cause at 
all, at any time.  

116. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 58058, subdivision (b) provides 

that the District may contract for instruction to be provided by a different agency, and, “an 
individual employed will continue to be an employee of a public or private agency, while at 
the same time qualifying as an employee of the District.”  What this provision does not say is 
as important as what it does say; the provision does not create an employment relationship 
through the ISA contract that provides the same sort of employment protections a directly 
employed District employee such as respondent enjoys.  It does not provide that a contract 
employee automatically becomes a District employee for the purposes of pay, benefits, 
status, tenure or layoff rights, so the portion of the regulation referring to, “qualifying as an 
employee of the District,” is far more limited and restrictive in scope and benefit provided 
than the manner in which respondent is using the term “District employed” in his contentions 
and argument here.  The ISA’s contractual creation of an at-will employment relationship for 
FIELD employees is the antithesis of the nature of employment that provides the protections 
of which respondent avails himself in this action.  It is inconceivable that a FIELD employee 
terminated for, as the ISA provides, any reason or no reason at all, would be able to enforce 
the right to the layoff procedures that are invoked here.  

117. The FIELD-employed instructors under the EISA are not District employees in 

the sense that section 87743 requires for the invocation and exercise of the right to bump an 
“other employee with less security.”  Thus, no FIELD- employed instructor under the ISA is
subject to being bumped by respondent.  Neither the ALJ, nor any provision, or combination 
of provisions in the ISA contractual and consent arrangements between the parties, or in any 
provision of law pointed out by the parties or found by the ALJ provides legal authority for 
the ALJ or the District in its final decision in this matter to order FIELD to hire a District
employee to bump a contract employee of FIELD, while still remaining a District employee 
for the purposes of pay and benefits.

31

Junior employee Steve Reynolds’ position, FIELD ISA Coordinator, Program 
Review Chair

118. Respondent contends that he can bump into the FIELD ISA Coordinator 

position, the Accreditation Liaison or Program Review Chair positions for the upcoming 
school year.  None of these claims have any merit.  The FIELD ISA Coordinator position in 
the upcoming school year will consist primarily of evaluation of FIELD-employed 
instructors delivering services under the ISA.  Full-time faculty members evaluate part-time 
faculty members as part of their regular duties, and when full-time faculty members perform 
such evaluation, they are paid a stipend.  At the time of the evidentiary hearing on the layoff, 
District personnel testified that there is no course load assignment committed for a FIELD 
ISA Coordinator yet in place, and the District had not yet decided whether or how much of 
any load at all will exist in the upcoming school year.  Dr. South testified at the June 
reopening hearing that the District intended to have the FIELD ISE coordinator duties 
performed by an administrator, most likely himself.  Therefore, there is no position as a 
FIELD ISA Coordinator now in existence into which respondent can bump.

119. Dr. Scott testified at both hearings that he will be performing the duties of the 

Accreditation Liaison position, which is in and of itself a temporary position, in the 
upcoming school year.  Dr. Scott is an administrator and respondent cannot bump him.  
Respondent’s claim through the former layoff procedure that the District was required to 
reorganize Accreditation Liaison services, so that he could bump into the position, sought to 
compel the District to change the manner in which those services were provided.  Such a 
contention has no legal support.  The District may, in its discretion, change or reorganize the 
loads of existing employees without having to conduct a layoff, and if any review at all is to 
take place, that is a matter of internal relations between administration and faculty, perhaps 
involving the Academic Senate, and/or negotiations between the faculty’s bargaining unit 
and administration.

120. The Program Review Chair respondent claims he can bump into is presently 

under review and is likely not to be a position in the upcoming school year.  Program Review 
Chair has been appointed by the Academic Senate in the past, but there is no evidence of a 
consistent and mandatory process for the appointment to this position.  The position is not 
necessarily a paid faculty position into which respondent can bump, and there was no 
evidence that it was a given that the position will exist and be staffed by a certificated 
employee in the upcoming school year.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Section 87743 reads:

No tenured employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 
causes other than those specified in Sections 87453, 87467, and 
87484, and Sections 87732 to 87739, inclusive, and no 

32

probationary employee shall be deprived of his or her position 
for cause other than as specified in Section 87740 except in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 87463 and Sections 
87743 to 87762, inclusive.

[¶] … [¶]

Whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school 
year, and when in the opinion of the governing board of the
district it shall have become necessary by reason of either of 
these conditions to decrease the number of tenured employees in 
the district, the governing board may terminate the services of 
not more than a corresponding percentage of the employees of 
the district, tenured as well as probationary, at the close of the 
school year.  However, the services of no tenured employee may 
be terminated under this section while any probationary
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained 
to render a service in a faculty service area in which the records 
of the district maintained pursuant to Section 87743.4 reflect 
that the tenured employee possesses the minimum qualifications 
prescribed by the board of governors and is competent to serve 
under district competency criteria.

[¶] … [¶]

The board shall make assignments and reassignments in a 
manner that employees shall be retained to render any service 
which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. 

2.

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth 

in sections 87740 and 87743.

PKS Reduction Issue

3.

Spanish Instructor services identified in the PKS Resolution is a particular 
kind of service that may be reduced or discontinued under section 87743.  The Governing 
Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue Spanish was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and 
was a proper exercise of its discretion, as set forth in the Factual Findings.  Cause for the 
reduction or discontinuance of these services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s 
college and its students, within the meaning of section 87740.

4.

The Governing Board’s Resolution reflects a reduction of 1.0 FTE (175-day 
Spanish Instructor), or whatever amount of that 1.0 FTE remains after the resolution of the 
pending writ proceedings.  The Superior Court’s decision affirmed Judge Engeman’s 2015 

33

decision that the actual reduction in Spanish was .7 FTE, leaving .3 FTE remaining for 2015-
2016.  Respondent actually taught a .33 FTE, which was the load of the single Spanish 1 
class in the fall of 2015 and the Spanish II class in the spring of 2016.  Since respondent’s 
approximately .3 FTE survived the 2015 layoff process following the Superior Court’s 
review, the “corresponding percentage” of employees that may be noticed for the upcoming 
2016-2017 school year is either .3 FTE or .33 FTE.8

5.

Respondent challenges the District’s claim that the discontinuance of Spanish 
is for reasons that relate solely to the welfare of the District’s college and its students, within 
the meaning of section 87740.  Respondent argues that the evidence does not show the 
declining enrollment the District claimed in Spanish classes, and that the evidence is at best 
ambiguous regarding how much enrollment is required for the classes to be cost-effective for 
the District offer them.  Declining enrollment is a conclusion that varies depending on how 
one looks at the statistical evidence presented by the District.  In a very short-term sense, 
enrollment is approximately flat, but over a longer term, enrollment has markedly declined, 
likely the product of the fact pointed out by one of the District’s witnesses that most high 
school students entering the college now have their foreign language requirements 
completely satisfied from high school classes, and do not need foreign language at the 
community college level to meet any continuation requirements.  

6.

Counsel is correct that the enrollment statistics do not show a large drop-off in

Spanish enrollment in the most recent two or three years.  But longer term, the evidence 
confirms a steady and significant enrollment decline over a period of years.  The evidence 
also showed that there are a great number of factors that go into the equation of how the 
District determines whether any class offering is a cost-effective proposition.  The District 
has concluded from the evidence showing a long-term year-over-year pattern of decline in 
Spanish enrollment over a several year period that continuing to offer Spanish in any form is 
not in the best interests of the District and its students, and that continuing to do so in any 
form is a marginal at best, and not a cost-effective proposition. Respondent directly 
experienced the effects of Spanish enrollment decline in 2014-2015 to the extent that he was 
required to spend part of his load in that school year in the Critical Skills Lab, because there 
was not enough enrollment to sustain his full 1.0 FTE of Spanish teaching.  

7.

It was not disputed that there are no mandatorily required Spanish courses that 

must be offered to satisfy transfer or major requirements or state mandates.  Therefore, 
offering Spanish is entirely within the District’s discretion, as is not offering it.  

8.

Furthermore, the determination of whether any particular course is a cost-

effective proposition is not merely a matter of only numerical enrollment, as respondent’s 
contentions suggested, but as the District witnesses refuted.  Cost-effectiveness 
determinations are complex, multi-faceted propositions that vary from class to class, in 

 

 

8 The .3 FTEF was the District’s rough approximation of the portion of the 
respondent’s Spanish Instructor assignment that will remain with a single Spanish course 
taught in each of the fall (Spanish I) and spring (Spanish II) semesters next academic year. 

34

which the District exercises its discretion in a way that may be different for a Spanish class 
than an English, math or an engineering class.  The District concluded that even at the 
reenrollment level that respondent taught in the two remaining Spanish classes in 2015-2016, 
one in each semester, that the enrollment level did not sustain offering the classes again in 
2016-2017.  The final removal of the last two remaining Spanish classes at the entry level 
finishes the process begun in 2015-2016, when the upper-level Spanish classes were 
discontinued, and the .7 FTE assigned to those classes was discontinued and that 
discontinuance was upheld.  A not insignificant portion of that .7 FTE in 2015-2016 was 
spent using respondent as a placeholder in the Critical Skills Lab, rather than delivering 
Spanish instruction to meet District student demand, because that demand simply did not 
exist.  

9.

Counsel’s claims seek to invade the province of the District’s discretion and 

compel the District to exercise its discretion in a fashion favorable to respondent.  The 
District’s exercise of its discretion can only be overturned in the presence of substantial and 
persuasive evidence that the District decision is arbitrary, capricious, or fraudulent, in the 
sense of being overwhelmingly contrary to the evidence.9  There is no evidence in this record 
that supports such a conclusion, as set forth in the Factual Findings.  The elimination of 
Spanish teaching is well within the exercise of the District’s discretion, and the reasons 
presented for the exercise of that discretion in this evidence are satisfactory under the legal 
standards in place that govern the evaluation.

Bumping Issues

Critical Skills Lab

10.

Next year, no full time faculty are or will be assigned to the Critical Skills 
Lab.  Respondent’s rights to continued employment are potentially superior to temporary 
part-time instructors who will continue to be employed in the lab.10 Respondent’s right to 
occupy positions held by one or more of any part-timer or temporary employee assigned to 
Critical Skills for 2016-2017, to retain his .3 or .33 FTE position, depends upon whether he 
meets the minimum qualifications specified for the given faculty service area District and 
section 53415 criteria.  Those standards are evaluated by section 53415 of title 5, as set forth 
in the Factual Findings, and as confirmed by the Superior Court, due to the fact that the 
District has and will continue in the upcoming school year to claim apportionment for 
attendance in Critical Skills.  

 

 

9 California School Employees Assn v. Pasadena Unified School District (1977) 71 

Cal.App.3d 318, 322; Campbell Elementary Teacher’s Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 
Cal.App.3d 796, 808.

10 Daniels v. Shasta-Tehama-Trinity J. Community College Dist. (1989) 212 Cal. 

App.3d 910, 920.  

35

11.

Respondent does not meet the section 53415 minimum qualifications for 

Critical Skills Lab, as set forth in the Factual Findings, there is, at this time, no one retained 
junior to him he can bump, and it is not even certain the service will be offered in the 
upcoming school year.  Respondent thus has no bump into any EDUC 670 position.

Men’s and Women’s Head Soccer Positions

12.

Respondent has not permitted vetting his qualifications to the faculty EQC, 

because he has not presented evidence of his claimed qualifying experience.  His claim that 
meets the district minimum qualifications to coach either the men’s or women’s soccer team, 
or both, remain unproved.  Respondent’s claim that it was the District’s obligation to 
appraise respondent’s qualifications to coach the team under the circumstances set forth in 
the Factual Findings lack factual and legal merit.  Respondent indisputably does not meet the 
minimum qualifications for the entire position, in that he lacks qualifications to teach 
kinesiology, which is more than half the FTE of the position.  In order to permit respondent 
to bump into the soccer coaching position, the District would have to split a full-time 1.0 
FTE position and allow respondent, a part-time employee, to exercise a “partial bump,”11 as 
well as go back and embrace, without an faculty ERC qualifications evaluation, and reward
him for his lack of diligence in pursuing the position and obtaining the qualifications review 
in the more than one year that has passed since the position that now is occupied by Mr. 
Kephart was first advertised.  Respondent does not meet minimum qualifications to bump 
into the soccer coaching position, and the District is under no legal obligation to split the 
position and permit respondent a partial bump into the coaching portion respondent claims he 
is qualified to occupy, despite the fact that Mr. Kephart is junior to respondent.

Field ISE Coordinator/Accreditation Liaison/Program Review Chair

13.

A District may provide a service in a different manner without eliminating it 
as PKS.  Cases interpreting section 44955, the analogous statutory provision for layoffs in 
school districts, have held that school districts have the discretion to determine particular 
kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a service continues to be performed or 
provided in a different manner by the District.12  

14.

Next year, the District will staff these positions with either an administrator
(Accreditation Liaison and/or Program Review Chair), or with a full-time faculty member 
paid a stipend for the extra duty of serving as a FIELD ISE coordinator evaluating the 

 

 

11 Specific case authority directly on point provides that the District is under no legal 

obligation to split a 1.0 FTE position in order to provide a bump to a part-time employee, 
even if that part-time employee is senior to the person occupying the 1.0 FTE position into 
which the part-timers seeks to bump.  Hildebrand, supra, page 342.

12 Campbell Elementary Teachers Association, Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 
796, 812, Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal. App.4th 334, 
343.  

36

services of the FIELD employees teaching ESL in the Bakersfield area.  The District is also 
at liberty to not offer one or more of these positions, combine them, have them staffed 
administratively, or have them staffed through the Academic Senate, as has occasionally 
occurred, although that is improbable in the case of the FIELD ISE coordinator, all as set 
forth in the Factual Findings.  To the extent that any of these positions will exist in the 
upcoming school year, no position will be held by a junior faculty member which respondent 
could bump by virtue of his seniority.  

RECOMMENDED DISPOSITION

The District may give Final Notice to respondent Juan Roberto Mazariegos that the 

remaining approximately .33 FTE of his services as a Spanish Instructor will not be required 
for the 2016-2017 academic year.  

DATED:  June 29, 2016 

_____________________________
STEPHEN J SMITH
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

37

