BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
COMPTON  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force  of: 

Certain  Certificated  Employees  of  the 
Compton  Unified  School  District, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  Case  No.  2017040015 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Erlinda  G.  Shrenger,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

heard  this  matter  on  May  3,  2017,  in  Compton,  California. 

Littler  Mendelson,  P.C.,  by  Adam  J.  Fiss,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Compton 

Unified  School  District  (District). 

Leticia  Acevez,  Rodney  Curry,  Raymond  Guzman,  Jamie  Puckett,  and  Ronald  Suazo 

(collectively,  Respondents)  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

Schwartz,  Steinsapir,  Dohrmann  &  Sommers  LLP,  by  Michael  R.  Feinberg,  Attorney  at 

Law,  represented  all  Respondents  except  for  Ronald  Suazo.  All  Respondents  were  present 
except  for  Jamie  Puckett  and  Ronald  Sauzo. 

The  hearing  in  this  matter  was  initially  scheduled  for  April  27,  2017.  The  parties 
thereafter  submitted  a  stipulation  and  order  to  continue  the  hearing,  thereby  extending  the 
deadlines  set  forth  in  applicable  Education  Code  sections.  In  accordance  with  the  stipulation 
and  order,  this  Proposed  Decision  shall  be  submitted  to  certificated  employees  who  are 
Respondents  and  the  governing  board  of  the  District  by  May  15,  2017,  and  the  governing  board 
may  have  until  May  22,  2017,  to  provide  final  notices  to  employees  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  ensuing  year.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44949,  subd.  (e).) 

Evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  made  at  the  hearing,  and  the  matter  was 

submitted  for  decision  on  May  3,  2017. 

 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Abimbola  Williams-Ajala  is  the  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  for 
the  District.  Dr.  Ajala  filed  Statements  of  Reduction  in  Force  in  her  official  capacity.  Dr.  Ajala 
and  her  staff  were  responsible  for  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

Board  Resolutions 

3. 

On  February  22,  2017,  the  Board  of  Trustees  (Board)  of  the  District  adopted 
Resolution  No.  16/17-51  (Reduction  Resolution),  which  proposed  a  layoff  of  8.0  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  employees.  Specifically,  the  Reduction  Resolution  provided  for 
the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  service  by  no  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  2017-2018  school  year: 

PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES 
oe 

NUMBER  OF  FULL  TIME  | 
EQUIVALENT  (FTE) 

  

un  GRADE  TO  y"  GRADE  been 

  

seo 

at 

wee 

_Health  Science 
Subtotal  —7"  to  12"  Grade 

. 

: 

- 

  

vest 

ce. 

~ 

sos att 

me 

eee  3:00 
800  | 

  

    

  

_ 

ae 

- 

ROPCTE 
Wood Tech  1A.  1B,  2A, 2B,  3A  &  3B 
Photography  LA,  1B  &  Commercial  photagraphy 
_Fashion  Clothing/Clothing 
Graphic  Tech/Print  Occupation 
Publication  At 
Subtotal  —  ROP/CTE 

     

ee 
. 

a 
a 

  

nec 

. 

  

TOTAL  FTE  REDUCTIONS  —-  ALL  PROGRAMS 

eect 

. 

es 

. 
1.60. 
80 
140_ 
1.00 
20. 
5.00  | 

8.00 

ae 

. 

. 

  

  

    

  

4. 

The  services  which  the  District  seeks  to  discontinue  or  reduce  are  particular 
kinds  of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955. 

5. 

The  decision  by  the  Board  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  was  neither  arbitrary 

nor  capricious,  but  rather  was  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion.  The  reduction  and 
discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has 
become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the 
Board. 

6. 

The  goal  of  ROP  services  is  that  students  will  learn  skills  that  will  enable  them  to 
succeed  in  the  labor  market.  The  District  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  ROP  services  as  set 
forth  in  the  Reduction  Resolution  based  on  its  review  of  labor  market  trends  to  ensure  that  ROP

classes  are  aligned  with  those  trends.  The  District  also  considered  survey  results  measuring 
students’  interest  in  ROP  classes  and  courses. 

7. 

On  February  22,  2017,  the  Board,  in  Resolution  No.  16/17-50  (Tie-Break 

Resolution),  adopted  tie-breaking  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated 
employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date,  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District 
and  its  students.  The  Tie-Break  Resolution  sets  forth  criteria  1  through  6.  The  criteria  are 
applied  in  numerical  order  to  employees  with  the  same  seniority  date  until  the  tie  is  broken.  If 
employees  are  still  tied  after  criterion  6,  the  District  will  break  the  tie  by  utilizing  a  lottery. 

March  15  Layoff Notices 

8. 

The  Reduction  Resolution  directed  the  Superintendent  or  a  designee  to  send 
appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  affected  by  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  in  accordance  with  the  Education  Code  and  to  afford  the  employees  all  rights 
they  are  entitled  under  the  law. 

9. 

(A)  By  March  15,  2017,  the  District  served  each  of  Respondents  and  certificated 
employee  Carl  Martin  with  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to 
them  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

(B)  The  written  notice  sent  to  employee  Carl  Martin  was  "precautionary,"  in  that 

the  District  did  not  have  sufficient  information  at  the  time  to  determine  whether  a  more  senior 
employee  could  "bump"  Martin  from  his  assignment.  As  discussed  in  Findings  14  and  15, 
below,  the  District  has  since  determined  that  no  senior  employee  can  "bump"  Martin  from  his 
assignment. 

(C)  The  District  did  not  serve  layoff  notices  corresponding  to  the  3.0  FTE 

reduction  in  Health  Sciences  because  there  were  no  certificated  employees  teaching  that  subject 
during  the  2016-2017  school  year. 

10. 

Respondents  submitted  timely  written  requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 

is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2017-2018  school  year.  Employee  Carl  Martin  did 
not  request  a  hearing  and  thereby  waived  his  right  to  a  hearing;  he  cannot  contest  the 
recommendation  of  his  non-reemployment  by  the  District.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44949,  subd.  (b).) 

11. 

On  April  14,  2017,  the  District  served  Respondents  with  a  Statement  of 

Reduction  in  Force  along  with  other  required  accompanying  documents  and  a  blank  Notice  of 
Participation  form.  On  April  20,  2017,  a  Joint  Notice  of  Participation  was  filed  on  behalf  of 
Respondents.  Prior  to  the  hearing,  the  District  rescinded  the  layoff  notice  issued  to  respondent

Jamie  Puckett.  The  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  shall  be  dismissed  as  to  respondent  Jamie 
Puckett. 

The  Seniority  List  and  the  Layoff 

12. 

The  District  created  a  seniority  list.  That  seniority  list  took  into  account  a 

number  of  factors,  including  each  certificated  employee's  first  date  of  paid  service,  present 
assignments,  credentials,  permanency  status,  and  other  pertinent  information. 

13. 

The  District  properly  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  and 
retirements  in  determining  the  number  of  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered.  The  District 
determined  that  attrition  in  the  2016-2017  school  year  did  not  affect  this  layoff  because  none  of 
the  attrition,  resignations,  and  retirements  involved  ROP  teachers. 

14. 

(A)  The  District  reviewed  its  records  and  the  seniority  list  to  determine  which 

employees  might  displace  or  “bump”  other  junior  employees.  The  results  of  the  Board's 
bumping  analysis  are  reflected  in  the  Notes  contained  in  the  annotated  seniority  list  received  in 
evidence  as  Exhibit  11. 

(B)  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 
In  doing  so,  the  senior 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  may  displace  or  "bump"  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v. 
Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469;  Ed.  Code,  §  44955,  subd.  (b).) 

(C)  The  Reduction  Resolution  established  competency  criteria  for  determining 

whether  a  senior  employee  could  be  reassigned  to  a  position  held  by  a  more  junior  employee  as 
provided  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  competency  criteria  are:  (1)  possession  of 
a  current  valid  credential  to  teach  the  assigned  subject  matter;  (2)  experience  teaching  the 
subject  for  at  least  one  year  or  the  equivalent  of  one  year  during  the  past  10  years;  and  (3) 
possession  of  all  appropriate  certifications,  as  determined  by  the  District  and  state  law,  to  hold 
the  position  (c.g.,  EL  Certification,  CLAD,  registered  nursing  license).  The  criteria  are 
reasonable.  (See  Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  District  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555,  557.) 

15. 

(A)  Respondent  Leticia  Acevez  (#751)'  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  29,  2006. 

She  is  an  ROP  teacher  at  Dominguez  High  School  and  employed  in  a  1.0  FTE  position 
teaching  clothing,  fashion  clothing,  and  commercial  photography.  She  holds  clear  CTE 
credentials  in  fashion  and  interior  design,  and  arts,  media  and  entertainment,  and  preliminary 
designated  subjects  in  commercial  photography  and  fashion  merchandising.  Acevez  was 
identified  for  layoff  by  the  District  to  account  for  a  0.4  FTE  reduction  in  commercial 

'  The  number  in  the  parenthetical  folowing  the  name  of  a  respondent  or  employee 

indicates  their  position  on  the  seniority  list.

photography  and  a  0.6  FTE  reduction  in  clothing/fashion  clothing. 

(B)  Employee  Carl  Martin  (#1143)  has  a  seniority  date  of  October  25,  2016. 

Martin  is  an  ROP  teacher  at  Willowbrook  Middle  School,  Roosevelt  Elementary  School,  and 
Clinton  Elementary  School.  He  is  employed  in  a  1.0  FTE  position  teaching  performing  arts  and 
music.  He  holds  a  preliminary  CTE  credential  in  arts,  media,  and  entertainment. 

(C)  Respondent  Aceves  contends  that  she  should  be  entitled  to  bump  into  the 

portion  of  Martin's  position  identified  as  "visual  arts"  on  the  seniority  list,  because  photography 
is  a  type  of  visual  art.  Although  the  seniority  list  shows  Martin's  assignment  as  "visual  arts" 
and  music  (e.g.,  Exh.  11),  Martin  actually  teaches  performing  arts  and  music.  Respondent 
Aceves  does  not  satisfy  the  Board's  competency  criteria  to  bump  into  part  of  Martin's  position 
because  she  does  not  have  experience  teaching  performing  arts  for  at  least  one  year  or  the 
equivalent  of  One  year  during  the  past  10  years.  The  District  properly  identified  respondent 
Aceves  as  an  employee  subject  to  layoff.  The  precautionary  layoff  notice  issued  to  Martin  shall 
be  rescinded. 

: 

16. 

Respondent  Ronald  Suazo  (#1119)  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  20,  2016. 

Suazo  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  at  Kelly  Elementary  School,  where  he  teaches 
photography.  He  holds  a  preliminary  CTE  credential  in  arts,  media  and  entertainment,  and 
information  communication  technology.  Suazo  is  subject  to  layoff  due  to  being  bumped  from 
0.6  FTE  of  his  position  by  Martin  Byrdsong  (#11),  who  is  a  more  senior  employee  credentialed 
and  competent  to  teach  photography,  and  due  to  the  remainder  of  Suazo's  position  accounting 
for  a  0.4  FTE  reduction  in  photography. 

17. 

Respondent  Raymond  Guzman  (#789)  has  a  seniority  date  of  October  9,  2006. 

He  is  an  ROP  teacher  at  Dominguez  High  School.  He  is  employed  in  a  1.0  FTE  position 
teaching  Wood  Tech  1B,  2B,  and  3B.  He  holds a  clear  designated  subject  credential  in 
carpentry.  The  District  properly  identified  Guzman  as  an  employee  subject  to  layoff  to  account 
for  a  1.0  FTE  reduction  in  Wood  Tech. 

18. 

Respondent  Rodney  Curry  (#115)  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  9,  1996.  He 
is  an  ROP  teacher  at  Dominguez  High  School.  He  is  employed  in  a  1.0  FTE  position  teaching 
Print  Occupation  and  Graphic  Tech.  He  holds  a  clear  designated  subjects  credential  in  Printing 
and  Graphics  Occupation.  The  District  properly  identified  Curry  as  an  employee  subject  to 
layoff  to  account  for  a  1.0  FTE  reduction  in  Graphic  Tech/Print  Occupation. 

19. 

Respondents  Acevez,  Guzman  and  Curry  contend  that  the  District's  decision  to 

reduce  ROP  services  does  not  promote  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students.  They 
contend  that  ROP  courses  lead  students  to  achieve  real  careers  after  high  school  and  described 
how  some  of  their  former  students  are  succeeding  in  the  labor  market  and  have  started  their 
own  businesses  because  of  skills  learned  in  ROP  classes.  Respondents  contend  that  their  ROP

  

courses  are  in  fields  where  jobs  are  not  in  decline,  and  they  contend  there  is  no  problem  with 
enrollment  or  student  interest  in  their  classes.  Respondents’  contentions  amount  to  improper 
second-guessing  of  the  Board's  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  ROP  services.  (See  Legal 
Conclusion  3(B),  below.)  The  District,  through  the  testimony  of  Dr.  Ajala,  sufficiently 
explained  the  basis  and  rationale  for  its  decision  to  reduce  ROP  services. 

20. 

No  certificated  employce  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  by  the  District  to 

render  a  service  for  which  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  qualified  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

L. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met. 

2. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Reduction  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955. 

3. 

(A)  The  Board's  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was 

neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and 
pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

(B)  Boards  of  education  hold  significant  discretion  in  determining  the  need  to 

reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services,  which  is  not  open  to  second-guessing  in  this 
proceeding.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal_App.3d  167.)  Such  policy-making 
decisions  are  not  subject  to  arguments  as  to  the  wisdom  of  their  enactment,  their  necessity,  or 
the  motivations  for  the  decisions.  (California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Huff  (1992)  5  Cal.App.4th 
1513,  1529.)  Such  decisions  and  action  must  be  reasonable  under  the  circumstances,  with  the 
understanding  that  "such  a  standard  may  permit  a  difference  of  opinion."  (Santa  Clara 
Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal_App.3d  831.)  The  process  of 
implementing  layoffs  is  a  very  flexible  one  and  that  school  districts  retain  great  flexibility  in 
carrying  out  the  process.  (See  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  769;  Zalec  v.  Governing  Bd.  of  Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4th  838.) 

4, 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to 

the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  District  identified  the 
certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  Board  directed  be 
reduced  or  discontinued. 

6

5. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employce  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  is  sustained  as  to  respondents  Leticia 

Acevez,  Rodney  Curry,  Raymond  Guzman,  and  Ronald  Suazo.  Notice  may  be  given  to  said 
respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2017-2018  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

3. 

The  District  shall  rescind  the  precautionary  layoff  notice  issued  to  Carl  Martin. 

The  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  for  Jamie  Puckett  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  11,  2017

ERLINDA  G.  SHRENGER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

- 

