BEFORE THE
STATE ADMINISTRATOR
INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction
in Force Against:

OAH No. 2017030924

THE CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF 
THE INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT NAMED IN THE APPENDIX,

   

  Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Laurie R. Pearlman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 17, 2017, in Inglewood. The record 
was closed and the matter was submitted for decision at the conclusion of the hearing.

Sharon J. Ormond, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented the 

Inglewood Unified School District (District).

Carlos R. Perez, Esq., Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented the respondents named in 

the Appendix.

At the hearing, the parties stipulated that the District timely served all notices upon 

respondents and all jurisdictional requirements have been met.  

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The District is currently under the authority of a State Administrator, Dr. 

Vincent C. Matthews, who was appointed by the California Superintendent of Public 
Instruction, and has assumed all legal rights, duties and powers of the District’s Board of 
Education, in accordance with Education Code section 41326.1

2.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

 

 

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise noted.

3.

As described in more detail below, the State Administrator resolved to reduce
and eliminate particular kinds of services totaling 27.50 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions 
and directed District staff to proceed to layoff certificated staff pursuant to sections 44949,
44955 and 8366.

4.

On March 9, 2017, District staff gave written notice to 25 certificated District 

employees, including respondents, advising them it had been recommended to the State 
Administrator that notice be given to them that their services will not be required for the 
2017-2018 school year.  Respondents comprise the 18 individuals who timely requested a 
hearing to determine if there is cause for not employing them next school year.

5.

The Statement of Reduction in Force was made and filed by Nora Roque in 

her official capacity as the District’s Executive Director of Human Resources, alleging cause 
exists to not reemploy respondents for the following school year.  Eighteen individuals 
timely submitted Notices of Participation, which contained requests for a hearing to contest 
the proposed layoffs, or were deemed by the District as having done so.  Respondents were 
provided all required documents in a timely manner.

The Layoff Resolution

6.

On March 8, 2017, the State Administrator adopted Resolution No. 25/2016-

2017 (the Resolution), which provides for the reduction or elimination of the following
particular kinds of services:

Services

 

 

FTE Positions

Reduce Elementary School Teaching Services
Reduce Secondary English Teaching Services
Reduce Secondary Math Teaching Services
Reduce Secondary Social Studies Teaching Services
Reduce Morningside High School Computer Applications 
 Teaching Services
Reduce Secondary Counseling Services
Reduce PM Preschool Teaching Services

19.00
3.00
1.00
1.00

1.00
1.00
1.50

Total Full-Time Equivalent Reductions
 

==========
27.50 FTE positions

7.

It was established by Executive Director Roque’s testimony that the Resolution
was required by the District’s current financial difficulties, including that the District must pay 
back a multi-million dollar loan it received from the State which prompted the District to be 
placed under the authority of the State Administrator.  The annual loan payments are $1.9
million. The District is still engaged in deficit spending.  More than 80 percent of the District’s 
current budget is related to staff compensation and benefits.  In addition, student enrollment in 
the District has decreased by 500 students per year.  

2

8.

The services or programs set forth in Factual Finding 6 are particular kinds of 
services which may be reduced or eliminated within the meaning of section 8366 and 44955.

9.

The State Administrator’s determination to reduce or eliminate those services 

or programs was within his sound discretion and was not proven to be arbitrary or capricious. 
Services will not be reduced below mandated levels.  The reduction or discontinuation of 
services is related to lack of work, lack of funds and the welfare of the District and its pupils, 
and it has become necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees.

The Seniority List and Layoffs

10.

The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

dates, current assignments and locations, credentials, and authorizations.  The seniority list 
was based on information from the District’s human resources records, as well as information 
from the Los Angeles County Office of Education (LACOE) and credentialing records of the 
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing.

11.

The Resolution defined that “competency,” for purposes of bumping as 

described in section 44955, includes: (1) possession of a valid clear or preliminary credential 
in the subject(s) or grade level to which the employee will be assigned at the beginning of 
the 2017-2018 school year; (2) appropriate full (not emergency) EL authorization (if 
required by the position); (3) in the case of displacing junior employees teaching in a 
departmentalized setting, single subject credential(s) or subject matter authorization in that 
subject area; and (4) any training and experience necessary to meet the job requirements of 
specialized positions (such as Dual Immersion Teachers or Opportunity Teachers). This 
definition of competency was not challenged by respondents.

12.

Attached to the Resolution are criteria to be used in determining the order of 
termination of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the 
same date.  The State Administrator resolved that such criteria would best serve the needs of 
the District and its pupils.  Although the tie-breaking criteria was used in developing the 
seniority list and impacted some respondents, no challenge was made to the tie-breaking 
criteria and it otherwise appeared to be reasonably related to the welfare of District pupils.  
For those instances in which the tie-breaking criteria did not resolve the issue, a lottery was 
used, impacting three of the preschool teachers.  No challenge was made to the tie-breaking 
criteria and it otherwise appeared to be reasonably related to the welfare of District pupils.  

13.

In the Resolution, the State Administrator also articulated a specific need to 

hire and retain teachers who possess special training and experience to teach classes in the Dual 
Immersion program.  Therefore, Ms. Roque was authorized to deviate from terminating 
certificated employees in order of seniority (skipping) in instances where the less senior 
employee possesses special training and experience to teach classes in the Dual Immersion 
program and will be assigned to do so in the 2017-2018 school year.

3

14.

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the least 
senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced or eliminated.  The 
District then determined whether those least senior employees held credentials in another 
area and were entitled to bump other employees with less seniority.  In determining who 
would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of 
reductions not covered by known vacancies and determined the impact on incumbent staff in 
inverse order of seniority.

15.

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations, and

retirements in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be delivered.

Individual Challenges

16.

A. Vincent Simpson:  Mr. Simpson teaches music classes at Crozier Middle 

School.  He holds a bachelor’s and master’s degree in music education.  Mr. Simpson is able 
to teach all instruments (wind, percussion, and string), as well as vocal (choir and chorale.)  
He was bumped by a more senior teacher who holds a credential in music.  This individual 
has been teaching computer application classes.  It was not established that the more senior 
teacher who bumped Mr. Simpson has as much experience teaching music as Mr. Simpson or 
that he has Mr. Simpson’s breadth and depth of instrumental and vocal knowledge.

B. Alicia Martinez:  Ms. Martinez is a child development center teacher who 
provides all-day preschool teaching services.  The District’s preschool teachers have either a 
morning assignment (8 a.m. to 11 a.m.), an afternoon assignment (12:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.) or 
an all-day assignment (7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.)  The Resolution called for reducing the 
afternoon preschool teaching services by 1.50 FTE  Ms. Martinez, Ramona Rocha and 
Bonnie Williams currently teach all-day preschool assignments.  They are junior to all of the 
other preschool teachers who currently teach morning only or afternoon only assignments.  
Ms. Martinez, Ms. Rocha and Ms. Williams were given notice that, for the 2017-2018 school 
year, they would be given a morning preschool assignment only; they were informed that 
their services would not be required in 2017-2018 for the all-day preschool assignments they 
currently hold.  Each of the three teachers faces a reduction of 0.05 FTE  Ms. Martinez 
contended that since only the afternoon preschool assignments must be reduced, those
individuals currently teaching afternoons only should have been given notice that their 
services would not be required for the 2017-2018 school year, despite their seniority.  

C. While the arguments made by Mr. Simpson and Ms. Martinez elicit 
sympathy, they do not establish a basis to rescind their layoff notices.  The District has 
discretion to perform its assignments and reassignments as it deems appropriate, so long as it 
acts in good faith.2 The State Administrator has discretion to determine whether and how the 

 

 

2 School districts have discretion to define positions in the manner which they will be 
taught as long as it is done in good faith.  (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District
(2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334.)  A governing board has the discretion to determine to reduce 
services by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 

4

needs of the District’s students will be met.  No evidence presented indicates the District or 
the State Administrator have acted in bad faith.

17.

Teachers who provide instruction in a language other than English are required 

to receive a bilingual teaching authorization. In California the bilingual authorization is 
called the Bilingual, Cross-cultural, Language and Academic Development (BCLAD) 
credential.  Respondents’ attorney queried whether a more senior teacher with a BCLAD 
credential could bump a junior teacher currently teaching in the Dual Immersion program.  In 
the Resolution, the State Administrator articulated a specific need to hire and retain teachers 
who possess special training and experience to teach classes in the Dual Immersion program.  
The Dual Immersion teachers have classroom experience and receive special training 
provided in-house and through LACOE.  No respondent holding a BCLAD credential 
established that he or she has the special training and experience possessed by those currently 
teaching in the Dual Immersion program.  Therefore, the District is authorized to deviate 
from terminating certificated employees in order of seniority, enabling the District to skip 
those teaching in the Dual Immersion program who will be assigned to do so in the 2017-
2018 school year.  

18.

School districts have authority and discretion to “make assignments and 

reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which 
their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.”  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (c).)  In 
this case, no respondent is credentialed and competent to perform any assignment held by 
less senior employees being retained.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The party asserting a claim or making charges in an administrative hearing 
generally has the burden of proof.  (Brown v. City of Los Angeles (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th 
155.)  As no other law or statute requires otherwise, the standard of proof in this case 
requires proof by a preponderance of the evidence.  (Evid. Code, § 115.) Therefore, the 
District bears the burden of establishing cause to affirm the proposed layoff decisions by a 
preponderance of the evidence.

2.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements of sections 8366, 44949 and 44955 

were met. (Factual Findings 1-5.)

///

 

 

 

 

employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.  (Rutherford v. Board of 
Administrators (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)  In determining whether the decision of 
a governing board is reasonable or in good faith, its action is measured by the standard set by 
reason and reasonable people, bearing in mind that such a standard may permit a difference 
of opinion on the same subject.  (Campbell v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.)

5

3.

The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services that 

may be reduced or eliminated pursuant to sections 8366 and 44955.  The State 
Administrator’s decision to reduce or eliminate the identified services was neither arbitrary 
nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of his discretion.  Services will not be reduced 
below mandated levels.  Cause for the reduction or elimination of those particular services 
relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 
44949.  (Factual Findings 6-9.)

4.

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due 

to the reduction and elimination of particular kinds of services.  (Factual Findings 1-9.)

5.

Taking into account the above findings and conclusions, no junior certificated 
employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services that a more senior employee subject 
to layoff is certificated and competent to render.  (Factual Findings 1-18.)

ORDER

The Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained against respondents.  The District

may give a final notice of layoff to all respondents.  Notice shall be given to respondents that 
their services will not be required for the 2016-2017 school year, and such notice shall be 
given in inverse order of seniority.

Dated:  

________________________________
LAURIE R. PEARLMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearing

6

April 28, 2017Appendix: The Respondents

General Education Program:

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Aguirre, Maria

Amini, Ali

Autrey, Deborah

Butler, Cordiya 

Cantu, Melissa

Caro, Maria

Chavez, Marc

Chestnut, Shandra

Green, Toyin

Jones, Cayana

Ojelabi, Timothy

Schmidt, Kristofor

Simpson, Vincent

Sosa, Eric

Tran, Hoa

Preschool Program:

16. Martinez, Alicia

17.

Rocha, Ramona

18. Williams, Bonnie

7

