BEFORE  THE 
COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
SAN  LUIS  OBISPO  COUNTY  OFFICE  OF  EDUCATION 
COUNTY  OF  SAN  LUIS  OBISPO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Statement  of  Reduction  Of: 

Case  No.  2017020705 

DENISE  PALERMO-BLAKELY, 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  3,  2017,  in  San  Luis  Obispo,  California. 

Roman  J.  Muiioz,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Thomas  Alvarez  (Alvarez),  Chief 
Human  Resource  Officer,  San  Luis  Obispo  County  Office  of  Education  (SLOCOE),  County  of 
: 
San  Luis  Obispo,  State  of  California. 

Cindy  Heller,  California  Teachers  Association  Staff,  represented  Denise  Palermo- 

Blakely  (Respondent). 

The  SLOCOE  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondent  and  other  certificated  employees  of  the  SLOCOE  notice  of  its  intent  not  to 
reemploy  them  for 
a 
Respondent  requested  a  hearing  for 
determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  her  for  the  2017-2018  school  year. 

the  2017-2018  school  year. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing  and  the  matter  was 

submitted  for  decision  on  April  3,  2017. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Chief  Alvarez  filed  the  Statement  of  Reduction  in  Force  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  SLOCOE.    

3. 

On  January  18,  2017,  James  J. 

Brescia,  Superintendent  of  the  SLOCOE 
(Superintendent),  adopted  a  Resolution  To  Reduce  or  Eliminate  Particular  Kinds  of  Services, 
Establishing  Tie-Breaking  Criteria  and  Establishing  Criteria  for  Assignments  (Resolution), 
reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the  2017-2018  school  year: 

Service 

FTE!  Positions 

Grades  7-12  Community  School  Teacher 
Resource  Specialist,  Community  School 
School  Nurse 
Counselor 

Total 

5.0 
1.5161 
1.0 
LO 

8.5161 

4. 

On  February  15,  2017,  the  SLOCOE  provided  notice  to  Respondent  that  her 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2017-2018  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services. 

5. 

Also  on  February  15,  2017,  the  SLOCOE  issued  the  Statement  of  Reduction  in 

Force,  and  on  the  same  date  served  it  and  other  required  documents  on  Respondent. 

6. 

On  February  16,  2012,  Respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Participation  in  the 
Reduction  in  Force  Hearing,  requesting  a  hearing  and  challenging  the  decision  of  the  SLOCOE 
not  to  reemploy  her  for  the  2017-2018  school  year. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

7. 

8. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code’  section  44955. 

9. 

The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither 

arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  Superintendent’s  discretion. 

10. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3, 
in  the  context  of  the  SLOCOE’s  having  the  financial  resources  to  fund  other  necessary  services, 
is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease 
the  number  of  certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Superintendent. 

’  Full-time  equivalent. 

?  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.    

11. 

|  The  Resolution  sets  forth  the  criteria  to  determine  seniority  among  employees 
who  first  rendered  paid  service  in 
a  probationary  position  on  the  same  date  (tie-breaking 
criteria).  Points  were  awarded  for  possession  of  a  valid  preliminary  or  clear  teaching  credential, 
possession  of  multiple  credentials,  having  a  greater  total  number  of  years  teaching  in  California 
public  schools,  possession  of  supplemental  teaching  authorizations,  possession  of  post-graduate 
degrees,  and  possession  of  undergraduate  major  or  minor  in  specified  subject  matter  areas.  The 
criteria  are  reasonable  as  they  relate  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  certificated  employees. 
The  SLOCOE  did  not  need  to  apply  the  criteria  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  of 
Respondent. 

12. 

The 

also 

Resolution 

criteria: 
contained 
“['C]ompetency,’  for  the  purposes  of  [section  44955],  shall  be  determined  solely  upon  current 
possession  of  a  preliminary  or  clear  credential  for  the  subject  matter  (i.e.,  Special  Education), 
grade  level  or  County  Office  program,  and  at  least  one  (1)  year  of  experience  within  the 
preceding  five  (5)  school  years  in  the  subject  matter,  grade  level  or  County  Office  program  to 
which  the  employee  seeks  to  displace  a  junior  employee  for  the  2017-2018  school  year.  . 
.” 
(Exh.  1,  at  p.  10.) 

competency 

following 

the 

. 

One  of 

The  SLOCOE  provides  alternative  education  services  to  students  in  San  Luis 
13. 
It  operates  community  schools  and  programs  for  students  with  special 
Obispo  County. 
education  needs. 
the  programs,  the  Vicente  School-Linked  Intensive  Program 
(Vicente),  serves  severely  emotionally  disturbed  students  by  providing  mental  health  services  as 
Mental  health  professionals  work 
an  integral  part  of  the  students’  educational  services. 
alongside  teachers  to  provide  services  during  the  school  day. 
Students  with  less  severe 
emotional  problems  or  other  special  education  needs  attend  other  community  schools,  including 
The  SLOCOE  also  operates  a  Juvenile  Court  School  in  the  County 
Loma  Vista  School. 
Juvenile  Hall  to  provide  instruction  to  students  who  are  incarcerated. 

Instruction 

Respondent  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  9,  2012.  She  holds  a  clear  Education 
14. 
Specialist 
Autism 
authorization.  She  also  holds  a  clear  Single  Subject  (English)  and  a  clear  Specialist  Instruction 
Credential  (Agriculture). 
She  provided  instruction  in  Juvenile  Court  School  during  the  1989  to 
1994  period.  Respondent  has  not  worked  at  Vicente. 

Mild/Moderate 

Disabilities, 

Credential, 

added 

with 

an 

15. 

For  the  past  five  years,  Respondent  has  worked  as 

a  Resource  Specialist, 
Alternative  Education.  She  works  in  the  Loma  Vista  School,  one  of  the  community  schools  run 
by  the  SLOCOE.  As  a  resource  specialist,  Respondent  does  not  provide  core  instruction  or 
Rather,  she  provides  special  education  support  to 
issue  grades  in  a  self-contained  classroom. 
students  assigned  to  other  teachers. 
For  instance,  she  works  with  students  unable  to  stay  in  a 
regular  classroom  for  an  entire  day  or  those  who  needed  extra  time  or  extra  support  to  complete 
Some  of  the 
If  necessary,  Respondent  provides  instruction  to  the  students. 
assignments. 

students  stay  with  her  for  the  entire  school  day,  some  for  a  significant  portion  of  the  school    

She  consults  with  other  teachers  and  with  members  of  planning  teams  about  matters  of 

year. 
special  education  eligibility  or  services. 

16. 

|  Respondent  asserts  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  the  assignment  a 
In  support  of  her 
less  senior  employee,  Lara  Mattson  (Mattson),  was  retained  to  perform. 
assertion,  Respondent  testified  that  her  entire  career  with  the  SLOCOE  has  been  in  alternative 
education,  and  she  has  extensive  experience  in  the  area.  She  can  perform  the  duties  of  a  special 
are 
education  teacher  in 
has  consulted  with  mental  health  professionals  about  the 
emotionally  disturbed  and  she 
students’  readiness  for  instruction. 
Some  of  Respondent’s  students  have  been  transferred  to 
Vicente  once  space  became  available.  She  has  received  training  in  subjects  that  would  assist  in 
providing  services  to  students  at  Vicente,  such  as  those  in  functional  behavior  assessment, 
anxiety  disorders  in  children,  and  nonviolent  crisis  intervention. 

Some  of  Respondent’s  students 

a  self-contained  classroom. 

Instruction 

Credential, 

Mattson  has  worked  with  severely  emotionally  disturbed  students  in 

Mattson  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  14,  2013,  and  holds  a  clear  Education 
17. 
Autism 
Specialist 
a  self- 
authorization. 
contained  classroom  at  Vicente  for  the  past  four  years. 
She  works  a  special  year-round, 
extended  school  schedule  and  has  received  special  training  to  teach  these  students.  As  required 
only  of  those  working  at  Vicente,  Mattson  has  completed  yearly  training  and  obtained  a 
certification  in  Restraint  and  Nonviolent  Crisis  Intervention. 

Mild/Moderate 

Disabilities, 

added 

with 

an 

18. 

Respondent  is  credentialed  to  teach  at  Vicente,  and  has  in  the  past  worked  with 
some  of  the  students  served  at  the  school. 
However,  despite  her  credential  and  experience, 
Respondent  has  not  worked  at  Vicente,  which  is  a  distinct  County  Office  program  for  at  least 
one  year  within  the  preceding  five  school  years,  as  required  by  the  SLOCOE  competency 
criteria. 
Therefore,  she  has  not  fully  met  the  competency  criteria  to  be  retained  to  teach  the 
assignment. 

19. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a  service 

which  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  7. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  3  and  8.    

3. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  which  cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers  1  through  10. 

4, 

Section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides,  in  pertinent  part:  “[t]he  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service 
which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.”  (Emphasis  added.) 
“Certificated”  is  defined  by  the  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  pertaining  to  credentials,  but 
“competent”  is  not  specifically  defined. 
In  Forker  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1994)  160  Cal.App.3d 
13,  19,  the  Court  defined  the  term  in  a  reemployment  proceeding  under  section  44956,  a  statute 
that  contains  the  same  “certificated  and  competent”  requirement,  in  terms  of  the  teachers’  skills 
and  qualifications,  specifically,  as  “relating  to  special  qualifications  for  a  vacant  position,  rather 
than  relating  to  the  on-the-job  performance  of  the  laid-off  permanent  employee.”  In  doing  so, 
the  Court  noted  that  courts  in  reduction  in  force  cases,  namely  Brough  v.  Governing  Board 
(1981)  118  Cal.App.3d  702,  714-15,  and  Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109 
Cal.App.3d  648,  654-55,  had  interpreted  the  term  in  a  similar  manner. 

As 

the 

have 

districts 

the  Forker  court  recognized, 

define 
school 
competency,  as  had  been  permitted  in  earlier  reemployment  cases,  King  v.  Berkeley  Unified 
School  District  (1979)  89  Cal.App.3d  1016  (King)  and  Martin  v.  Kentfield  School  District 
(1983)  35  Cal.3d.  294  (Martin).  In  King,  the  court  upheld a  district’s  requirement  that  laid  off 
teachers  have  prior  teaching  experience  in  the  open  jobs  in  which  they  claimed  competency, 
namely,  mathematics  and  physical  education. 
In  Martin,  a  district  was  permitted  to  require 
prior  teaching  experience  in  middle  school  before  deeming  laid  off  elementary  school  teachers 
competent  to  teach  in  middle  school,  if  such  requirement  was  equally  applied  to  all  certificated 
employees,  not  just  those  on  a  preferential  rehire  list. 

discretion 

to 

In  Duiax  v.  Kern  Community  College  District  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555,  565  (Duax),  a 
case  arising  under  the  community  college  reduction  in  force  statute,  now  section  87743,  the 
governing  board  had  established  a  standard  of  competency  that,  required  one  year  of  full-time 
teaching  in  the  subject  area  within  the  last  ten  years.  After  acknowledging  the  discretion 
afforded  to  school  districts,  and  set  forth  in  King  and  Martin,  the  court  stated:  “While  these 
decisions  stress  the  discretion  reposed  in  a  school  board  in  defining  the  term  ‘competent,’  the 
court  in  Forker  .  ..  added  further  assistance  in  stating,  ‘{a]s  interpreted  by  the  Martin  court,  the 
term  ‘competent’  as  used  in  section  44956  relates  to  specific  skills  or  qualifications  required  of 
the  applicant.  Decisions  prior  to  Martin  have  interpreted  that  term  in  a  similar  manner.’  (/d.  at 
p. 
9.  See  also  Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.  App.3d  648,  654-655; 
Ozsogomonyan,  Teacher  layoffs  in  California:  An  Update  (1979)  30  Hastings  LJ.  1727,  1749- 
1751.)  Hence,  from  these  authorities  we  conclude  that  a  board’s  definition  of  competency  is 
reasonable  when  it  considers  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  the  teacher  threatened  with  layoff.”

The  Duax  court  upheld  the  governing  board’s  definition  of  competence  as  a  reasonable 
exercise  of  the  governing  board’s  discretion.  In  this  regard,  the  court  stated:  “(T]he  mandate  is 
that  the  governing  board  establish  a  standard  of  competency  that  relates  to  the  skills  and 
qualifications  of  the  teacher.  That  standard  was  established  by  resolution  of  the  governing 
board,  and  since  it  requires  only  one  year  of  teaching  in  the  last  ten,  not  one  in  the  last  two  or 
three,  we  are  not  persuaded  that  it  too  narrowly  defines  competency...  .”  (Duax,  supra,  196 
Cal.App.3d  at  567.) 

In  Bledsoe  v.  Biggs  Unified  School  District  (2009)  170  Cal.App.4th  127  (Bledsoe),  a 
reduction  in  force  case,  the  court  accepted  a  competency  rule  that  defined  competency,  in  part, 
as  “at  least  one  semesier  actual  teaching  experience  in  alternative  education  within  the  last  five 
years.”  (Bledsoe,  supra,  170  Cal.App.4th  125,  at  135.) 

Therefore,  as  the  foregoing  authorities  demonstrate,  a  school  board  or  other  public 
education  employer  may  define  competence  to  determine  the  selection  of  teachers  for  economic 
Competence,  in  turn,  must  be  defined  in  terms  of  the  skills  and 
layoff  or  reinstatement. 
qualifications  of  the  certificated  employee. 
The  SLOCOE  requires  that  teachers  seeking  to 
bump  into  a  position  have  at  least  one  complete  school  year  actual  teaching  experience  within 
the  past  five  school  years  in  the  in  the  subject  matter,  grade  level  or  County  Office  program  to 
which  the  employee  seeks  to  displace  a  junior  employee. 
The  SLOCOE’s  competency  rule 
relates  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  its  certificated  employees  in  terms  of  training  and 
The  SLOCOE  competency  rule  is 
experience,  and  a  similar  rule  was  upheld  in  Bledsoe. 
reasonable  and  SLOCOE  may  therefore  use  it  in  implementing  the  layoffs. 

Respondent  has  not  worked  in  the  Vicente  Program,  which  is  a  distinct  County  Office 
Program,  and  does  not  satisfy  the  competency  criteria  established  by  the  SLOCOE.  While  she 
does  have  experience  working  with  the  emotionally  disturbed  students  taught  at  Vicente,  she 
has  not  worked  as  the  teacher  of  record  in  a  self-contained  classroom  at  Vicente  for  an  entire 
Accordingly,  she  is  not  competent  to 
year,  which  is  what  the  competency  criteria  requires. 
displace  Mattson. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondent  Denise  Palermo- 
Blakely  that  her  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2017-2018  school  year  due  to  the 

reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services.    

DATED:  c€, 

2 

Cc  7  lc  4 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

