BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
METROPOLITAN EDUCATION DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA 
 STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2017031425 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction 
in Force of Certificated Employee 
 
JOHN BETTS,  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondent. 

 

 

 

 
PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Adam J. Fiss and Maggy Athanasious, Littler Mendelson, P.C., represented the 

Administrative Law Judge Jill Schlichtmann, State of California, Office of 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on May 9, 2017, in San Jose, California. 
 
 
Metropolitan Education District. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Christopher E. Schumb, Attorney at Law, represented respondent John Betts. 
 
The matter was submitted for decision on May 9, 2017.     

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 

1. 

Alyssa Lynch made and filed the Statement of Reduction in Force in her 

official capacity as the superintendent of the Metropolitan Education District (District).    
The District offers a Regional Occupational Program (ROP) that provides career technical 
education (CTE) classes to high school students from nearby, participating high schools.     
 

2. 

On March 8, 2017, the governing board of the District adopted Resolution No. 
08-03-08-17 (PKS Resolution), reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of services for the 
2017-2018 school year, and directing Superintendent Lynch to send appropriate notices to all 

employees affected by the reduction or elimination of services.1     
 

3. 

The PKS Resolution identified the services to be reduced no later than the 

beginning of the 2017-2018 school year as: 
 

Teacher, Engineering for Manufacturing 
Teacher, Cybersecurity 
Teacher, Mobile App Design and Computer Coding   
Teacher, Pharmacy Careers   

 
   

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

0.5 FTE2 
0.5 FTE 
0.5 FTE 
0.5 FTE 

The District subsequently rescinded the Cybersecurity, Mobile App Design and 
Computer Coding and Pharmacy Careers layoff notices.  As a result of the reduction in force 
identified in the PKS Resolution, the District will not offer the Engineering for 
Manufacturing course next year.   
 

 
The services set forth in the governing board’s PKS Resolution are particular 

 
4. 

  

 

kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955.  No service is being reduced below a mandated level. 
 

5. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), when a governing 

board reduces particular kinds of services resulting in a decrease in the number of 
certificated, permanent employees, the services of a permanent employee may not be 
terminated if another employee with less seniority is retained to render a service that the 
more senior employee is “certificated and competent to render.”   

 
6. 

Respondent Betts is a part-time teacher at the District (0.50 FTE).  He teaches 

the Engineering for Manufacturing course.  Respondent is certificated and competent to 
teach the Engineering for Manufacturing course; however, he is not certificated to teach any 
other course offered by the District. 
 

7. 

On March 13, 2017, Superintendent Lynch served respondent Betts with 
written notice of her recommendation that his services would not be required for the       
2017-2018 school year.  The notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation.   
 

8. 

Respondent Betts timely requested a hearing to determine if there was cause 
for the reduction of his services for the ensuing year.  The District timely served respondent 
with a packet which included a statement to respondent, the statement of reduction in force, 
copies of appropriate Education and Government Code sections, a notice of participation and 
                                                 

1 On March 8, 2017, the governing board adopted tie breaking criteria in Resolution 

No. 09-03-08-17.  The tie breaking criteria were not used because there are no employees 
who became employed on the same date as respondent Betts. 
 

2 Full-Time Equivalent. 
 

2 

 

 

a notice of hearing.  Respondent Betts filed a timely notice of participation.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements have been met.   
 
Basis for PKS Resolution and Layoff Notice 
 

9. 

Meagan Azevedo, the District’s Human Resources Director, testified at 

hearing.  She was involved in the layoff process.  The District ties its classes to the current 
labor market, and the tools and education students need in order to succeed in that market.  
The District reviews and evaluates its course offerings based on viability and student interest.  
The District prepares materials for high school students to consider and assists teachers in 
recruiting students for their courses.  This year, the District determined that reducing the 
services identified in the PKS Resolution met the needs of the students.  The cause for the 
reduction in particular kinds of services relates to the welfare of the schools and the pupils 
thereof. 
 

10. 

In order to effectuate the reduction in force, Azevedo reviewed respondent’s 

credential and history at the District.  Respondent Betts has taught Engineering for 
Manufacturing (formerly known as Precision Machining) since being employed by the 
District on August 24, 2009.  Respondent holds a Designated Subject, Vocational Education 
credential in the subjects of Machine Tool Operations and Machine Shop.  Azevedo 
determined that respondent was not credentialed to teach any course that the District offers 
other than Engineering for Manufacturing.  As a result of the PKS Resolution, the District 
will not offer Engineering for Manufacturing or any other course that respondent is 
credentialed to teach in the 2017-2018 school year.   

The District’s Seniority List identifies respondent’s position as a 0.55 FTE.  

The teaching assignment is a 0.50 FTE.  However, pursuant to the Collective Bargaining 
Agreement, part-time teachers are compensated for attending staff meetings.  The Collective 
Bargaining Agreement states in pertinent part: 

 
11. 

 

Part-time unit members will have their base FTE status 
increased by 0.05 FTE to compensate them for their attendance 
at such meetings, e.g., if a part-time unit member’s base FTE 
status is 0.5 FTE, that status will be increased to 0.55 FTE. 

 
If the teacher no longer holds a teaching position with the District, the teacher no 

longer attends staff meetings and the compensation for attending staff meetings is not owed.  
In other words, the 0.05 FTE compensation applies only to part-time teachers currently 
employed by the District.   
 
Respondent’s Evidence and Contentions 
 

12. 

Respondent Betts has taught valuable skills to his students over the years. 

Respondent frequently receives calls from employers interested in hiring his students.  He 
has been able to find jobs for every student who was interested in pursuing a career in 

 

3 

machining.   
 

13. 

Respondent has attempted to increase the enrollment size of his class.  He 

developed interesting exercises for students to experience during tours and made 
presentations at participating high schools.  Unfortunately, only a handful of students visited 
his class during recent tours.  The course name was changed from Precision Machining to 
Engineering for Manufacturing as the result of a collaborative effort with the District to 
increase interest in his class.  In retrospect, it may have been detrimental.  
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
1. 

 
Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.  
 

2. 

 The services referenced in the PKS Resolution set forth in Factual Finding 3 

are the kind which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes 
and case law.  (See Ed. Code, § 44955; Campbell Elem. Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 
76 Cal.App.3d 796; Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  The 
decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but rather a 
proper exercise of the District’s discretion.   

 
3. 

 
4. 

The evidence established that no certificated employee with less seniority than 

respondent is being retained to render services which respondent is certificated and 
competent to perform.  (Factual Finding 10.)   

Respondent argues that because the Seniority List identifies his position as 

0.55 FTE and the PKS Resolution reduces only 0.50 FTE, the PKS Resolution is defective, 
or in the alternative, that he should be entitled to keep a 0.05 FTE position. This argument is 
rejected.  The teaching assignment is 0.50 FTE.  The additional 0.05 FTE constitutes 
compensation paid to part-time teachers to attend staff meetings.  If the teacher is no longer 
employed by the District, the compensation is not earned or paid.   
 

5. 

In accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, cause exists for 

reduction of particular kinds of services of the District, beginning no later than the 
commencement of the 2017-2018 school year, as follows: Teacher, 0.5 FTE position in 
Engineering for Manufacturing.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the school and the 
pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.  (Factual Findings 2, 3 
and 10.)   
 

6. 

Notice may be given to respondent Betts that his services will not be required 

for the 2017-2018 school year.   
 
 
 

 

4 

Notice may be given respondent John Betts that his services will not be required for 

ORDER 

 

the 2017-2018 school year. 
 
 
DATED: May 19, 2017 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
JILL SCHLICHTMANN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

5 

