BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
BELLFLOWER UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction In Force of:

CERTIFICATED TEACHERS OF THE 
BELLFLOWER UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT,

 Respondents.

OAH No. 2018030759

PROPOSED DECISION

Laurie R. Pearlman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Bellflower, California, on April 20, 
2018.

Eric Bathen, Attorney at Law, represented Bellflower Unified School District 

(District).

Daniel B. Rojas and Glenn Rothner, Attorneys at Law, represented 43
respondents1 listed in Exhibit 14, who were present at the hearing except as noted 
below. 

Respondents Jennifer Bergman, Amy M. Dolliver, Jenna K. Lind, Andre 
Lopez, Melissa McCutcheon, John Palmer, Matthew Sanjurjo, and Stacey Van Fossen 
were not present at the hearing, but were represented by Mr. Rojas and Mr. Rothner.

There was no appearance by, or on behalf of three respondents who had filed a 

request for hearing:  Jordan Clarke, Jeannette Garces and Florian Mocilnikar.  They 
were properly served with the Accusation and notice of hearing and they were 
determined to be in default.

Oral and documentary evidence was received and oral argument was heard.  
The record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 20, 2018.

 

 

1 The District dismissed Derek Bedell as a respondent in this matter because he 

is being re-employed by the District for the 2018-2019 school year due to attrition 
from a recent retirement.

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Tracy McSparren is the District’s Interim Superintendent.  Sulema 

Holguin is the District’s Director of Instructional Personnel.  Their actions were taken 
in their official capacities.  Ms. McSparren made and filed the Accusation in her
official capacity.  The District is a properly constituted public school district located 
in the County of Los Angeles.  It is composed of high schools (grades 7-12) and 
elementary schools (TK2 to grade 6).  Currently, it has an enrollment of 11,956 
students.

2.
District.

Respondents in this proceeding are certificated employees of the 

3.

On March 14, 2018, the District timely provided written notice to 

respondents, pursuant to Education Code3 sections 44949 and 44955 and Government 
Code section 11500 et seq., that they would not be re-employed by the District for the 
2018-2019 school year.  (Exhibit 1, p.1.)

4.

On April 5, 2018, the District filed and thereafter served the Accusation 

and related documents on respondents.  (Exhibit 2.)  Each respondent appearing in 
this matter filed a timely request for hearing for a determination of whether cause 
exists for not reemploying them for the 2018-2019 school year.4  All prehearing 
jurisdictional requirements were met.

5(A). On March 8, 2018, the Board of Education (Board) of the District 

adopted Resolution of the Board of Education’s Intention to Reduce and/or 
Discontinue Particular Kinds of Service (PKS Resolution) (Exhibit 1, pp. 6-8), which 
provides for the elimination of 55 full time equivalent (FTE) positions, described as 
follows: 

[T]hirty-two (32) single subject FTE reduction due to declining 
enrollment in grades K-12 in the statutory subject areas of: 
English, Mathematics, Science, Physical Education, Home 
Economics, Music, Art, Industrial and Technology Education, 
Social Science, and World Languages-Languages other than 

2 TK is a two-year Kindergarten program for children born between September 

 

 

2 and December 2.

3 All statutory citations are to the Education Code, unless indicated otherwise.

4 Eight individuals failed to file a request for hearing and did not appear, or 

have representation, at the hearing:  Sandra De Hoop, Ethel Fimbres, Rogelio Garcia, 
Katina Joncich, Valeh Khavari, Desirea Kyle, Andrew Malonzo, and Sixiang Xie.

2

English; and twenty-three (23) multiple subject FTE due to a 
reduction in student enrollment for a total of fifty-five (55) FTE 
reductions of particular kinds of services in grades TK-12th 
grade and Adult Re-Entry. 

5(B). The PKS Resolution (Exhibit 1, p. 7) indicates that the District shall

retain certain certificated employees, regardless of their seniority, if they are:

. . . considered necessary to meet the District’s program 
staffing needs.  Such employees shall be retained based upon 
their qualifications and credentials and include, but are not 
necessarily limited to, special education teachers and multiple 
subject teachers with BCC/BCLAD/BSP certification in 
Spanish.  In accordance with Education Code Section 44955(c) 
the Governing Board shall make assignments and 
reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be 
retained to render any service which seniority and 
qualifications entitle them to render.

5(C). The services set forth in Factual Finding 5(A) are particular kinds of 

services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.

6.

On March 8, 2018, the Board of the District adopted a Resolution of the 

Board of Education to Determine the Order of Termination of Certificated Personnel
(Exhibit 3), which establishes tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority
of certificated employees with the same date of first rendering paid service to the 
district.  The criteria establish a point system and process to be applied.

7.

The Board took action to reduce the services set forth in Factual 

Finding 5(A) because the District has lost approximately 1,500 students over the last 
four years and anticipates an additional 300 student decrease in enrollment during the 
2018-2019 school-year.  This would result in a loss of revenue to the District which 
receives funding based upon attendance and enrollment.  The District is overstaffed.  
The reduction of services is not related to the capabilities and dedication of the 
individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.  The decision to 
eliminate the particular kinds of services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but is 
rather a proper exercise of the District’s discretion.

8.

Ms. Holguin was responsible for implementation of the technical 

aspects of the Board’s Resolutions.  She and her staff reviewed available information 
to compile a tentative seniority list containing seniority dates, current assignments, 
credentials, certifications and other pertinent data.  The list was made available for 
review by certificated employees within the District so that they could verify, update 
or correct pertinent information.  

3

9.

The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of 
the least senior employees currently assigned in the various services being reduced, 
including whether more senior employees affected by the layoffs held credentials in 
another area and were entitled to displace or “bump” other less senior employees.  In 
determining who would be laid off for each kind of service reduced, the District 
counted the number of reductions not covered by the known vacancies, and 
determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  The District 
then checked the credentials of affected individuals and determined whether they 
could “bump” other employees.
 

10.

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations, 
retirements and requests for transfer in determining the actual number of layoff 
notices to be delivered to employees by March 15, 2018.

11.

The District rescinded the layoff notice to Derek Bedell due to attrition 

from a retirement which was announced after March 15, 2018.

12.

Respondents challenged the manner in which the District skipped 

Denise Lara, a high school teacher whose seniority date is August 26, 2015, and who 
holds a single subject credential in Spanish, and has CLAD, LDS, and ESL status.5  
Ms. Holguin explained that Sixiang Xie, a Mandarin language teacher6 who has more 
seniority than Ms. Lara, was laid off while Ms. Lara was skipped because, as a 
Spanish language teacher, Ms. Lara was considered necessary to meet the District’s 
program staffing needs, as expressed in the PKS Resolution.  (Exhibit 1, pp. 7-8.)  
Respondents did not establish that Ms. Xie, or anyone senior to Ms. Lara, was 
certified and competent to teach Spanish at the high school level.

13.

Respondents challenged the lay-off notice issued to Henry C. Chen, 

who teaches Driver’s Education and is also credentialed to teach Health.  Ms. Holguin 
testified that Mr. Chen’s lay-off notice is based upon the “Assignment Description”
(Exhibit 10), which Ms. Holguin and her staff put together to implement the Board’s 
PKS Resolution.  The “Assignment Description” in Exhibit 10 lists “Single Subject-
Elective/Vocational” with an FTE reduction of eight.  The particular 
Elective/Vocational subjects to be reduced are Music, Mandarin, Technology, 
Industrial Arts, Art, Health, and Industrial Technology.  Driver’s Education is not
included in that list.  Moreover, “Single Subject-Elective/Vocational” is not identified 
in the PKS Resolution as one of the particular kinds of services to be reduced.  
(Exhibit 1, pp. 7-8.)  Accordingly, the layoff notice for Mr. Chen, a Driver’s 
Education teacher, must be rescinded.

5 These designations indicate that Ms. Lara is able to teach English-learners.

 

 

6 As noted previously, Ms. Xie did not request a hearing, nor was she present 

or represented at the hearing.

4

14.

Respondents assert that pursuant to Education Code section 44955, 

subdivision (b), the school board cannot terminate the services of “more than a 
corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the district” if the layoffs 
are the result of a decline in average daily attendance in all of the schools of a district 
for the first six months of the school year.  Respondents contend that because the 
District failed to compute a “corresponding percentage,” the reduction in force cannot 
be upheld.  Respondent’s argument is not well-taken.  The Board identified this as a 
reduction of particular kinds of services, rather than as a lay-off resulting from a 
decline in the average daily attendance in all of its schools for the first six months of 
the school year.  Although the District noted that it was reducing particular kinds of 
services due to a drop in student enrollment, the reduction in force is not based upon a 
decline in average daily attendance during a specified time period.  The District’s 
failure to compute a percentage does not render its action arbitrary or capricious, or 
an improper exercise of its discretion.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Section 44949 provides in pertinent part:

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by 
the governing board that his or her services will not be required for the 
ensuing  year for the reasons specified in Section 44955, the governing 
board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the 
superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that it has been 
recommended that the notice be given to the employee, and stating the 
reasons therefore.

2.

Section 44955 provides in pertinent part as follows:

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her position for 
causes  other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and 
Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no  probationary employee 
shall be deprived of his or her position for cause other than as specified 
in Sections 44948 to 44949, inclusive.

(b) Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all of 
the  schools  of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in 
session shall have declined below the corresponding period of either of 
the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the  governing  board 
determines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following 
year as a result of the termination of an interdistrict tuition agreement 
as defined in Section 46304, whenever a particular kind of service is to 
be reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following 
school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the 

5

modification of curriculum, and when in the  opinion  of  the  governing 
board of the district it shall have become necessary by reason of any of 
these conditions to decrease the number of permanent employees in the 
district,  the  governing  board  may terminate  the  services  of  not  more 
than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the 
district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school 
year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by statute,  the  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this 
section while any  probationary employee, or any other employee with 
less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.

[¶] . . . [¶]

As between employees who first rendered paid service to the district on 
the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of 
termination solely on the basis on needs of the district and the students 
thereof.  Upon the request of any employee whose order of termination 
is so determined, the governing board shall furnish . . . a statement of 
the specific criteria used in determining the order of termination and the 
application of the criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other 
employees in the group . . . .

(c) . . . [S]ervices of such employees shall be terminated in the inverse 
of the order in which they were employed, as determined by the board 
in  accordance  with  Sections  44844  and  44845.    In  the  event  that  a 
permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices and a right 
to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be 
deemed reemployed for the ensuing school year.

The governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such 
a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which 
their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. . . . 

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of 
the following reasons:

(1)  The  district  demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 
teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated 
employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary to  teach  that 
course  or  course  of  study or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others 
with more seniority do not possess.

6

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 

and 44955 were met.

3.

4.

Boards of education hold significant discretion in determining the need 

to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services, which is not open to second-
guessing in this proceeding.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified 
School Dist. (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  Such policy-making decisions are not 
subject to arguments as to the wisdom of their enactment, their necessity, or the 
motivations for the decisions.  (California Teachers Assn. v. Huff (1992) 5 
Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.)  Such decisions and action must be reasonable under the 
circumstances, with the understanding that “such a standard may permit a difference 
of opinion.”  (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831, 845.)  Numerous cases stand for the proposition that the process of 
implementing layoffs is a very flexible one and that school districts retain great 
flexibility in carrying out the process.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. 
Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796.)

5.

The services set forth in Factual Finding 5 are particular kinds of 

services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of section 44955.  
The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the 
reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s 
schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.

6.

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 

44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to 
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce service’ 
by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board 
of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

7.

Cause exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44945 to reduce the 

number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or 
discontinuation of the particular kinds of services set forth in Factual Finding 5.  The 
District properly identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds 
of services that the Board directed be reduced or discontinued, except as to Henry 
Chen, as noted in Factual Finding 13.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if 

the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities which their more senior 
counterparts lack.  (Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 
Cal.App.3d 399; Santa Clara, supra.)  This “skipping” is a process, under section 

8.

9.

7

44955, subdivision (d)(1), wherein a school district may choose to demonstrate a 
specific need and that an employee has the special training and experience to meet 
that need.  In fact, school districts have been permitted to present at hearing, for the 
first time, evidence of the type of tie-breaking that might apply.  (Zalac v. Governing 
Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838; Bledsoe v. Biggs 
Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127.)  In the case of Ms. Lara, the 
decision to retain her was proper under the general language of the resolution 
allowing the board to deviate from strict seniority to retain her, based upon her 
qualifications and credentials and to meet the needs of the District, as well as the 
statutory authority under section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

ORDER

1.

The Bellflower Unified School District may give notice to respondents 

Alvarez, Arlene; Azevedo, Ashley; Baca, Elizabeth; Bergman, Jennifer; Blanck, 
Brooke; Chang, Christina; Chatterjee, Anita; Chin, Jit Fong; Clark IV, Alexis; Clarke, 
Jordan Zachary; Croes, Amanda; Dolliver, Amy M.; Ellis, Mark; Garces, Jeannette; 
Gonzalez, Javier; Haggard, Stephanie; Hamilton, Holly M.; Hofmans, Lynnette R.; 
Hooker, Marisela; Huntington, Jennifer S.; King, Kelly A.; Kinsey, Ben; Klingsporn, 
Heather; Lind, Jenna K.; Lopez, Andre; Lopez, Misthian; McCutcheon, Melissa; 
Mendoza, Albert D.; Mocilnikar, Florian Stuart; Moran, Guadalupe; Munoz, Michael; 
O’Connell, Rebecca; Opfer, Kristie M.; Palmer, John; Pedersen, Hillary; Sanjurjo, 
Matthew; Shaheen, Phil; Silva, Anita; Sneddon, Reid; Sochin, Deborah; Stiglbauer, 
Christine K.; Stocks, Elizabeth; Ugale, Summer; Van Fossen, Stacey; and Webber, 
Joseph, that their services will not be required for the 2018-2019 school year.

2.

The Bellflower Unified School District may not give notice to 

respondent Henry C. Chen that his services will not be required for the 2018-2019 
school year.

Dated: 

__________________________
LAURIE R. PEARLMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

8

April 27, 2018