BEFORE THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
MONTECITO UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT
COUNTY OF SANTA BARBARA
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force 
Involving:

 

RONALD ZECHER
Certificated  Employee  of  the  Montecito  Union 
School District,
 
   
 

 Respondent.

 

 Case No.  2018040060

PROPOSED DECISION

Eileen Cohn, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, heard this 

matter on April 23, 2018, in Montecito, California.

Elizabeth B. Mori, Attorney at Law, represented Anthony Ranii, Superintendent 

(Superintendent) and Montecito Union School District (District).

Robert A. Bartosh, Attorney at Law, represented Ronald Zecher (Respondent), who was 

present.

Oral and documentary evidence, and evidence by oral stipulation on the record, was 

received at the hearing, and the matter was submitted for decision on April 24, 2018.

SUMMARY

The Board of Trustees of the Montecito Union School District (Board) has decided to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) and has given Respondent and others 
notice of its intent not to reemploy them for the 2018-2019 school year as certificated employees.  
Respondent is a music teacher and music services have been reduced by .55 Full-Time Equivalent 
(FTE) thereby displacing Respondent.  Respondent claims he met the competency criteria set forth 
by the District and as, such, he was wrongfully laid off instead of more junior certificated 
elementary school teachers.  The sole issue in dispute is whether Respondent meets the 
competency criteria established by the Board based upon his one year of teaching in a special 
program. The weight of the evidence established that the Superintendent properly accounted for 

Respondent's experience, he did not meet the Board's competency criteria and, therefore, is subject 
to layoff pursuant to the Board's Resolution.

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

3.

The Superintendent filed the Statement of Reduction in Force in his official 

capacity.  The District is an elementary school district located in Santa Barbara County.  

Respondent is a certificated employee of the District.  

On April 3, 2018, the Superintendent issued the District Statement of Reduction in 

Force and served it and other required documents on Respondent.  

4.

Respondent timely submitted a Request for Hearing/Notice of Participation in 
Reduction in Force Hearing Form, requesting a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying him for the 2018-2019 school year.

5.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services (PKS)

6.

(a)

On February 20, 2018, at a regular meeting of the Board of Trustees of the 

District (the Governing Board), upon recommendation of the Superintendent, the Governing 
Board adopted Resolution No. 2017/2018-12 (Resolution-12), entitled "Establishment of Criteria 
for Order of Layoff and Reemployment Following Layoff of Certified Employees with Same First 
Date of Paid Service in a Probationary Position."  Resolution-12 provides for the order of 
termination where two or more certificated employees first rendered paid, probationary service to 
the District on the same date (tie-breaking criteria).  (Ex. 6.)  The Board set the following tie-
breaking criteria:

//

//

//

//

//

2

CRITERIA

Active Credentials

Possession of BCLAD, CLAD, SDIE, or EL
Certification
Prior  K-12  Public  School  Teaching 
Experience
Master's Degree
Doctorate Degree
National Board Certificate

2 points
1 point
5 points

POINTS
2 points per clear credential
1 point per preliminary credential
1 point per supplementary credential
1 point

1 point per year (5 points maximum)

(Ibid.)

(b)

In the event of a tie after the points are applied, the District will use a lottery 

system with low lottery numbers indicating low seniority.  (Id.)

(c)

The criteria are reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of 

certificated employees.  

7.

(a)

On March 5, 2018, at a regular meeting of the Governing Board, upon 

recommendation of the Superintendent, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2017/2018-
15, entitled “Resolution to Decrease the Number of Certificated Employees Due to a Reduction or 
Elimination of Particular Kinds of Services” (Resolution-15), to reduce or discontinue continue the 
following PKS for the 2018-2019 school year:

FTE1

PKS
K-6 Elementary Teacher 

Music
Art
Physical Education
Spanish
Librarian

(Ex. 1.)  

 

 Total FTE

4.0

 .55
 .33
 .25
 .30
 .20
5.63

3

(b)

The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are PKS

that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code2 section 44955.

 

1 Full time equivalent.  
2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.  

8.

On March 5, 2018, at a regular meeting of the Governing Board, upon 

recommendation of the Superintendent, the Governing Board also adopted Resolution No. 
2017/2018-13 (Resolution-13), entitled "Resolution to Establish Competency Criteria Due to a 
Reduction in Particular Kinds of Certificated Services," which further established competency 
rules when a less senior employee possesses competency "in those areas of service in which the 
Board has determined not to reduce services."  (Ex. 7.)  The Board established the following 
criteria:

[¶] [a]s to any certificated employee who seeks to move into a 
position requiring certification qualifications held by a less senior 
certificated employee, the employee who seeks to move into a 
position requiring certification held by a less senior certificated 
employee, the employee must have teaching experience in the 
subject area and/or elementary grade level for at least one (1) year 
within the last (10) years.  

(Ex. 7.)  

9.

(a)

On March 9, 2018, the Superintendent provided notice to Respondent, via 
personal delivery, that .55 of a FTE of his services will not be required for the 2018-2019 school 
year due to the reduction of PKS in the area of Music.  (Ex. 4.)  Another music teacher, more 
senior than Respondent, did not receive a layoff notice. Respondent is the most junior music 
teacher.  

(b)

The Superintendent also provided timely and proper notice of layoff to six 
other certificated employees.  (Ex. 3.)  No other certificated employee requested a hearing.3  There 
were no challenges to the service, timeliness or comprehensiveness of the notice.  

(c)

(d)

seniority than Respondent. 

The layoff notice to HN, a certificated employee, was rescinded. 

Three teachers who received layoff notices, PM, KL, and LM have less 

10.

(a)

The reduction of services set forth in factual finding number 7 is related to 

the welfare of the District’s schools and its pupils, in the context of the loss of revenue and the 
need to continue providing services to students served by the District, and it has become necessary 
to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the Board.

(b)

The Governing Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set 

forth in finding 7 at the request of the Superintendent because of the anticipated reduction of 
funding and the anticipated decline in student enrollment.  The District is part of a community that 

3  To protect their privacy the names of the other certificated employees, who did not 

request a hearing, are represented by initials.  

 

4

has been seriously impacted by extreme flooding, but projected student enrollment for the 2018-
2019 school year is not based solely upon temporary circumstances, but on historical trends.  
Student enrollment is declining and is anticipated to decline to 390 students from 420 students 
during the 2018-2019 school year.  The number of classrooms will be reduced from 26 to 22.  

(c)

The evidence confirms that the decision to reduce the PKS is neither 

arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the Governing Board and 
Superintendent’s discretion. The decision involved extensive discussions with administrators 
and District leadership and was due to budgetary constraints and decreased enrollment.  The 
decision for layoffs was made in a manner that would cause the least disruption in services to 
students.  

(b)

The District was able to lower the number of layoffs by accounting for 

attrition by granting the request of two teachers to job share one teaching position, and one 
teacher's decision to retire.  As a result of its accounting, the District was able to reduce the number 
of  classroom teachers receiving notices.4  

11.

(a)

The District provided foundation for the resolutions and other exhibits, and 

the rationale for the layoffs from the testimony of two credible and well-qualified witnesses 
directly involved in the reduction in force for the 2018-2019 school year: Virginia Alvarez, Chief 
Business Official and Human Resources, and Superintendent Anthony Ranii.  Ms. Alvarez 
developed the resolutions with the Superintendent and both were present at the Board meetings 
where they were introduced and passed.  

(b) Ms. Alvarez conducted careful and extensive due diligence to confirm the 

accuracy of the seniority list and respondent's competency before determining the layoffs.  She 
audited teachers' personnel files for their credentials, checked the California Commission on 
Teacher Credentialing's public records to make sure all the teachers' credentials were accounted 
for, and e-mailed the list to the teachers for their review.  No challenges were raised regarding the 
accuracy of the seniority list and the evidence established that it is accurate and correct.  (Ex. 8.)

(c)

Having no record of respondent's employment in the District as a K-6 

classroom teacher, Ms. Alvarez also contacted respondent's previous employer, the Santa Barbara 
School Districts to ascertain whether Respondent fulfilled the competency requirements within the 
last ten years for his work in the Santa Barbara School Districts.  The response she received from 

 

4  Respondent is teacher number 30 of 41 teachers with seniority with number one being 
the highest and number 41, the lowest.  Respondent started the same date as teacher number 31, 
RM.  Respondent is also more senior than teacher number 33, AC, who started on August 26, 
2014, and is also a fourth-grade teacher.  Whether Respondent met the tie-breaking criteria with 
RM, or is entitled to "bump" AC, is not reached in this decision because Respondent does not meet 
the District's competency criteria to "bump" into the positions held by either teacher.  

5

that school district, did not put Ms. Alvarez on notice that Respondent had fulfilled the 
competency criteria needed to avoid a layoff.5  That school district reported to Ms. Alvarez that 
Respondent worked from January 2, 2001 through August 4, 2012, as a child development and 
music teacher.  

Evidence of Respondent's Competency

12.

Respondent has worked for the District for under five years, and has a start date of 
August 26, 2013.  He is a full-time certificated employee currently assigned as the music teacher 
(80 percent) and an English-learner (EL) teacher (20 percent).  Respondent possesses multiple 
subject and single subject teaching credentials, a cross-cultural language and academic 
development (CLAD) certificate, a Master of Arts degree, an administrative services credential 
and a child development program director permit. 

13.

Respondent has been an employee of Santa Barbara schools, either with the Santa 

Barbara School Districts or the District, for many years.  He began as a custodian in 1987.  For 
many years he worked half-time for both the Santa Barbara School Districts and the District as a 
contract employee.  At the Santa Barbara School Districts he worked in an administrative position 
responsible for home instruction for parents with preschool or pre-kindergarten (Pre-K)6 school 
children and worked in the child development program as a teacher in the Pre-K /family literacy 
program.  After he worked in the Pre-K program he worked as a music teacher.  

14.

Respondent provided credible and sincere testimony about his work for the District 

and for Santa Barbara School Districts.  Respondent challenges the Superintendent and Ms. 
Villegas's conclusion that he does not meet the competency requirements set by Resolution-13 to 

 

5  Respondent objected to the admissibility of the e-mail communication with the Santa 

Barbara School Districts.  (Ex. 9.)  Over respondent's objection it was admitted as 
administrative hearsay pursuant to Government Code section 11514, to the extent that the e-
mail supports and explains the testimony of Ms. Alvarez and Respondent, who also testified 
about his prior work experience at the Santa Barbara School Districts, which it did.  In 
addition, whether or not the e-mail is direct evidence of Respondent's competency under the 
reduction in force criteria, it is direct evidence of Ms. Alvarez's due diligence and good faith 
when she determined Respondent did not meet the competency criteria for retention.  
Admissibility under the Administrative Procedure Act, which governs this action, is broader 
than that of proceedings governed strictly by the California Evidence Code.  However, when 
an appropriate hearsay objection is raised, pursuant to Government Code 11514, as it was 
here, the e-mail can come in only as administrative hearsay, unless, there is another basis for 
admission.  The ALJ considered whether the e-mail constituted a business record pursuant to 
Evidence Code section 1271, and determined that it did not meet the required criteria.  

6  Pre-K and preschool are used interchangeably and refer to the same program in this 

decision. 

6

teach a multi-subject, K-6 classroom.  Respondent does not challenge the District's reduction of 
music services. Respondent maintains that he meets the competency requirements when he 
purportedly performed one year in the last 10 in the elementary grade level, and therefore should 
have been retained over other certificated staff who teach self-contained multi-subject elementary 
school classes.  Respondent asserts that he was competent to teach a multi-subject elementary 
school class and as a result, he should have been retained instead of teacher RM, based upon his 
credentials under the tie-breaking criteria for teachers starting the same date, or AC, a more junior 
certificated multi-subject elementary school teacher.  (Ex. 8.)  AC and RM teach fourth grade and 
were not subject to the reduction in force notification.  Respondent has not taught one FTE year at 
the fourth-grade level.  He has been a substitute teacher for undisclosed grade-levels but there is no 
evidence that he has taught for a FTE of one year as a substitute elementary school teacher.  

15.

(a)

The parties do not dispute that if Respondent had taught one FTE year of

transitional kindergarten he would have satisfied the competency criteria.  Transitional 
kindergarten (T-K) is essentially a two-year kindergarten.  It follows the curriculum of a one-year 
kindergarten program and uses the curriculum, grading and any common core requirements 
attendant to a kindergarten program.  A T-K is considered "elementary grade level"; Pre-K is not. 

(b)

Respondent maintains that he fulfilled the competency requirements when 
he taught a 24-child class during the 2009-2010 school year in the Santa Barbara School Districts
identified as a Pre-K family literacy program.  During the 2009-2010 school year he was asked to 
teach a Pre-K Family Literacy Program (PKFL), which would become the model for that school 
district's T-K.  Respondent testified that he taught the full range of subjects, including, language 
arts, math, science, in addition to physical education and music.  

(c)

Jennie A. Martinez, the retired child development teacher and child 

development coordinator of that school district, wrote a letter which supported and explained 
Respondent's testimony.  (Ex. C.)  Ms. Martinez hired Respondent as the "ideal teacher candidate" 
who met the school district's goal of hiring a multi-subject credentialed teacher with experience in 
"curriculum development, knowledge of the California Teaching Standards and Preschool 
Learning Foundations, familiarity [with] working with 2nd language learners, confidence with 
working with families, and knowledge of the community."  (Ibid.)  Ms. Martinez expressed 
enthusiasm for Respondent's work and accomplishments, including his application of his multi-
subject credential to "prepare the children for the transition to a rigorous kindergarten experience." 
(Id.)  The students scored well on a measure called the "Kindergarten Student Entrance Profile" 
developed by the University of California, Santa Barbara, and Respondent created "meaningful 
activities for parent engagement, and " mentored a second teacher."  (Id.)  

16.

Respondent's claim that he taught a class substantively similar to a T-K was not 

sufficiently supported by the evidence.  Respondent admits that he taught in a pilot program and 
that the T-K program was not technically a required program or introduced in the Santa Barbara 
School Districts until after the 2010-2011 school year.  Respondent's participation ended with his 
participation in the development of the program as part of his Pre-K assignment during the 2009-

7

2010 school year.  During cross-examination, Respondent candidly stated he used a progress 
report or rubric used for Pre-K pupils.  Significantly, Ms. Martinez did not use language that 
confirmed that Respondent's class substantively met the requirements of a T-K, and aside from 
Respondent's testimony and Ms. Martinez's letter there was no supporting documentation of the 
curriculum.  Ms. Martinez wrote that after the 2009-2010 school year "[t]he intention was he 
would transition to a T-K classroom that would serve as a model for the district."  (Ex. C.)  Ms. 
Martinez does not distinguish between a Pre-K and T-K curriculum.  She identifies the classroom 
that he worked to design as continuing today as a "quality Pre-K and T-K experience."  (Ibid.) 
Accordingly, it is unclear what proportion of time was spent on Pre-K, or what part of the 
curriculum was considered T-K.  

17.

The Superintendant provided competent testimony that rebutted Respondent's claim 
that he served one FTE year in a T-K class.  Prior to his tenure with the District, the Superintendent
worked in a previous school district where he oversaw three preschools and kindergarten 
programs.  He was familiar with T-K as a two-year kindergarten for those children who do not 
meet the cut-off to begin kindergarten.  A T-K is different than preschool as it applies the state 
standards required for kindergarten, but over the course of two years, instead of one.  In contrast, 
preschool is not driven by state standards and focuses on preacademic skills such as sound-letter 
correspondence, play-based exercises and skills such as cutting.  

18.

The weight of the evidence established that Respondent does not meet the Board's 
competency criteria to "bump" into another certificated position.  Accordingly, the District met its 
burden of proof that no certificated employee junior to Respondent has been retained to render a 
service which Respondent is certificated and competent to render.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. The party asserting a claim or making charges in an administrative hearing 

generally has the burden of proof.  (Brown v. City of Los Angeles (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th 
155.)  As no other law or statute requires otherwise, the standard of proof in this case requires 
proof by a preponderance of the evidence.  (Evid. Code, § 115.)  Therefore, the District bears 
the burden of establishing cause to affirm the proposed layoff decisions by a preponderance of 
the evidence.

2.

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955 were met.  Therefore, jurisdiction was established for this proceeding as to Respondent 
by reason of findings 1-5.

3.

The District proved by a preponderance of the evidence that it fulfilled the 

requirements of  Education Code section 44955 to reduce the number of certificated 
employees due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services by reason of 
findings 6-11.  The Board’s decision to reduce or eliminate the identified services set forth in 

8

finding 7 was neither arbitrary nor capricious in that the decision relates solely to the welfare 
of the District’s schools and the pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949, 
by reason of Findings 6-11.  Boards of Education hold significant discretion in determining the 
need to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services, which is not open to second-guessing in 
this proceeding.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  Such policy-
making decisions are not subject to arguments as to the wisdom of their enactment, their necessity, 
or the motivations for the decisions.  (California Teachers Assn. v. Huff (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 
1513, 1529.)  Such decisions and action must be reasonable under the circumstances, with the 
understanding that "such a standard may permit a difference of opinion."  (Santa Clara Federation 
of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  School districts have discretion to 
define positions in the manner which they will be taught as long as it is done in good faith.  
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334.)  

4.

Pursuant to Education Code sections 44845 and 87414 every probationary or 

permanent employee is deemed to have been employed on the date upon which he or she first 
rendered paid service in a probationary position.  

5.

(a)

The District met its burden of proof that Respondent did not meet the 

competency requirements to teach a multi-subject elementary grade class by reason of 
findings 6-18.  The weight of the evidence established that no competent permanent or 
probationary employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service for which 
Respondent is certificated and competent to teach pursuant to Education Code section 44955, 
subdivision (a).  There was insufficient evidence that Respondent had one year of experience 
as a transitional kindergarten teacher or elementary school teacher.  Respondent relies on 
Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified Sch. Dist (Bledsoe)(2009) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 136-137, where the 
court determined that the teacher was qualified to teach under the broader qualifications 
applicable to a community day school.  However, the facts in Bledsoe are distinct from the 
circumstances here where, despite Respondent's credentials, he has not met the reasonable 
criteria of "teaching experience in the subject area and/or elementary grade level for at least one 
(1) year within the last (10) years," by reason of findings 6-18.  

(b)

The District met its burden of proof that it made the appropriate 

"correlation between the applicant's specific training and experience and the duties of the 
available position."  (King v. Berkeley Unified Sch. Dist. (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1019.)  
The Governing Board's adoption of competency criteria by Resolution-13 was reasonable.  
(Daux v. Kern Community College Dist. (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d. 555, 565.)  

6.

By reason of the findings herein, the District met its burden of proof and may 
notify the Respondent that his services will not be required for the 2018/2019 school year by 
reason of the whole of the findings herein.

//

9

ORDER

The Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained.

The  Superintendent  may notify  Respondent Ronald Zelcher that his services will 

not be required for the 2018-2019 school year due to the reduction of particular kinds of services

1.

2.

DATED:

____________________
EILEEN COHN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

May 1, 2018