BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
COACHELLA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of 
Certain Certificated Employees of Coachella
Valley Unified School District.

OAH No. 2018030556

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in Thermal, California, on April 18, 2018.

Margaret A. Chidester, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Chidester & Associates 

represented the Coachella Valley Unified School District.

Jon Y. Vanderpool, Attorney at Law, Smith, Steiner, Vanderpool & Wax, represented 

respondents identified in Exhibit “I”.  

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Gwendolyn Dixon, Ralph England, Holly 

Kaye, Hidall Garcia, Olga Noris and Abraham Ramirez Oropez.  Mr. Vanderpool did not 
represent the foregoing individuals.

The matter was submitted on May 3, 2018.1

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION

The Governing Board of the Coachella Valley Unified School District determined to 

reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers for budgetary reasons.  

 

 

1 The record remained open for receipt of briefs.  On April 26, 2018, the parties filed
briefs.  The District’s Post- Hearing Brief was marked for identification as Exhibit 13, and 
Respondents’ Closing Brief was marked for identification as Exhibit C.  On May 3, 2018, the 
District notified the administrative law judge and opposing counsel that she would not file a 
reply brief; this document was marked for identification as Exhibit 14  

On May 3, 2018, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted.

The decision was not related to the competency or dedication of the individuals whose 
services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.  

The Coachella Valley Unified School District (District) staff carried out the 

Governing Board’s decision by using a selection process involving review of credentials and 
seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between/among employees with the same first dates 
of paid probationary service.  The selection process was in accordance with the requirements 
of the Education Code. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Coachella Valley Unified School District serves more than 17,000 

students and consists of 14 elementary schools, three middle schools, two comprehensive 
high schools, one middle high school, a continuation school and an adult education high 
school.

2.

For the 2018-2019 school year, the District is facing a projected budget deficit 

of $11 million over the next two years.  On March 1, 2018, in an effort to bridge the 
projected budget deficit, the Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2018-#62.  According 
to the Resolution, the Governing Board determined that it was “in the best interests of the 
District, and the welfare of the students thereof, to reduce or discontinue certain particular 
kinds of services hereinafter enumerated.”

In the Resolution, the Governing Board directed the Superintendent to send notices to 
all employees affected by the particular kinds of services (PKS) reductions or eliminations.  
Also, the Governing Board directed the Superintendent, or his designee, to make assignments 
and reassignments of certificated employees following implementation of the PKS reductions 
or eliminations to ensure that each remaining certificated employee is assigned to a position 
for which he or she is properly credentialed pursuant to Education Code section 44955.2

3.

The Resolution identified the following PKS for reduction or elimination by 

Full Time Equivalent (FTE) for a total of 96 FTEs:

PKS
Multiple Subject Credential Teachers
(K-8)
English Teachers
Social Science Teachers
Mathematics Teachers
Mild Moderate Special Education Teacher
PE Teacher

FTE

63
 10
5
 5
 1
 1

2 Hereinafter all reference is to the Education Code unless otherwise stated.

 

 

2

Spanish Teachers
Counselors
Science Teachers
Agriculture

 2
 6
 2
 1

5.

6.

7.

4.

On March 2, 2018, Maria G. Gandera, Ed.D. (Dr. Gandera), Assistant 

Superintendent of Human Resources and Risk Management, sent preliminary layoff notices 
to the certificated employees identified for layoff.  A copy of the Resolution and information 
concerning the right to request a hearing were enclosed with the preliminary layoff notices.

In response to the preliminary notices, 96 people submitted hearing requests.  

These persons are identified in Exhibit “II”.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied.

Although properly noticed, there was no appearance by or on behalf of 

Respondents Gwendolyn Dixon, Ralph Dixon, Holly Kaye, Hidall Garcia, Olga Noris and 
Abraham Ramirez Oropez, and the matter proceeded against them as a default pursuant to 
Government Code section 11520.

8.

The District considered all known attrition, including resignations and 

retirements, in determining the actual number of final layoff notices to be delivered to its 
certificated employees.  As a result of attrition, the District proposed to reduce or eliminate 
57 FTE positions.  

During the hearing, the District rescinded the layoff notice previously issued to 

Gabriel Baca.

9.

The District’s Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources and Risk 

Management was responsible for implementing the technical aspects of the layoff.  She 
developed a seniority list for probationary or permanent certificated staff that included, 
among other matters, the name of the certificated employee, seniority date, status, 
assignment, credential(s) and authorization(s).

The seniority date was based on the first date of paid service rendered.3  A teacher 

hired as a probationary employee who worked as a substitute or temporary employee for at 
least 75 percent of the school days during the previous year and had performed the duties 
normally required of a certificated employee of the school district, was deemed to have 
served a complete school year as a probationary employee if employed as a probationary 
employee for the following school year.  The teacher was entitled to have that earlier year 

3 Code section 44845

 

 

3

counted as a year of probationary service.  The prior year was “tacked” on for seniority 
purposes, 4 but only one year could be tacked. 

Dr. Gandera used the seniority list to develop a proposed order of layoff to determine 

the least senior employees currently assigned to provide the service being reduced.  Then, 
she determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another area that 
would entitle them to “bump” other junior employees.  In determining who would be laid off 
for the service reduced, Dr. Gandera counted the number of reductions and determined the 
impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  Then, she checked the credentials of 
each affected individual and whether he/she could “bump” another employee.  

10.

Respondent Nicole Reyes challenged her seniority date of October 7, 2015, 

arguing that her seniority date should be changed to August 29, 2014.

During the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 school years, Ms. Reyes did not have a 
credential; instead, she worked with a 30-day emergency substitute teaching permit.  From 
October 29, 2014, to December 12, 2014, she worked a long-term substitute assignment 
without a credential and then worked a second long-term assignment to the end of the 2014-
2015 school year.  Although both assignments served third grade students, they were distinct.  
The first was substituting for a classroom teacher who returned in December 2014, and the 
second was substituting in intervention instruction.

Service under a provisional credential, such as a 30-day short term substitute permit,

does not count toward permanency.5  On October 7, 2015, Ms. Reyes received her intern 
multiple subject teaching credential and a regular assignment.  An intern serves two complete 
consecutive years, then a full third year.  Only after three years, two under an intern 
credential, and one under a preliminary credential, does the individual earn permanency.

Seniority is determined as of the date a certificated employee “first rendered paid 

service in a probationary position.”  (See Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Assn. v. 
Bakersfield City School District (2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1300-1301, citing San Jose 
Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 640-641 [statute applies to probationary 
service in any position requiring certification qualifications].).  Accordingly, employees who 
are hired to serve in a capacity other than probationary employment are not entitled to have 
that service recognized for purposes of seniority.  (Id. at p. 1293 [“temporary employees do 
not accrue seniority”].)

Based on the foregoing, Respondent Reyes’s seniority date should not be changed to 

August 29, 2014.  Her seniority date of October 7, 2015, was properly calculated.

4 Code section 44918

 

 

5 Code section 44911

4

11.

The Governing Board elected to exempt certain certificated employees from 
the order of certified layoff because of special training experience or credentials that others 
with more seniority do not possess.  Relevant to this proceeding were “dual immersion 
teachers who are presently assigned to teach dual immersion instruction and who will be 
assigned to teach in a District dual immersion program in 2018-2019.”    

As to the Governing Board’s decision to skip the dual language immersion teachers, 
Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), authorizes a District to deviate from terminating a 
certificated employee in order of seniority if it demonstrates a specific need for personnel to 
teach a specific course or course of study and that the certificated employee has special 
training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those 
services, which others with more seniority do not possess.  

Because subdivision (b) of Code section 44955 mandates that “the services of no 

permanent employee may be terminated . . . while any probationary employee, or any other 
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent employee 
is certificated and competent to render,” junior employees may be given retention priority 
pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), only if they possess special training and 
experience that their more senior counterparts lack.  (Alexander v. Board of Trustees (1983) 
139 Cal.App.3d 567, 571; Moreland Teachers Assn. v. Kurze (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 
655.)

The “special training and experience necessary” language in Code section 44955, 

subdivision (d)(1), must be read in context with Code section 44955, subdivision (b).  When 
one does that, it appears that the word “necessary” substantially limits Code section 44955, 
subdivision (d)(1).  A district may require special training and special experience, but a 
district cannot require more of either than is “necessary” to teach the course.  If “necessary” 
were not read in that limiting way, Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), could be used to 
circumvent the seniority rights secured by Code section 44955, subdivision (b).  On the other 
hand, reading “necessary” in that limiting way harmonizes the language of the two 
subdivisions.

Thus, a district may not use skipping criteria that are not “necessary” to teach a 
course.  Requiring a certain type of experience or a certain length of experience may be 
appropriate but only if it is shown to be “necessary.”  There are a few decisions in which 
courts have approved of a requirement of prior experience.  Martin v. Kingfield School 
District (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, is an example.  That case concerned the section 44956 
preferred right of reappointment.  An elementary school teacher who had been terminated 
asserted her right to be rehired to fill a new position as a middle school science teacher, a 
position for which she was credentialed.  The district established a requirement of prior 
experience as a middle school teacher and did not rehire Martin for the position.  The case 
stands for the proposition that a district, in requiring prior middle school experience for a 
middle school science position, did not abuse its discretion.  However, as the job descriptions 
introduced at this hearing demonstrated, the District did not require prior secondary school 
experience before hiring counselors, it merely desired it. 

5

The seminal case for the retention of less senior employees, Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified 

School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, requires a district to not only establish a specific 
need for personnel to teach a specific course of study, but to also establish that the 
certificated employee it proposes to retain has special training and experience necessary to 
teach that course or course of study or to provide those services.  (Id. at p.138.)  Prior 
administrative law decisions may be relied upon when making those determinations.  (Id. at 
137-142.)

The District has a diverse student population and a significant number of students 

who learn in Spanish and in English; in certain schools, there is a relatively high demand for 
teachers who are fluent in both languages.  The junior teachers who are being skipped and 
retained hold the credentials necessary to teach in both languages.

With the exception of the dual language immersion teachers exempted by the 
Governing Board Resolution at Exhibit B, no less senior teachers are retained while more 
senior teachers credentialed to perform the same service are laid off.  There are no more 
senior teachers being laid off who possess a Bilingual, Cross-cultural, Language and 
Academic Development Authorization, Bilingual Certificate of Competence or Bilingual 
Authorization in Spanish, the credentials required to teach in a dual immersion program (the 
2017-2018 standard of dual immersion competency).  No senior teacher is being laid off to 
allow retention of a junior teacher with the same credential.

12.

The services that the Governing Board proposed to reduce were “particular 

kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955.  The Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular 
kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of 
discretion. 

13.

The Governing Board’s reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of 

services related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuance 
of particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees of the District as determined by the Governing Board. 

14.

There was no evidence that the District proposes to eliminate any services 

mandated by state or federal statute or regulations.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 

6

thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.) 

3.

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the 
Coachella Valley Unified School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
services.  The cause for the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is 
related solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof. 

4.

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
continuing position that he/she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior 
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Poppers 
v. Tamalpais Union High School Dist. (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399, 405.)

5.

No employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to 

perform a service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render.

ORDER

1.

The layoff notice issued to Gabriel Baca is rescinded.  The Preliminary Notice 

of Not to Reemploy and Statement of Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of 
Services against Gabriel Baca is dismissed.

2.

Except as provided in paragraph one of this Order, the Preliminary Notices of 

Intent Not to Reemploy and Statement of Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of 
Services against Respondents listed on Exhibit “II” are sustained.  The Coachella Valley 
Unified School District shall give notice to these Respondents listed on Exhibit “III” before 
May 15, 2018, that their services will not be required for the 2018-2019 school year because 
of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.

3.

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

DATED:  May 4, 2018

 

_______________________________________
VALLERA J. JOHNSON
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

7

