BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
AZUSA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the District’s Statement of 
Reduction in Force Against:

OAH No. 2018030808

Sharon K. Both, Lynda Angelique Clenney, 
Kevin Knight, Alexandra Laszlo, Oscar 
Ramirez, Robert Ranger, and Roland Souza,

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Julie Cabos-Owen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with 
the Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 26, 2018, at the Azusa 
Unified School District Offices in Azusa, California.  Sharon J. Ormond, with Atkinson, 
Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented the Azusa Unified School District (District).  
Hannah S. Weinstein with Rothner, Segall & Greenstone, represented all Respondents 
appearing at the hearing, who are identified as follows:  Sharon K. Both; Lynda Angelique 
Clenney; Alexandra Laszlo; Robert Ranger; and Roland Souza. 1

Oral and documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard.  The record 

was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on April 26, 2018.

//

//

//

//

//

//

1 Respondents Kevin Knight and Oscar Ramirez were not present at the hearing.

 

 

1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Parties and Jurisdiction

1.   

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

2.    On February 20, 2018, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted 
Resolution Number 17-18:49 (Resolution) to reduce or discontinue the following particular 
kinds of services provided by the District no later than the beginning of the 2018-2019
school year:  

Services Being Reduced or
Eliminated

JROTC Teaching Services
High School Business Teaching Services
High School Home Economics Teaching Services
Middle School English Language Arts Teaching Services
Secondary Math Teaching Services
Middle School Social Science Teaching Services
Middle School Science Teaching Services
Music Teaching Services

 

Total FTE Reduction:

Number of Full-time
Equivalent (FTE)
Positions

2.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
2.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
2.0 FTE
1.0 FTE
2.0 FTE
1.0 FTE

12.0  FTE

 

 

3.

The Board further determined that the reduction or discontinuance of

particular kinds of services necessitated a decrease in the number of certificated employees 
by a corresponding number of FTE positions.  The Board directed the Superintendent or her 
designee to take all actions necessary and proper to accomplish the purposes of the 
Resolution and to notify the appropriate employees that their services would not be required 
for the 2018-2019 school year.  

4.

On February 23, 2018, Ramiro Rubalcaba, the District’s Assistant 
Superintendent of Human Resources, filed the Statement of Reduction in Force while acting 
in his official capacity.

5A. On February 26, 2018, the District served each Respondent with a Notice of 

Recommendation Not to Reemploy for the 2018-2019 School Year (preliminary layoff 
notice), informing him/her that his/her services would not be required for the ensuing 2018-
2019 school year.  

5B.

On that same date, the District served each Respondent with the Statement of 

Reduction in Force, Statement to Respondent, blank Request for Hearing and Notice of 

2

Participation form, and copies of pertinent provisions of the Government and Education 
Codes. 

Respondents each timely submitted a signed Request for Hearing and Notice 

of Participation.2    

6.

7.

On March 26, 2018, the District served a Notice of Hearing on Respondents.    

Propriety of Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

8.

The services identified in the Resolution and set forth in Factual Finding 2 are 

particular kinds of services which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of 
Education Code section 44955.  (See also Legal Conclusion 2.)

9.

The decision to reduce the particular kinds of services was based in part on 
fiscal solvency concerns, including the District’s need to maintain the required amount in
reserve.  The Board decided to reduce its budget next year, in part by reducing particular 
kinds of services.  The decision to reduce particular kinds of services also took into account 
student course requests and the District’s objective to offer programs which align with 
criteria for college and career readiness.  

10.

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified particular kinds of 

services was neither arbitrary nor capricious and constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
(See also Legal Conclusion 3.)

11.

The reduction or elimination of the identified particular kinds of services 

relates solely to the welfare of the schools in the District and its students.  (See also Legal 
Conclusion 6.)

12.

There was no evidence that reduction or elimination of the FTE positions 

would reduce services below mandated levels.  (See also Legal Conclusion 4.)

13.

Prior to the adoption of the Resolution, the District considered all known 

attrition in determining the number of layoff notices to be served on its employees.3

//

 

 

2 Shannon Mixer and Gabriela Rodriguez were served with preliminary layoff notices 
and with the District’s Statement of Reduction in Force packet.  However, neither submitted 
any Request for Hearing and Notice of Participation, and they therefore waived their right to 
a hearing.  

3  In a layoff proceeding like this, a governing board need only consider positively 

assured attrition which occurs prior to the March 15th layoff notice deadline, not thereafter.  
(San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635.)  

3

Seniority List and Tiebreaking Criteria

14A. The District maintains a seniority list which contains employees’ seniority 

dates, current assignments, and credential and certificate information.

14B. The information on the seniority list is accurate.

15A. The District used the seniority list with seniority dates to develop a proposed 
layoff list of the least senior employees currently assigned in the various particular kinds of 
services being reduced.  The District also considered each teacher’s credentials and 
certifications.  

15B. Using the information on the seniority list, the District identified the most 

junior employees working in a particular kind of service being reduced or discontinued and 
determined which employees would receive layoff notices.

16.

On November 7, 2017, the Board adopted Resolution Number 17-18:24 (Tie 
Breaker Resolution) establishing tiebreaker criteria for determining the relative seniority of 
certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date.  The District applied 
the tiebreaker criteria to determine the order of termination of certificated employees who 
first rendered paid service to the District in a probationary position on the same date.4

17.

Respondents did not challenge the tiebreaker criteria or their application.

//

//

//

//

//

//

//

//

 

 

4 Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, “As between employees 

who first rendered paid service to the district on the same date, the governing board shall 
determine the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the district and the students 
thereof.”

4

Competency Criteria

18.

The Board’s Resolution also established a definition of competency for 
purposes of allowing an employee currently assigned in a position subject to layoff to 
“bump” a less senior employee holding another position not subject to layoff.5  For bumping 
purposes, an employee meets the definition of “competency” by: 

possession of a valid clear or preliminary credential in 

(1)
the subject(s) or grade level to which the employee will be 
assigned at the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year; 

possession of an appropriate full (not emergency) EL 

(2)
authorization (if required by the position); 

in the case of displacing junior employees teaching in a 

(3) 
departmentalized setting, possession of a single subject 
credential(s) or subject matter authorization in that subject area; 
and 

any training and experience necessary to meet the job 

(4) 
requirements of specialized positions (such as AVID[6]).  

In no event may a more senior employee displace a more junior 
employee unless the more senior employee is both competent 
and credentialed for the entire assignment of the more junior 
employee.  

(Exhibit 3.)

19A.

In drafting the competency criterion which requires possession of a single 

subject credential or subject matter authorization (subdivision (3), above), the District sought 
to maintain the standards it had applied under the federal No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB).  
NCLB had required a teacher to hold a single subject credential or a subject matter 
authorization in order to be deemed highly-qualified.  A supplemental authorization was 
insufficient to be considered highly-qualified under NCLB.  A supplemental authorization 
differs from a subject matter authorization in that its acquisition requires completion of 20 
semester units, whereas a subject matter authorization requires 32 semester units. After the 
repeal of NCLB several years ago, the District continued to utilize the same standards in 
order to retain the most qualified teachers for its students.  Although the California 

 

 

5 A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to replace, or “bump,” 
into the position of a junior employee who is providing a service which the senior teacher is 
certificated and competent to fill, thus allowing the senior teacher to avoid layoff.  (Ed. 
Code, § 44955, subd. (b); Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)  

6 AVID is the acronym for Advancement Via Individual Determination.

5

Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) authorizes a teacher with a supplemental 
authorization to teach in grades 9 and below, the District requires a teacher to meet the 
former NCLB “highly-qualified” standards (i.e., possession of a single subject credential or 
subject matter authorization).  The Resolution’s competency criteria reflect the “highly-
qualified” NCLB requirement.  

19B. Regarding the competency criterion, subdivision (4), although AVID can be 

taught by a teacher with any credential, the teacher must be AVID-trained and AVID-
certified.    

19C. The competency criterion requiring that a senior employee bumping a junior 

employee be competent and credentialed “for the entire assignment of the more junior 
employee” took into account that it is atypical and challenging to assign a teacher to only 
part of an assignment.    

20A. Respondents challenged the competency criteria, arguing that the criteria were 

arbitrary and unreasonable.  For the reasons set forth in Legal Conclusion 7, Respondents’
assertions are not persuasive.

   

20B. The District’s competency criteria are deemed reasonable.  (See Legal 
Conclusion 7.)  Therefore, the District’s definition of competency in determining bumping 
rights is upheld.    

21.

The District analyzed potential bumping rights of teachers subject to layoff, 
and the District determined that nobody less senior than Respondents was being retained to 
render services which Respondents are certificated and competent to render. 

Respondent Lynda Angelique Clenney

22A. Respondent Lynda Angelique Clenney  (#80 on seniority list; seniority date 

2/4/1992) teaches Home Economics, specifically Fashion Design and Interior Design, in the
Career Technical Education (CTE) program.  She asserts that she is certificated and 
competent to teach middle school English Language Arts.  Respondent Clenney holds a 
single subject clear credential in Home Economics and a supplemental authorization in 
English that allows her to teach English in grades 9 and below.  For acquisition of her 
supplemental authorization in English, Respondent Clenney completed 20 semester units, 
and she needs 12 additional units to obtain her subject matter authorization.  

22B. Respondent Clenney asserts that she should bump into the positions held by 
the following middle school English Language Arts teachers: Peggy Harris (#232; seniority 
date 9/2/1999) who holds an introductory subject matter authorization in English; Johnny 
Rico (#249; seniority date 8/31/2000), who holds a subject matter authorization in English; 
and Jennifer Colleen Gutierrez (#250; seniority date 8/31/2000), who holds a subject matter 
authorization in English and who also teaches AVID.  Respondent Clenney asserts that she 
could teach AVID because “in order to get AVID training, you have to be assigned to teach 

6

AVID,” and AVID training occurs over the Summer or in the Fall just prior to 
commencement of classes.    

22C. Respondent Clenney does not currently have a subject matter authorization to 

meet the District’s competency criteria for teaching middle school English, nor does she have 
prior AVID training or certification.  Although she could obtain the requisite subject matter 
authorization by completing 12 additional units, and she could later obtain AVID training 
and certification, since these would be secured after March 15, she cannot now use 
anticipated certification to assert bumping rights.7  Respondent Clenney did not establish that
she meets the competency criteria required to bump into a middle school English Language 
Arts position or an AVID position.

Respondent Sharon Both

23A. Respondent Sharon Both (#97 on seniority list; seniority date 9/2/1993) 
teaches Home Economics, specifically Fashion Design and Foods, in the CTE program.  She
asserts that she is certificated and competent to teach middle school English Language Arts.  
Respondent Both holds a single subject clear credential in Home Economics and a 
supplemental authorization in English that allows her to teach English in grades 9 and below.  

23B. Respondent Both asserts that she should bump into the positions held by the 

following middle school English Language Arts teachers: Peggy Harris (#232; seniority date 
9/2/1999) who holds an introductory subject matter authorization in English; Johnny Rico 
(#249; seniority date 8/31/2000), who holds a subject matter authorization in English; and 
Jennifer Colleen Gutierrez (#250; seniority date 8/31/2000), who holds a subject matter 
authorization in English and who also teaches AVID; and Julie Camacho (#287; seniority 
date 8/29/2002), who holds an introductory subject matter authorization in English.  

23C. Respondent Both has received AVID training, and she previously taught 

AVID for two years.  She asserts that she should bump junior employees teaching AVID.  
Fifteen employees less senior than Respondent Both teach partial assignments of AVID:  

 

 

7 “[C]redentials recorded after March 15 cannot be used by a teacher to assert 
bumping or reassignment rights.” (Vassallo v. Lowrey (1986) 178 Cal.App.3d 1210, 1217
(citing Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 
815).)  The reasoning behind the March 15 deadline was the districts’ requirement to 
consider credentials in determining to whom to send layoff notices.  The Vassallo Court 
noted that, although the employee had a credential which would have entitled her to bump 
into another assignment, the credential was not recorded with the county board of education 
in time for the school district to consider it.  Pursuant to statute, districts were required to 
“send all termination notices by March 15 of the preceding academic year. Since such 
districts cannot add to the layoff list after March 15, sometime before that date such districts 
must consider the seniority and credentials of all employees to be laid off, reassigned, or 
‘bumped.’”  (Id. at pp. 1216-1217.)  The same analysis can be applied to training and 
certification obtained after the March 15 deadline.

7

Heather Neal (#99) who teaches .8 French, .2 Yearbook, and .2 AVID; Andrew Alvarez 
(#173) who teaches .6 History and .4 AVID; Ms. Gutierrez (#250) who teaches .6 high 
school English and .4 AVID; Brad Wong (#255) who teaches .8 Science and .2 AVID; 
Griselda Berry (#296) who teaches .6 History and .4 AVID; Douglas Dolter (#312) who 
teaches .6 Anatomy and Physiology, .2 Biology and .2 AVID; Nolan Sinclair (#327) who 
teaches .8 Physical Education and .2 AVID; Laura Camarena (#328) who teaches .8 Math 
and .2 AVID; Aracely Velasco (#345) who teaches .8 Math and .2 AVID; James Shea (#359) 
who teaches .4 Physics, .4 Chemistry, and .2 AVID; Michelle Garcia (#366) who teaches .4 
Math and .6 AVID; Stanley Baik (#370) who teaches .8 Math and .2 AVID; Whytnie 
Grennan (#378) who teaches .4 Expository Reading and Writing Course, .2 Yearbook, and .4 
AVID; Nena Marinez (#400) who teaches .6 high school English, .4 Leadership, and .2 
AVID coordinator; and Lanae Harper (#420) who teaches .2 high school English, .4  English 
Language Development, and .4 AVID.  

23D. Respondent Both does not currently have a subject matter authorization to 
meet the District’s competency criteria for teaching middle school English.  Additionally, 
while she has prior AVID training and experience and could teach partial assignments of 
AVID currently being taught by junior employees, she does not hold any credentials to teach 
the remaining portions of those junior employees’ assignments.  Consequently, Respondent 
Both does not meet the District’s competency criterion that she be “competent and 
credentialed for the entire assignment of the more junior employee.”  (See also Legal 
Conclusion 7.)  Respondent Both did not establish that she meets the competency criteria 
required to bump into a middle school English Language Arts position or AVID position.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code sections 

44949 and 44955 were met.  

The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services which 

may be reduced or discontinued pursuant to Education Code section 44955.

The decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither 

arbitrary nor capricious and was a proper exercise of the Board’s discretion.  

Services will not be reduced below mandated levels.  

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees in the District due 

to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  

Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare 

of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code sections 44955.  

7A.  Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part: 

8

[T]he services of no permanent employee may be terminated . . . while 
any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, 
is retained to render a service which said permanent employee is 
certificated and competent to render.  

7B.

A school district has the authority and the discretion to establish competency 

criteria for purposes of determining bumping rights.  (Duax v. Kern Community College 
District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 563-567.)  This discretion is limited only by a 
reasonableness standard (i.e. a district’s criteria must be reasonable, and not fraudulent, 
arbitrary or capricious).  (Campbell Elementary Teachers Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 
Cal.App.3d 796, 808.)   “[A] board’s definition of competency is reasonable when it 
considers the skills and qualifications of the teacher threatened with layoff.”  (Duax, supra, 
at p. 565 [approving a recency requirement of “one year of teaching in the last ten,” but 
opining that a “one in the last two or three [years]” standard “too narrowly defines 
competency.”].)  

7C.

Respondents challenged the competency criteria, arguing that the criteria 

(requiring a subject matter authorization and requiring prior AVID training and certification) 
were arbitrary and unreasonable.  Respondents contend that the District crafted the 
competency criteria so narrowly that senior teachers slated for layoff could not exercise any 
bumping rights.  They also argued that the training requirement for AVID was “arbitrary” 
and “based on conduct in the past.”  (Counsel’s oral closing argument.)  The District argued 
that it has the authority and discretion to require qualifications for competency which rise 
above the minimal credentialing established by the CTC.  The District further argued that 
there is nothing unreasonable in establishing competency criteria to maintain the highly-
qualified standards and to assure the highest quality of teachers for its students.  The 
District’s argument was more persuasive.

7D.

The competency criteria established by the District were within the District’s 

discretion and related to the qualifications of the teachers subject to layoff.  For example, 
while Respondents Clenney and Both held the minimum CTC credentialing to allow them to 
teach middle school English Language Arts, they did not have (nor were they ever prevented 
from obtaining) the requite educational qualifications (i.e., a subject matter authorization) to 
meet the competency criteria.  

7E.

Respondents further argued that the District, through its competency criteria,
should not be able to preclude bumping into a partial assignment.  However, the District’s 
criterion requiring that a senior teacher seeking to bump into an assignment be able to 
assume the entire position held by the junior employee is reasonable and well within the 
discretion of the District to define positions within the District and to establish requirements 
for employment. (See Martin v. Kentfield School Dist. (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 299–300; 
Duax, supra at p. 565.)  “Education Code section 44955, which gives preference to qualified 
employees based on their relative seniority, does not compel a district to split a full-time 

9

position held by an employee with less seniority.”  (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified Sch. 
Dist. (2009) 172 Cal. App. 4th 334, 342–43.)

7F.

Given the foregoing, the District’s competency criteria were reasonable and 

were not arbitrary or capricious.  

   

8.

No certificated employee junior to any Respondent is being retained to 
perform any services which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.   

9.

Cause exists within the meaning of Education Code section 44955 for 

terminating or reducing Respondents’ employment for the 2018-2019 school year, as set 
forth in Factual Findings 1 through 23 and Legal Conclusions 1 through 8.    

ORDER

The Statements of Reduction in Force served on all Respondents are sustained.  
Notice may be given to all Respondents, in inverse order of seniority, that their services will 
not be required for the 2018-2019 school year.  

Dated:  

________________________________
JULIE CABOS-OWEN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

10

May 2, 2018