BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
MOORPARK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force 
Against:

OAH No.:  2018040171

ROBYN LYON,

 Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter came on for hearing before Glynda B. Gomez, Administrative Law Judge 

of the Office of Administrative Hearings, at Moorpark, California, on April 20, 2018.

Jeff C. Marderosian, Attorney at Law, represented the Complainant.

Jake Anderson, Regional Staff member of the California Teachers Association, and

Roger F. Lyon, Attorney at Law, represented Respondent.

The administrative hearing concluded on April 20, 2018.  The record remained open 

,for submission of a brief by Respondent on April 23, 2018 and any response by 
Complainant by April 26, 2018.  Respondent's brief was marked and received as Exhibit A 
and Complainant's brief was marked and received as Exhibit 7.

The Administrative Law Judge now finds, concludes and orders as follows:

SUMMARY

The Governing Board (Board) of the Moorpark Unified School District (District) 

decided to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by certificated 
personnel for the 2018/2019 school year.  Respondent Robyn Lyon was the only certificated 
employee to contest lay off at the administrative hearing. The decision was not related to the 
dedication or performance of the teacher whose services were proposed to be reduced or 
eliminated.  District staff carried out the Board’s decision by using a selection process
involving review of credentials and seniority, “bumping,” and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service.  The selection process complied with 
Education Code requirements.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Complainant Dr. Kelli Hays filed the Statement of Reduction in Force in this 

proceeding in her official capacity as Superintendent of the District.

Respondent Robyn Lyon is a certificated employee of the District. 

Parties

1.

2.

Reduction of Services

3.

On February 27, 2018, the Governing Board of the District, upon 
recommendation by the Superintendent, adopted and issued resolution number 2017-2018-05
entitled “Reduction To Decrease the Number of Certificated Employees Due to a Reduction 
in Particular Kinds of Services” (Resolution) to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
certificated services no later than the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year because of a 
reduction of programs and services.

4.

The Resolution specifies the Reduction or Elimination of Particular 

Certificated Services as follows:

TYPE OF PROGRAM

FTE (Full-Time Equivalent)

Counselors

High School Technology Teacher

Middle School Social Studies Teacher

 1.0   FTE

 1.0  FTE

 1.6  FTE

High School Social Studies Teacher

 1.0   FTE

Total

 

 4.6   FTE

5.

The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are particular 
kinds of services (PKS) that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 
44955.

6.

With regard to services provided by the District, on February 27, 2018, the 

Board adopted Exhibit  A of  Resolution No. 2017-2018-05 to determine the order of layoff 
for those certificated employees with the same date of first paid probationary service.

7.

The decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was neither 

arbitrary nor capricious, but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s discretion given the 
budgetary constraints and other factors considered by the Board, and the manner in which the 
decision to reduce or discontinue services was reached.

2

8.

Exhibit B of the Resolution provides the Competence Criterion as follows:

A Certificated employee subject to layoff shall be 
considered competent to perform a service if and only if:

1.

The certificated employee has under the 

appropriate credential performed the service for one complete 
school year within the last ten (10) years.  One complete school 
year is defined as actual service of at least 75% of the number of 
days the regular schools of the District are in session; and

2.

The certificated employee is "highly qualified" 

under [No Child Left Behind] NCLB.

(Exhibit 1.)

Notice and Process

9.

On February 27, 2018, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955,
the Governing Board directed that notice be given to Respondent that her services will not be 
required for the ensuing school year, and stating the reasons therefore.

10.

On March 9, 2018, within the deadline set forth in Education Code section 

44949, the Respondent was provided written notice by personal service or registered mail of 
the recommendation that Respondent receive notice pursuant to Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955 that her services will not be required for the ensuing school year, and 
stating the reasons therefore.

11.

Respondent timely requested a hearing.  Thereafter, a District Statement of 
Reduction in Force was served upon the Respondent, and the Respondent filed a notice of 
defense, which was timely or accepted by the District without objection.

Respondent Robyn Lyon

12A. Respondent Robyn Lyon is a full-time certificated employee who possesses a 

clear single subject credential in computer concepts and applications and a multi-subject 
credential.  

12B. Respondent paid her fees and submitted documentation for a Career Technical 

Education credential which she expected to be issued the day of the hearing. 

13.

Respondent's teaching assignment was as a High School Technology Teacher.  

Her classes included Graphic Arts with Web Design beginning and advanced levels, 
Introduction and Advanced Game Design, Keyboarding, Computer Applications, Media 

3

Production, and Directed Studies.  Respondent's position was designated as 1.0 FTE High 
School Technology Teacher and as such was designated as a PKS to be eliminated.

14.

Respondent's multi-subject teaching credential permits her to teach elementary 

school in a self-contained classroom.  Respondent worked as an elementary school 
technology teacher and a media specialist at Garvey Elementary School District and White 
Oak Elementary School District for approximately two years during the period of 2013-2015.  
However, she has not served as an elementary school teacher teaching a self-contained class 
in the last ten years, other than as a substitute covering a class for the regular teacher on a 
few occasions.  Therefore, Respondent does not meet the Board's Competency Criteria for 
"bumping" into an elementary school teaching position. 

15A. The District maintains a Seniority List which contains employees’ seniority 

dates, current assignments and locations, credentials, authorizations, and employment status 
(permanent, probationary or temporary).  Respondent's seniority date per the Sonority List is 
August 17, 2015.  

15B. Respondent attended some workshops and training sessions in June of 2015 

before the start of the school year and was compensated for her attendance.  Respondent
asserted at hearing that her seniority date on the Seniority List may be incorrect because it 
did not account for her compensated time in June of 2015.  Respondent failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that her seniority date was incorrect or her voluntary 
attendance at the June 2015 training sessions constituted her first day of probationary service.  
Nevertheless, a June 2015 seniority date would not change the outcome of this proceeding 
because Respondent does not meet the Board's competency criteria to "bump" into any of the 
seven positions held by the certificated employees with seniority dates between June 1, 2015 
and August 17, 2015 on the Seniority List which included special education, social science, 
speech and language, math, and studio art positions.  

16.

The evidence established that the Seniority List utilized in the layoff process is 

accurate as to the information contained therein.  No junior certificated employee is being 
retained to perform services which a more senior employee subject to layoff is certificated 
and competent to render.

17.

Respondent also asserted that there were incoming ninth graders who wished 

to take the classes that she taught.  She also asserted that the 2017-2018 low enrollment in 
some of her classes was caused by behavior problems of certain students that had been 
administratively placed in her class.  According to Respondent, some of her students 
transferred out of the class rather than cope with the behavior of those students.  District did 
not rebut her testimony on this point.

//

4

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The party asserting a claim or making charges in an administrative hearing 
generally has the burden of proof.  (Brown v. City of Los Angeles (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th 
155.)  As no other law or statute requires otherwise, the standard of proof in this case 
requires proof by a preponderance of the evidence.  (Evid. Code, § 115.)  Therefore, the 
District bears the burden of establishing cause to affirm the proposed layoff decisions by a 
preponderance of the evidence.

2.

All notices and other requirements of Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955 were met.  Therefore, jurisdiction was established for this proceeding as to all 
Respondents by reason of Findings 1-11.

3.

Cause was established as required by Education Code section 44955 to reduce 

the number of certificated employees due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular 
kinds of services by reason of Findings 1-8.  The Board’s decision to reduce or eliminate the 
identified services set forth in Findings 3-5 and 8 was neither arbitrary nor capricious in that 
the decision relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and the pupils within the 
meaning of Education Code section 44949, by reason of Findings 1-11. Boards of education 
hold significant discretion in determining the need to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 
services, which is not open to second-guessing in this proceeding.  (Rutherford v. Board of 
Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  Such policy-making decisions are not subject to 
arguments as to the wisdom of their enactment, their necessity, or the motivations for the 
decisions.  (California Teachers Assn. v. Huff (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.)  Such 
decisions and action must be reasonable under the circumstances, with the understanding that 
"such a standard may permit a difference of opinion."  (Santa Clara Federation of Teachers v. 
Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)  School districts have discretion to define 
positions in the manner which they will be taught as long as it is done in good faith. 
(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334.) 

4.

Pursuant to Education Code sections 44845 and 87414 every probationary or 

permanent employee is deemed to have been employed on the date upon which he or she first 
rendered paid service in a probationary position.  

5.

No permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained 
to render a service for which Respondent is certificated and competent to perform by reason 
of Findings 1-17.

6.

Cause exists to give notice to Respondent that her services will not be 
required for the 2018/2019 school year by reason of the whole of the Findings herein.

//

//

5

ORDER

Notice may be given to Respondent Robin Lyon that her services will not be required 

for the 2018/2019 school year.

Dated:  

GLYNDA B. GOMEZ
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

April 27, 2018