BEFORE THE
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
LOS ANGELES COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force 
Involving:

 

Certificated  Employees  of  the  Los  Angeles 
County Office of Education,
 

 

 

 

 Respondents.

 Case No.  2018030097

PROPOSED DECISION

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this matter on April 16, 2018, in Downey, California.

Patrick  Saldaña,  Deputy General  Counsel,  represented  Vibiana  Andrade (Complainant), 
Acting  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education  (LACOE), 
County of Los Angeles, State of California.

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney at Law, represented Karen Collier, Mary Cruz-Boddie, David 
Ejimole (Ejimole), Francis Gordon, Lisa Harrington, Jacqueline Levine, Dolores Medina, Barbara 
Moore,  Abimbola  Ogbecie,  Shoshana  Payne,  Maria  Ruiz,  Teresa  Sandoval, and  Nye  Sanipe-
Ihediwa (Respondents).  

Debra Duardo, M.S.W., Ed.D., LACOE Superintendent of Schools (Superintendent), has 
decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has  given  Respondents  and 
others  notice  of  her intent  not  to  reemploy them  for  the  2018-2019 school  year.    Respondents 
requested a hearing for a determination of whether cause exists for not reemploying them for the 
2018-2019 school year.

Oral  and  documentary evidence,  and  evidence  by  oral  stipulation  on  the  record,  was 

received at the hearing, and the matter was submitted for decision on April 16, 2018.

///

///

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

Complainant filed the Statement of Reduction in Force in her official capacity.

Respondents are certificated employees of the LACOE.

3.

On  February 20,  2018,  the  Superintendent  adopted  Resolution  No.  1-S,  entitled 
“Resolution  to  Reduce  or  Discontinue  Particular  Kinds  of  Services” (Resolution), reducing  or 
discontinuing the following services for the 2018-2019 school year:

 

 Service

 

 FTE1 Positions

Division of Student Programs/LA County Court Schools SELPA
 Counselor
 Educational Audiologist
 Resident Teacher on Assignment
 School Psychologist
 Teacher APE
 Teacher JCS
 Teacher ED
 Teacher ISP
 Teacher LSS

Division of Accountability, Support and Monitoring
 Project Director III
 Coordinator II
 Consultant II

Division of Curriculum and Instructional Services
 Project Director III
 Consultant II

Division of Special Education
 Assistant Director
 Assistant Principal
 Coordinator II
 Counselor
 Director II
 Educational Audiologist
 Principal

 
1 Full-time equivalent.

2

5.0
1.0
1.0
3.0
1.0
5.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

2.0
1.0
1.0

1.0
1.0

1.0
8.0
3.0
1.0
1.0
5.0
1.0

 Regional School Psychologist
 School Nurse
 School Psychologist
 Teacher APE
 Teacher Autism
 Teacher CAR
 Teacher DHH
 Teacher DIS HH
 Teacher ED
 Teacher ID DH
 Teacher ID
 Teacher LSS
 Teacher LSS No Cred
 Teacher MD
 Teacher Mobility
 Teacher ORT
 Teacher VH
 Teacher on Special Assignment

6.0
 

 

 

2.0

1.0

 12.0
4.0
 13.0
4.0
 23.0
2.0
8.0
   12.0
6.0
   33.0
8.0
9.4
2.0

9.0
2.0

1.0

  202.4

Instructional Technology Outreach Consultant II

Total

7.

8.

4.

On March 14, 2018, the Superintendent provided notice to Respondents that their 
services will not be required for the 2018-2019 school year due to the reduction or elimination of 
particular kinds of services. 

 

5.

Also on March 14, 2013, the Superintendent issued the Statement of Reduction in 

Force and served it and other required documents on Respondents. 

6.

Respondents each timely submitted a Request for Hearing/Notice of Participation 
in Reduction in Force Hearing Form, requesting a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying them for the 2018-2019 school year.

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

The services set forth in factual finding number 3 are particular kinds of services 

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code2 section 44955.

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.

 

3

9.

The  Superintendent  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth  in 
factual  finding  number  3  because  of  the  anticipated  reduction  of  funding and  the  anticipated 
decline  in  student  enrollment.   The decision to reduce the particular kinds of services is neither 
arbitrary nor capricious but is rather a proper exercise of the Superintendent’s discretion.

10.

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  is  related  to  the 
welfare of the District’s schools and its pupils, in the context of the loss of revenue and the need to 
continue  providing  services  to  students  in Los Angeles County, and it has become necessary to 
decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the Superintendent.

11.

On February 20, 2018, the Superintendent adopted Resolution No. 3-S setting forth 
the  criteria  to  determine  seniority among  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a 
probationary position on the same date (tie-breaking criteria).  Criteria to be considered, in order of 
significance,  included  possession  of  authorizations  to  teach  students  with  limited  English 
Language  proficiency,  possession  of  other  teaching  authorizations,  possession  of  designated 
provisional credentials, earliest LACOE employment even if not in a certificated position, earliest 
receipt of certification from the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, and, if ties still 
remained  after  application  of  prior  criteria,  success  in  a random  drawing.    The  criteria  are 
reasonable  as  they relate  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  certificated  employees.    The 
Superintendent  did  not  need  to  apply the  criteria  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  of  any 
Respondent.

12.

The  Superintendent  skipped  certain  junior  employees  on  the  basis  of  specialized 
training  and  experience  and  actual  assignment  in  the  Los  Angeles  County Outdoor  Science 
School.  Respondents did not challenge the retention of any individual to teach this assignment.

13.

The  Superintendent  established  competency criteria for those wishing to teach in 
specialized high schools, IPoly High School and Los Angeles County High School for the Arts, or 
to work as a Speech and Language Pathologist.  Individuals wishing to serve in the high school 
positions are required to have taught certain rigorous courses, described as “a-g,” for at least two 
consecutive  semesters  in  the  past  seven  school  years.  Those  wanting to  work  as  speech  and 
language pathologists must have maintained a caseload of at least five hearing- impaired students 
for  at  least  two  consecutive  semesters  in  the  past  seven  school  years.    The  competency criteria 
relate to the skills and qualifications of certificated employees and are reasonable.  No Respondent
asserted that he or she met the competency criteria to teach at one of the specialized high schools 
or to work as a speech and language pathologist.

14.

Respondent  Ejimole  holds  a  Clear  Level  II  Education  Specialist  Instruction 
Credential and  teaches  Special  Education.    He  testified  that  the  Superintendent  incorrectly 
calculated  his  seniority date.    His  assigned  seniority date  is  November  9,  2007.    Respondent 
Ejimole asserts that his seniority date should be August 28, 2007, because he started working on 
that date and remained in the same assignment, with the same students, until the conclusion of the 

4

school  year.    The  Superintendent  counters  that  Respondent  held  30-Day Substitute  Teaching 
Permits and worked as a substitute teacher during the 2007-2008 school year until November 9, 
2007,  when he  received  his  first  Intern  Permit  and  his  certificated  employment  contract  as  a 
probationary employee.  If Respondent is given the higher seniority date, he would not be senior to 
any employee retained to perform a service Respondent Ejimole is certificated and competent to 
perform.    

15.

The  Superintendent  has  taken  into  account  all  positively assured  attrition  in 
determining  the  need  to  layoff  certificated  employees and  plans  to  take  additional  attrition  into 
account before issuing final layoff notices.  

16.

No certificated employee junior to any Respondent was retained to render a service 

which any Respondent is certificated and competent to render.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, 

by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 7.

The  services listed  in  factual  finding  number  3 are particular  kinds of  services

within the meaning of section 44955, by reason of factual finding numbers 3 and 8.  

3.

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949 and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  which  cause 
relates  solely to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers 1 through 13. 

4.

Section 44955 directs that certificated permanent and probationary employees are 
to  be  laid  off  by inverse  order  of  seniority, consistent with their qualifications and status. Thus, 
subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part:  “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services 
of  no  permanent  employee  may be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service 
which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render.”  Moreover, the statute 
requires: “[T]he governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such manner that 
employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle 
them to render. . . .”  (§ 44945, subd. (c).)   Respondents were selected for layoff in accordance 
with  their  seniority and  credentials,  and,  the  Superintendent  may,  therefore,  issue  notices 
terminating their services for the 2018-2019 school year, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 
through 16 and legal conclusion numbers 1 through 3.  

5

5.

As  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  14,  adjustment  of  Respondent  Ejimole’s 
seniority to August 28, 2007 will not impact whether he is retained for the 2018-2019 school year. 
He  nevertheless  seeks  to  have  his  seniority adjusted  for  the  purpose  of  placement  in  the 
preferential rehire list.  However, the instant proceeding is authorized by sections 44949 and 44955
to  determine  whether  cause  exists for not reemploying Respondent for the ensuing school year. 
Section 44955 provides: “As between employees who first rendered paid service on the same date, 
the governing board shall determine the order of termination solely on the basis of needs of the 
district and the students thereof.  Upon the request of any employee whose order of termination is 
so determined, the governing body shall furnish in writing . . . a statement of the specific criteria 
used  in  determining  the  order  of termination and the application of the criteria in ranking each 
employee  relative  to  other  employees  in  the  group.  .  .  .”    (Emphasis  added.)  Thus,  the  plain 
language of the statute directs review of the order of termination, not the order of reemployment.
Preferential  rehiring  is  the  subject  of  other  statutory provisions,  such  as,  for  instance,  sections 
44956 and 44957.  Inasmuch as adjustment of Respondent’s seniority will not impact his order of 
termination,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  may not  modify or  adjust  his  seniority date in  this 
proceeding.

6.

Cause exists to terminate the services of Respondents Karen Collier, Mary Cruz-
Boddie,  David  Ejimole,  Francis  Gordon,  Lisa  Harrington,  Jacqueline  Levine,  Dolores  Medina, 
Barbara  Moore,  Abimbola  Ogbecie,  Shoshana  Payne,  Maria  Ruiz,  Teresa  Sandoval,  and  Nye 
Sanipe-Ihediwa, by reason of factual finding numbers 1 through 16, and legal conclusion numbers 
1 through 5. 

1.

The Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained.

ORDER

2.

The  Superintendent  may notify Respondents  Karen  Collier,  Mary Cruz-Boddie, 
David  Ejimole,  Francis  Gordon,  Lisa  Harrington,  Jacqueline  Levine,  Dolores  Medina,  Barbara 
Moore,  Abimbola  Ogbecie,  Shoshana  Payne,  Maria  Ruiz,  Teresa  Sandoval,  and  Nye  Sanipe-
Ihediwa  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  during  the  2018-2019  school  year  due  to  the 
reduction of particular kinds of services.

DATED:

SAMUEL D. REYES
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

April 23, 2018