BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD
PASADENA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In the Matter of the District Statement of
Reduction in Force Against:

Certain Certificated Employees of the 
Pasadena Unified School District,

 

 

 Respondents.

OAH No. 2018030806

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard by Eric Sawyer, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 24-25, 2018, in Pasadena. 

Jeff C. Marderosian, Esq., Law Offices of Jeff C. Marderosian, represented the 

Pasadena Unified School District (District).

Respondents are the 80 individuals identified in exhibit 5 who were served with a 
District Statement of Reduction in Force. Maria Keegan Myers, Esq., Rothner, Segall & 
Greenstone, represented the 55 respondents identified in the amended exhibit A.  Jean Shin, 
Staff Attorney, California Teachers Association, represented the 20 respondents identified in 
exhibit B.  No appearance was made by or on behalf of any other respondent.

Mr. Marderosian and Ms. Shin requested, and were allowed, to provide verbal closing 

arguments at the conclusion of the hearing.  The record thereafter was held open for parties
to submit written closing briefs.  Such briefs were timely received and marked as indicated 
from Mr. Marderosian (ex. 14) and Ms. Myers (ex. F).  The record was closed and the matter 
submitted for decision upon receipt of the briefs on April 27, 2018.

The Governing Board (Board) of the District decided to reduce 103.2 full-time 

equivalent positions due to an anticipated $14.1 million budget deficit.  Despite several 
challenges by many respondents, the District established by a preponderance of the evidence 
that the Board’s proposed layoff mostly meets the requirements of the Education Code and 
honors the seniority of its certificated staff.  However, many respondents not performing 
services subject to reduction were apparently subjected to layoff based on their credentials.  
In addition, the District’s Advanced Placement skipping category is invalid, creating an 
unanticipated ripple effect resulting in more senior respondents no longer being subject to 
layoff.  Various stipulations also preclude many other respondents from layoff.

1

Parties and Jurisdiction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

2.

3.

Dr. Brian McDonald made and filed the District Statement of Reduction in 

Force in his official capacity as the District’s Superintendent.

Respondents were at all times mentioned certificated District employees.

On March 8, 2018, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2444, which proposed to 

reduce or discontinue the particular kinds of services encompassing 103.2 full-time 
equivalent (FTE) positions by the close of the 2017-2018 school year.
 

4.

Before March 15, 2018, certificated employees of the District, including 

respondents, were given preliminary notice that their services would not be required for the 
following school year, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.1  Of the 
certificated employees given preliminary layoff notices, 16 (those named in ex. 5A) were 
given what is referred to as a precautionary notice, because the employees who received 
them are subject to the Board’s skipping decisions, described in more detail below, and 
therefore would not be laid off if the skipping decisions pertaining to them are valid.

5.

Respondents timely requested a hearing to determine if there is cause for 

terminating their services.  Respondents were thereafter served with a District Statement of 
Reduction in Force.  Respondents timely filed Notices of Participation, or were deemed by 
the District to have done so. In addition, it was determined during the hearing that 
respondents Joanna Lee and Daniel Jarashow could appear and participate in this matter, 
despite a dispute whether they had timely filed appropriate documentation, for the reasons 
explained on the record during the hearing.

6.

A.  Respondent Candace Kovacic testified she did not receive a preliminary 

layoff notice (layoff notice) until March 16, 2018, and, as a result, contends her layoff notice
should be rescinded.

B.  Respondent Kovacic testified her supervising principal told her before 
March 15, 2018, that she (Ms. Kovacic) was not on the layoff list the principal had seen.  
Respondent Kovacic further testified she received nothing from the District, until March 16, 
2018, when she found a layoff notice in her mailbox.  The layoff notice she received was 
sent by regular mail, not certified.  Although the letter was addressed correctly, respondent 
Kovacic noticed her last name on the envelope was misspelled “Kovac.”

C.  As established by the credible testimony of Billie Johnson, an executive 

secretary with the District, the layoff notice in question was timely deposited in the US mail
on March 13, 2018, by both regular mail and certified mail with return receipt requested, 

1 Further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified.

 

 

2

addressed to respondent Kovacic at her address of record, but using the last name “Kovac.”
Respondent Kovacic never received the layoff notice sent by certified mail, as established by 
her testimony and USPS tracking documents (ex. 13) showing the certified letter was never 
claimed and was returned to the District.  What respondent Kovacic received on March 16, 
2018, was the layoff notice sent by regular mail, which was identical to the notice sent by
certified mail.  She timely submitted a Notice of Participation, and was present at and 
participated in the hearing.

D.  Under these circumstances, respondent Kovacic’s argument is rejected, 

because she was properly served with the layoff notice for purposes of the Education Code.2  
The District timely deposited the layoff notice in question in the mail before March 15th.  
Although the last three letters of respondent’s last name were omitted, the rest of her name 
and address were correct, and therefore the notice is deemed to have been addressed to 
respondent Kovacic’s last known address.  One day after the March 15th deadline, 
respondent Kovacic received (by regular mail) the exact copy of what had been timely sent 
by certified mail.  Respondent established no prejudice in being served with the notice in this 
way, and she readily participated in the hearing, as is discussed in more detail below.

7.

During the hearing, the District withdrew the layoff notice and District 
Statement of Reduction in Force against the following respondents: (a) Maria Barajas, 
because she was given a new seniority date of August 23, 2013; (b) Jason Trapp, because he 
is being reassigned to a dual language immersion program (DLIP) position for the next 
school year; (c) Reyna Haro, because she is also being reassigned to a DLIP position for the 
next school year; and (d) Luis Rendon, for a reason not established.

The Board’s Resolution

8.

Resolution No. 2444 specifically provides for the reduction or elimination of 

the following particular kinds of services:

Particular Kinds of Services

Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Positions

Elementary Teacher (Multiple Subject)
Middle School Teacher (Mathematics) 
Middle School Teacher (English)
 

 

52.4 FTE
0.50 FTE
3.00 FTE

2 Section 44949, subdivision (d), provides that a layoff notice is properly served when 

deposited in United States registered mail and addressed to the last known address of the 
employee.  Section 70 allows school districts to use certified mail in lieu of registered mail. 
Districts are only required to deposit the notice in the mail on or before March 15th; it need 
not be shown the notices are thereafter received by or before that date. (San Jose Teachers 
Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 633.)  Under the Administrative Procedure Act, 
actual receipt of an item timely mailed and properly addressed is generally not mandatory to 
effectuate valid service.  (Miller Family Home, Inc. v. Department of Social Services (1997) 
57 Cal.App.4th 488, 492–493.)

3

Middle School Teacher (Social Studies)
Middle School Teacher (Health)
High School Teacher (Math)
High School Teacher (English)
High School Teacher (Health)
Middle School Teacher (Computer Science Teacher)
Middle School Teacher (Music)
Middle School Teacher (Art)
Permit Pre K Teacher
Early Transition Kinder (ETK)
Clinical Psychologist
Middle School Librarian
Counselor
Resource Teacher
Elementary Teacher (RTI)
High School Teacher (RTI)
TOSA I (STEAM Coach)
TOSA II (Gate)
TOSA II (College and Career)
TOSA II (Support Programs)
Coordinator III Ombudsman
District Athletic Director
Coordinator III Equity/Access
High School Assistant Principal

Total positions to be reduced or eliminated: 

2.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
3.00 FTE
3.00 FTE
2.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
0.40 FTE
1.40 FTE
3.00 FTE
3.00 FTE
4.00 FTE
1.50 FTE
2.00 FTE
8.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
2.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
1.00 FTE
2.00 FTE
=======
103.2 FTE

9.

The decision to reduce or eliminate 103.2 FTE positions was the result of the 

District’s financial difficulties, including an anticipated $14.1 million budget deficit.

10.

Prior to sending out the layoff notices described above, the Board considered

all known assured attrition.

11.

A.  Pursuant to Resolution No. 2444, the Board determined it was necessary to 

retain certificated employees for the following school year regardless of seniority (skipping)
to teach a specific course or courses of study who possess the types of special training and 
experience which others more senior do not possess.

B.  Resolution No. 2444 specified the course or courses of study subject to 

skipping as those taught by certificated employees:3

///

 

 

3 Although the resolution also identified a sixth area of skipping concerning English 

Learners (EL) authorization, the Board and/or District decided to not implement that skip.

4

1.  currently assigned two periods or more to an Advanced Placement 
(AP) program, who have participated in a minimum of 30 hours of training for teaching an 
AP program, and possess appropriate certification.

and in the last ten years participated in a minimum of 18 hours of IB training.

2.  currently assigned to an International Baccalaureate (IB) position 

Academy (ISA) at Blair School.

3.  currently assigned to a teaching position at the International Student 

4.  currently assigned to a teaching position at Eliot Arts Magnet 

Academy, Jackson STEM Dual Language Magnet Academy, Washington Elementary STEM 
Magnet School, or Washington STEAM Magnet Academy, and in the last 10 years have 
participated in a minimum of 24 hours of training for the position.

5.  holding a current, valid Multiple Subject or Single Subject 

credential and possess a current valid BCLAD in Mandarin and/or Spanish and either (a) 
currently assigned to teach in a District DLIP or (b) have taught in a District DLIP for one 
year in the last five years.

12.

Exhibit A to Resolution No. 2444 established tie-breaking criteria to determine 

the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid probationary service 
on the same date.  The tie-breaking criteria were used in this matter to resolve ties in 
seniority amongst certificated personnel.  The validity of the tie-breaking process is not in 
dispute.

13.

Exhibit B to Resolution No. 2444 defines competency for purposes of 

determining a certificated employee’s competency to perform a service in accordance with 
section 44955 as when the employee has, under the appropriate credential, performed the 
service for one complete school year within the last 10 years.  One complete school year is 
defined as actual service of at least 75 percent of the number of days the regular schools of 
the District are in session.4  The validity of the competency criteria is not in dispute.

State-Mandated Levels of Services

14.

A.  The District issued layoff notices to all three of its high school health 
teachers, respondents Wendy Ramirez, Sean Mcneley, and Danny Montejano.  Because 
health education services are mandated by state law, and part of the District’s required 
curriculum, respondents argue these proposed layoffs will reduce services below state-
mandated levels and therefore cannot be implemented. 

 

 

4 The competency definition also included that the certificated employee possess a 

BCLAD, CLAD or other appropriate EL authorization.  However, the Board and/or District 
decided to not implement that part of the definition.

5

B.  The District’s health education services are mandated by the Healthy 
Youth Act, codified at sections 51930-51939.  The Healthy Youth Act requires school 
districts to provide integrated, comprehensive, accurate, and unbiased comprehensive sexual 
health and HIV prevention education at least once in middle school and once in high school.  
(§ 51930.)  In addition to the state-mandated requirements under the Healthy Youth Act, the 
District’s own graduation requirements include that all graduating seniors complete five units 
of health.

C.  The District’s Chief Human Resources Officer, Dr. Steven Miller, testified 

that although the District has no current plan in place to provide for delivery of these 
instructional services without certificated health teachers, next school year the District will 
be providing these services by properly qualified and certificated employees.  Dr. Miller 
testified that before the three health teachers in question were hired, the District had provided 
the mandated health education services by properly qualified teachers other than those with a 
health credential.  Dr. Miller also cited certain credentials related to Physical Education and 
Biology that allow instruction of the state-mandated services.  

D.  The fact that the District currently does not have a specific plan in place to 
offer these services does not invalidate this part of the proposed layoff, where the District has 
pledged that it will offer this service next school year by properly credentialed staff and has 
outlined a feasible plan that can do so.  Respondents cite no case authority for the proposition 
that the District is required to have a final instructional plan in place to effect an economic 
layoff. On the contrary, the courts have recognized that a school district must make 
decisions on economic layoffs between March and May of each year, despite uncertainties 
regarding its finances and its enrollment for the next year. (Campbell Elementary Teachers 
Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 807–808.) A governing board may take 
action to reduce services even if it has not yet decided how it will provide mandated services 
or who will provide them. (See Zalac v. Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist.
(2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838, 853–854, and Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn., Inc. v. 
Abbott, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at pp. 810-812.) In this case, respondents’ argument that the 
District will not meet legally-mandated levels of service is premature and it is rejected.

15.

Based on the above, the reduction or elimination of the FTE positions in 

question will not reduce services below mandated levels.

Particular Kinds of Services

16.

A.  The District based its layoff on a reduction in particular kinds of services 

(or PKS).  However, respondents Yafeng Liao and Dr. Manuel Rustin argue they were 
improperly issued layoff notices based on their credential rather than the services they 
provide.  There are several other respondents to whom this argument also applies.

B.  Courts have held that a particular kind of service may be a certain subject, 

it may be the teaching of the subject for a particular purpose, or it may be a particular manner 
of teaching the subject.  (Gallup v. Board of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571.)  For 

6

example, elementary teaching is a PKS.  (CTA v. California Teachers Assn. v. Board of 
Trustees (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)  Thus, it has been held in a prior layoff case such as this 
that in a PKS reduction, layoffs must be based on the services that a district intends to 
reduce, not the credential that a teacher holds.  (See, e.g., Santa Ana Unified School District
(2010, Formaker) OAH Case No. 2010011287 [ordering rescission of reductions that are 
based upon the type of credential held, rather than a PKS, thus focusing on who is 
performing the service rather than how the service will be performed].)

17.

Yafeng Liao.  Respondent Liao is a Mandarin teacher at Willard Elementary 
School who possesses a multiple subject credential and a BCLAD in Mandarin.  Ms. Liao 
testified that her current assignment is solely as a Mandarin teacher; she does not deliver any 
other instructional services.  When questioned about this on cross-examination, Dr. Miller 
could only surmise respondent Liao may be currently misassigned.  Yet respondent Liao is 
listed on District exhibit 10J as being subject to layoff because of her multiple subject 
credential.  The Board’s resolution does not identify any reduction in Mandarin services.  
The practical effect of laying off respondent Liao would be retaining one more elementary 
school teacher (who requires a multiple subject credential) than the Board had anticipated 
and instead laying off a Mandarin teacher, which the Board had not anticipated.  For this 
reason, respondent Liao should not be subject to layoff.

18. Manual Rustin.  Respondent Rustin testified he teaches various social studies 

courses at John Muir High School (Muir).  He has a social science credential.  Thus, 
respondent Rustin’s current assignment is solely as a high school social sciences teacher; he 
does not deliver any other instructional services.  Yet respondent Rustin was listed on 
District exhibit 10M as being subject to layoff under the “Middle School Teacher (Social 
Studies)” service reduction. The Board’s resolution does not identify any reduction in high 
school social studies.

19.

Russell Wong.  Although respondent Wong did not make this argument during 
the hearing, it is clear from his testimony and the District’s various seniority charts that he is 
a high school social studies teacher also involved in the IB program at Blair School.  Similar 
to respondent Rustin’s situation, respondent Wong was listed on District exhibit 10M as 
being subject to layoff under the middle school social studies service reduction.

20.

Janet Ho & Kun Hee Lee.  Similar to respondent Wong’s situation, 
respondents Janet Ho and Kun Hee Lee teach high school social studies at Muir and Marshall 
Fundamental (also a high school), respectively.  Both are subject to layoff under the middle 
school social studies service reduction.

21.

Daniel Jarashow.  Respondent Jarashow teaches two periods of AP classes 

deemed to constitute social studies, which subjects him to layoff.  But he also teaches three 
periods of science, which is not a PKS subject to reduction and therefore should not subject 
him to layoff for .60 of his 1.0 FTE position.  As to the .40 FTE position in social studies, 
respondent Jarashow teaches at Marshall Fundamental, a high school.  Thus, none of the 
services provided by respondent Jarashow are identified as being reduced.

7

22.

The District’s master seniority list and the seniority worksheet for the middle 

school social studies reduction clearly show there are a number of social science teachers 
assigned to the District’s middle schools.  For reasons that were not established, those 
employees were not selected for layoff. On the other hand, the District offered no evidence 
explaining why a high school social studies teacher should be subject to the middle school 
social studies service reduction.  Therefore, the District has not met its burden of proving that 
respondents Rustin, Wong, Ho, Lee, or Jarashow are subject to the middle school social 
studies reduction.  Their layoff notices must be rescinded.

Attacks on Skipping Categories

23.

Respondents do not contest the skipping categories pertaining to the IB 

program or DLIP.  However, a majority of respondents (those represented by Ms. Myers) 
argue the other three implemented skipping categories are invalid.

24.

A.  Permanent employees may not be terminated while an employee with less 

seniority is retained to render a service which the senior employees are “certificated and 
competent to render.”  (§ 44955, subd. (b).)  A teacher is qualified to serve in a teaching 
position by possession of an appropriate credential plus completion of appropriate academic 
preparation or experience in the subject matter in which the vacant position occurs.  (Taylor 
v. Board of Trustees (1984) 36 Cal.3d 500.) 

B.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to 

a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee in that position.  (Lacy v. 
Richmond Unified Sch. Dist. (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473–474.)

C.  However, section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), permits a district to deviate 

from the order of seniority in teacher layoffs when “the district demonstrates a specific need 
for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that the employee [who is 
retained] has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study 
. . . which others with more seniority do not possess.”  These are factual questions, and the 
district seeking to skip junior teachers bears the burden of proving each element.  (Bledsoe v. 
Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 138, as modified on denial of rehg.
(Jan. 12, 2009).)5

///

 

 

5 Respondent Violeta Lerma is listed as one who received a precautionary notice (ex. 
5A), indicating she is subject to a skip.  However, one of the District’s seniority worksheets 
(ex. 10A) shows she is subject to the remaining .40 FTE position layoff of the 1.40 FTE 
positions of middle school art service reduction; the worksheet does not indicate she is being 
skipped.  Respondent Lerma did not appear at the hearing, and no further evidence was 
presented concerning her situation, other than Dr. Miller’s testimony that respondent 
Lerma’s layoff is only partial and that she retains a .60 FTE position with the District.

8

ADVANCED PLACEMENT

25.

As discussed above, the District seeks to skip those currently assigned to two 

periods or more of an AP program, who have participated in a minimum of 30 hours of 
training for teaching an AP program and possess an appropriate credential.

26.

Dr. Miller testified the AP skip is not an area in which the District has 

previously sought to exempt junior employees from layoff.  Dr. Miller testified that training 
in AP courses is offered by the College Board, the organization that administers the AP exam 
and approves all AP curriculum.  According to Dr. Miller, all teachers who teach an AP class
are obligated to complete College Board-approved AP training.  Dr. Miller further testified 
that the District pays for teachers assigned to teach AP to complete AP training.  Dr. Miller 
emphasized that the District has spent significant time and money training its AP teachers, 
and to lay them off will result in a waste of that training, plus incurring more costs in the 
future to train new teachers to replace those laid off.

27.

Dr. Miller’s testimony on these points, however, was contradicted by several 

witnesses, including Dr. Mark Anderson, the principal of Marshall Fundamental School 
(Marshall).  Dr. Anderson testified that AP training is highly encouraged or recommended, 
but is not required to teach AP courses, with the exception of one AP program called AP 
Capstone, which is comprised of two courses, AP Seminar and AP Research.  Teachers in the 
AP Capstone program are required to complete a year-long training course.  Marshall began 
offering the AP Capstone program in 2017.  Only one of the teachers that the District seeks 
to skip, respondent Joshua Tornek, has completed the AP Capstone training.

28.

Other witnesses confirmed that the District regularly assigns AP courses to 

teachers without any training.  Daniel Harris, a teacher at Muir, convincingly testified he first 
taught AP Physics in the 2014/2015 school year and taught it for a second time during the 
2016/2017 school year.  Mr. Harris submitted his planned curriculum to the College Board, 
who certified his course.  Mr. Harris was not offered the opportunity to attend any AP 
training before, during, or after he taught AP Physics.  Allison Steppes, a counselor at 
Pasadena High School, credibly testified she is also aware that teachers have been assigned 
to teach AP courses with no prior training.

29. When the District has hired teachers from outside specifically to teach AP 

courses, the District has not made AP training a minimum qualification.  Principal Anderson 
testified he conducted an external search to recruit a teacher for AP Psychology.  The job 
posting for that position did not include any reference to AP training.  (Ex. E.)  The same is 
true of AP Calculus.  (Ex. D.)  

30.

To successfully skip junior employees who have received AP training, the 
District must demonstrate that the junior teachers possess special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course of study.  The District failed to prove this, with the exception 
of the AP Capstone program, because AP training is not necessary to teach an AP course.  
While the District may prefer to retain junior teachers based on training investments made in 

9

some of them in the past, that preference does not meet the criteria of section 44955, 
subdivision (d)(1).  If a school district’s preference to retain certain junior teachers is enough 
to justify a skipping decision, the narrow exception provided by section 44955, subdivision 
(d)(1), would swallow or supplant the overall rule in favor of seniority.

31.

A.  According to District exhibits 10H and 10M, the District applied the AP 
skip to the following five respondents: Vickie Mach; Daniel Jarashow; Janet Ho; Kun Hee 
Lee; and Joshua Tornek.  Because respondent Tornek is assigned to teach the AP Capstone 
program, which is a valid skip because it does require special training and experience 
necessary to teach the course, he was properly skipped.  The other four AP respondents, who 
received precautionary notices, were not properly skipped.

B.  Invalidating the AP skip has the following unanticipated ripple effect 

concerning those subject to the 2.0 FTE positions of middle school social studies service 
reduction (ex. 10M), especially considering the problem discussed above concerning 
respondents Rustin, Wong, Ho, Lee and Jarashow:

she is subject to the valid DLIP skip.

1.  Carla Ayala is the least senior employee in this PKS reduction, but 

2.  Respondents Jarashow and Janet Ho are the next more senior 

employees, but they were subject to the invalid AP skip.  However, as discussed above, these 
respondents should not be subject to layoff due to the improper use of their credentials as the 
reason for subjecting them to the middle school social studies layoff.

discussed in more detail below, he is subject to the valid ISA skip.

3.  Respondent Escalante is the next more senior employee, but, as 

the same situation as respondents Jarashow and Ho, and therefore is not subject to layoff.  

4.  Respondent Kun Hee Lee is the next more senior employee, but is in 

AP skip is valid because it relates to the AP Capstone program.

5.  Respondent Joshua Tornek is the next more senior employee, but his 

6.  The next two more senior employees are respondents Rustin and 
Wong, and they are the two employees selected to fulfill the 2.0 FTE positions of middle 
school social studies service reduction.  However, they are in the same situation as 
respondents Jarashow, Ho, and Lee, and also should not be subject to layoff.

7.  The next senior employees listed for the middle school social studies 
reduction were not selected for layoff, were not given layoff notices, and therefore cannot be 
subject to layoff.  The practical effect of the above findings is that the District cannot 
effectuate any of the 2.0 FTE positions for service reduction of middle school social studies.

10

32.

The invalid AP skip applied to respondent Mach for the high school math 

service reduction (3.50 FTE positions) means she is subject to layoff as a junior employee, as 
are two other non-respondent employees.  (Ex. 10H.)  Only a .50 FTE position remains to be 
fulfilled for this service reduction.  Respondent Eric Glenn was initially selected for a 1.00 
FTE layoff, and theoretically he would be a candidate to have his 1.00 FTE position layoff 
reduced to the remaining .50 FTE position reduction.  But the remaining .50 FTE position 
needed for this service reduction was applied to Musaki Fukao, who is more senior to 
respondent Glenn.  Since Musaki Fukao did not appeal his or her layoff notice, the District 
may lay off him or her.  This means the District has the requisite 3.50 FTE positions subject 
to the high school math reduction, and that respondent Glenn is no longer subject to layoff.

MAGNET SCHOOLS

33.

As discussed above, the District seeks to skip qualified junior employees 

currently assigned to a teaching position at one of the four following magnet schools: Eliot 
Arts Magnet Academy (Eliot Arts magnet); Jackson STEM Dual Language Magnet 
Academy (Jackson STEM magnet); Washington Elementary STEM Magnet School
(Washington STEM magnet); or Washington STEAM Magnet Academy (Washington 
STEAM magnet).  In addition, those to be skipped must have in the last 10 years participated 
in a minimum of 24 hours of magnet training.

34.

As the names of the schools indicate and as the testimony established, unlike 

regular schools, there is a different focus or theme of education at each of these magnet 
schools.  For Eliot Arts magnet, the theme is art.  For Jackson and Washington Elementary 
STEM magnets, the theme is science, technology, engineering and math.  For Washington 
STEAM magnet, the theme is science, technology, engineering, arts, and math.

35.

The delivery of instruction at each magnet school is different in that the theme 

of each school is infused into each subject taught.  For example, instruction for teachers at 
Eliot Arts magnet infuses art into primary core subject instruction.  Thus, in language and 
sciences classes at Eliot Arts magnet, the curriculum is tied into arts, with lessons in all core 
subjects always relating to art.  The same is true for the other four magnets.  Dr. Miller, as 
well as the District’s LCAP, Planning and Signature Programs Coordinator, Shannon 
Mumolo, credibly testified that it is this thematic approach which makes the magnet schools 
special from other regular classes throughout the District.  Bethel Lira, a magnet school 
teacher, and past president of United Teachers of Pasadena (respondents’ collective 
bargaining association), admitted in her testimony that training is necessary to learn how to 
build lessons or units that integrate a magnet’s theme into the educational content.  In fact, 
she believes training is not all that is necessary; one must learn how to integrate the requisite 
theme into the curriculum.  Based on the above, it was established that both training and 
experience is necessary to teach in a magnet school, not just a particular credential.

///

///

11

36.

Some respondents argue the magnet schools do not constitute a specific course 

of study because teachers at magnet schools must still follow the same state standards and 
curriculum as teachers in other regular classes.  While true, that argument does not account 
for the fact that the magnet teachers must take the additional step of integrating all that 
subject matter into the particular theme of their magnet school.

37.

In 2013, the District received $7.9 million in federal grant funds to pay for the 

conversion of the schools and fund the specialized training necessary to properly equip 
teachers to teach in the magnet schools based upon each school’s particular theme.  In 2017, 
the District again received a $14.5 million federal grant to expand the program at 
Washington STEM magnet and to add magnet schools at Altadena Elementary and Muir.  
These grant funds have almost been fully exhausted, with the result being a cadre of teachers 
trained in developing themes for their courses.  The federal government will audit the 
District to make sure the grant funds have been used properly, including staffing the magnets 
with appropriately trained teachers, and that the District will maintain the magnet models in 
future school years.  The District’s failure to do so will jeopardize its ability to receive this 
kind of significant magnet funding in the future.

38.

As demonstrated by District exhibit 12, there are currently 106 teachers 

assigned to the four magnet schools in question.  Some respondents argue seven of those 106 
teachers do not have the requisite 24 hours of specialized magnet training, meaning the 
training is not necessary to teach at a magnet.  However, as discussed below, it was 
determined during the hearing that four of those seven teachers in question actually have the 
requisite training hours.  It is also abundantly clear that the rest of the 106 magnet teachers 
have at least that amount, if not substantially more.  This shows the District makes specific 
magnet training a necessary component of teaching at a magnet school.  The District’s 
decision to not skip those magnet teachers who have failed to compile the requisite training 
hours shows the District’s good faith.  The fact there is a miniscule number of teachers who 
do not currently possess the required training hours is more consistent with normal patterns 
of attrition and personnel movement; it does not necessarily, on its face, show that magnet 
training is not a necessary component of the position.

39.

According to the credible testimony of Dr. Miller and Ms. Mumolo, each 

teacher skipped has received the requisite hours of special training.  If those teachers are not 
skipped, millions of dollars in special training will have been lost, which would be
detrimental to the District, given its poor financial situation.

40.

Based on the above, it was established that the magnet school skips are valid.  

The magnet schools’ thematic approach constitute a specific need of the District to retain 
junior teachers to teach a specific course of study, and those being skipped have special 
training and experience that more senior employees do not possess.  Invalidating the skip 
would result in the waste of millions of dollars of grant funds spent on training the involved 
individuals and could jeopardize the District’s ability to attract future grant funds, facts 
which are further indicia of the special nature of this course of study.

12

41.

The respondents given precautionary notices because they are being skipped 

due to teaching at one of these four magnet schools should not be laid off because this 
skipping category is valid.  These respondents are Joanna Lee; Daniel Chua; Robert Ward; 
Oscar Manzanares; Alisha Marie Schloesser; Jacobo Coronel; Rosyln Crowder; and Micol 
Issa.6

INTERNATIONAL STUDENT ACADEMY

42.

The District also seeks to skip one teacher currently assigned to the ISA, 

respondent Luis Escalante.

43.

Respondent Escalante is part of a cohort of four teachers who have been 

trained to teach students new to this country.  The ISA receives students from throughout the 
District.  There are currently 160 students in this program.  The students have varied fluency 
in English, from none to poor to good.  But the ISA teachers focus not just on language, but 
also on the academic and cultural needs of these “newcomers” to this country.  The ISA 
teachers try to help acclimate the newcomers to the District and their immediate 
communities.  When students have completed 12 to 18 months at the ISA, they have the 
option to return to their school of residence.  Blair principal David Ibarra credibly testified 
the four ISA teachers receive intensive specialized training in how to support immigrants at 
school and in the community.  In light of these circumstances, the District established a 
specific need for personnel to teach the newcomer program at the ISA.

44.

Some respondents argue the District has not established that a specific need 

exists for the ISA.  They contend the District provided limited and insufficient evidence 
about the number of English Language Learners who are new to the District from other 
countries.  Yet, it was established that 160 students are in the program and need assistance 
with bridging language barriers, to various degrees.  Respondents also ignore the equally 
important component of helping the newcomers acculturate to school and community 
settings, a skill most of the other students in the District take for granted.  

45.

These respondents also cite several administrative layoff decisions from prior 
years concerning the invalidation of skips related to ELD teachers with a CLAD or BCLAD 
certification.  Yet, those cases are not analogous, as they do not involve the type of special 
program provided by the ISA.  More analogous is the Bledsoe case, in which a challenge to a 
community day school skip was rejected.  The Bledsoe court determined the community day 
school served a distinct and difficult student population, i.e., those who had been expelled or 
who had extreme behavioral difficulties; to deal appropriately with such students, teachers 
needed specialized background, training and experience; and that therefore, a specific need 
by the school district for such teachers was established.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School 

 

 

6 Mallory White is designated in exhibit 5A as having been given a precautionary 

notice.  According to exhibits 9 and 12, she was skipped because she teaches at Washington 
STEAM magnet.  However, she did not request a hearing and is not one of the respondents 
listed in exhibit 5.  Therefore, no findings are made as to her.

13

Dist., supra, 170 Cal.App.4th at p. 138.)  Here, it is also worth noting that, unlike the other 
attacked skip categories, the involved respondents offered no evidence rebutting the 
District’s showing that the ISA skip fulfills a specific need.  Moreover, there were no 
respondents who testified they have the requisite training and experience to teach in the 
program next school year, indicating the ISA program constitutes a specific course of study 
necessarily taught by those who have special training and experience.

Overall Findings

46.

The District maintains a seniority list containing employees’ seniority dates, 
current assignments and locations, credentials and authorizations.  Dr. Miller testified to the 
accuracy of the seniority list, and how it was compiled.  In or about January of 2018,
certificated employees were notified in writing of the District’s records regarding their 
employment history with the District, and they were allowed to confirm or challenge the 
accuracy of that information.  The seniority list was updated based on new information 
obtained from certificated employees that was verified.  It was established that the 
information on the seniority list is accurate, except for the changes noted in the remaining 
Factual Findings.

47.

The District used the seniority list to implement and determine the proposed 

layoffs.  The District then determined whether the least senior employees held other
credentials entitling them to bump other more junior employees. In determining who would 
be subject to layoff for each kind of particular service reduced, the District counted the 
number of reductions not covered by the known vacancies, and determined the impact on 
incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.

48.

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the above-described particular 

kinds of services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its 
discretion.

49.

The cause for reducing and/or eliminating the above-described particular kinds 

of services relates solely to the welfare of the schools in the District and its pupils.  

50.

Taking into account the findings and conclusions above and below, no 

permanent certificated employee with less seniority will be retained to render a service that 
the remaining respondents are certificated and competent to render.

Seniority Disputes

///

51.

Absent unusual factual or legal circumstances, seniority is measured from the 
first date on which an employee renders paid service in a probationary position.  (§§ 44845 
and 87414.)

14

52.

Sean Mcneley.  Respondent Mcneley challenges his seniority date of August 9, 

2017, arguing it should be changed to an earlier date not established in August 2015, when 
he was first hired by the District as a CTE instructor.  Respondent Mcneley was hired for the 
2015/2016 school year under a temporary contract at Blair; released at the end of that school 
year; hired again at Blair under another temporary contract for the 2016/2017 school year; 
and released at the end of that school year.  He was not hired under a probationary contract 
until August 9, 2017.  In its closing brief, the District concedes respondent Mcneley’s two 
consecutive years of past full-time temporary service entitles him to “tack-on” one year of 
additional probationary service credit, pursuant to section 44918.  The added year of credit 
warrants adjusting respondent Mcneley’s seniority date to the beginning of the school year 
predating his probationary contract.  The District’s master seniority list (ex. 9) indicates that 
date at Blair was August 9, 2016, which should be respondent Mcneley’s correct seniority 
date.  However, it was not established that this new seniority date would preclude respondent 
Mcneley from layoff; it may impact his recall status.

53.

Samantha Davidson.  Respondent Davidson seeks to change her seniority date 

from August 12, 2016, to August 10, 2016.  It is true that respondent Davidson began 
working for the District on August 10, 2016, she did so as a substitute teacher, and she only 
possessed at that time a credential allowing her to teach as a substitute.  She did not sign her 
probationary contract with the District until August 12, 2016, when she received her teaching
credential and it was posted.  Under these circumstances, cause was not established to adjust 
her seniority date.  In any event, it was not established that the requested change in her 
seniority date would prevent respondent Davidson from layoff.

Individual Bumping and Skipping Challenges

54.

Jennifer Thompson, Laura MacDonald, Martin Dorado, Jr. & Karina 

Machuca-Evans.  The District agrees these four respondents, who are currently assigned to 
teach at one of the four magnet schools in question, have the requisite magnet training to 
qualify for the magnet school skip.  Therefore, the layoff notices to these four respondents 
should be rescinded, and they are not subject to layoff.

55.

Janice Khorozian & Candace Kovacic.  These respondents have the type of 

credentials that would allow them to teach at one of the four magnet schools.  However, 
neither respondent meets the magnet school skipping criteria, in that they are not currently 
assigned to a position at one of the magnet schools in question, and they do not have the 
requisite 24 hours of magnet school training.  Their testimony to the contrary was not 
persuasive.  Therefore, these two respondents are not qualified to be skipped.

56.

Ashley Webb.  Respondent Webb is currently assigned to the Altadena Arts 

Magnet Elementary School (Altadena Arts magnet), which recently became a magnet school.  
Teachers at that magnet are in the process of completing their magnet training, given the 
newness of the program.  Between February 2018 and the date of the hearing, respondent 
Webb has attended 18 hours of magnet training.  Aside from the question whether her current 
assignment to a magnet other than the four specified for skipping would qualify, respondent 

15

Webb does not currently have the requisite 24 hours of magnet training.  Her testimony that 
she expects to complete 59 total hours of magnet training by this August is not determinative, 
because districts cannot consider training and experience achieved after the March 15th 
layoff notice deadline.7

57.

Respondents Alves, Partma, Grimes, Cole, Raab, Pech & Synold.  The parties 
stipulated during the hearing that the following respondents have multiple subject credentials
and believe to be qualified to teach in any assignment at one of the four magnet schools 
subject to skipping: Helena Alves; Lauren Partma; Sabrina Grimes; Julia Cole; Karen Raab; 
Marlene Pech; and Jennifer Synold.  These respondents argue their layoff notices should be 
rescinded, based on their seniority, if the magnet school skip is invalid.  Since that skip is
valid, their argument is rejected.  In addition, it was not established that any of these 
respondents are currently assigned to a magnet school or that any of them have the requisite 
24 hours of magnet training.  These respondents do not meet the magnet school skip criteria 
and therefore no cause was established to rescind their layoff notices.

58.

A.  Katherine Mickelson.  Respondent Mickelson is currently assigned to teach 

a third grade class at the Washington STEM magnet.  The District did not skip her because 
its internal training records indicate she has no hours of magnet training while employed at 
the District.  Respondent Mickelson testified she has 24 hours or more of such training, 
comprised of 18 hours at the UCLA Center X during the 2016/2017 school year and at least 
six hours of magnet training during A Monday personal development days (A Monday 
training) at Washington STEM.  However, Washington STEM principal Karrone Meeks 
convincingly testified the UCLA Center X training respondent Mickelson received in the 
prior school year was not magnet training, but rather was training with a literacy coach from 
UCLA, which is not magnet training.  Principal Meeks also convincingly testified the A 
Monday training respondent Meeks received was similarly on reading and literacy, given her 
teaching assignment, and therefore did not constitute magnet training.  Ms. Mumolo also 
credibly testified that the District’s training spreadsheet for Washington STEM (ex. 12, p. 3) 
was accurate as to respondent Mickelson.  Since respondent Mickelson does not have 24 
hours of magnet training, she is not eligible for the magnet school skip.

B.  Respondent Mickelson also contends she has the requisite special training 
and experience necessary to teach in a DLIP, and therefore should have been skipped under 
that category.  She has a BCLAD and is fluent in Spanish.  In 2005/2006, she taught in a 
Spanish kindergarten class for another school district, and in 2011 she taught in a 
Spanish/Mandarin dual program for another school district.  However, respondent Mickelson 
is not eligible for a DLIP skip because she is not currently assigned to a District DLIP, and 
she has not taught such a course for the District within the past five years.

 

 

7 See, for example, San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at 

p. 635 [districts do not consider assured attrition after the deadline] and Degener v. 
Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689 [districts do not consider a credential obtained 
after the deadline].

16

C.  Based on the above, cause does not exist to skip respondent Mickelson and 

she is therefore subject to layoff.

59.

Luis Escalante.  As found above, respondent Escalante is not subject to layoff 
because his ISA skip is valid.  Respondent Escalante further argues he is not subject to layoff 
because even if the ISA skip was invalid, he also is qualified for the IB skip, a category not 
subject to attack.  The District concedes that four-fifths of respondent Escalante’s current
assignment is considered to be in the IB program, since the ISA is housed within the IB.  The 
District further concedes that if a majority of a teacher’s current assignment is in the IB 
program, that teacher should be deemed to be in a current IB assignment.  Moreover, 
respondent Escalante has the requisite 18 hours of IB training for purposes of the IB skip 
criteria.  Therefore, respondent Escalante would be eligible for the IB skip, if necessary.

60.

Russell Wong.  As discussed above, respondent Wong is not subject to layoff, 

because he was improperly classified in the middle school social studies reduction.  
However, respondent Wong also argues he should not be laid off because he is eligible for 
the IB skip.  Only two-fifths of respondent Wong’s current assignment is in the IB program.  
The District argues that because less than a majority of his assignment is in IB, he should not 
be viewed as having a current assignment to the IB program.  However, Board Resolution 
No. 2444 states that, for this skip, one must be “currently assigned” to the IB program.  
Respondent Wong is currently assigned to the IB program.  On the other hand, the AP skip 
requires at least two current periods of AP instruction, showing that when the Board wanted 
to quantify a threshold amount of instruction necessary to qualify for a skip, it would be 
specific.  Respondent Wong also has the requisite 18 hours of IB training.  (Ex. C.)  Under 
these circumstances, respondent Wong would be eligible for the IB skip, if necessary.

61.

Eric Glenn.  As discussed above, respondent Glenn is not subject to layoff, 

because a more junior employee involved in the invalid AP skip is subject to being laid off in 
his place.  However, respondent Glenn also argues he is eligible for the IB skip.  The current 
school year is respondent Glenn’s first year at IB.  According to his supervising principal, 
David Ibarra, respondent Glenn was hired after the IB training was offered during the 
summer of 2017, and he has not received 18 hours of IB training since that time.  Principal 
Ibarra also persuasively testified that the A Monday training respondent Glenn has attended 
does not constitute IB training.  Respondent Glenn does not qualify for the IB skip.

62.

Penelope Ibbotson.  Respondent Ibbotson contends she also has the requisite 
special training and experience necessary to teach in a DLIP, and therefore should have been
skipped under that category.  Her relevant prior experience was teaching a bilingual class for 
another school district from approximately 1993 to 2001, and her fluency in Spanish, which 
she believes allows her to teach in any DLIP or bilingual class in Spanish.  She also has a 
BCLAD.  While respondent Ibbotson has the requisite credentials, she does not meet the 
DLIP skipping criteria, in that she is not currently assigned to a DLIP and was not previously 
assigned to a District DLIP in the past five years.  Respondent Ibbotson is not eligible for the 
DLIP skip.

17

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

1.

The party asserting a claim or making charges in an administrative hearing 
generally has the burden of proof.  (Brown v. City of Los Angeles (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th 
155.) For example, in administrative hearings dealing with personnel matters, the burden of 
proof is ordinarily on the agency prosecuting the charges (Parker v. City of Fountain Valley
(1981) 127 Cal.App.3d 99, 113); in personnel matters concerning the dismissal of a teacher 
for cause, the burden of proof is similarly on the discharging school district (Gardner v. 
Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035).  As no other law or 
statute requires otherwise, the District bears the burden of proof in this matter, and the 
standard of proof is a preponderance of the evidence.  (Evid. Code, § 115.)

All notice and jurisdictional requirements of sections 44949 and 44955 were 

met. (Factual Findings 1-7.)

The services identified in Resolution No. 2444 are particular kinds of services 

that can be reduced or discontinued pursuant to section 44955.  The Board’s decision to 
reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of its discretion.  Services will not be reduced below mandated levels.  Cause 
for the reduction or discontinuation of those particular services relates solely to the welfare 
of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.  (Factual Findings 
8-50.)

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due 

to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services.  (Factual Findings 1-50.)

Pursuant to stipulation between the parties, the District will not lay off 

respondents Maria Barajas, Jason Trapp, Reyna Haro, and Luis Rendon.  (Factual Finding 7.)

Because it appears the following respondents were subject to layoff based on 

their credentials, and the District failed to meet its burden of establishing these employees 
provide services subject to reduction pursuant to section 44955, the layoff notices issued to 
respondents Yafeng Liao, Manuel Rustin, Russell Wong, Janet Ho, Kun Hee Lee, and Daniel 
Jarashow must be rescinded.  (Factual Findings 8-22.)

7.

Because the District’s AP skip (except as to the AP Capstone program) is 
invalid pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), respondent Vickie Mach, a junior 
employee to whom the invalid skip was applied, is subject to layoff in the area of high school 
math, but respondent Eric Glenn is no longer subject to layoff based on his seniority.  Since 
the District’s other skips are valid, no cause was established to layoff the remaining 
respondents who received precautionary notices (except as discussed above concerning 
Mallory White and respondent Violeta Lerma) and they shall not be laid off.  (Factual 
Findings 8-13 & 23-45.)  In addition, the following four respondents proved they have the 
requisite training and experience to be skipped to teach in one of the four magnet schools in 

18

question and are therefore not subject to layoff: Jennifer Thompson, Laura MacDonald, 
Martin Dorado, Jr., and Karina Machuca-Evans.  (Factual Finding 54.)

8.

All other arguments against the Board’s Resolution No. 2444 having been 

rejected, and taking the changes described above into account, no junior certificated 
employee is otherwise scheduled to be retained to perform services that a more senior 
employee is certificated and competent to render. (Factual Findings 1-62.)

ORDER

1.

The District Statement of Reduction in Force is dismissed against respondents

Maria Barajas; Jason Trapp; Reyna Haro; Luis Rendon; Yafeng Liao; Dr. Manuel Rustin; 
Russell Wong; Janet Ho; Kun Hee Lee; Daniel Jarashow; Eric Glenn; Jennifer Thompson; 
Laura MacDonald; Martin Dorado, Jr.; and Karina Machuca-Evans.  The District shall not 
give them final layoff notices for the next school year.

2. 

The District Statement of Reduction in Force may also be dismissed against 

those respondents who received precautionary layoff notices, and are identified in exhibit 5A
(but not including Mallory White), except for respondent Vickie Mach and .40 of a FTE 
position for respondent Violeta Lerma.  The precautionary notice respondents shall not be 
given final layoff notices for the next school year, except respondent Mach may be given a 
final layoff notice for the next school year, and respondent Lerma may be given a final layoff 
notice for .40 of a FTE position for the next school year.

3.

The District Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained against the 

remaining respondents.  The Board may give a final notice of layoff to those respondents. 
Notice shall be given to those respondents that their services will not be required for the 
2018-2019 school year, and such notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.

Dated:  

____________________________
ERIC SAWYER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

19

May 4, 2018