BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF THE SANTA CLARA COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction 
in Force of Certificated Employees:

OAH No. 2018030560

YAEL JAARI, CLAUDIA JONES, 
VERONICA RAMOS and STEVE 
SANCHEZ, 

Respondents.

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Jill Schlichtmann, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 25, 2018, in San Jose, California.

Adam J. Fiss and Maggy Athanasious, Littler Mendelson, P.C., represented the Santa 

Clara County Office of Education.

Christopher E. Schumb, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Yael Jaari, Claudia 

Jones and Veronica Ramos.

Steve Sanchez did not appear and was not represented at hearing.

The matter was submitted for decision on April 25, 2018.    

Introduction

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Anisha Munshi made and filed the Statement of Reduction in Force in her 
official capacity as the Director of Human Resources of the Santa Clara County Office of 
Education (County Office).  The County Office employs teachers in the subjects of
Alternative Education, Special Education, Migrant Education and in a Regional Occupational 
Program (ROP) that provides career technical education.    

2.

On February 28, 2018, Mary Ann Dewan, Ph.D., the County Superintendent of 

Schools, approved a resolution reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of services for the 
2018-2019 school year (PKS Resolution), and directing Phillip J. Gordillo, the Chief Human 
Resources Officer, to send appropriate notices to all employees affected by the reduction or 
elimination of services. 

3.

On February 28, 2018, Superintendent Dewan adopted tie breaking criteria in 

a separate resolution.  The tie breaking criteria were not used because there are no employees 
affected by the layoff notice who became employed on the same date.  

4.

On April 2, 2018, the PKS Resolution was revised; it clarified the prior 

resolution, but did not otherwise affect respondents’ layoff notices.

 

5.
been satisfied.

All jurisdictional requirements of the County Office and respondents have 

6.

The PKS Resolution identified the non-administrative services to be reduced 

no later than the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year as:

Teacher – Alternative Education
Teacher – ROP – Computer Applications
Teacher – ROP – Dental Assisting  
Teacher – Special Day Class
Teacher – Migrant Education

 

5 @ 1.0 FTE1
1 @ 1.0 FTE
1 @ 0.5 FTE
1 @ 1.0 FTE
3 @ 1.0 FTE

The County Office subsequently rescinded four Alternative Education teacher layoff 

notices.  One Alternative Education teacher and the ROP Dental Assisting teacher did not 
request a hearing on the layoff notices.  The eliminated Special Day Class position was not 
included in the layoff because it was satisfied through attrition.    

7.

The services set forth in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of services 

that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  

8.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), when a governing 
body reduces particular kinds of services resulting in a decrease in the number of certificated, 
permanent employees, the services of a permanent employee may not be terminated if 
another employee with less seniority is retained to render a service that the more senior 
employee is “certificated and competent to render.”  

1 Full-Time Equivalent.

 

 

2

Migrant Education Teachers

9.

Respondent Yael Jaari is a full-time Migrant Education teacher.  Respondent 

Jaari’s seniority date is January 10, 2017.  She has a multiple subject (preliminary) credential 
and a general subjects credential.  

10.

Respondent Claudia Jones is a full-time Migrant Education teacher.  
Respondent Jones’s seniority date is July 1, 2016.  She has a multiple subject (clear)
credential and a general subjects credential.  

11.

Respondent Veronica Ramos is a full-time Migrant Education teacher.  
Respondent Ramos’s seniority date is July 1, 2016.  She has an administrative services
(clear) credential, a multiple subject (clear) credential and a general subjects (examination) 
credential.  

12. Migrant Education teachers provide supplemental services to migratory 
students age 22 or younger before and after school or during lunch.  The students come from 
families in the fishing and agricultural industries.  Migrant Education teachers provide 
academic intervention in English Language Arts and Mathematics.  They also connect 
migratory students to available resources.  In the 2017/2018 school year, Migrant Education 
teachers provided services to approximately 750 students in 10 regions.  

13.

Respondents Jaari, Jones and Ramos provided these services for the County 
Office.  The services are funded by a contract with the California Department of Education 
(CDE).  The County Office reviewed the mandates in the contract with CDE that will take 
effect on July 1, 2018.  The County Office decided to change its staffing needs to better serve 
the student population and meet the mandates of its contract.  In place of the three full-time 
positions noticed for layoff, the County Office seeks to hire 50 teachers on an hourly basis on 
site in various Districts to provide the educational intervention and case management 
services that it is obligated to provide under the CDE contract.  It will continue to provide the 
services, but in a different manner.  The County Office is currently working on a recruitment 
and training plan.

14.

The County Office intends to continue to provide Migrant Education at the 

current level in compliance with its contract obligations with CDE.  

15.

On March 5, 2018, Chief Human Resources Officer Gordillo served 

respondents Jaari, Jones and Ramos with written notice that their services would not be 
required for the 2018-2019 school year.  The notice sets forth the reasons for the resolution.  

16.

Respondents Jaari, Jones and Ramos timely requested a hearing to determine if 

there was cause for the reduction of their services for the ensuing year.  The County Office
timely served respondents with a packet which included a statement to each respondent, the 
statement of reduction in force, copies of appropriate Education and Government Code 
sections, a notice of participation and a notice of hearing.  Respondents Jaari, Jones and 

3

Ramos filed timely notices of participation.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have 
been met.  

17.

The County Office did not retain any employee with less seniority than 

respondents Jaari, Jones or Ramos to perform services for which they are certificated and 
competent to render.

ROP – Computer Application Position

18.

ROP teachers provide education in subjects that are tied to the job market.  
The courses are meant to prepare high school students for graduation and to enter the job 
market.  Class offerings are affected by workforce trends.  There needs to be enough student 
interest in the subject matter to support offering the course. 

19.

Based on these factors, the County Office decided to eliminate one full-time 

ROP position in computer applications.  

20.

ROP services are not being reduced below a mandated level.

21.

Respondent Steve Sanchez teaches computer applications.  His seniority date 

is August 10, 2015.  Respondent Sanchez has a career technical education teaching credential 
(preliminary) in the subject areas of information and communication technology and 
business and finance. 

22.

On March 5, 2018, Chief Human Resources Officer Gordillo served 

respondent Sanchez with written notice that his services would not be required for the     
2018-2019 school year.  The notice set forth the reasons for the recommendation.

23.

Respondent Sanchez timely requested a hearing to determine if there was 

cause for the reduction of his services for the ensuing year.  The County Office timely served 
respondent with a packet which included a statement to respondent, the statement of 
reduction in force, copies of appropriate Education and Government Code sections, a notice 
of participation and a notice of hearing.  Respondent Sanchez filed a timely notice of 
participation.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.

24.

The County Office did not retain any employee with less seniority than 

respondent Sanchez to perform services for which he is certificated and competent to render.

Respondents’ Evidence and Contentions

25.

Respondents Jaari, Jones and Ramos have provided valuable educational 

intervention and case management services to their migratory students.  They have 
developed relationships with the students and their families.    

4

26.

Respondent Ramos has worked in Migrant Education for 13 years, including 

nine years in administration.  She questions whether the County Office will be able to recruit 
and train 50 teachers to provide services to migratory students in time for the next school 
year.  In order to provide Migrant Education, a teacher should be experienced, bilingual and 
have empathy and knowledge of the students’ backgrounds.  Respondent Ramos questions 
whether the new model will provide the students with sufficient intervention services.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied. 

2.

The services referenced in the PKS Resolution set forth in Factual Finding 6
are the kind which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes 
and case law.  (See Ed. Code, § 44955; Campbell Elem. Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 
76 Cal.App.3d 796; Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  The 
decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but rather a 
proper exercise of the Superintendent’s discretion.  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees, supra,
64 Cal.App.3d 167.)

3.

The evidence established that no certificated employee with less seniority than 

respondents Jaari, Jones, Ramos or Sanchez is being retained to render services which 
respondents Jaari, Jones, Ramos and Sanchez are certificated and competent to perform.  
(Factual Findings 17 and 23.)  

4.

 In accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, cause exists 

for reduction of particular kinds of services of the County Office, beginning no later than the 
commencement of the 2018-2019 school year, as follows: one ROP – Computer Applications 
teacher at 1.0 FTE, and three Migrant Education teachers at 1.0 FTE each.  The cause relates 
solely to the welfare of the school and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education 
Code section 44949.    

5.

Notice may be given to respondents Jaari, Jones, Ramos and Sanchez that their

services will not be required for the 2018-2019 school year.  

5

ORDER

Notice may be given to respondents Jaari, Jones, Ramos and Sanchez that their 

services will not be required for the 2018-2019 school year.

DATED: April 30, 2018

 

_________________________________
JILL SCHLICHTMANN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

6

