BEFORE THE
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE
MOUNTAIN VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the District Statement of 
Reduction in Force of:

VEREE MADDEN,

OAH No. 2018040279

 Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Administrative Law Judge Ed Washington, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, State of California, in Hayfork, California, on May 8, 2018.

Thomas E. Gauthier, Attorney at Law, represented the Mountain Valley Unified 

School District (District).

Lesley Beth Curtis, Attorney at Law, represented Veree Madden (respondent).

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for 

decision on May 8, 2018.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdiction

2.

3.

1.

Debbie Miller is the Superintendent of the District.  The actions of 

Superintendent Miller, and those of the District’s staff and Board of Trustees (Board), were 
taken solely in their official capacities. 

Respondent is a certificated employee of the District.

On March 15, 2018, Superintendent Miller recommended that the Board 

reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) no later than the beginning of the 
2018-2019 school year in the amount of 2.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.  On the 
same date, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2017/18-34, titled “Resolution Reducing 

Certain Certificated Services for the 2018-2019 School Year (Reduction in Employment of 
Certificated Employees, Layoff of Certificated Employee)” (Resolution).

4.

The Resolution specifies that it will be necessary to reduce “2.0 FTE Multiple 

Subject (Elementary Teaching Services)” of the District and to decrease a corresponding 
number of certificated employees in the District not later than the beginning of the 2018-
2019 school year.  The Resolution also provides that the order of termination between 
employees who first rendered paid service on the same day shall be based on the tie breaking 
criteria set forth in Education Code section 44955 and the applicable collective bargaining 
agreement.1 The Resolution further specifies that the Board has considered all positively 
assured attrition that has or is expected to occur prior to making its decision to decrease the 
number of certificated employees of the District to correspond with its reduction in PKS.  
The Resolution contains no skipping, bumping, or competency criteria.

5.

The Board directed Superintendent Miller to determine which employees’ 
services will not be required for the 2018-2019 school year as a result of the reduction or 
elimination of PKS and send appropriate notices to all employees whose services would be 
terminated as a result of the Board’s action.

6.

On March 15, 2018, Superintendent Miller served respondent and another 
certificated employee, Amanda Comaianni, with a document titled “Layoff Agreement.”  
Attached to the Layoff Agreement were a Notice of Participation form and a Request for 
Hearing form.  The Layoff Agreement provided to respondent includes the following 
information:

Respondent is a certificated employee who waives and relinquishes all 

rights, including the right to a hearing, as specified in Education Code Sections 
44949 et seq., 44955 et seq., and Government Code Section 11500 et seq.

The District and [respondent] have jointly agreed that there is cause 

pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Education Code including, but not 
limited to, Education Code Sections 44949 and 44955 to layoff [respondent]
from his/her employment with the District, effective June 30, 2018.

The District and [respondent] have agreed that the District need not 

take the action specified in [the] Education Code including the action specified 
in Sections 44955 and 44959 in order to accomplish the layoff of [respondent] 
and that in lieu thereof, this Agreement is being signed.

NOW THEREFORE AND IN CONSIDERATION OF THE ABOVE, 

it is agreed and covenanted as follows:

 

 

otherwise specified.

1 Hereinafter, all statutory references are to the California Education Code unless 

2

[Respondent] is the proper subject of a layoff.  [Respondent] 
waives and relinquishes his/her right to a hearing as provided by 
Education Code Sections 44949, et seq., 44955 et seq., and 
Government Code Sections 11500, et seq.

Cause exists to reduce the certificated staff of the District by 
[respondent] signing this agreement pursuant to the provisions 
of Education Code Sections 44955 and 44959 and Government 
Code Sections 11550, et seq.

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

Effective June 30, 2018, [respondent] shall be laid off from 
his/her employment and his/her employment shall cease. 
[Respondent] waives the right to receive a notice of 
nonreemployment pursuant to Education Code Section 44049 
and 44955.  No further action is required to implement the 
layoff of [respondent].

This agreement constitutes the notice required pursuant to
Education Code Sections 44955 and 44949 that the services of 
[respondent] will not be required for the ensuing school year, 
2018-2019.  No further notice of layoff, notice of 
reemployment, or other notice is required to complete the layoff 
of [respondent].

The District is willing to enter into this layoff agreement if and 
only if it is signed by [respondent] and delivered to the District 
office on or before March 15, 2018.  If this layoff agreement is 
not signed by [respondent] and delivered to the District office 
on or before March 15, 2018, then this Agreement shall never 
become effective, the offer to enter into this agreement shall be 
deemed withdrawn, and by signing of this Agreement by the 
employee after the aforesaid date shall be ineffective, null, void 
and of no force or affects, unless the Agreement is also signed 
by the Superintendent or Board of Trustees of the District after 
the aforesaid date.

This Agreement may be unilaterally withdrawn and terminated 
by the District at any time before June 30 of the 2017-2018 
school year.  The District shall provide at least five (5) days 
written notice to [respondent] if the District terminates or 
withdraws this Agreement.  In such event [respondent] will not 

3

be laid off and will continue to be employed by the District for 
the succeeding school year.

(Capitalization in original.)

7.

Respondent accepted the Layoff Agreement, but refused to sign the document.  

On March 15, 2018, respondent submitted a Notice of Participation form to the District, 
which specified that she was requesting a hearing and objected to “the District Statement of 
Reduction in Force,” on the grounds that it does not state acts or omissions that form a basis 
for action and that it is so indefinite or uncertain that she cannot prepare a defense.  Ms. 
Comaianni did not provide the District with a Notice of Participation or Request for Hearing.
The District intends to layoff Ms. Comaianni at the close of the current school year.  

8.

By way of a letter dated March 23, 2018, the District sent respondent a 

“clarifying letter” to “reiterate the substance of the [Layoff Agreement]” respondent received 
on March 15, 2018.  Copies of Sections 44949 and 44955, the Resolution, and a District 
Statement of Reduction in Force, dated March 23, 2018, were included as attachments to the 
clarifying letter.  The letter includes the following information:

The [Board] recommended that you be given notice that your
services will be terminated at the close of the current school 
year pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.
The reasons for this action are set forth in the attached 
Resolution adopted by the [Board] on March 15, 2018.

9.

On March 27, 2018, respondent submitted a second Notice of Participation to 

the District, in which she requested a hearing to present her defense to the charges in the 
District Statement of Reduction in Force.  On May 2, 2018, respondent served the District 
with an Amended Notice of Participation in which she included the following additional 
objections:

a.

b.

c.

d.

to all skipping of an employee with the same date of hire not 
noticed for layoff, Megan Rourke;

to the District utilizing a lottery system only to conduct tie-
breaking for purposes of seniority between respondent and 
another employee with the same date of hire;

that the District, through attrition and layoff, has already lost 
two multiple subject teachers and therefore, under the 
Resolution, has no need to layoff respondent;

that the District is illegally attempting to reduce services 
below a mandated level since with the loss of three multiple 
subject teachers it will not have enough multiple subject 

4

teachers remaining to teach Transitional Kindergarten, 
Kindergarten, First or Second grades;

e.

that the District is illegally failing to follow the mandate in 
Education Code section 44955 to, “make assignments and 
reassignments so as to avoid layoff.”  The District is posting 
an open English position.  The District has a teacher
currently teaching in a multiple subject position who taught 
English during the 2016-2017 school year (last year).  The 
law mandates that the District reassign this individual back 
to English, thereby opening a multiple subject position and 
avoiding the layoff of respondent.

Testimony of Superintendent Miller

10.

Superintendent Miller is the Superintendent and Principal of Mountain Valley 

Unified School District.  She is also the Principal of Hayfork High School, which is a 
necessary small high school.2  She is responsible for the personnel decisions of the District 
and made the recommendation to the Board to layoff respondent.  Superintendent Miller 
holds a multiple subject teaching credential and an administrative services credential and has 
a bachelor’s degree in liberal studies.

11.

Superintendent Miller has been a school administrator for 13 years.  Prior to 
working for the District, she was a high school principal in Siskiyou County.  She has also 
worked as an elementary school principal for Paradise Unified School District, and as an 
alternative education principal for Gridley Unified School District.  Superintendent Miller is 
familiar with teacher credentialing and assignment matters as a component of her job duties,
experience.  She has also received training in those areas through the Association of 
California School Administrators.

12.

The District is in Trinity County and is comprised of three sites:  a K-8 

elementary school, a 9-12 necessary small high school, a 9-12 continuation school, along 
with an After School Program and a Pre-K School Readiness Program.  The District has 
approximately 255 students as of 2017-2018 school year.  There are 36 classified employees.

13.

Over the last several years, the District has been “running deficit spending” by 
intentionally maintaining overstaffing of two teachers at its elementary school, to allow them 
to provide intervention services.  They funded the overstaffing with 1.5 million dollars the
District maintained in reserves.  Around December 2016, the District discovered mold in two
of their schools and spent all of their reserves to address mold damage.  In November 2017, 
the District passed a bond to allow it to obtain sufficient funding to prevent any layoffs due 
to the loss of reserves.  However, that bond “is caught up in litigation,” and the District 

2 The parties stipulated on the record that Hayfork High School is a necessary small 

high school, as defined in Section 42285, and within the meaning of Section 44865.

 

 

5

cannot rely on the bond to fund services for the 2018-2019 school year.  As a result, the
District anticipated $315,000 in budget cuts for the upcoming school year.  Unless the 
District reduces its multiple subject elementary teaching services by 2.0 FTE, it will not have 
enough resources to meet its obligations. 

14.

The District maintains a seniority list of certificated employees.  The seniority 

list was prepared and is maintained by Superintendent Miller’s administrative assistant as 
part of her regular duties.  The seniority list is based on the most current information 
maintained in the certificated employees’ personnel files.  The list is updated every time a 
personnel change occurs.  Every time the seniority list is updated it is posted at the District 
and also provided to the California Teachers Association.  The District’s seniority list was 
admitted into evidence over respondent’s objection pursuant to Evidence Code section 1280.3

15.

The seniority list reflects that both respondent, and another certificated 
employee, Megan Rourke, have seniority dates of August 11, 2011.  The seniority list 
reflects that respondent and Megan Rourke each hold a multiple subject teaching credential, 
and that Megan Rourke also holds a reading certificate.  The District was not aware of either 
respondent or Megan Rourke holding any other credentials as of March 15, 2018.

16.

Except for Ms. Comaianni, there are five other District certificated employees 
with less seniority than respondent.  Three of those employees are assigned to Hayfork High 
School: Bert Dyer, who teaches Special Education at .6503 FTE; Mike Miller, who teaches 
Social Sciences at 1 FTE; and Michael Blackwell, who teaches Math at 1 FTE.  Dyer, Miller, 
and Blackwell each have seniority dates of August 17, 2015.  One of the five District 
certificated employees with less seniority than respondent, Timbre Beck, teaches English at 
Hayfork High School.  Ms. Beck has been non re-elected, creating a 1 FTE teaching vacancy 
at Hayfork High School in English.

3 Evidence Code section 1280, provides as follows:

 

 

Evidence of a writing made as a record of an act, condition, or 
event is not made inadmissible by the hearsay rule when offered 
in any civil or criminal proceeding to prove the act, condition, or 
event if all of the following applies:

(a) The writing was made by and within the scope of duty of a

public employee.

(b) The writing was made at or near the time of the act, 

condition, or event.

(c) The sources of information and method and time of 

preparation were such as to indicate its trustworthiness.

6

17.

Prior to serving respondent with notice of layoff, Superintendent Miller 

reviewed the credentials and experience of the five individuals on the seniority list with less 
seniority than respondent to determine if respondent could perform any of their assignments.  
She determined that respondent could not perform any of their assignments because each of 
those employees were either special education teachers, which requires a special credential, 
or single subject high school teachers, which requires a special single subject credential.  

18.

Although respondent and Megan Rourke have the same seniority date, Megan

Rourke was not provided with a Layoff Agreement.  The District retained Megan Rourke
because she holds a reading credential, which she acquired in January 2016, and because she 
has experience providing reading intervention services for the District since August 2014.  

19.

Reading intervention is done in small groups, usually between one to eight

students, and solely for readers below grade level.  Megan Rourke provides reading 
intervention to first through third grade student in the mornings, and for students in grades 
four through eight in the afternoons.  She assesses the students to identify inhibitors to 
reading and develops lesson programs for each student to address their needs.  She then 
reassesses the students and develops new lesson programs, as needed.  Megan Rourke spends 
her entire day performing reading intervention, which includes a portion of the day dedicated 
to reading intervention for English Learners.  Megan Rourke’s assignment will be virtually 
the same for the 2018-2019 school year.  The reading certificate authorizes Megan Rourke to 
provide these services pursuant to California Code of Regulations, title 22, sections 80014 
and 80014.1.  Megan Rourke is the only certificated employee of the District who provides 
reading intervention services.  No other teacher in the District possesses a reading certificate.

20.

In 2014, the District determined reading intervention was needed to improve 

student success.  The District evaluated the reading level of its eighth grade students and 
discovered that only 48 percent of its students were reading at or above grade level at the 
completion of the eighth grade.  Currently, 64 percent of the District’s students read at or 
above grade level at the completion of the eighth grade.  Superintendent Miller believes this 
improvement is due solely to Megan Rourke’s work in reading intervention.  

21.

A job description for the reading intervention position was admitted into 

evidence.  The job title identifies the position as “Intervention Specialist/Support 
Teacher/Exploratory Wheel.” The job description lists the following five “education and 
credential requirements” for the position:

• Valid California Multiple Subject Teaching Credential.
• English Learner Authorization or commitment to obtain.
• Experience in Title I or other project school.
• Experience using data management systems.
• Experience in assessment and diagnosis of reading and/or 

math.

7

22.

Prior to serving respondent with the Layoff Agreement, Superintendent Miller 

reviewed these criteria to see if respondent met them.  Superintendent Miller was not sure 
whether respondent met the education and credential requirements identified on the job 
description.  However, she concluded that respondent was not qualified to perform reading 
intervention because respondent does not possess a reading certificate. She also preferred to 
retain Megan Rourke over respondent because she felt Megan Rourke was performing 
exceptionally with reading intervention. Superintendent Miller did not ask respondent if she 
met the experience requirements.  

23.

The District also attempted to begin a math intervention program for the first 
time, during the 2017-2018 school year.  The math intervention services were provided by 
Margaret Rourke during a portion of each day, in addition to teaching Agriculture and Art 
courses daily. Margaret Rourke is the mother-in-law of Megan Rourke.  She has a seniority 
date of September 3, 1996, and holds a multiple subject teaching credential and a cross-
cultural certificate.  The math intervention services will not continue during the 2018-2019 
school year.  

24.

The Resolution does not list the math intervention services as a PKS to be 

reduced.  The District did not list the elimination of math intervention services on the 
Resolution, because no credential was required to perform math intervention and because the 
person providing the math intervention services is a multi-subject teacher who will continue 
to work in 2018-2019 under her multiple subject credential.

25. Wendy Armagnac is also a certificated employee of the District who teaches a 
sixth grade class at Hayfork Elementary School. Ms. Armagnac previously taught English at 
the high school, but moved from high school English to teaching a sixth grade class in or 
around October 2016.  Ms. Armagnac has a seniority date of August 20, 2007, and holds a 
multiple subject teaching credential, a single subject English credential, a cross-cultural 
certificate, and has a master’s degree.

26.

Prior to serving respondent with the Layoff Agreement, Superintendent Miller 
asked Ms. Armagnac if she would be willing to transfer into the open English position at the 
high school, to “open up” a multiple subject teaching position at the elementary school.  Ms. 
Armagnac was not willing to return to her former position at the high school teaching 
English.  Superintendent Miller testified that she is prohibited from involuntarily transferring 
Ms. Armagnac into the high school English position, because there is no basis to make any 
involuntary transfer pursuant to Section 6.11 of the District’s Certificated Employee 
Contract.4

4 Section 6.11 of the District’s Certificated Employee Contract provides:

 

 

An involuntary transfer shall not be made arbitrarily or 
capriciously.  It may be made for the following reasons:  A 
decrease in the number of pupils which requires a decrease in 
the number of unit members, class size considerations, 

8

27.

According to Superintendent Miller, the District plans to continue with the 2.0 

FTE multiple subject teaching layoff.  She has no concerns that the layoffs will prevent the
District from having an appropriate number of credentialed staff to meet the it  needs.  The 
District will continue to meet all class size requirements.  Most class sizes are approximately 
20 students or less.  There are currently no class sizes that exceed permissible class size 
limits.  Based on the District’s projections for the 2018-2019 school year, no class sizes will 
exceed class size limits and there are no mandated services that the District will not provide.  

Respondent’s Testimony 

28.

Respondent has worked for the District for seven years and teaches transitional 

kindergarten and kindergarten at the elementary school.  She holds a bachelor’s degree in 
liberal studies.  Prior to working for the District, respondent taught preschool for several 
years and has also taught special education.  She also taught in a Title I school providing 
reading instructions to students for an entire day, three days a week, while working for 
Janesville Union Elementary School District.

29.

As a Title I instructor respondent completed assessments and curriculum 

planning for individual students.  She would pull students out of their traditional classes and 
work with them in small groups to improve their reading skills, as part of a reading 
intervention program.  

30.

Respondent has also completed classwork or programs related to reading 

intervention.  She has previously used a system called DIBELS, which stands for Dynamic 
Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills, to perform reading intervention.  In part, DIBELS 
provides standardized methods for benchmark testing, assessment, and intervention.  She was 
given brief instruction on DIBELS, which lasted “less than a day,” and relied primarily on 
written manuals to utilize the system.  There was no formalized DIBELS training program.
She briefly used the DIBELS while working at the District during the 2011-2012 and 2012-
2013 school years.

31.

Although not reflected on the District’s seniority list, respondent testified that 

in addition to possessing a multiple subject teaching credential, she also holds a site 
supervisor permit for early childhood education, and a Cross-cultural and Language 
Academic Development certificate, also known as a CLAD.  The CLAD authorizes her to 
teach English Language Learners.

32.

Respondent understood that the District was “planning to lay her off” when 
she was served with the Layoff Agreement.  Prior to receiving the agreement, no one from 
the District asked respondent if she had any experience teaching at a Title I or other project 

 

 

 

 

elimination of program(s), decreased funding, change in school 
configuration or school closing.  Such transfers will be subject 
to annual review, upon the request of the teacher.

9

schools, experience working with data management systems, or experience in the assessment 
and diagnosis of reading skills.

33.

Respondent does not possess a reading certificate and has not taken any 

courses required to obtain the certification.  She has never taught high school English and has 
never taught English in a single-subject setting.  However, she would teach reading 
intervention if asked to by the District.  She “probably would” teach at Hayfork High School 
if asked, because she loves teaching and does not want to stop teaching next year.

Discussion

NOTICE OF LAYOFF

34.

Respondent argued that the Layoff Agreement she received on March 15, 2018 

does not meet the elements of Section 44949.  Section 44949 provides that no later than
March 15th, an employee subject to layoff shall be given written notice of the District’s 
intent to layoff the employee, shall inform the employee of the reasons therefore, and shall 
advise the employee of their right to hearing to determine if there is cause to layoff the 
employee.  Respondent asserts that the Layoff Agreement is actually a settlement agreement, 
designed to reflect that the signor has effectively waived the rights specified in Sections 
44949 and 44955, including the right to a hearing.  

35.

The Layoff Agreement was personally served on respondent along with a 
Notice of Participation form, and Request for Hearing form.  The Layoff Agreement is 
written in the form of a settlement agreement.  It offers, upon execution, certain benefits to 
the employee subject to layoff in exchange for the employee waiving certain rights provided
under the Education Code, however respondent did not sign it or otherwise indicate that she 
agreed to its terms.  Although phrased in the form of a joint agreement, the Layoff 
Agreement specifies “that there is cause pursuant to . . . Education Code Sections 44949 and 
44955 to layoff [respondent] from [her] employment with the District, effective June 30, 
2018.”  Respondent’s right to a hearing is referenced in the document, but solely as a right 
she will waive upon execution.  The Layoff Agreement does not specify the basis for the 
layoff.  Respondent consulted with her union representative after receiving the Layoff 
Notice, and provided to the District signed Notice of Participation and Request for Hearing 
forms on the same day she received the Layoff Agreement.

36.

Superintendent Miller testified that the Layoff Agreement was the same 

document that the District utilized years ago during a prior layoff.  After the Layoff 
Agreement was served on respondent, she decided to send the clarifying letter because she 
learned from the District’s legal counsel that although the Layoff Agreement stated that 
respondent would be subject to layoff, the document “may not have contained all the new 
standard language” required by the Education Code.

37.

Though the Layoff Agreement did not describe the basis for the layoff, it was 
sufficient to inform respondent that she was subject to layoff pursuant to Sections 44949 and 

10

44955, and that she had the right to request a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 
reemploying her for the ensuring year.  This is evident from the terms the Layoff Agreement 
and its attachments, and is also evident from respondent’s actions.  She submitted a signed 
Notice of Participation and Request for Hearing on the same day she received the Layoff 
Agreement.  The subsequent clarifying letter provided the basis for the layoff, applicable 
Education Code sections, and the District Statement of Reduction in Force.  There was no 
evidence at hearing that respondent was prejudiced by the apparent purpose or form of the 
Layoff Agreement.  The errors in the District’s Layoff Agreement are nonsubstantive 
procedural errors that did not prejudice respondent and cannot constitute cause to dismiss 
charges sustained by the evidence.  (Ed. Code § 44949, subd. (c)(3).)

38.

Respondent also asserted that because the Resolution only specifies that 

District will be reducing or discontinuing two multiple subject positions, and fails to mention 
that the math intervention services provided by Margaret Rourke will not be provided the 
ensuring year, the Resolution fails to provide notice of all of the District’s PKS to be reduced 
or discontinued.  However, Margaret Rourke is a multiple subject teacher for the District not 
subject to layoff.  She has more seniority than respondent and Ms. Comaianni.  With the 
elimination of the math intervention services at the end of the 2017-18 school year, Margaret 
Rourke will be assigned to a different subject within multiple subject teaching.  There is no 
basis to include Margaret Rourke’s reassigned duties, within multiple subject teaching, in the 
Resolution.  Accordingly, this omission does not render the Resolution invalid or fail to 
provide respondent with the notice she is entitled to under Sections 44949 and 44955.

SENIORITY AND SKIPPING

39.

Respondent and Megan Rourke have the same seniority date.  On February 27, 
2014, they drew lots to determine which of them had seniority over the other, and respondent 
prevailed.  Respondent asserted that by subjecting her to layoff while retaining Megan 
Rourke for the upcoming school year, the District violated either the tie breaking criteria 
specified in Section 44955 or failed to provide a basis to deviate from terminating 
certificated employees in order of seniority, specified in that same statute.  Essentially 
respondent argued that because she has seniority over Megan Rourke, by the drawing of lots, 
she should be retained to teach the reading intervention program that Megan Rourke teaches.  
Although Respondent does not possess a reading certificate, she noted that the District 
allowed Megan Rourke to teach reading intervention for 17 months before she obtained a 
reading certificate, and that the job description for the position does not specify that a reading 
certificate is required.

40.

However, Megan Rourke is providing reading intervention pursuant to a 

Reading and Literacy Added Authorization, as described in California Code of Regulations, 
title 22, sections 80014 and 80014.1.  Those regulations authorize a holder of a reading 
certificate to provide reading intervention services to the grade levels authorized by their 
prerequisite teaching credential.  The District did not ask respondent whether she was 
qualified to teach reading intervention, prior to serving her with the Layoff Agreement.  
However, respondent testified that although she has experience and areas specified in the 

11

“experience and credential requirements” portion of the job description, she does not hold a 
reading certificate authorizing her to provide reading intervention services as described in the 
aforementioned regulations.

41. Moreover, Superintendent Miller testified persuasively that in 2014 the 
District identified a need to improve the reading abilities of many of its students, as only 48
percent of their eighth grade students were reading at or above grade level.  There has been a 
16 percent improvement since 2014 as a result of Megan Rourke’s intervention services.
The District is allowed to deviate from completing certificated employee layoffs in order of 
seniority if it demonstrates a specific need for an employee to teach a specific course or
course of study, and that employee has special training and experience  to teach that course 
or course of study, which more senior employees do not possess.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. 
(d).)  The case of Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, cited 
by respondent, critically differs from the facts of this case.  In that case, the Court determined 
that it was the school district’s duty to inquire whether Bledsoe, who was subject to layoff, 
would consent to being assigned to another school because he fell within a particular 
category of “qualified teachers available for assignment” pursuant to Section 44865.  Section 
44865 provides that possession of a “valid teaching credential issued by the State Board of 
Education or the Commission for Teacher Preparation and Licensing, based on a bachelor’s 
degree, student teaching, and special fitness to perform.”  Here, unlike in Bledsoe, 
respondent is not among a qualified pool of teachers available for reassignment to reading 
intervention, because she does not possess a reading certificate authorizing her to provide 
those services for the District.

BUMPING INTO A NECESSARY SMALL HIGH SCHOOL

42.

Hayfork High School is a necessary small high school.  There are three 

certificated employees who work at the high school with less seniority than respondent, who 
are previously identified in Finding 16, above:  Bert Dyer, Mike Miller, and Michael 
Blackwell.  Each of these instructors have seniority dates of August 17, 2015.  There is also a 
vacant 1 FTE English position at Hayfork High School.  As specified above, Section 44865 
provides that a District employee who has a valid teaching credential and special fitness to 
perform, shall deem the holder of that credential qualified for assignment as a teacher in 
necessary small high schools.  Respondent possesses a valid teaching credential based on a 
bachelor’s degree, and therefore is qualified for assignment to teach at Hayfork High School.

43.

The District argued that although Section 44865 qualifies certain teachers for 

assignment to necessary small high schools, it does not require that any reassignment of 
these qualified teachers occur, even with their consent while being subject to layoff.  The 
District argued that the consensual assignment of qualified teachers to necessary small high 
schools is permitted under the Education Code, but is not required. The District also argued 
that it would be contrary to public policy to place teachers who are deemed qualified for 
assignment to a necessary small high school in certain high school settings, as it may result 
in preschool and kindergarten teachers potentially being assigned to teach advanced high 
school courses.  The District’s arguments were not persuasive.  

12

44.

First, Section 44955, subdivision (c) provides that the governing board shall 

make assignments and reassignments in a manner that employees shall be retained to provide 
any service their seniority and qualifications entitle them to provide.  The plain language of
Section 44865 states that respondent is “deemed qualifying for assignment” to Hayfork High 
School, with her consent, because she meets the criteria specified in the statute and because 
Hayfork High School it is a necessary small high school.  Respondent testified that she 
“probably would” teach at a high school level if asked because she enjoys teaching and 
wants to continue to do it.

45.

The vacant teaching position Hayfork High School was open when respondent 

was noticed for layoff and respondent is qualified for assignment to the high school.  It was 
the District’s obligation to ask respondent whether she would consent to an assignment at the 
high school prior to advising her that her services would be terminated at the close of the 
current school year due to a reduction or discontinuation of PKS.  (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified 
School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 137.)  The obligation to inquire as to respondent’s 
willingness to be reassigned to Hayfork High School is consistent with the Board Resolution, 
which specifies that in finding it necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
of the District, the Board “has considered all positively assured attrition which has occurred 
to date and which is expected to occur [including] all deaths, resignations, retirements and 
other permanent vacancies and leaves of absence in reducing the services.”  

46.

Although the District argued that respondent may not be competent to render 
the services she is deemed qualified to perform under Section 44865, it provided no criteria 
in the Resolution for determining whether a teacher is “certificated and competent” to bump 
into an assignment occupied by a less senior employee at any District school.  The 
Resolution does specify that the Board determined PKS must be reduced or discontinued by
“2.0 FTE Multiple Subject (Elementary Teaching Services).”  However, the Resolution does 
not describe nor authorize the District to deviate from completing layoffs based strictly on 
seniority, when Section 44865 deems a certificated employee qualified for assignment at its
necessary small high school.

47.

For instance, the Resolution does not specify that the District may deviate 

from completing layoffs based on seniority due to a specific and legitimate need to ensure 
that its high school teaching positions are assigned to District employees who hold certain 
single subject teaching credentials.  Even had the Resolution included such language, it 
would be contrary to Section 44865 considering the District’s high school is a necessary 
small high school.  Section 44865 is designed to expand rather than restrict the authority of 
the Board to place willing individuals in job assignments outside the scope of their respective 
credentials.” (California Teachers’ Association v. Governing Board of Central Union High 
School District (1983) 141 Cal.App.3d 606, 615.)  The District did not establish that the 
vacant English position, nor any other certificated position at its necessary small high school,
requires any “special fitness to perform” that respondent does not possess.

13

48.

The District cannot challenge respondent’s competency to perform an 

assignment at a necessary small high school, as an alternative to layoff, without first defining 
what constitutes “certificated and competent to teach” or identifying a legitimate “special 
fitness to perform” in its Resolution.  Consequently, the District must inquire whether 
respondent would consent to an assignment at Hayfork High School, where she is qualified 
for assignment.  If respondent does not consent to an assignment at the high school, the 
notice of layoff shall remain in effect.  If respondent consents to an assignment at the high 
school, the District shall rescind the notice given to respondent and assign her to the vacant 
teaching position at the high school or make other assignments and reassignments in a 
manner that will allow respondent to be retained to render any service her seniority and 
qualifications entitle her to provide. 

INVERSE BUMPING

49.

Because Ms. Armagnac currently teaches a sixth grade class at the elementary 
school and previously taught high school English, respondent argued that the District should 
reassign Ms. Armagnac to the vacant high school teaching position to create a multiple 
subject teaching vacancy within the district she could fill.  This is frequently called “inverse 
bumping.”  As the court in Duax v. Kern Community College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 
555, 568-569, explained, “inverse bumping” occurs when a senior employee is reassigned to 
a position held by a junior employee to open up a position for another employee.  Duax held 
that the law does not contemplate “inverse bumping rights.”  Instead, a school district’s 
obligations to make assignments and reassignments under the law is “limited to attempting to 
place an employee who would otherwise be terminated in a position being held by another 
employee with less seniority.” (Id. at p. 569.)

50.

Prior to serving respondent with the Layoff Notice, Superintendent Miller 

attempted to create a multiple subject teaching position at the elementary school, by asking 
Ms. Armagnac if she would voluntarily transfer to the vacant English position at the high 
school.  Ms. Armagnac declined. Superintendent Miller made no attempt to involuntarily 
transfer Ms. Armagnac to the vacant high school position, and asserted that she believed she 
would violate the Certificated Employee Contract if she attempted to do so.  

51. While the District has an affirmative obligation to reassign senior teachers 

who are losing their positions, it does not have the same obligation to reassign senior 
teachers who are not losing their positions in an effort to save junior teachers.  In short, the
District cannot be compelled to engage in inverse bumping and to reassign Ms. Armagnac to 
a position she does not desire in order to create an elementary school teaching position for 
respondent.

MANDATED SERVICES

52.

Respondent argued that based on the District’s anticipated teaching schedule 

for the 2018-2019 school year, the structure of its anticipated teaching schedule does not 
comply with what CTC permits for multiple subject teaching.  She asserted that what appears 

14

to be planned regrouping teaching structure, after her layoff, would not provide for the 
minimum required hours of kindergarten instruction pursuant to Section 46118, and therefore 
her layoff would result in services being reduced below mandated levels.  However, 
Superintendent Miller testified that the anticipated Hayfork Elementary School Teaching 
Schedule for 2018-2019 had not been finalized as of the day of hearing.  The Board was 
scheduled to meet the following day to determine how to structure its school schedules in 
light of the reduction of its workforce and in a manner that ensures services mandated by 
state or federal laws are maintained.

53.

The evidence did not establish that the District will eliminate any mandated 

services by reducing or discontinuing the PKS specified in the Resolution.  Any other 
assertions raised by the parties at hearing which are not addressed above are without merit.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

2.

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Sections 44949 and 44955.  

All notices and other jurisdictional requirements of Sections 44949 and 44955 were met.

A District may reduce services within the meaning of Section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  The burden is on the District to demonstrate that the reduction or elimination of 
the particular kinds of services is reasonable and that the District carefully considered its 
needs before laying off any certificated employee.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers 
Association v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 807-808.)  

3.

The services identified in Resolution No. 2017/18-34 are particular kinds of
services that may be reduced or discontinued pursuant to Sections 44949 and 44955.  The 
description of services to be reduced, both in the Resolution and in the notice given 
respondent, adequately described particular kinds of services.  (Zalac v. Ferndale USD
(2002) 98  Cal.App.4th 838; see, also, Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 
689.)

4.

Legal cause exists to reduce or eliminate 2.0 FTE of particular kinds of 

services offered by the District as set forth in the Factual Findings.  The Board’s decision to 
reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and was a 
proper exercise of its discretion.  Cause for the reduction or discontinuance of services 
relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of 
Section 44949.

15

5.

Section 44955, subdivision (c), in part, provides as follows:

[The Board] shall make assignments and reassignments in such 
a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service 
which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render. 
However, prior to assigning or reassigning any certificated 
employee to teach a subject which he or she has not previously
taught, and for which he or she does not have a teaching 
credential or which is not within the employee’s major area of 
postsecondary study or the equivalent thereof, the governing 
board shall require the employee to pass a subject matter
competency test in the appropriate subject.

6.

Section 44865 provides:

A valid teaching credential issued by the State Board or the 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing, based on a bachelor’s 
degree, student teaching, and special fitness to perform, shall be 
deemed qualifying for assignment as a teacher in the following 
assignments, provided that the assignment of a teacher to a 
position for which qualifications are prescribed by this section 
shall be made only with the consent of the teacher:

[¶] . . . [¶]

(d) Necessary small high schools.

7.

Respondent is deemed qualified for assignment to Hayfork High School, a 
high school within the District, because it is a necessary small high school and respondent 
meets the qualifications for specified in Section 44865.  The high school has one vacant full 
time teaching position and three teaching positions held by employees with less seniority 
than respondent.  Prior to serving respondent with the documents that constituted her notice 
of layoff, the District failed to provide respondent with the opportunity to consent to teach at 
the high school as provided by law. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 
Cal.App.4th 127, 137.)  The District also failed to provide any competency criteria in the 
Resolution to determine whether respondent was competent to “bump” into any assignment 
of a more junior employee of the District.  Consequently, the District has failed to make 
assignments and reassignments in a manner that employees shall be retained to render any 
services their seniority and qualifications entitle them to perform, as provided in Section 
44955, subdivision (c).

8.

As set forth in Factual Findings 42 through 48, and Legal Conclusion 7, 

because the District did not establish compliance with Section 44955, subdivision (c), when 
it failed to inquire whether respondent would consent to an assignment at the high school, 
and when it failed to include competency criteria for the purpose of “bumping” less senior

16

employees at the high school, the Layoff Agreement and clarifying letter that constituted 
notice of layoff served on respondent must be rescinded, if respondent consents to 
assignment at the District’s necessary small high school.

RECOMMENDATION

Cause exists for the reduction of 2.0 full-time equivalent certificated positions at the 

end of the 2017-2018 school year.  

As set forth in Legal Conclusion 8, if respondent consents to assignment at the 

District’s necessary small high school, the District shall rescind the layoff notice given to 
her. The District shall provide respondent with a reasonable amount of time, but no less than 
48 hours, to provide said consent.

DATED:  May 25, 2018

ED WASHINGTON
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

17

