BEFORE THE
EL DORADO COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of:

 

ANTONIA HALL,

OAH No. 2018040242

 Respondent.

PROPOSED DECISION

This matter was heard before Timothy J. Aspinwall, Administrative Law Judge, 
Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, on April 30, 2018, in Placerville, 
California.

Michael Tucker, Attorney at Law, represented the El Dorado County Office of 

Education (EDCOE).

Hall).

Matthew Chevedden, Attorney at Law, represented Antonia Hall (respondent or Ms. 

Testimony and documentary evidence were received, and oral closing arguments 

were made.  The record was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on April 30, 
2018.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Ed Manansala is the El Dorado County Superintendent of Schools
(Superintendent).  The Superintendent’s actions and those of EDCOE’s staff and Governing 
Board, were taken solely in their official capacities. 

2.

On February 27, 2018, the Superintendent signed a Resolution of Intention to 
Reduce or Discontinue Particular Kinds of Service (Resolution), authorizing the reduction or 
discontinuance of particular kinds of services (PKS) no later than the beginning of the 2018-
2019 school year.  The reduction or discontinuance consisted of:  (1) Court School Teacher, 
General Education Credential, 1 FTE; and (2) School to College and Career Pathway, 
Director, 1 FTE.      

1

3.

On February 28, 2018, the Superintendent caused respondent to be timely 

served with a written Notice of Layoff.  The Notice of Layoff advised respondent, a 
certificated employee of EDCOE, that her services would be terminated at the close of the 
2017-18 school year because of the discontinuance or reduction of PKS, as set forth in the 
Resolution.  Respondent timely filed a Request for Hearing, and this hearing followed.  

4.

In determining the extent by which to reduce or discontinue PKS, the 

Superintendent and EDCOE considered all positively assured attrition up to and including 
the date of the Resolution.  The Resolution does not reduce services below the mandated 
levels.    

5.

The Resolution established criteria allowing the Superintendent to deviate 

from terminating certificated employees in order of seniority (skipping) if it is demonstrated 
that: (1) there is a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, 
and (2) a junior certificated employee has special training and experience necessary to teach 
the course or course of study, which more senior certificated employees do not possess.  The 
Resolution states in relevant part, as follows:

WHEREAS, the County Superintendent requires certificated 
personnel who are authorized to provide special education 
instruction to students with disabilities, including students at the 
juvenile court school who hold an Education Specialist or 
Preliminary Education Specialist Certificate;

WHEREAS, the County Superintendent requires certificated 
personnel who are assigned to the juvenile court school to 
obtain and maintain the necessary security clearance from the El 
Dorado County Probation Department, the party responsible for 
the juvenile court school in which the El Dorado County Office 
of Education provides certificated personnel for instruction;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the County 
Superintendent may deviate from terminating any certificated 
employee in the order of seniority if by March 1, 2018, such 
employee possesses:

a)  Possesses an [sic] Preliminary Education Specialist or 
Education Specialist credential, that are valid through the 2018-
2019 school year; or

b)  Possesses one or more credentials, certifications, or 
permits authorizing instruction in special education (including, 
without limitation, a District Intern Permit, a University Intern 
Permit, a Provisional Internship Permit, a Special Temporary 

2

Certificate, a Short-Term Staff Permit, an Emergency Permit) 
authorizing service in the area of special education; and 

c)  For the 2018-2019 school year, will be assigned 

within the scope of any one or more of such credentials, 
certifications, or permits and/or to teach a specific course or 
course of study; and 

d)  Possesses, or possesses the ability to obtain, security 

clearance from the El Dorado County Probation Department. 

6.

EDCOE prepared a seniority list of certificated employees.  The 
Superintendent skipped three certificated employees junior to respondent in determining to 
serve respondent with a Notice of Layoff.  Two of the certificated employees who were 
skipped, Aiko Akers and Anna Njoten, meet the skipping criteria in that they possess special 
education credentials and security clearance from the El Dorado County Probation 
Department (Probation).  A third certificated employee who was skipped, David Delgado,
does not meet the skipping criteria, in that he does not have any of the special education 
credentials or qualifications set forth in the skipping criteria (a) and (b), but does have 
security clearance from Probation.  None of these three certificated employees junior to 
respondent were served with a Notice of Layoff. 

7.

Respondent does not have any of the special education qualifications set forth 
in the skipping criteria (a) and (b), nor does she have security clearance.  Probation notified 
EDCOE by memorandum dated December 6, 2017, that respondent’s security clearance had 
been revoked, effective on the same date.  The Chief of Probation testified that it is necessary 
for teachers to have security clearance to enter the enclosed areas where classes are taught in 
juvenile detention facilities.  No evidence was introduced why respondent’s security 
clearance was revoked, or whether she possesses the ability to obtain such security clearance.

8.

Respondent was placed on administrative leave after Probation revoked her 

security clearance, and remains on administrative leave as a certificated employee of 
EDCOE.  Prior to that, she taught for approximately 11 years at EDCOE court schools
housed in juvenile detention facilities in El Dorado County.    

9. 

In order to deviate from the order of seniority and retain a junior teacher, the 

District must satisfy the requirements of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d). 
This section provides in relevant part:

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may deviate 
from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority 
for either of the following reasons:

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to 
teach a specific course or course of study, . . . and that the 

3

certificated employee has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which 
others with more seniority do not possess.

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 

constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the 
laws.

10.

By the standards in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), and based 
on the skipping criteria set forth in the Resolution, EDCOE properly skipped Ms. Akers and 
Ms. Njoten.  Mr. Delgado, however, was not properly skipped because he does not have any 
of the special education qualifications required by skipping criteria (a) or (b).

11.

Counsel for EDCOE argues that the skipping criteria should be read to mean

that junior employees may qualify for skipping if they (1) possess the special education 
qualifications under criteria (a) or (b), or (2) possess security clearance or the ability to 
obtain security clearance as set forth in criterion (d).  This argument is rejected as 
unsupported by a plain reading of the Resolution and the skipping criteria contained therein. 
Specifically, the skipping criteria is phrased in the disjunctive only as between criteria (a) 
and (b).  The skipping criteria is phrased in the conjunctive as between criteria (b), (c), and 
(d).  Moreover, the two paragraphs of the Resolution preceding the skipping criteria 
enumerate the Superintendent’s requirements of certificated personnel, including (1) 
authorization to provide special education instruction, and (2) security clearance from 
Probation.  A plain reading of the Resolution and the included skipping criteria compels an 
interpretation that a junior employee may qualify for skipping only if he/she possesses the 
special education qualifications under criteria (a) or (b), and possesses Probation security 
clearance or the ability to obtain such clearance.  This plain reading has additional support in 
the testimony of EDCOE’s Executive Director of the Special Services Department, that 
approximately 30 percent of the students in court schools have special needs, and require a 
special education teacher.

12.

EDCOE did not established cause under Education Code section 44955, 

subdivision (d), to deviate from seniority order with respect to David Delgado.  Respondent
has been affected by the erroneous decision to skip Mr. Delgado.  The appropriate remedy 
for this error is to direct EDCOE to rescind the Notice of Layoff to respondent.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The fundamental principle of a particular kind of service layoff is that 

permanent teachers must be laid off in inverse order of seniority.  Pursuant to Education 
Code section 44955, subdivision (b), a district may deviate from seniority and retain junior 
employees only when authorized by statute to do so.  In Education Code section 44955, 
subdivision (d)(1), the Legislature authorized districts to deviate from terminating employees 
in order of seniority only when certain conditions apply, including when “the certificated 

4

employee [to be skipped] has special training and experience necessary to teach that course 
or course of study or to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not 
possess.” As set forth in Factual Findings 10 through 12, Mr. Delgado does not have the 
requisite training and experience in special education set forth in the skipping criteria.  
Therefore, EDCOE did not established cause to skip Mr. Delgado and issue the Notice of 
Layoff to respondent.

2.

Because EDCOE did not establish compliance with section 44955, subdivision 

(d)(1), when it skipped Mr. Delgado and issued a Notice of Layoff to respondent, the Notice
of Layoff served on respondent should be rescinded.

RECOMMENDATION

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions, EDCOE shall rescind the 

Layoff Notice served on Antonia Hall.

DATED:  May 21, 2018

TIMOTHY J. ASPINWALL
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

