 

 

 

BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
SACRAMENTO CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SACRAMENTO 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

  
OAH No. 2019030573 

 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED BY THE SACRAMENTO 
CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
                                                   Respondents. 
 
 
 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Heather M. Rowan, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

Gabriela Flowers and Kate Holding, Attorneys at Law, of Lozano Smith, represented 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter on April 24 through 26, 2019, in Sacramento, 
California. 
 
 
the Sacramento City Unified School District (District). 
 
 
Lesley Beth Curtis, Attorney at Law, of Langenkamp Curtis Price, represented 
respondents identified in Attachment A attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
 
 
 

No respondent appeared on his or her own behalf.  

Oral and documentary evidence was received.  The parties filed simultaneous 

closing briefs on May 1, 2019.  The District’s brief was marked as exhibit 43, and 
respondents’ brief was marked as exhibit KKK.  The record was closed and the case was 
submitted for decision on May 1, 2019. 
 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

The District is a large urban school district that provides services to 

approximately 43,000 students in and surrounding the City of Sacramento.  The District 
employs approximately 2,000 certificated employees. 
 

1

 

 

2. 

Cancy McArn is the District’s Chief Human Resources Officer.  She, with her 
staff, compiled the data that led to recommendations to the District Governing Board (Board) 
regarding the reduction of particular kinds of services (PKS).  The actions of Ms. McArn and 
the Board, were taken in their official capacities. 
 

3. 

The District has experienced declining enrollment, reduced funding, and 

increased District program needs, leading to a significant budget deficit that is projected to 
grow without intervention.  It is now facing a $35 million deficit for school year 2019-2020.  
The District must make difficult fiscal decisions to remain solvent, and to avoid a “state 
takeover,” or receivership, which will result in deeper financial cuts.  Ms. McArn and her 
staff met and developed proposals for programs and services to be reduced and/or eliminated 
to address the anticipated budget deficit. 

 
4. 

Ms. McArn presented her findings and alternative recommendations to the 
Board at its regular meeting on February 21, 2019, proposing to reduce particular kinds of 
services, and a corresponding reduction in certificated employees (Resolution #3053).  She 
also presented a proposed resolution specifying criteria to be used to determine the order of 
termination of certificated employees with equal seniority (Resolution #3054 – tie-breaking 
criteria), and criteria for deviation from terminating a certificated employee in order of 
seniority (Resolution #3055 – skipping criteria).  As a result of the District’s current financial 
situation, the Board determined that it must reduce particular kinds of services throughout the 
organization. 
 

5. 

Cindy Nguyen is the District’s Employee Relations Director.  Together with 

Ms. McArn, she recommended to the Board that particular kinds of services being offered by 
the District be discontinued or reduced.  Their report stated the reasons for the 
recommendation and the method of accomplishing the reduction.  The Board approved the 
recommendations and, following the adoption of Resolution #3053, directed that the 
recommendation be implemented.  The Board also directed the Superintendent or a designee 
to identify an equivalent number of certificated personnel and give those certificated 
employees notice in writing of the recommendation that their services would not be required 
for the ensuing school year.  The recommendation of certificated personnel to be identified 
for layoff from employment with the District was not related to their skills or performance as 
teachers. 
 

6. 

On February 21, 2019, the Board adopted Resolution #3053.  The Board 

resolved that the District needs to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services as 
recommended; it was resolved that it is necessary to terminate the employment of an 
equivalent number of certificated employees of the District due to the reductions.  Exhibit A 
to Resolution #3053 authorized the Superintendent or designee to take action to reduce or 
discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2019-20 school year: 
 
 
/ / / 
 

2

 

Services 

 
Vacant: 
 
Teacher, Adult Ed, Hourly 
Teacher, Elementary 
Teacher, Elem, Spec Subj 
Teacher, K-8 
Teacher, Middle 
Teacher, High 
Teacher, Resource 
Teacher, ROTC 
Training Specialist 
Lead School Nurse 
 
 
Adult Education 
 
ADULT ED:  
Administrative Assistant  
ADULT ED:  Cisco IT 
Essentials/Networking 
ADULT ED:  Court 
Reporting 
ADULT ED:  Optometry 
 

 
 
Child Development 
 
Teacher, Resource 
Parent/Preschool Ad 
Teacher 
Child Development (10 
month) Teacher, Child 
Development (12 month) 
 
 
 
 
 

Number of Full-
Time Equivalent 
Positions  
 
 
 
1.4 
6.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
2.8 
.20 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
Sub Total  
 
 
 
1.00 

0.60 

1.00 

1.00 
 
Sub Total  
 
 
 
3.0 
2.0 

2.0 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.4 FTE 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3.60 FTE 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Sub Total  
 

 
7.0 FTE 
 

 

3

K-12 Teachers: 
 
Art 
Clinician Psych/Social 
Worker 
Computers (Business) 
Counselors 
English 
FL: Chinese 
FL: Spanish  
Librarian 
Math 
Music 
Physical Education 
ROP:  Auto  
School Nurse 
School Psychologist 
Science: Biology 
Science: Physics 
Social Science 
Social Worker 
Teacher, Elementary 
Teacher, Middle (CORE) 
Teacher, Resource 
Training Specialist 
Teacher, Elementary, 
Special Subject:  Physical 
Education 
Teacher, Elementary, 
Special Subject:  Library 
Teacher, Elementary, 
Special Subject:  Computer 
Teacher, Elementary, 
Special Subject:  Music 
 
 
 

 
.40 
.60 

3.0 
3.7 
8.0 
1.0 
1.0 
.40 
3.5 
1.4 
6.7 
1.0 
.89 
1.2 
3.0 
1.0 
7.10 
4.4 
55 
1.8 
8.9 
3.6 
4.6 

.40 

.40 

.40 

positions. 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

4

 
Sub Total  
 
Total 
Elimination:  

 
123.39 FTE 
 
 
150.39 

The proposed reductions total 150.39 FTE, with an equivalent number of certificated 

 

 

 

 

7. 

Resolution #3055 specified skipping criteria where there was a specific need 
within the District for certificated employees qualified to serve the needs of K-12 students 
with respect to the following programs, services and qualifications:   
 

Individuals fully-credentialed and currently serving in classes requiring 
Bilingual Cross-Cultural Language and Development (BCLAD) 
certification, to the extent necessary to staff BCLAD positions. 
 
Individuals fully credentialed to serve in a special education assignment. 

Individuals fully credentialed and currently serving in classes requiring, 
and has completed formal training/coursework in, the Waldorf method of 
teaching. 
 
Individuals fully-credentialed and currently serving in classes requiring a 
Single Subject, Mathematics credential or a Single Subject, Science 
credential, to the extent necessary to staff math or science-required 
positions. 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

 

Fully-credentialed, as applied to the above, means an employee who 
possesses a preliminary, clear, or internship credential. 

 
The Board noted a special need to retain certificated employees who possess these 

qualifications, regardless of seniority, pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
(d). 

At the same meeting, the Board also adopted Resolution #3054.  This 

Resolution set forth criteria for breaking ties when two or more certificated employees with 
the same first day of paid service were facing potential layoff.  The Board listed categories 
for consideration, and assigned weights to each category, as follows:  Category I – 
Professional Preparation:  (1) Each single subject, multiple subject or service credential (3 
points per credential); (2) Each supplemental or subject matter authorization (1 point per 
authorization; (3) Each limited assignment permit (1/2 point per permit); (4) Doctorate 
degree held (1 point per degree held); (5) Master’s degree held (1 point per degree held); (6) 
National Board certification (1 point for certification).  These criteria were to be applied 
independently, and in case of ties continuing through listed criteria, Category II – Lottery, 
was to be used to break such ties. 
 

9. 

The services set forth in Resolution #3053 are “particular kinds of services” 
that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  
The reduction or elimination of the particular kinds of services set forth in Resolution #3053 
constituted a proper exercise of the Board’s discretion, within the meaning of Education 
Code section 44955. 

 
8. 

 

5

 

 

10.  At the Board’s regular meeting on February 21, 2019, it was presented with 
and adopted Resolution #2018-19-C.  This resolution directed the release and reassignment 
of 7.2 FTE administrator positions.  Administrators are not subject to the layoff procedures 
of Education Code sections 44955 and 44949.  They are released per Board resolution, 
notified of their release by March 15, and reassigned as of June 30.  On June 30, the end of 
the school year, the released administrators become teachers.  As teachers, their seniority 
dates are identified and adjusted, and they become part of the pool of teachers who are either 
laid off, or assigned to a teaching position, depending on their credentials. 

 
11.  On March 7, 2019, at a special meeting of the Board, Ms. McArn presented 

additional resolutions for the Board’s consideration.  Resolution #3058 is nearly identical to 
Resolution #3053, in that it is introduced by an explanation for the need for a District 
reduction of particular kinds of services, and directed the Superintendent or a designee to 
send layoff notices to the certificated employees in reduced or eliminated positions.  Exhibit 
A to Resolution #3058 authorized the Superintendent or designee to take action to reduce or 
discontinue the following particular kinds of services for the 2019-20 school year: 
 
Certificated Management: 
Full-Time. 

 

 
Currently Vacant: 
 
Coordinator, Child 
Development Programs 
Coordinator II, ROP 
Coordinator I, Instructional 
Technology 
 
 
Currently Filled, to be 
eliminated in the 2019-20 
School Year: 
 
Assistant Principal on 
Special Assignment 
Coordinator, Child 
Development Programs 
Coordinator II, Foster Youth 
Services 
Coordinator II, Multilingual 
Literacy 
Coordinator I, Visual and 
Performing Arts 
Coordinator II, New 

1.0 
1.0 

 
1.0 

1.0 

.20 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

Number of Full-
Time Equivalent 
Positions 
 
 
 
1.0 

Sub Total  
 
 

3.0 FTE 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

6

 

 

 

 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

Teacher Induction 
Coordinator II, Linked 
Learning 
Coordinator III, 
Curriculum& Instruction, 
Science 
Coordinator III, Gate and 
AP Programs 
Director I, Master Schedule 
& Instruction 
Director II, Social & 
Emotional Learning 
Director II, Innovative 
Schools 
Assistant Superintendent, 
Labor Relations 
 
 
Services 
 
K-12 Teachers: 
 
Music 
Teacher, Elementary 
Social Science 
Science: Biology 
Counselors 
 
 

Sub Total  
 
 
 
 
 
1.0 
7.0 
2.0 
1.0 
2.0 
Sub Total  
 
Total 
Elimination: 

12.2 FTE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 FTE 
 
 
28.2 FTE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

12.  At hearing, the District explained that most administrators have “return rights” 
to teaching positions if their positions are reduced or reassigned.  Resolution #3058 identifies 
15.2 FTE administrator positions that will no longer be needed in the 2019-20 school year.  
Three of those positions are vacant.  It also lists 13 FTE teaching positions that the District 
made available so that those administrators can return to teaching positions.  The resolution 
is poorly crafted.  The District is not eliminating 28.2 positions in addition to the 150.39 
positions identified in Exhibit A to Resolution #3053.  Rather, the District is eliminating 15.2 
FTE administrator positions, three of which were vacant.  A total of 12.2 FTE administrators 
will be released from their positions and reassigned to teaching positions.  Once the Board 
decided to eliminate 12.2 FTE administrator positions, it was left with a larger pool of 
teachers (by 12.2 FTE), which had a larger impact on the District budget.  Aware that the 
District intended to reduce salary expenditures by $5.1 million, Ms. McArn identified 13 
FTE teaching positions whose certificated employees would receive layoff notices so that the 

 

 

12.2 administrators could be reassigned in those positions.  The PKS reduction was not in the 
13 FTE teaching positions because while those certificated employees in those positions 
received layoff notices, the actual positions remain, and an administrator will be reassigned 
to fill those positions. 

 
13.  On March 7, 2019, at its special meeting, the Board also adopted Resolutions 
#3063 and #3064.  These resolutions are identical to the tie-breaking and skipping criteria in 
Resolutions #3054 and #3055. 

 
14. 

In total, the District identified 178.59 FTE positions to be eliminated.  After 
accounting for attrition and vacant positions, the District identified 109 employees whose 
positions were being eliminated.  On March 12, 2019, the District served via certified mail a 
written preliminary notice that advised permanent and probationary certificated employees, 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that their services would not be 
required for the next school year.  The preliminary notices were served on 109 certificated 
permanent and/or probationary employees of the District.  Each written notice set forth the 
reasons for the recommendation and noted that the Board had adopted Resolutions 3053 and 
3058, which were attached to the preliminary notice.  Other than the employees specifically 
discussed below, the District received timely requests for hearing from all respondents.   
 

15.  Ms. McArn made and filed the Statements of Reduction in Force1 (Statements) 

against each certificated employee who timely requested a hearing after receiving the 
preliminary notice.  The District asserted it mailed all Statements by certified mail, return 
receipt requested.  The Statements were sent on two dates:  March 28, 2019, and April 12, 
2019.  The District provided respondents’ counsel with lists of respondents who were 
included in those mailings.   

 
16.  Of the 109 District employees served with Statements, 27 did not request a 

hearing.  Four employees failed to timely request a hearing, and two appeared at hearing to 
explain their reasons.  Any certificated employee who failed to file a request for hearing 
and/or a Notice of Participation, and is not addressed below, waived his or her right to a 
hearing, and may be laid off. 
 
Stipulations at Hearing Regarding Rescission 

 
17.  At hearing, the District stated that the following layoff notices have been or 

will be rescinded:  Morgan Komure (Science), Andrew Pena (Spanish), Christine Schoenfeld 
(school psychologist), one training specialist, and one resource teacher, neither of which are 
yet identified.  Kai Phan is an administrator with return rights.  He received a layoff notice, 
which the District states will be or has been rescinded, because he was found to be able to 
bump a less senior teacher with a multi-subject credential.   

 

                                                 

1 Historically referred to as the Accusation.  

8

 

 

18. 

The District found cause to eliminate 1.2 FTE school psychologist positions.  
It sent two layoff notices for a total of 2.0 FTE positions:  one to Christine Schoenfeld, and 
one to Glenda Feece.  At hearing, the District stated Christine Schoenfeld’s notice had been 
rescinded.  One additional school psychologist position will open because Cynthia Vierra 
will move from being a school psychologist to a special education teacher.  The District 
could not say for certain whether Glenda Feece’s notice would therefore be rescinded.  The 
District is directed to determine whether Ms. Feece’s notice should be rescinded, or whether 
another more senior teacher would bump into her position. 

Late Requests for Hearing 

 

 
19. 

Colleen Vaughn-Waggoner, Alfredo Decali, Erika Hernandez, and Yesenia 
Sanchez filed late Requests for Hearing.2  Erika Hernandez and Yesenia Sanchez did not 
receive a Statement packet.  Ms. Hernandez was included in respondents’ counsel’s Group 
Notice of Participation.  Ms. Sanchez filed a Notice of Participation separately.  They did not 
appear at hearing, and were deemed to have waived their right to hearing.   
 

20. 

Colleen Vaughn-Waggoner signed her Request for Hearing on March 19, 

2019, the date it was due to the District office.  She called or emailed the District office and 
asked if she could return the form electronically, and was told she would have to personally 
bring it in.  Respondent Vaughn-Waggoner coaches varsity softball, in addition to teaching 
physical education.  She is generally unavailable from the start of the school day until 
sometime after 6:30 p.m., due to softball practice and games.  On March 20, 2019, she made 
arrangements for another teacher to cover her morning class, and she filed her Request for 
Hearing at 8:05 a.m. with the District.  Over the District’s objection, Respondent Vaughn-
Waggoner was permitted to participate. 

 
21.  Alfredo Decali signed his Request for Hearing on March 19, 2019, the date it 
was due to the District office.  On that day, he called Human Resources and asked whether 
he could scan the form and send it electronically.  He was informed that he had to return it in 
person and have the form date-stamped.  On March 19, 2019, Mr. Decali had a “health issue” 
and medical appointments that prevented his taking the Request for Hearing to the District 
office personally.  The following morning, Mr. Decali went to the District office and his 
Request for Hearing was date-stamped “March 20 2019.”  At hearing, the District withdrew 
its objection to Mr. Decali’s participation and he was permitted to participate. 
 
Non-receipt of Statement of Reduction in Force 
 

22. 

Several certificated employees testified or informed counsel that they did not 
receive the packet including the Statement.  The District countered that the Statements were 
mailed by certified mail, which satisfied the jurisdictional requirement.   
                                                 

2 The District alleged that Christine Schoenfeld also submitted a late Request for 

Hearing.  As addressed above, her layoff notice was rescinded at hearing, and the issue is 
moot. 

9

 

 

23.  Amber Kadrie testified that she never received the Statement packet.  The 

District produced evidence that it was mailed by certified mail to her address of record on 
March 28, 2019.  Kristie Corcoran also testified that she did not receive the Statement 
packet.  The District produced evidence that it was mailed by certified mail to her address of 
record on April 12, 2019.  
 

24. 

The District argued that mailing the Statement packets by certified mail to the 
address of record satisfied the service requirement.  The District’s assertion is supported by 
the Education Code.  Education Code section 44924 provides that once an employee returns 
the request for hearing, “the proceeding shall be conducted and a decision made in 
accordance with” the Administrative Procedures Act (APA).  Limited exceptions apply.  The 
APA, in Government Code section 11505, subdivision (c), provides:  “Service by registered 
mail shall be effective if a statute or agency rule requires the respondent to file the 
respondent’s address with the agency and to notify the agency of any change, and if a 
registered letter containing the accusation or District Statement of Reduction in Force and 
accompanying material is mailed, addressed to the respondent at the latest address on file 
with the agency.”  District employees are required to update the District with any change of 
address.  See, for example, PSL-F027, the District’s change of address form, which contains 
the directive:  “Employees are to fill out a Change of Address Form . . . ” and provide to 
Human Resources.  Thus, service of the Statement is deemed effected when made by 
registered mail to the employee’s last known address of record.  Accordingly, service is 
deemed effective on Ms. Kadrie and Ms. Corcoran.   
 
District’s Failure to Mail Statement of Reduction in Force 
 

25. 

Respondents alleged that the District did not send 12 other teachers the 
Statement packets as required after those teachers submitted timely or deemed-timely 
Requests for Hearing.3  The District could not produce evidence at hearing that those packets 
had been mailed.  The 12 respondents contend that they must be returned to work because 
accusations were neither prepared for, nor served upon them.  They note that under 
Education Code section 44955 an employee is deemed reemployed for the ensuing school 
year if the employee “is not given the notices and a right to a hearing as provided for in 
section 44949.”  They contend that there can be no jurisdiction over them in these layoff 
proceedings.   
 
26. 

The District erred by not mailing the Statement packets to the identified 

individuals who timely submitted a Request for Hearing.  Sacramento City Teachers 
Association (SCTA), the teachers’ union, filed a group Notice of Participation that included 
these 12 individuals.  These employees submitted to and were brought within the jurisdiction 
of these proceedings.  SCTA had the power of representation and was on notice as to the 

                                                 

3 Cameron Collins, Kaylee Creevan, Douglas Dammarell, Angela DuBose, Molly 

Durst Roman, Randy Laforteza, Jaime Musillani Macias, Gabriella Orozo, Melanie Ota, Erin 
Pressley, Christopher Rasmussen, and Brittany Rogers. 

10

 

 

proceedings with regard to all of its members.  It was actively involved in representation, 
securing counsel, discovery and interaction with the District in this process.   
 

27. 

These 12 individuals suffered no prejudice by the District’s apparent failure to 
serve Statement packets on them because SCTA and their counsel represented their interests 
and answered by filing the notices of defense.  Their interests were well represented at 
hearing.  The District’s failure to individually serve an accusation upon them was not 
prejudicial.  It constituted a non-substantive procedural error and should not constitute cause 
for dismissing the charges.  (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (c)(3).)   
 
Respondents’ Failure to File Notice of Participation 
 

28.  Neither Paul Yenovkian nor Ger Yang filed a Notice of Participation with the 
District, as required under Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(2).  Ger Yang did 
not appear at hearing; she is deemed to have waived her right to hearing.   

Paul Yenovkian appeared at the second day of hearing and was permitted to 

testify to explain why he did not file the Notice of Participation, and why he should be 
permitted to participate in the hearing.  He testified that he filed a timely Request for 
Hearing, and because he was away with his sixth grade class during the time of the “union 
meeting,” he did not understand that there was a second step, which was filing the Notice of 
Participation with the District.  When an SCTA representative contacted him to remind him, 
he returned his Notice of Participation to SCTA on April 15, 209, but did not forward it to 
the District.  
 
30. 
 

Education Code section 44949 provides: 

The respondent shall file his or her notice of participation, if 
any, within five days after service upon him or her of the 
District Statement of Reduction in Force and he or she shall be 
notified of this five-day period for filing in the District 
Statement of Reduction in Force. 

 
29. 

 
31. 

The District’s sample Statement directed the recipient to return the Notice of 

Participation within five days.  At hearing, because the District did not receive Mr. 
Yenovkian’s Notice of Participation, it was determined that the court lacked jurisdiction over 
him, and he was not permitted to participate at hearing. 
 
District’s Failure to Serve Preliminary Notice to Address of Record 
 

32.  Dekeithi Walton did not receive a Preliminary Notice at his address of record 

on or before March 15, 2019.  He appeared at hearing to explain his circumstances.  Mr. 
Walton moved between the time he was hired with the District and August 13, 2018, when 
he submitted a Form PSL-F027 to the Human Resources office to change his address of 
record.  The form is stamped “Received August 13 2018 Human Resource Services.”  Below 

11

 

 

the updated information, the form has two spaces for a human resources representative to 
initial and date.  The first states “Information Taken By,” and the second, “On Line.”  Both 
spaces were initialed and dated.  Respondent believed he had taken all necessary steps to 
inform the District of his new address. 

 
33.  On January 11, 2019, Mr. Walton signed the Seniority Verification Form.  
That form contained his prior address.  Mr. Walton did not make changes to the form.  He 
received his paychecks by Direct Deposit, but his paystubs were mailed to his house.  He 
testified that the paystubs were mailed to his old address, and forwarded to his new address.  
He did not receive the Preliminary Notice postdated on March 15, 2019, or before.   

 
34.  Mr. Walton argued that the District’s failure to send the preliminary notice to 
his properly updated address necessarily means his layoff notice should be rescinded based 
on the District’s jurisdictional deficiency.  Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c) 
provides:  In the event that a permanent or probationary employee is not given the notices 
and a right to a hearing as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed 
reemployed for the ensuing school year. 

 
35. 
 

Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a)(1) provides: 

No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice 
by the governing board that his or her services will not be 
required for the ensuing year for the reasons specified in Section 
44955, the governing board and the employee shall be given 
written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her 
designee, or in the case of a school district that has no 
superintendent by the clerk or secretary of the governing board, 
that it has been recommended that the notice be given to the 
employee, and stating the reasons therefor. 

 
Education Code section 44949, subdivision (d) states:   
 

Any notice or request shall be deemed sufficient when it is 
delivered in person to the employee to whom it is directed, or 
when it is deposited in the United States registered mail, postage 
prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the 
employee. 
 
The District argued that Mr. Walton’s preliminary notice was properly and 

36. 

timely sent to his last known address of record, which was the address on the Seniority 
Verification Form.  He signed the form, and was given an opportunity to update his address.  
Mr. Walton eventually received the Preliminary Notice, but not before March 15, 2019.  The 
District offered no explanation regarding why Mr. Walton’s address was not properly 
updated when he submitted the change of address form.  The District argued that Education 
Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3) controls.  That subdivision states:  “Nonsubstantive 

12

 

 

procedural errors committed by the school district or governing board of the school district 
shall not constitute cause for dismissing the charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.”  
The District contends that because Mr. Walton ultimately received the Preliminary Notice, 
filed a request for hearing, and subsequently filed a Notice of Participation, he enjoyed all of 
the due process rights afforded others timely served, and no prejudice occurred from this 
nonsubstantive procedural error.   
 

37. 

For the District to prevail, the harmless error provision must be read to include 

the failure to serve a timely preliminary notice.  Even then, the omission must be construed 
as “nonsubstantive.”  If those conditions are met, the District would prevail because no 
prejudice was established apart from the absence of the earlier notice contemplated by the 
statute.  The District’s position is untenable for the reasons explained below. 

Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a)(1) requires a school District to 

issue preliminary notices by the March 15 deadline.  The certificated employee may then 
request a hearing by the date provided in the preliminary notice.  (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. 
(b).)  Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c) explains the procedures that follow the 
request for hearing: 

 
38. 

 

(c) If a hearing is requested by the employee, the proceeding 
shall be conducted and a decision made in accordance with 
Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of Part 1 of 
Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the governing 
board shall have all the power granted to an agency in that 
chapter, except that all of the following shall apply: 
 
(1) The respondent shall file his or her notice of participation, if 
any, within five days after service upon him or her of the 
District Statement of Reduction in Force and he or she shall be 
notified of this five-day period for filing in the District 
Statement of Reduction in Force. 
 
(2) The discovery authorized by Section 11507.6 of the 
Government Code shall be available only if request is made 
therefor within 15 days after service of the District Statement of 
Reduction in Force, and the notice required by Section 11505 of 
the Government Code shall so indicate. 
 
(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law 
judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing 
findings of fact and a determination as to whether the charges 
sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils of the schools.  The proposed decision 
shall be prepared for the governing board and shall contain a 
determination as to the sufficiency of the cause and a 

13

 

 

 

recommendation as to disposition.  However, the governing 
board shall make the final determination as to the sufficiency of 
the cause and disposition.  None of the findings, 
recommendations, or determinations contained in the proposed 
decision prepared by the administrative law judge shall be 
binding on the governing board.  Nonsubstantive procedural 
errors committed by the school district or governing board of 
the school district shall not constitute cause for dismissing the 
charges unless the errors are prejudicial errors.  Copies of the 
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and 
to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the 
proceeding is commenced.  All expenses of the hearing, 
including the cost of the administrative law judge, shall be paid 
by the governing board from the district funds. 

39. 

Exceptions (1) through (3) are not broadly applied to section 44949.  They 

specifically apply to subdivision (c), which lists exceptions to the hearing procedures 
required by Government Code section 11500, et seq.  There is no suggestion in Education 
Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), that nonsubstantive errors by the District or Board 
apply to the requirement that the employee “must be given written notice” by March 15. 
 

40. 

Education Code section 44949 includes many procedural obligations including 

those specified in the formal hearing provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) 
adopted by reference in the statute.  These include notice provisions relating to the filing of 
the statement of reduction in force and notice of participation, discovery rights, and 
procedures relating to the administrative hearing and issuance of a proposed decision.  None 
of these procedures includes language mandating a particular consequence for failure to 
comply.  Limiting the application of section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), to procedures other 
than the notice requirements for the preliminary and final notices comports with a plain 
reading of the statutory language.  More importantly, this interpretation gives continued 
significance to the clear language in Education Code section 44955 requiring the 
reemployment of a teacher if the preliminary notice is not provided in a timely manner. 
 

41. 

This reading is also consistent with the rule that specific provisions are 

paramount over general ones.  (See Taylor v. Board of Trustees (1984) 36 Cal.3d 500, 513).  
Section 44955, subdivision (c), is a specific provision dealing with the consequences for a 
school district’s failure to give timely preliminary or final notices to teachers.  As such, it 
prevails over the general provisions of Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3), 
addressing procedural errors generally.4 
 

                                                 

4 Additionally:  “Exceptions to the general provisions of a statute are to be narrowly 

construed; only those circumstances that are within the words and reason of the exception 
may be included.”  (Corbett v. Hayward Dodge (2004) 119 Cal.App.4th 915, 921.)  

14

 

 

42. 

Even if the harmless error provision were read to include the failure to serve a 
timely preliminary notice, the District must also establish that the failure is nonsubstantive.  
Ward v. Fremont Unified School Dist. (1969) 276 Cal.App.2d 313, at page 321, ruled that the 
May 15 deadline (in an earlier version of Education Code section 44955) was 
“jurisdictionally mandatory.”  The Court recited the legal principle, followed in California 
and the majority of other jurisdictions, that “when a consequence is enunciated for failing to 
comply with an act on a given date, that date is deemed to be jurisdictionally mandatory, not 
directory.”  (Ibid., citing Thomas v. Driscoll (1940) 42 Cal.App.2d 23, 27, and Shaw v. 
Randall (1860) 15 Cal. 384.)  In Karbach v. Board of Education (1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 355, 
the Court held that the “notices” in Education Code section 13447 (later renumbered section 
44955) which must be served to avoid the consequence that the employee “be deemed 
reemployed,” include the March 15 preliminary notice and the required specifications of 
reasons.  (Id. at page 363.)   
 

43. 

There is no jurisdiction over Mr. Walton.  He timely updated his address with 
the District, the District failed to complete the change.  Mr. Walton’s address of record is the 
address he provided the District on August 13, 2018.  He received no Preliminary Notice at 
that address on or before March 15, 2019. 

44. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 

 

Jurisdiction, Generally 
 

sections 44949 and 44955. 
 
August 30, 2018 Seniority Date 
 
 
 

SENIORITY VERIFICATION FORM 

45. 

Prior to the winter break in December 2018, the District sent a packet to all 
site and department principals or administrators with a cover letter offering instruction for 
the “annual notification procedures for certificated seniority verifications.”  The principals 
and administrators were to distribute the enclosed “Employee Information Report 298e,” 
(Seniority Verification Form) to each certificated employee.  A list of all certificated 
employees was also included for the principal or administrator to use as a checklist as the 
forms were returned.  The packet included one form for each certificated employee, which 
contained the employee’s employee identification number, position, contact information, 
seniority date, and credentials, among other information.  At the bottom was a line for a 
signature and date. 
 

46.  Ms. Nguyen explained that she printed one Seniority Verification Form per 

certificated employee, provided the forms for a school or site to the site principal or 
administrator, and requested that the forms be returned to her no later than January 18, 2019.  
She used this information to confirm the seniority dates and credentials of all certificated 
employees. 
 

15

 

 

 

 

 

47. 

Respondents explained that prior to winter break, they were handed this form 

and asked to sign it and return it.  The instruction sheet with the purpose for the form was not 
provided.  The Seniority Verification Form does not state to what the employee is attesting 
by signing the form.   
 

48. 

The District argued that respondents were given the opportunity to contest 

their seniority dates when they were provided the Seniority Verification Form, and they, in 
essence, waived their right to contest the dates at hearing.  The District’s argument is not 
persuasive.  First, it is problematic that certificated teachers were provided the form and 
asked to sign it, often without further instruction.  Second, Education Code section 44924 
provides: 

 
any contract or agreement, express or implied, made by any 
employee to waive the benefits of this chapter or any part 
thereof is null and void. 

“This chapter” refers to Chapter 4 of the Education Code regarding “Employment of 

Certificated Employees.”  Education Code section 44845 in the same chapter states: 

 

Every probationary or permanent employee employed after June 
30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on the date 
upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary 
position. 

49. 

Thus, certificated employees do not waive their actual seniority date by way of 

the Seniority Verification Form.  To the extent the form is an express or implied agreement 
to such a waiver, it is null and void.  Respondents’ arguments regarding their individual 
seniority dates must be addressed. 
 

NEW TEACHER ORIENTATION 

50. 

For the 2018-19 school year, teachers who were new to the District were 

informed that on August 21, 2018, and again on August 28, 2018, the District would hold a 
New Teacher Orientation (NTO).  The one-day NTO was co-sponsored by SCTA, which 
provided sign-in sheets, lunch, and assistance throughout the day.  Various communications 
from the District to new employees referred to the NTO as “mandatory.” 
 

51. 

The District’s salary schedule defines the rates of pay for employees in 

particular classes and steps.  The salary is based on 181 “service days.”  The District argued 
that the first date of the 181 service days, and the new employee start date for the 2018-19 
school year was August 30, 2018, per the District’s instructional calendar.  The District 
argued that the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA5) provides that NTO is exempted 
                                                 

5 The District offered the CBA effective July 1, 2004, through June, 30, 2011, and the 

Tentative Agreement based on negotiations facilitated by Mayor Darrell Steinberg in 

16

 

 

 

 

from service days because it is neither paid nor mandatory.  No teacher was disciplined for 
not attending, and no teacher was paid to attend. 
 

To support this contention, the District cited Article 12, Section 12.7.4 of the 

52. 
CBA, which states: 
 

All certificated personnel who voluntarily perform duties 
authorized by the Personnel Services Office which are beyond 
their normal service day shall be paid at their per session rates 
of pay, except for assignments and meetings as set forth in 
Article 5, Sections 5.9 through 5.10.7, and Sections 12.8.4 
through 12.9.8 of this Article. 

53.  Ms. Nguyen explained that Article 12, Section 12.7.4 provides that if a teacher 
provides a voluntary service, the teacher shall be paid their “per session rate of pay” (hourly 
rate), rather than the daily rate.  There are exceptions, however.  For example, no per session 
pay is given for staff meetings; and social workers, program specialists, psychologists, child 
welfare and attendance counselors, and others have designated lengths of their service year 
over the standard 181 days of service, for which no per session rate is given.  Article 5, 
section 5.9.86 also excepts the following: 

 

New teachers shall have no more than one (1) additional day of 
service required for all District-wide meetings in addition to 
whatever requirements exist for all teachers. 

54. 

Thus, new teachers are not paid the per session rate for attending NTO, 

because it is specifically excepted from the per session service rate for voluntary services.  
Ms. Nguyen acknowledged that Section 5.9.8 refers to NTO, but stated that new teachers are 
not paid for this day.  She averred that new teachers do not attend NTO to “provide a 
service,” therefore this day does not qualify for purposes of “service days,” or seniority.  
 

55.  Ms. Nguyen’s assertion does not comport with the reality of the NTO or the 
language of the CBA.  The CBA specifically contemplates that new teachers will have 182 
days of service rather than 181 days of service.  The CBA requires teachers new to the 
                                                                                                                                                             
November 2017.  The Tentative Agreement states it is “effective July 1, 2016, through June 
30, 20[  ].”  No evidence that it was approved by the Board was submitted.  Both agreements 
are relied on herein to the extent they were referred to at hearing. 
 

6 This Section is renumbered and in the Tentative Agreement, and was amended to 
read:  “New teachers shall have no more than one (1) additional day of service required for 
all District-wide meetings in addition to whatever requirements exist for all teachers.  In 
addition, the Parties agree to negotiate a new and mutually agreeable Article 5.9.8.1 to reflect 
the New Employee Orientation requirements.”  This additional language does not impact the 
analysis regarding NTO. 

17

 

 

 

District to have “no more than one additional day of service.”  NTO is a one-day, District-
wide meeting to orient new teachers to the District.  An additional service day is built in to 
the contract for all new teachers, which explains why it is excepted from the per session rate 
of pay:  it is already included in new teachers’ salary.  It is only logical that NTO is that 
additional service day, especially considering that new teachers were informed the NTO was 
mandatory.   
 

56. 

The District argues that NTO was not mandatory because there were no 

penalties for not attending, and the District did not consider it mandatory.  The evidence 
showed that the District communicated to the teachers that the training was mandatory, 
specifically using the word “mandatory,” in fact.  Because it is part of the first-year contract, 
and was mandatory, the District’s arguments that it did not discipline teachers who did not 
attend is not persuasive.   
 

57. 

Finally, the CBA defines “service year” as “[t]he school year plus the 

additional workdays required for specific job classifications within the bargaining unit.”  
New teachers are required to work an additional workday as part of their contract, which is 
therefore included in their service year.  In 2018-19, NTO was provided on August 21, 2018, 
and August 28, 2018, which are the days that define new teachers’ service year, depending 
on their dates of attendance. 

 

Other Meetings, Paid or Unpaid 
 

NEW EMPLOYEE ORIENTATION  
 
58. 

Education Code section 44845 states:  Every probationary or permanent 

employee employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on the date 
upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.”  (Emphasis added.)  
Additionally, when explaining tie-breaking, Education Code 44955 states that seniority is 
determined by the date the employee “first rendered paid service to the district . . . .”   

 
59.  New Employee Orientation (NEO) provides information about being a District 
employee, and is required by the Human Resources Department.  Several respondents argued 
that the NEO was their first day of service to the district because it was mandatory and they 
were told in no uncertain terms that they could not assume their positions until this was 
completed.  One respondent even recalled being told she would not get paid until the NEO 
was completed.  These arguments are not persuasive.  NEO is not a paid service to the 
District, but a function of human resources to orient the employee to her new employment.  
Thus, NEO is not a date any respondent can use to establish seniority. 
 

PEST CERTIFICATION 

60.  Many respondents were informed that they would be required to obtain 
District-training in pest management, or as one respondent described it:  “how to keep pests 
out of the classroom.”  After completing the training, the participant received a certificate of 

18

 

 

 

completion.  No evidence was presented that this was a paid service.  Like the NEO, taking 
the pest management training is not a date a respondent can use to establish seniority, but is 
more akin to a human resources function to educate new employees regarding the methods 
the District uses for pest control. 
 

BENCHMARK TRAINING AND NGSS 

61. 

In addition to the mandatory NTO, the District offers various training sessions 

for all teachers, both new and continuing, during the summer months.  These include 
Benchmark Training, English Language Arts/English Language Development (ELA/ELD), 
comprehensive sexual health education, and Next Generation Science Standard (NGSS).  
Several teachers testified at hearing that they believed that as first year teachers, they were 
required to participate in the summer trainings, and their seniority dates should be updated to 
reflect these trainings.  The teachers were paid the per session rate for participating in the 
trainings.  The District argued that these trainings do not establish seniority date, that the 
proper seniority date should be the one in the Seniority Verification Form, and that the 
trainings were voluntary and cannot be considered as required service. 
 

62. 

For the reasons stated above, the argument regarding the Seniority Verification 

Form is without merit.  Based on the evidence that respondents were paid per session rates 
for these trainings, the trainings are not “required” under the terms of the contract.  
Otherwise, per Ms. Nguyen’s testimony, respondents would have been paid a daily rate.   
 

63. 

The respondents’ argument is without merit.  Seniority credit is given for 

training when it occurs during the first school year in which the employee serves in a 
probationary capacity.  In this case, the beginning of that school year was the start date 
reflected in the contract between the employee and the District.  If the training was given 
during that school year, probationary credit should have been given if the training was 
mandatory and if the attendee was paid as part of his/her regular salary.  The District’s 
summer training does not satisfy those criteria.   
 

64. 

The fact that some of the teachers who took the summer training believed the 

training was required by the District does not affect its status as voluntary.  Even if it did, the 
training did not occur during the school year, and it was not paid for through teachers’ 
regular salaries.  The District’s exclusion of these summer training sessions was reasonable. 
 
Adjusted Dates of Seniority 
 

65. 

To avoid repetitive testimony, respondents’ counsel produced a chart to 

outline what trainings or orientation respondents participated in, and on what date.  The chart 
was accepted as argument as it is a compilation of evidence, rather than evidence itself.  The 
chart provides information on NTO, NEO, ELA/ELD, NGSS, Benchmark Training, and Pest 
Management Training.  As discussed above, the NTO is built in to the new teachers’ service 
year, and constitutes “rendering a paid service” to the District, under Education Code section 
44845.   

19

 

 

The District is directed to adjust seniority dates for respondents who attended NTO.  
Based on the chart and evidence presented, the following dates apply, subject to verification: 
 
Rocio Almanza 
Veronica Avelar* 
Brittany Barbone*7 
Michelle Bohlin* 
Lisa Brown* 
Lily Busher* 
Angela Cook 
Kristie Corcoran* 
Kaylee Creevan* 
Douglas Dammarell* 
Melina Diaz* 
Angela DuBose 
Molly Durst Roman 
Briana Fonseca* 
Nicole Fossum* 
Matthew Garber* 
Erica Hernandez* 
Kristine Hiett* 
Tori Horton* 
Andrew Jones* 
Nancy Khang* 
Kathryn Kiley* 
Randy Laforteza* 
Julie Law-Marin* 
Tabitha Lichtenhan* 
Mabeth Lopez* 
Brittany Martin* 
Jaime Masillani-Macias* 
Jacelyn Neumann* 
Yessenia Ortiz* 
Melanie Ota* 
Michael Petzold8* 

August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 20, 2018 (ELA) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 8, 2018 (Benchmark) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 

                                                 

7 One * indicates the certificated employee’s name appears on SCTA’s sign-in sheet 

for August 21, 2018.  Two ** indicates the employee’s name appears on SCTA’s sign-in 
sheet for August 28, 2018 NTO.  Both sign-in sheets were admitted at hearing. 

 
8 Respondent Petzold established that he was paid to provide new-student orientation 
on August 28, 2018.  This paid service postdates the NTO he attended, however, and whether 
it constitutes a basis to adjust seniority is not considered. 

20

 

 

Erin Pressley* 
Samuel Prowell* 
Christopher Rasmussen* 
Lobelia Robinson 
Lindsey Rodriguez9 
Brittany Rogers* 
Michelle Rogers* 
Amanda Sacks* 
Jenna Smith* 
Victoria Tacherra* 
Natalie Tamblyn* 
Graciela Uribes* 
Colleen Vaughn-Waggoner* 
Mariela Ventura* 
Dustin Watson* 
Jennifer Yang* 
Eric Yee* 
Carolyn Zierenberg* 
 
Skipping 
 

August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 30, 3018 
August 30, 2018 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 28, 2018 (ELA/ELD) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 
August 21, 2018 (NTO) 

66. 

Economic layoffs are generally to be carried out on the basis of seniority.  A 
teacher with more seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment than a junior 
teacher.  A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to a position held by a 
junior teacher if the senior teacher is properly credentialed and competent to teach.  That 
displacement of a junior teacher is known as “bumping.”  In general, the District has an 
affirmative obligation to reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions 
held by junior teachers if the senior teacher has both the credentials and competence to 
occupy such positions.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (c).)   

The seniority rule is not absolute, and a junior teacher with a needed credential 

or skills may be retained even if a more senior teacher is terminated.  Such “skipping” is 
recognized by statute and appellate law.  (See Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1); Santa Clara 
Federation of Teachers, Local 2393 v. Governing Board of the Santa Clara Unified School 
District (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831).   

To depart from a seniority-based economic layoff, Education Code section 

44955, subdivision (d)(1), requires the District to “demonstrate a specific need for personnel 
to teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that the certificated employee [to be 
skipped] has special training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study 
. . . which others with more seniority do not possess.” 

                                                 

Orientation in August 2018. 

9 Respondent Rodriguez testified at hearing that she did not attend New Teacher 

 
67. 

 
68. 

21

 

 

 

69.  As discussed above in Factual Findings 7 and 14, the Board adopted 
Resolutions #3055 and #3064 to define those categories in which the District identified a 
“specific need for personnel to teach the courses or courses of study.”  Generally, they are 
credentialed teachers currently serving in classes requiring BCLAD, credentialed special 
education teachers, teachers fully credentialed and currently serving in classes requiring a 
formal training/coursework in the Waldorf method, and who have completed training or 
coursework in Waldorf; and fully credentialed and currently serving in classes requiring 
single subject mathematics or science. 

 
70. 

 
72. 

Respondents do not challenge special education credentials.  They also do not 

challenge BCLAD or single subject math and science credentials as areas appropriate for 
skipping.  They do challenge, however, the method used to identify which fully credentialed 
BCLAD, math, and science teachers were skipped, if they had the same seniority date as 
respondents. 
 

WALDORF SKIP 

71.  Ms. McArn presented to the Board a resolution to skip Waldorf-trained or 
experienced teachers.  She and Ms. Nguyen suggested that all of the information that was 
presented to the Board on February 21, 2019, and March 7, 2019, was a result of the “one-
stop staffing” process.  Through this process, each school site or department worked with a 
human resource analyst to identify the projected budget and staffing allocation, and from 
there, staffing cuts were determined.  The principals of the District’s three Waldorf schools 
identified a need for teachers with specialized training and experience to teach at Waldorf 
schools.  Five teachers were skipped based upon their current assignments as Waldorf 
teachers.  All of the teachers currently work at A.M. Winn, one of the District’s Waldorf 
schools, and all have a seniority date of August 30, 2018, except one, whose seniority date is 
September 12, 2018.  They represent teachers who would have received a layoff notice based 
on their seniority, but were skipped based on their specialized training or experience. 

Two Waldorf principals testified at hearing regarding the importance of a 

teacher who teaches at a Waldorf school to have specific Waldorf training, and the extent of 
the training the Waldorf teachers have received.  Mechelle Horning is the principal at Alice 
Burney Waldorf school.  She explained the particular differences between a Waldorf 
classroom and a traditional classroom.  She categorized Waldorf experience and/or training 
for Waldorf teachers as “essential.”  First, Waldorf is child-development based, and the 
curriculum is based on what the Waldorf method characterizes as “developmentally 
appropriate” for a student’s age.  Waldorf is a “hands-on” method, and introduces concepts 
to students through experiential input.  As an example, Principal Horning stated, “In a first 
grade classroom, students would be introduced to letters through the artistic work of the 
teacher with drawing and painting, chalkboard work, clay, beeswax modeling.”  The 
curriculum is not based on the textbooks that are used in traditional classrooms in the 
District.  The teachers create lessons “following a Waldorf roadmap” of what is appropriate 
for the age-level.  This roadmap is part of Waldorf training.  Principal Horning asserted that 

22

 

 

the Board has adopted a “separate document” from the common core standards applied in 
traditional classrooms. 

 
73.  Nischa Turturici, Principal at A.M. Winn, added to this testimony, stating that 
teachers, “need to come in with training because there is no scripted curriculum provided for 
them.”  They need to use “12 senses” to incorporate within their instruction in the classroom, 
understand the alliance standards document, and also incorporate music, movement, and 
other activities within the classroom-setting, which is “expected by their colleagues as well 
as the parents.”  She stated that Waldorf teachers have particularized training.   

 
74.  A summary of the training of the teachers at Alice Burney and A.M. Winn was 

presented at hearing.  The teachers have varying levels of education and experience 
particular to the Waldorf method.  But what each teacher has in common is hundreds of 
hours of Waldorf-specific training.  All five of the Waldorf teachers at A.M. Winn who were 
skipped completed the Rudolf Steiner College10 two-year Teacher Certification Program 
(675 hours), along with many other training programs.  Many participated in Waldorf 
training that the District provided, in addition to other Waldorf training.  

  
75.  Ms. Nguyen prepared the “skip list” of teachers to be skipped who fall within 

the categories above.  She stated that based on the comments given at Board meetings by 
Waldorf teachers and community members, the District has acknowledged Waldorf as a 
unique program.  She acknowledged that non-Waldorf teachers “might” have been assigned 
to a Waldorf school in the surplus process previously.  She stated that in developing the skip-
list, if she saw anything “related to Waldorf” regarding a teacher who would otherwise have 
received a layoff notice, she put that name on the skip list.  Her testimony on this point was 
vague and unhelpful.   

 
76. 

The District has the burden under Education Code section 44955 to establish a 

“specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide 
services authorized by a services credential with a specialization in either pupil personnel 
services or health for a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has special training 
and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services, 
which others with more seniority do not possess.”  (See also, Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School 
District, supra, 170 Cal.App.4th at p. 138.)  Through the principals’ testimony, and the chart 
showing the extent of training and experience for each teacher at A.M Winn and Alice 
Burney, the District presented sufficient evidence to support its resolution skip criterion 
regarding Waldorf teachers.     
 

SPECIAL EDUCATION SKIP 
 
77. 

The special education skipping criteria states that an individual will be skipped 

if she is fully credentialed to serve in a special education assignment.  Cynthia Vierra was 
skipped, but is currently filling a school psychologist position, though she is credentialed in 
                                                 

10 A Waldorf-specific college in the Sacramento region. 

23

 

 

 

special education.  Respondents argued that the District cannot “stockpile” credentials, and a 
teacher can only be skipped if she is fully credentialed and will be teaching in a capacity to 
use that credential.   
 

Appellate case law supports respondents’ arguments.  Alexander v. Delano Joint 

Union High School District (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 576, analyzed a district’s skipping 
criteria that resulted in retaining junior teachers who had bilingual credentials but were not 
using them.  The court found that it was an abuse of discretion to skip junior teachers with 
less college units (in math, in that case) and teaching experience than more senior teachers 
solely because the junior teacher was bilingual.   

 
78.  At hearing, the District dispensed with this challenge by stipulating that 

Cynthia Vierra will in fact be assigned to teach special education in 2019-20. 
 

MATH AND SCIENCE SKIP  

79. 

Respondents do not argue that the needs of the District and its students are best 

served by being fully staffed in the areas of math and science.  They contend, however, that 
the three teachers with single subject biological science credentials were skipped arbitrarily, 
when other teachers with the same credentials were not.  The District explained that the only 
teachers who were skipped were people who held the appropriate credential and are currently 
required to use it.  Skipping credentialed math and science teachers who are currently 
teaching in positions requiring those credentials is reasonable.  Mr. Petzold argued that he 
should be skipped because he holds a single subject in Science:  Biological Sciences, and 
Psychology, with ELA.  Mr. Petzold is not currently teaching high school biology, and while 
he has a single subject biology credential, his position as a middle school biology teacher 
does not require that credential.  He does not fit within the skipping criteria, criteria which is 
found to be reasonable.11 
 
Tie breaking 
 
80.  As discussed in Factual Finding 8, the Board adopted criteria to apply when 

two teachers have equal seniority.  Respondents did not contest the criteria, but several 
teachers testified regarding additional points that were not accounted for.  Additionally, at 
the time of hearing, the District, in conjunction with SCTA had not conducted a lottery to 
determine the position of each teacher under Category II.  At hearing, the District 
acknowledged that Angela Cook had not been granted an additional point for an advanced 
degree in Category I.  Her total points were increased.   

 

                                                 

11 There was an assertion at hearing that the District may intend to rescind one notice 

for a biology teacher.  There was no stipulation on this point, and it cannot be definitively 
considered here.  The District is reminded to consider Mr. Petzold’s updated seniority date 
when making the calculation regarding this rescission.   

24

 

 

81.  Melanie Ota received a Master of Arts in Teaching at the University of 
California, Irvine (UCI) in 2018.  When the District hired her, Ms. Ota’s official transcripts 
post-high school were requested.  At hearing, she produced the official transcript from UCI 
that she provided the District on August 7, 2018.  The transcript shows Ms. Ota completed 
76 units toward her master’s degree, and she “advanced to candidacy” on May 30, 2018.  Ms. 
Ota believes this is evidence she was conferred that degree.  She also produced a letter at 
hearing from UCI confirming that she had earned a master’s degree as of September 12, 
2018.  She did not provide this letter to the District.  

 
82. 

The District argued that the letter is not evidence she received her degree, 

which may be true, but it is also evidence that on August 7, 2018, at the time she provided 
the District with her transcript, the District was on notice that Ms. Ota had completed the 
necessary coursework for a master’s degree.  The information she provided at hearing 
confirmed this.  Ms. Nguyen testified that the District requires an official transcript 
indicating the date a degree was issued by the university by March 15 for it to be considered 
in the layoff process.  The District did not provide any documentation to demonstrate that 
certificated employees were informed that any advanced degrees must be confirmed with the 
District by March 15, other than Ms. Nguyen’s unsupported assertion.  Indeed, one reason 
for an employee to file a Request for Hearing is to present evidence contrary to the District’s 
assumptions. 
 
Ms. Ota’s reliance on this transcript was reasonable.  She presented sufficient 
evidence that she should be allotted an additional point based on the transcript she provided 
the District. 

 
83.  Gabriela Uribes produced her curriculum vitae at hearing, and described her 

efforts to provide all of her transcript to the District, including a master’s degree and a 
doctorate.  She also has a BCLAD in Spanish, and an administrative services credential.  She 
was not given points, per the tie-breaking criteria, for her additional services credential.  The 
District agreed that three points were due to Ms. Uribes, for a total of eight points.  This 
moves Ms. Uribes to position one for purposes of the lottery. 
 
Administrators 
 

84.  As discussed in Factual Finding 13, the District identified 15.2 FTE 
administrator positions that will be reduced or eliminated in 2019-20.  Those administrators 
were previously certificated classroom teachers, and on June 30, 2019, will be classified as 
such again.  They have return rights to positions that align with their seniority, certification, 
and competency.  The District did not produce a seniority list for administrators, but 
identified their adjusted seniority dates and credentialing on its “bump chart.”  This chart 
also shows that three administrators who are bumping less senior teachers do not have a 
Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development (CLAD), authorization, though the 
position requires it. 

 

25

 

 

85.  Kai Phan, as discussed above, will have his layoff notice rescinded, because he 
was found to be able to bump into a position requiring an MS credential.  Mr. Phan does not 
have a CLAD authorization, nor do two other released administrators:  Debra Hetrick and 
Linda Kingston.  Ms. Hetrick bumped a less senior teacher, and Ms. Kingston was issued a 
layoff notice.  The CLAD is an authorization, not a credential, and is required for a teacher to 
teach in a position that has English language learning students.  The District asserted it would 
apply for an emergency CLAD authorization on the teachers’ behalf, which is its practice if a 
teacher qualifies for the authorization.   

 
86. 

 
87. 

Respondents argue that because they do not have the CLAD, these 

administrators are not qualified to bump less senior teachers.  The District explained that the 
administrators have seniority and are qualified to move into the identified positions based on 
their credentialing.  The CLAD, though required, is an authorization that can be applied for 
on an emergency basis if a teacher is qualified.  Allowing these teachers to bump on this 
basis was appropriate. 

Respondents also argue that there was no evidence presented, and Ms. Nguyen 

could not confirm, that current administrator Aaron Pecho, who bumped a biology teacher, 
has classroom experience in biology, such that he is “certificated and competent.”  They 
further argue that he is not “currently serving in classes” requiring a biology certificate.  This 
confuses the District’s skipping criteria with bumping.  A teacher who bumps another teacher 
must be found to be “certificated and competent.”  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)  Biology 
is not included in the District’s “competency criteria” in Resolution #3055.  Nevertheless, the 
District’s reliance on Mr. Pecho’s single subject biology and chemistry credential with ELA 
is a reasonable measure of his competency. 
 
Reasonableness of Layoff 

 
OVER-NOTICING 
 
88. 

The District engaged in over-noticing.  Ms. Nguyen testified that when she 

conducted the layoff analysis, based on the FTEs identified in the Board’s resolutions, 
certain reductions would have required splitting up positions to match the exact FTE 
reduced.  Resolution #3053 identified, for example, .9 FTE for librarians, and the bump chart 
accounts for a 1.0 FTE reduction.  Similarly, the resolution identified .4 FTE in art, and the 
bump chart shows a 1.0 FTE reduction.  It has been held that it is “within the scope of a 
school district’s discretion . . . to define a position as full time if the district concludes that 
the assignment cannot be as well performed on a part-time basis. . . .  So long as the 
determination is reasonable and made in good faith, neither section 44955 nor any other 
provision of the Education Code precludes a school district from defining a position, or 
‘service,’ as full time.”  (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 
Cal.App.4th 334, 343-344.)  Respondents argue that there is no basis to determine that a 
position “cannot be as well performed on a part-time basis” in many situations.  It is true that 
the District did not lay out in the resolution or at hearing its basis for making that 

26

 

 

 

determination.  Nevertheless, it was in the District’s discretion to do so, and that 
determination is not unreasonable. 

 
89. 

 
91. 

The evidence shows that the District properly considered and accounted for 

positively assured attrition when identifying individuals subject to layoff, including attrition 
caused by retirement, resignation, and non-reelection known to the District as of March 15, 
2019.  Ms. Nguyen testified that attrition after March 15 is eventually taken into account via 
the surplus process, which post-dates the May 15 final layoff notices. 
 

90. 

Respondents argue that the District should consider not only positively assured 

attrition prior to March 15, but also attrition up to the date of final layoff notices:  May 15.  
In so doing, five additional layoff notices would be rescinded.  They argue that Education 
Code section 44955 states that layoffs must be “necessary,” and if there is positively assured 
attrition prior to the final layoff notice, a corresponding number of layoffs are not necessary.  
Respondents also identify a split of authority in whether to consider attrition up to May 15.  
(Cf. San Jose v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d, 627, 635-636, and Lewin v. Board of Trustees 
(1976) 62 Cal.App.3d 977, 980-983.)   

School boards must find that reducing particular kinds of services and the 

layoffs that follow are necessary.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)  No one disputes that the 
District must consider all positively assured attrition.  Prior to issuing layoff notices, which 
were reduced from the initial identified FTE positions, the District considered all retirements, 
non-reelections, and resignations.  The layoff process is not static.  Even up to the time of 
and throughout hearing, rescissions were issued, additional attrition was identified, and 
further credentials were accounted for.  Requiring the District to respond to movement of a 
variety of factors on a daily basis would render the layoff process so cumbersome and 
uncertain that no decision could be made.  Ms. Nguyen stated at hearing that all positively 
assured attrition after March 15 will be considered, whether in the surplus process or by 
rescinding additional notices.  The District has demonstrated its commitment to continue to 
consider attrition, though perhaps not on a deadline that works for all parties involved. 
 

RATIOS 

92. 

Respondents argued that psychologists and counselors, for example, will be 

out of ratio following this layoff, which violates the CBA.  The District has listed as a 
justification for the layoff that it is attempting to bring teacher/student ratios “up to contract.”  
This hearing is not devised to determine whether the CBA has been, or will be, violated, or 
whether the District’s layoff will create ratios within the CBA.  Those determinations are 
beyond the scope of these proceedings. 
 

ARBITRARY AND CAPRICIOUS 
 
93. 

Respondents argue that the entire layoff was arbitrary and capricious because 

in addition to over-noticing, the District could not point to a specific document or point in 
time that led to its determination that 178.59 positions should be reduced or eliminated.  

27

 

 

Respondents argue that the enrollment numbers projected for 2019-20 are arbitrarily low, 
and cannot be relied on.  They further argue that the data that arose from the one-stop process 
shows a reduction far less than those listed on the District’s resolutions.  The Board 
determined that a reduction of $5.1 million through the one-stop process was essential to 
contribute to addressing the District’s debt.  But when respondents calculate the average cost 
per teacher at approximately $90,000 with salary and benefits, they figured that a reduction 
of 56.67 FTE would adequately address that.  Moreover, this amount could have been 
addressed by attrition (prior to March 15) alone.  Ms. Nguyen, who drafted Resolutions 
#3053 and #3058, could not clarify how she came to the number 178.59, except to say that in 
determining the layoff list, she had to rely on what the Board adopted.  This circular 
reasoning understandably causes respondents to question the entire process. 

 
94. 

Respondents’ focus on each point in time, each calculation, and when all 

available information was considered, and by whom, avoids two simple points.  First, the 
District is facing a $35 million deficit, and it crafted its PKS reduction so as to affect the 
least number of teachers, while working toward remaining solvent.  Second, the District’s 
primary mission and responsibility is not to ensure that its teachers remain employed, but to 
educate the students in the community in serves.  There is no doubt that the District’s human 
resources team, principals, and budget analysts could have provided more complete and 
comprehensible information.   
 

95. 

Schools districts have broad discretionary decision-making when determining 

the particular kinds of service to reduce.  San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 
Cal.App.3d 627,636 found:  “Where the governing board determines to discontinue or reduce 
a particular kind of service . . . it is within the discretion of the board to determine the 
amount by which it will reduce a particular service.”  The court explained that this decision 
is “not tied in with any statistical computation, such as reduction in the number of students.”  
(Ibid.)  A school board may determine whether a particular kind of service should be reduced 
or discontinued, and it cannot be concluded that the governing board acted unfairly or 
improperly simply because it made a decision it was empowered to make.  (Rutherford v. 
Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174.)   
 

96. 

“In determining whether the decision of a school board is reasonable as 

distinguished from fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious, its action is measured by the standard 
set by reason and reasonable people, bearing in mind that such a standard may permit a 
difference of opinion on the same subject.”  (Arthur v. Oceanside-Carlsbad Junior College 
Dist. (1963) 216 Cal.App.2d 656, 663.)  Thus, respondent’s calculations and second-
guessing undermines the District’s authority to determine the amount by which services will 
be reduced.  The difference of opinion regarding the Board’s determination is 
understandable, but the decisions are not unreasonable. 
 
Individual Arguments, Not Addressed Above 
 

97.  Melody Mo.  Resolution #3053 provides for 1.0 FTE to be eliminated in 

Foreign Language:  Chinese.  Melody Mo teaches Chinese at Hiram Johnson High School.  

28

 

 

 

Her seniority date is October 20, 2015.  She has a master’s degree in Chinese and a Single 
Subject credential.  Each year she teaches about 150 students Chinese.  She asserted that for 
the 2019-20 school year, 153 students have already signed up to take Chinese at Hiram 
Johnson.  This is not an estimate.  These are students who have determined their classes for 
2019-20. 

 
98.  Ms. Mo received a layoff notice.  The result of the one-stop process was that 

one Chinese position would be reduced at John F. Kennedy High School.  The Chinese 
teacher at JFK is senior to Ms. Mo, and did not receive a notice; that teacher also anticipates 
a full class load in 2019-20 based on students who have already signed up.  There are only 
two Chinese teachers at the high school level in the District.  Ms. Mo argues that by allowing 
students to sign up for classes at both John F. Kennedy High School and Hiram Johnson 
High School, the District has implied it is not reducing 1.0 FTE in Foreign Language: 
Chinese. 

 
99.  Ms. Mo’s argument is reasonable.  But there was no testimony to establish that 

if students sign up for a class in the Spring, the class will necessarily be available in the Fall 
semester.  The District is directed to determine whether a Chinese language position will be 
eliminated in 2019-20 based on student enrollment. 
 
Welfare of the District and Its Students 

 
100.  Other than that set forth particularly above, the Superintendent’s designees 

correctly identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services that 
the Board directed be reduced or discontinued.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled 
to be retained to perform services which a more senior employee is certificated and 
competent to render, unless skipped, as set forth above. 
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955.  All notices and other jurisdictional requirements of sections 44949 and 
44955 were met.   
  

2. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  The burden is on the District to demonstrate that the reduction or elimination of 
the particular kinds of services is reasonable and that the District carefully considered its 
needs before laying off any certificated employee.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers 
Association v. Abbott, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at pp. 807-808.)   
 

29

 

 

 
5. 

 
6. 

 
8. 

 
9. 

3. 

Legal cause exists to reduce or eliminate 178.59 FTE of particular kinds of 
services offered by the District as set forth in detail in the Factual Findings.  Cause for the 
reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools 
and pupils, within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
 

4. 

Cause exists to retain teachers who are fully-credentialed to serve in special 
education assignments, and teachers who are fully credentialed to and will serve in classes 
requiring BCLAD certification, as set forth in Resolutions #3055 and #3064, regardless of 
seniority.  (Findings 70 and 71.)   

Cause also exists to retain teachers who are fully-credentialed to serve in 

classes requiring Single Subjects:  Mathematics credential, and Single Subjects:  Biology 
credential, but only to the extent that retained (skipped) teachers are assigned, or will be 
assigned next school year, into positions requiring these credentials.  (Finding 80.) 

As explained in Factual Findings 72 through 77, the District demonstrated a 

specific need for teachers with specialized training and experience to teach at its Waldorf 
Methods Schools, and therefore the application of skipping criteria to teachers currently in 
the Waldorf program is sustained.          
 

7. 

As set forth in Factual Finding 44, the District must rescind the layoff notice to 
Dekeithi Walton.  The District does not have jurisdiction over Mr. Walton based on improper 
notice required by Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a)(1).  

If it has not already done so, the District must rescind layoff notices issued to 
Morgan Komure, Andrew Pena, Christine Schoenfeld, Kai Phan, one training specialist, and 
one resource teacher.  (Finding 18.)  The District must also determine the impact of Cynthia 
Vierra’s move to special education from being a school psychologist.  (Finding 19.) 

The District engaged in over-noticing.  As explained in Factual Findings 89 

through 92, the District’s determination of the number of FTE positions to notice was 
reasonable and made in good faith.  That determination is not unreasonable and is upheld.  
Similarly, the District’s reliance on attrition prior to March 15 was reasonable.  The District 
is obligated to consider all positively assured attrition that occurs after March 15, which it 
has asserted it will do.   

 
10.  After considering the District’s need to account for administrators bumping 

into positions, application of tiebreak criteria, rescinded notices, positively assured attrition, 
and assignments/reassignments into partial positions, the number of layoff notices issued by 
the District was neither unreasonable nor an abuse of its discretion.  The matters set forth in 
Findings 94 through 97 have also been considered.  The layoff as a whole was not arbitrary 
and capricious.  
 
11.  As explained in Factual Findings 46 through 58, the District will make 
corrections to the seniority of those new teachers who attended New Teacher Orientation.  

30

 

 

 
12. 

 
13. 

The seniority will be adjusted as laid out in Factual Finding 66.  New Employee Orientation, 
Pest Management Training, Benchmark training, and Next Generation Science Standard 
training do not establish seniority dates, as explained in Factual Findings 59 through 65.   

The District applied bumping rules with some consistency, and generally 

allowed bumping based upon the more senior employee holding a credential or authorization 
to teach the assignment of the less senior teacher.  The District articulated the rationale for its 
bumping rules.  The District must update its tie-breaking chart, and personnel records to 
include credentialing and other information brought to its attention by Angela Cook, 
Gabriela Uribes, and Melanie Ota.  (Findings 81 through 84.)  Once the tie-breaking chart is 
complete, a new lottery must be performed. 

Cause exists for the reduction of the particular kinds of services and for the 
reduction of full-time equivalent certificated positions at the end of the 2018-2019 school 
year pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  Other than the foregoing, no 
employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to render a service which 
any respondent is certificated and competent to render.  Except as set forth above, the 
District’s Governing Board may give final notice to remaining respondents whose 
preliminary notices have not been rescinded before May 15, 2019, that their services will not 
be required for the ensuing school year, 2019-2020. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION 
 

Cause exists for the reduction of 178.59 full-time equivalent certificated positions at 
 
the end of the 2018-2019 school year.  After making the adjustments set forth in the Factual 
Findings and Legal Conclusions, notice shall be given to remaining respondents that their 
services will be reduced or will not be required for the ensuing school year, 2019-2020, 
because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  Notice shall be 
given in inverse order of seniority.   
 
 
 
DATED:  May 6, 2019 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

___________________________ 
HEATHER M. ROWAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 
 
 
 

31

 

 

 

Attachment A 

Respondents Represented by Counsel 

 
1  Rocio Almanza 

38  Amber Kadrie 

Jaime Masillani-Macias  
Jacelyn Neumann  

47  Mabeth Lopez  
48  Brittany Martin  
49  Mee Miranda 
50  Melody Mo 
51 
52 
53  Peter Newman 

39  Nancy Khang  
40  Kathryn Kiley  
41  Morgan Komure 
42  Cristin Kosakowski 
43  Randy Laforteza  
Julie Law-Marin  
44 
Ian Leary 
45 
Samantha Clevenger  46  Tabitha Lichtenhan  

2  Veronica Avelar  
3 
James Ballenger 
4  Brittany Barbone  
5  Michelle Bohlin  
6  Lisa Brown  
7  Lily Busher  
8  Adrianne Camacho 
9 
10  Rhianna Clifton 
11  Gary Coartney 
12  Bethany Coburn 
13  Cameron Collins 
14  Angela Cook 
15  Kristie Corcoran  
16  Kaylee Creevan  
17  Douglas Dammarell   54  Gabriella Orozco 
18  Alfredo Decali 
19  Melina Diaz  
20  Rachelle Dowd 
21  Angela DuBose 
22  Molly Durst Roman  59  Michael Petzold  
23  Candace Evans 
24  Glenda Feece 
25  Melissa Ferguson 
26  Briana Fonseca  
27  Nicole Fossum  
28  Matthew Garber  
29  Jessica Gonzalez 
30  Anna Gutierriez 
31  Tiffany Harris 
32  Erica Hernandez  
33  Kristine Hiett  
34  Tori Horton  
35  Myisha James 
36  Dezarae Johnson 
37  Andrew Jones  

60  Erin Pressley  
61  Samuel Prowell  
62  Christopher Rasmussen  
63  Lobelia Robinson 
64  Lindsey Rodriguez 
65  Brittany Rogers  
66  Michelle Rogers  
67  Amanda Sacks  
68  Yesenia Sanchez 
69  Christine Schoenfeld 
Jenna Smith  
70 
71  Victoria Tacherra  
72  Natalie Tamblyn  
73 
74  Graciela Uribes  

55  Yessenia Ortiz  
56  Melanie Ota  
57  Gregory Palmer II 
58  Andrew Pena 

Jonathan Thackeray 

Jennifer Yang  

75  Colleen Vaughn-
Waggoner  
76  Mariela Ventura  
77  Timmy Vo 
78  Dekeithi Walton 
79  Dustin Watson  
80  Ger Yang 
81 
82  Mai Yang 
83  Eric Yee  
84  Pail Yenovkian 
85  Carolyn Zierenberg-Senge  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

32

