 

 
 
 

BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
DIXON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SOLANO, CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction 
in Force Against Certain Certificated 
Employees, 
 
 
                                                 Respondents. 
 

 
 
 
OAH  No. 2019030302 

 
 
PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Administrative Law Judge Diane Schneider, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 9, 2019, in Dixon, California. 
 

John W. Dietrich, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

Costa Kerestenzis and Christopher Hammer, Attorneys at Law, Beeson, Tayer & 

Sacramento, California, represented the Dixon Unified School District. 
 
 
Bodine, Sacramento, California, represented respondents James S. Bair IV, Lindsey C. 
Curley, Tammy M. Fagan, Ellen C. Main, Alexander Y. McCarthy-Donovan, Jacob A. 
Ritschel, Tahira Singh and Riley R. Steidlmayer, who were not present at the hearing. 
 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of respondents Kayla E. Cimini, Matthew S. 

Forrest, Rebecca E. Krumdieck, Tracey A. Leveroni, Melanie A. Sadorra, Robert G. Stoces, 
or Emily F. Titus. 
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted for decision on April 9, 2019. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondents James S. Bair IV, Lindsey C. Curley, Tammy M. Fagan, Ellen C. 

 
 
Main, Alexander Y. McCarthy-Donovan, Jacob A. Ritschel, Tahira Singh, Riley R. 
Steidlmayer, Kayla E. Cimini, Matthew S. Forrest, Rebecca E. Krumdieck, Tracey A. 
Leveroni, Melanie A. Sadorra, Robert G. Stoces, and Emily F. Titus are certificated 
employees of the Dixon Unified School District (District). 
  

2. 

On February 21, 2019, pursuant to the recommendation of Superintendent Brian 

Dolan, the District’s Board of Trustees (Board) adopted Resolution No. 19-1598, which sets 
forth the Board’s determination that it is in the best interests of the District, and the welfare of 
the schools and its pupils, to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) for the 
2019-2020 school year, for a total of 11.7 full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated positions. 
(Resolution No. 19-1598 is set forth in Attachment A.) 
 
Superintendent Dolan delegated the authority to administer the reduction in 
 
force proceeding to Leanee Medina Estrada, Director of Human Resources.  Estrada made 
and filed the Notice of Recommendation That Services Will Not Be Required (Notice) in her 
official capacity as the District’s Director of Human Resources. 
 

3. 

4. 

All Notices were timely and properly served on respondents.  All Notices and 

other jurisdictional requirements contained in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 
have been provided or satisfied.   

 
5.  With the exception of Titus and Leveroni, all respondents requested a hearing.   
 
6. 

At hearing, the District presented a Proposed Final Layoff List (Layoff List) 

that includes the following 10 respondents: Curley, Fagan, McCarthy-Donovan, Ritschel, 
Singh, Steidlmayer, Forrest, Krumdieck, Leveroni, and Stoces.  Pursuant to the Layoff List, 
respondents will receive layoff notices for 1.0 FTE, with the following exceptions:  Forrest 
(0.6), McCarthy-Donovan (0.4), and Steidlmayer (0.4). 
 

According to the Layoff List, layoff notices have been rescinded for the 

following five respondents: Bair IV, Cimini, Sadorra, Main, and Titus. 

The reduction or discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of the 

7. 

 
8. 

9. 

District and of its pupils. 
 
 
certificated and competent to perform. 
 
 
 
 

No junior employee is being retained to render a service that any respondent is 

10.  No contentions were raised by or on behalf of respondents. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The services identified in Attachment A are particular kinds of services that 

 
 
may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision 
to reduce or discontinue the identified services complied with the guidelines set forth in 
Education Code section 44955.  The Board’s decision was neither arbitrary nor capricious 
and was a proper exercise of its discretion.   
 

 

2 

2. 

Cause exists because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of 

 
services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to the respondents 
identified in the Layoff List, set forth in Factual Finding 6, that their services will not be 
required for the 2019-2020 school year.  The cause for the reduction or discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services relates to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within 
the meaning of section 44949. 
 
 

ORDER 

 
Notice may be given to respondents Lindsey C. Curley, Tammy M. Fagan, Alexander 

Y. McCarthy-Donovan, Jacob A. Ritschel, Tahira Singh, Riley R. Steidlmayer, Matthew S. 
Forrest, Rebecca E. Krumdieck, Tracey A. Leveroni, and Robert G. Stoces that their services 
will be reduced or eliminated for the 2019-2020 school year because of the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services.   
 
 
  
 DATED:  April 15, 2019 

 
 
________________________________ 
DIANE SCHNEIDER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

 
List of Attachments 
Attachment A:  Resolution No. 19-1598 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3 

