BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
MORGAN HILL UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2019030795 

 
 
 

 

In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction 
in Force of Certificated Employee: 
 
HEIDI RACZ,  
 
 
 
 
 

Respondent. 

 

 

 

 
PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Kelsey Cropper, Attorney at Law, Liebert Cassidy Whitmore, represented the Morgan 

David Conway and Vishtasp Soroushian, Attorneys at Law, represented respondent 

 
Administrative Law Judge Jill Schlichtmann, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 23, 2019, in Morgan Hill, California. 
 
 
Hill Unified School District. 
 
 
Heidi Racz, who was present. 
 
 
received, marked as Exhibits 17 and E, and considered.  The matter was submitted for 
decision on April 26, 2019.     
 
 

The record was held open for filing of closing briefs.  The briefs were timely 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 
Introduction 
 

1. 

 
2. 

Steve Betando made and filed the Statement of Reduction in Force in his 

official capacity as the Superintendent of the Morgan Hill Unified School District (District).      

Heidi Racz (respondent) is a certificated employee in the District.  She holds 
an Education Specialist Instruction Credential in the subject area of Early Childhood Special 
Education.  Respondent’s credential authorizes her to conduct educational assessments 
related to a student’s access to the academic core curriculum and progress towards meeting 
instructional academic goals, and provide instructional and Special Education Support to 

students from birth through pre-kindergarten (ages three to five) who are eligible for early 
intervention special education and related services, to individuals with a primary disability in 
specific learning disabilities, mild/moderate intellectual disabilities, traumatic brain injury, 
other health impairment, autism, moderate/severe intellectual disabilities, emotional 
disturbance, and multiple disabilities including developmental delay and disabling medical 
conditions.  The credential does not permit the holder to teach students in kindergarten or 
older. 

 
3. 

Respondent teaches in a preschool special day class at a school in the District 
that provides special education services to students age three to five.  The primary disability 
of the children in the preschool program is autism.  Respondent’s credential does not allow 
her to teach in any other class or program in the District.   
 
The Reduction in Force 
 

4. 

On March 5, 2019, the Governing Board of the District approved a resolution 

reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of services for the 2019-2020 school year (PKS 
Resolution), and directing the Superintendent or his designee to send appropriate notices to 
all employees affected by the reduction or elimination of services.1  
 

5. 

The PKS Resolution identified the following services be reduced no later than 

the beginning of the 2019-2020 school year as: 
 

Education Specialist Instruction Credential:  

Early Childhood Special Education: 1.0 FTE2 
 

 
Career Technical Education Teaching Credential:  

 

Information Technology: 1.0 FTE3        

 

 
On March 8, 2019, Fawn Myers, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources 

6. 

Division, notified respondent that the Governing Board had decided to reduce particular 
kinds of services, and that her services would not be required for the 2019-2020 school year.  
Respondent timely requested a hearing to determine whether cause existed for not 
reemploying her for the ensuing year.  The District timely served respondent with a packet 
which included a statement to respondent, the statement of reduction in force, copies of 
                                                 

1 The Governing Board approved a resolution adopting tie breaking criteria for 
determining the order of seniority of employees with the same date of first paid service in a 
probationary position on February 5, 2019.  The tie breaking criteria were not utilized 
because there are no employees affected by the layoff notice who became employed on the 
same date. 

 
2 Full-Time Equivalent. 
 
3 The teacher impacted by this reduction in service did not request a hearing.   

 

2 

appropriate Education and Government Code sections, a notice of participation and a notice 
of hearing.  Respondent timely filed a notice of participation.  All prehearing jurisdictional 
requirements have been met.   
 

7. 

Myers testified with candor at hearing.  Myers explained that prior to the 
March 5, 2019 Governing Board meeting, she met with the Special Education Director, 
Michael Vogel, to discuss special education needs for the 2019-2020 school year.  Vogel 
advised her that the reduction of one FTE position in the preschool special day class was 
warranted as a result of projected enrollment and anticipated program changes.   
 

8. 

Public schools are responsible for providing needed speech and language 
services to children residing in the district from age three until they enter kindergarten.  
School districts may, but are not required to, provide preschool special education services to 
students with disabilities.  El Toro Elementary School is a school in the District; the District 
provides preschool special day classes to disabled students at this school.  Respondent 
teaches in the preschool special day class at El Toro Elementary School; two teachers besides 
respondent provide special day class services at the District.  The number of students in the 
program varies.  At present, there are nine to 11 students total in the morning and afternoon 
sessions.  At times there have been three or less students in a session with a teacher and an 
aide.  There are 10 students pending eligibility; if all 10 were added to the current 11 
students, 21 students would be served by three teachers, which is less than the District’s 
expected caseload.   
 

9. 

Vogel testified with candor at hearing.  He works with the Special Education 
Coordinator to determine staffing needs and placement of special education students.  Vogel 
reported that the Governor’s Office and the Department of Education are strongly 
encouraging school districts to place special needs students in the least restrictive 
environment; in other words, to provide opportunities for special needs children to attend 
classes with typical children. 
 

10. 

Public funds are made available for preschool services (Head Start) for 

students with income limits to be provided through Child Development Centers (CDC).  
Districts can recommend students with special needs for inclusion in these programs with 
typically developing children.  Vogel has been discussing a potential partnership with a  
state-funded preschool program but nothing firm has been put in place.  However, the 
District can, and has, recommended children to be placed in a nearby state-funded CDC 
when room is available.  Because of the State’s emphasis on inclusivity, the District intends 
to recommend more students for placement in state-funded CDC’s, requiring fewer staff in 
the preschool special day class.  There are currently eight open spaces at a nearby CDC; 
Vogel recently asked his team to identify students who could be placed in that program.  
When the District recommends a student for CDC placement it is discussed in the 
individualized education program meeting.  If the student’s parents agree with the 
recommendation, they complete an application and the student is enrolled.   
 

 

3 

11. 

Placing special day class students in a CDC will reduce the number of 

students in the preschool special day class.  The District can maintain appropriate services 
for its students with a reduction of 1.0 FTE in Early Childhood Special Education.  If in the 
future the District does not have enough preschool teachers to meet the needs of its students, 
it will rehire a certificated teacher from its list.      

 
12. 

The District employs three teachers holding an Education Specialist 

Instruction Credential with a subject area of Early Childhood Special Education.  
Respondent’s first day of paid service was on August 10, 2015.  The other two teachers with 
this credential have more seniority than respondent.  Respondent does not dispute that she is 
the teacher in this preschool special day class program with the least seniority. 
 
Respondent’s Contentions 
 

13. 

Respondent testified with candor at hearing.  She has taught full-time as a 

certificated teacher with the District since the 2015-2016 school year.  For two years before 
that, she worked in the preschool program as a paraprofessional.  She has developed close 
relationships with the students and their families.  It has been very satisfying to see her 
students make more progress on their goals than their parents thought was possible. 
 

14. 

Respondent contends that the Governing Board’s decision to reduce the 

number of teachers in the preschool program was arbitrary and not based on reduced 
enrollment or program changes.  Respondent argues that she has observed no decline in 
enrollment in the preschool special day class.   

 
The evidence at hearing established that the Governing Board did not base its 

decision on declining enrollment.  The decision was based on the current and projected 
number of children in the program, and on its need to follow the State’s mandate to place 
students in the least restrictive environment; for preschool students, that requires that 
students be placed in CDC’s.  The Governing Board’s decision was not arbitrary.  The cause 
for reducing or discontinuing the services identified in the PKS Resolution relates solely to 
the welfare of the schools of the District and the pupils thereof.   

 
15. 

 
16. 

 
17. 

Respondent also contends that the Governing Board’s reason for reducing the 

special day class was not adequately described or definitive in the notices sent to her.  This 
argument is rejected.  The notices sent to respondent adequately described the services to be 
reduced, the anticipated need for the reduction and the reason for the reduction. 

Respondent further contends that she was prejudiced by not receiving several 
email messages between Vogel and the CDC coordinator which were requested in discovery.  
No evidence of prejudice was established at hearing and this argument is rejected. 

Respondent argues that because the Governing Board adopted “skipping” 

criteria that included special education and autism certificates, she should have been skipped.  

 

4 

 

 
1. 

 
3. 

The skipping criteria do not include credentialed employees holding the Education Specialist 
Instruction Credential held by respondent.   

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were satisfied.  
(Factual Finding 6.) 

 
2.  Whether to eliminate or reduce particular kinds of services is in the sound 

discretion of the Governing Board, and can only be overturned upon a showing of an abuse 
of discretion.  (San Jose Teacher Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639.)  
Particular kinds of service may be reduced or eliminated even if the service continues to be 
performed in a different manner by the District.  (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School 
District (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.)  

The services referenced in the PKS Resolution set forth in Factual Finding 5 
are the kind which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes 
and case law.  (See Ed. Code, § 44955; Campbell Elem. Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 
76 Cal.App.3d 796; Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.)  The cause 
for reducing or discontinuing the services identified in the PKS Resolution relates solely to 
the welfare of the schools of the District and the pupils thereof.  (Factual Findings 6 through 
11, 14.) 
 

4. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), when a governing 
body reduces particular kinds of services resulting in a decrease in the number of certificated, 
permanent employees, the services of a permanent employee may not be terminated if 
another employee with less seniority is retained to render a service that the more senior 
employee is “certificated and competent to render.”   

 
No permanent or probationary certificated employee with less seniority, and no 
  
temporary certificated employee, is being retained to render service for which respondent is 
credentialed and competent to render.  (Factual Findings 2 and 12.) 
 

5. 

 In accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, cause exists 

for reduction of particular kinds of services of the District, including an Education Specialist 
Instruction Credential: Early Childhood Special Education at 1.0 FTE, beginning no later 
than the commencement of the 2019-2020 school year.  The cause relates solely to the 
welfare of the school and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 
44949.     
 

6. 

Notice may be given to respondent Heidi Racz that her services will not be 

required for the 2019-2020 school year.   

 

 

5 

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice may be given to respondent Heidi Racz that her services will not be required 

for the 2019-2020 school year. 
 
 
DATED: May 2, 2019 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

_________________________________ 
JILL SCHLICHTMANN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

6 

