BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
BASSETT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the District Statement of 
Reduction in Force Against: 
 
CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF  
THE BASSETT UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT,   
 

Respondents. 

 

OAH No. 2019030446 

 

 
 

 

  
  
PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Michael E. Wolfsohn, Esq., Leal Trejo, PC, represented Bassett Unified School 

Respondents are 38 certificated employees of the District whose names are listed on 

 
Administrative Law Judge Thomas Heller, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in La Puente, California on April 22, 2019.   
 
 
District (District). 
 
 
Attachment A.  Hannah S. Weinstein, Esq., Rothner, Segall & Greenstone, represented all of 
the respondents except Melissa Ann Mccutcheon, who did not appear either personally or 
through counsel.  
 
 
 
 

The matter was submitted on April 22, 2019. 

SUMMARY 

 
 
The Governing Board of the District (Board) resolved to reduce or discontinue 
particular kinds of services and a corresponding number of full-time equivalent positions for 
the 2019-2020 school year, and sent layoff notices to the 38 respondents.  All of the 
respondents except Mccutcheon requested a hearing on whether there was cause for the 
layoffs.  The District rescinded 27 of the layoff notices at the start of the hearing, but 
requests approval to lay off the remaining 11 respondents.  The District proved there was 
cause for the 11 layoffs, and its request will therefore be granted. 
 
 

 
Background 
 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

The District provides educational services to students at seven school sites.  Its 

student enrollment has been in decline in recent years, leading to reductions in revenue and 
deficit spending.  Financial projections for the 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 school years 
predict that the District’s funding reserves will not meet the state minimum reserve amount 
despite cost-cutting measures other than layoffs. 
 

2. 

Superintendent Debra French recommended that the Board reduce or 

discontinue particular kinds of services (PKS) of the District.  On February 26, 2019, the 
Board adopted Resolution No. 15-19 to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services and 
a corresponding number of full-time equivalent (FTE) positions by the beginning of the 
2019-2020 school year “as a result of declining enrollment and a review of and modification 
to student services,” as follows: 
 

Position 

Teacher Specialist: 21st Century Learning & Innovation Specialist 
Teacher Specialist: Early Literacy Specialist 
Teacher Specialist: Instructional Technologist Intervention Specialist 
Teacher Specialist: Instructional Coach & Interventionist 
Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA): Technology/IET 
Teacher Specialist 
P.E. Teacher – High School 
Librarian 
English Teacher – High School 
Science Teacher, Continuation High School 
Science/Physics Teacher – High School 
Social Science Teacher – Middle School 
Math Teacher – High School 
Math Teacher – Continuation High School 

TOTAL 

PKS Reduced 
or Discontinued 
2 FTE 
2 FTE 
1 FTE 
1 FTE 
1 FTE 
1 FTE 
1 FTE 
1 FTE 
2 FTE 
1 FTE 
1 FTE 
1 FTE 
1 FTE 
1 FTE 
17  FTE 

 
(Exhibit E.) 
 

 

 

3. 

The Board directed the Superintendent or her designee to send all appropriate 

notices to employees whose positions were affected, and to take all other actions necessary to 
implement the resolution.  The Board also adopted “tie-breaking” criteria to distinguish 
among any employees who had the same start date, and “skipping” criteria to retain 
employees who were credentialed and working in certain special education and counseling 
positions and had training and experience that more senior employees did not have. 

2 

4. 

On February 27, 2019, the District notified the 38 respondents via registered 

mail and personal delivery that their services would not be required for the 2019-2020 school 
year due to a reduction in force based on budgetary constraints.  The notices also advised 
respondents that they could request a hearing to determine if there was cause to lay them off.  
All of the respondents except Mccutcheon requested a hearing, and Tomiko Lee-Nolasco, the 
District’s Interim Executive Director of Human Resources, filed a District Statement of 
Reduction in Force in her official capacity on March 19, 2019.  The District Statement of 
Reduction in Force alleged there was cause for the layoffs due to the Board’s determination 
to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services, which resulted from the District’s current 
fiscal obligations and deficits. 

 
Hearing 
 

5. 

At the start of the hearing, the District rescinded 27 of the layoff notices, 

leaving 11 remaining respondents: Jorge Corona Avila, Viviana N. Bravo, Amy Kawai Chan, 
Adam Aien Elmi, Jessica Roxana Estrada, Larry Wayne Hatfield, Maria Jose Koreen, Yuri 
Yaewon Lee, Marlo Leon, Carina Maldonado Olander, and Melissa Ann Mccutcheon.  The 
District still seeks to reduce or discontinue 17 FTE positions, but retirement and other 
attrition will allow some employees who would otherwise be subject to layoff to fill in 
elsewhere. 
 

6. 

The District and all of the remaining respondents except Mccutcheon 

stipulated that all notices to and from the District concerning the layoffs and hearing were 
timely and appropriate, and that the District’s seniority list of certificated employees was 
accurate.  As noted above, Mccutcheon did not request a hearing or appear at it personally or 
through counsel.  The District’s evidence in support of the layoffs included the layoff 
notices, seniority list, Board resolution, District Statement of Reduction in Force, budgetary 
projections for future school years, proofs of service, and other supporting documents.  In 
addition, the District called Monika Arora, its Director of Fiscal Services, to testify about the 
District’s financial condition and expected inability to meet the state minimum reserve 
amount absent the layoffs.  Arora also testified that some sites in the District were 
determined to be overstaffed, and that determination was reflected in the 17 FTE positions to 
be reduced or discontinued.   

 
7. 

The District also called Lee-Nolasco to testify about the selection of the 38 

respondents who received layoff notices.  Her testimony established that the District 
followed the seniority list, and that none of the remaining 11 respondents met the Board’s 
skipping criteria or could “bump” (i.e., displace) a less senior teacher from his or her 
position.  Lee-Nolasco’s testimony also established that the District initially identified 38 
employees for layoff as a precaution to allow for possible bumping of less senior teachers. 
 

8. 

In response, none of the remaining respondents asserted any error concerning 
the District’s determination of their seniority, application of the skipping criteria, or possible 
bumping of other teachers.  Instead, the 10 respondents who appeared argued that the layoffs 
were not really based on a decision to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services, but 

 

3 

rather on a decline in the District’s average daily attendance that required calculations of the 
specific decline and a corresponding percentage of certificated employees.  (See Ed. Code,  
§ 44955, subd. (b).)  They also argued that the District sent out too many layoff notices, 
violating their due process rights by creating uncertainty about who would really be laid off.  
In addition, they argued that the District’s decision to lay off two teachers at the continuation 
high school was arbitrary and capricious, because the resulting increase in class sizes would 
be detrimental to students.  Jessica Estrada, a teacher at the continuation high school, 
testified the students there succeed due to small class sizes, and that increased class sizes 
could reduce the graduation rate. 

 

Discussion 
 

9. 

The evidence established that the District properly identified the 11 remaining 

respondents for layoff based on the seniority list and the positions to be reduced or 
discontinued.  It also established that the District gave the remaining respondents proper 
notice of the proposed layoffs.  In addition, the evidence established that the Board’s 
decision to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services was reasonable under the 
circumstances and related solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils of the schools. 
 

10. 

Respondents’ argument that the Board’s decision was really based on a decline 

in average daily attendance that required calculations of the specific decline and a 
corresponding percentage of certificated employees was unpersuasive.  (See Ed. Code,  
§ 44955, subd. (b).)  The resolution was expressly based on the Board’s decision to reduce or 
discontinue particular kinds of services, not on a decline in average daily attendance, which 
was not mentioned in the resolution.  Respondents rely on the reference to “declining 
enrollment” in the resolution to argue otherwise, but that reference alone does not prove the 
Board acted for a reason other than the one stated in the resolution.  
 

11. 

In addition, the evidence established that the District acted reasonably in 

sending out 38 initial layoff notices for the 17 FTE positions to be reduced or discontinued.  
Lee-Nolasco persuasively testified the District did so to accomplish the purposes of the 
resolution while allowing for possible bumping of less senior teachers.  Respondents argued 
that the layoff notices to 38 employees created uncertainty about who would be laid off, but 
presented no evidence concerning that argument. 

 
12. 

Furthermore, no evidence suggested the Board’s decision to reduce or 

discontinue the particular positions it selected was arbitrary or capricious.  The testimony of 
Arora and Lee-Nolasco established that those positions were selected reasonably with 
reference to budgetary constraints and staffing needs.  Estrada’s testimony that laying off two 
teachers at the continuation high school would be inadvisable reflects a disagreement with 
the Board’s decision, but not arbitrary or capricious action by the Board. 
 
 
 
 

 

4 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
Legal Standards 
 

1. 

“Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance in all of the 

schools of a district for the first six months in which school is in session shall have declined 
below the corresponding period of either of the previous two school years, whenever the 
governing board determines that attendance in a district will decline in the following year as 
a result of the termination of an interdistrict tuition agreement as defined in Section 46304, 
whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued not later than the 
beginning of the following school year, or whenever the amendment of state law requires the 
modification of curriculum, and when in the opinion of the governing board of the district it 
shall have become necessary by reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number of 
permanent employees in the district, the governing board may terminate the services of not 
more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of the district, permanent 
as well as probationary, at the close of the school year.”  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) 
 

2. 

In such a layoff, “[e]xcept as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated . . . while any probationary employee, or any other 
employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service which said permanent employee 
is certificated and competent to render.”  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).)  “Essentially this 
language provides ‘“bumping”’ rights for senior certificated and competent employees, and 
‘“skipping”’ authority for a district to retain ‘junior employees who are certificated and 
competent to render services which more senior employees are not.  [Citations.]’”  (Bledsoe 
v. Biggs Unified School Dist. (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 135, quoting Alexander v. Board 
of Trustees (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 571.) 

 
3. 

“A board’s decision as to reduction or discontinuation of a particular kind of 

service is not tied in with any statistical computation, such as reduction in the number of 
students.”  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635 (Allen).)  
Instead, “[t]he number of terminations made necessary by PKS reductions depends totally 
upon the district’s decision as to how many services to reduce.  Put another way, the 
language of section 44955 that the governing board of a school district ‘may terminate the 
services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of said 
district’ is only applicable to [average daily attendance] terminations based upon an actual 
reduction in attendance.  Where the governing board determines to discontinue or reduce a 
particular kind of service, there is no way to calculate a ‘corresponding percentage,’ hence it 
is within the discretion of the board to determine the amount by which it will reduce a 
particular service.”  (Id. at pp. 635-636.) 
 

4. 

“[N]o later than March 15 of the school year preceding dismissal, the district 

must give a notice (preliminary notice) to each certificated employee of the decision 
recommending he or she not be reemployed for the ensuing year, stating the reasons 
therefore and the employee’s entitlement to a hearing.”  (Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at pp. 
631-632.)  “The employee may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 

 

5 

reemploying him or her for the ensuing year.”  (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b).)  “If an 
employee fails to request a hearing . . . , his or her failure to do so shall constitute his or her 
waiver of his or her right to a hearing.”  (Ibid.)   

If a hearing is requested, the school district files and serves a District 

Statement of Reduction in Force, which the employee answers with a Notice of Participation.  
(Gov. Code, §§ 11503, subd. (b), 11505.)  “The hearing takes place before an administrative 
law judge who prepares a proposed decision which the board may or may not accept.  The 
board’s final decision to terminate and notice to the employee of that decision (final notice) 
must be made by May 15.  Any employee not given the preliminary and final notices and the 
right to the hearing is deemed reemployed for the following year.  [Citations.]”  (Allen, 
supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at p. 632; see Ed. Code, §§ 44949, 44955.) 

The layoff decision of a governing board must be reasonable under the 

circumstances.  (Campbell Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 
807-808 (Campbell).)  “‘In determining whether the decision of a school board is reasonable 
as distinguished from fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious, its action is measured by the 
standard set by reason and reasonable people, bearing in mind that such a standard may 
permit a difference of opinion on the same subject.’  [Citation.]”  (Id. at p. 808.) 
 
Discussion 
 

The District satisfied the jurisdictional and notice requirements for the 

proposed layoffs.  (Factual Findings 2-6, 9.)   

Respondent Mccutcheon waived her right to a hearing by failing to request 

one.  (Factual Finding 4; Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b).)   
 

9. 

The services identified in the Board’s resolution are “particular kind[s] of 

service[s]” that may be reduced as proposed.  (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) 
 

10. 

The Board’s layoff decision was reasonable under the circumstances.  (Factual 

Findings 9-12; see Campbell, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at pp. 807-808.) 
 

11.  No permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being retained 

to render a service that the employees to be laid off are certificated and competent to 
perform.  None of the respondents asserted otherwise.  (Factual Findings 7-8.) 

The proposed layoffs are related solely to the welfare of the schools and the 

pupils of the schools.  (Factual Finding 9; Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b)(3).) 

Respondents’ arguments against the layoffs are unpersuasive.  First, the Board 

did not have to calculate the specific decline in average daily attendance or a corresponding 
percentage of certificated employees, because the proposed layoffs are based on a Board 
decision to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  (Factual Findings 9-10; see 

 
5. 

 
6. 

7. 

 
8. 

 
12. 

 
13. 

 

6 

Allen, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at pp. 635-636.)  Second, the District’s decision to send the 
layoff notices to 38 respondents was reasonable, given the possibility that some of them 
could bump into the positions of less senior employees.  (Factual Finding 11.)  No evidence 
or legal authority indicates this was a due process violation.  Third, the District’s decision to 
lay off two teachers at the continuation high school was not arbitrary or capricious.  (Factual 
Finding 12.)  Estrada’s difference of opinion with the Board did not establish that it was.  
(See Campbell, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at p. 808.) 
 

14. 

Based on the above, there is sufficient cause for not reemploying the 11 

remaining respondents for the ensuing school year.  (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b).) 
 
 

ORDER 

1. 

The District Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained as to the following 

11 certificated employees:  Jorge Corona Avila, Viviana N. Bravo, Amy Kawai Chan, Adam 
Aien Elmi, Jessica Roxana Estrada, Larry Wayne Hatfield, Maria Jose Koreen, Yuri Yaewon 
Lee, Marlo Leon, Carina Maldonado Olander, and Melissa Ann Mccutcheon. 

Notice may be given to the above-named employees that their services will not 

 
2. 

be required for the 2019-2020 school year. 
 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
THOMAS HELLER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

7 

 

 

May 6, 2019ATTACHMENT A 
 
LIST OF RESPONDENTS 

 

Acero, Ignacio 
Acosta, Jacqueline 
Albay Yenney, Dave 
Arreola, Amy Marlyn 
Avila, Jorge Corona 
Bravo, Viviana N. 
Chan, Amy Kawai 
Correll, Cynthia 
Covington, Thomas Scott 
Elmi, Adam Aien 
Estrada, Jessica Roxana 
Figueroa, Maria E. 
Flores, Yvonne Dorine 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14.  Gonzalez, Elena Reveles 
15.  Gutierrez, Jesus 
16.  Hatfield, Larry Wayne 
17.  Henderson, Tamara L. 
18.  Herrera-Lopez, Aura 
19.  Hutchins, Rebecca Michelle 
20. 
21.  Koreen, Maria Jose 
22. 
Lee, Yuri Yaewon 
23. 
Lee, Leslie T. 
24. 
Leon, Marlo 
25. 
Ly, Robin Huynh 
26.  Maldonado Olander, Carina 
27.  Mc Candliss, William Bernard 
28.  Mc Donough, Jennifer Jolene 
29.  Mccutcheon, Melissa Ann 
30.  Morales, Giuliana Maria 
31.  Moreno, Lolbette 
32.  Nelson, Alyssa Lauren 
33. 
Puente, Belinda Grace 
34. 
Rohde, Katie E. 
35. 
Sakuma, Carin Noel 
36. 
Tamayo, Krystle Lorraine 
37. 
Tapia, Jessica Ivonne 
38. 
Torres, Luz 

Jephcott, Michael Andrew 

 

8 

