BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF  
MOUNT DIABLO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

 
 
OAH No. 2019021027 

 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction 
in Force of: 
 
The Certificated Employees Identified in 
Appendix A,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Respondents. 

 

 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 
Administrative Law Judge Melissa G. Crowell, State of California, Office of 

Associate General Counsel Deborah A. Cooksey represented the Mt. Diablo Unified 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 15, 2019, in Concord, California. 
 
 
School District. 
 
 
 
 
Respondent’s brief was marked as Exhibit B.  The District’s brief was marked as Exhibit 16.  
The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 23, 2019.  
 
 

The record was left open until April 23, 2019, for submission of written argument.  

Attorney Ernest H. Tuttle III, Tuttle & McCloskey, represented all respondents. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 

1. 

Nellie Meyer, Ed.D., made and filed the Statement of Reduction in Force in 
her official capacity as Superintendent of the Mt. Diablo Unified School District (District). 
 

2. 

Respondents are listed on Attachment A.  Each respondent is a certificated 

employee of the District who was issued a preliminary layoff notice.  The District has 
rescinded the preliminary notices it issued to the following certificated employees: Kelly 
Duncan (0.5 FTE), Juan Paez (1.0 FTE), Linda Ruiz (1.0 FTE), and Terri Shamroukh (1.0 
FTE).  These four certificated employees are no longer respondents.  
 

3. 

On February 25, 2019, the Board of Education of Mount Diablo School 

District (Board) passed Resolution No. 18/19-44 reducing or discontinuing particular kinds 
of services for 2019-2020 school year, and directing Superintendent Meyer to give 

appropriate notices to certificated employees whose positions will be affected by the action.  
The resolution was based on Superintendent Meyer’s report that the reductions were 
necessary because of the District’s projected budget deficits. 

 
4. 

On or before March 15, 2019, Superintendent Meyer gave written notice to 

respondents of the recommendation that his or her services will not be required for the 2019-
2020 school year.  The reasons for the recommendations were set forth in the preliminary 
notices.  
 
5. 

Respondents filed timely requests for hearing to determine if there is cause for 

terminating their services for the 2019-2020 school year.  A Uniform District Statement of 
Reduction in Force was served on respondents, all of whom are deemed to have timely filed 
notices of participation.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met.  
 

6. 

On February 25, 2019, the Board took action to reduce or discontinue the 

following particular kinds of services for the 2019-2020 school year: 
 

District Wide 
Site Administrators 
Central Office Administrators 
School Counselors 
Librarians 
 
Elementary Teaching Positions 
Multiple Subject 
Teacher Intervention, Categorical Programs, Site 
Based 
 
Middle & High School Teaching Positions 
Middle School Core 
Middle School Reading 
Middle School ELD 
Middle School ALD 
High School Teacher Coach/Specialist 
Electives 
      6th Grade Rotation 
      Hands on Technology 
      Web 
       Leadership 
      Yearbook 
       Language Arts Lab 
      On Your Own 
                                                 

1 Full-time equivalent positions. 

 
5.0 FTE1 
3.0 FTE 
5.0 FTE 
1.0 FTE 
 
 
10.0 FTE 
3.0 FTE 

 
 
5.80 FTE 
1.20 FTE 
0.80 FTE 
0.60 FTE 
2.80 FTE 
 
0.20 FTE 
0.20 FTE 
0.20 FTE 
1.00 FTE 
0.20 FTE 
0.20 FTE 
0.40 FTE 

 

2 

      Enhancement (Rotation) 
      Service (Rotation) 
      World Cultures 
      Coding 
      AVID Coordinator 
      Academic Success 
      Current Events 
      Rotation 
      AVID 
Instrumental Music 
English 
Social Science 
Physical Education 
French 
Art 
Industrial Technology 
Health Careers, CTEIG Grant 
Project Lead the Way, CTEIG Grant  
Total:  

 

 

0.20 FTE 
0.40 FTE 
0.20 FTE 
0.40 FTE 
0.20 FTE 
0.20 FTE 
0.20 FTE 
0.20 FTE 
0.60 FTE 
1.60 FTE 
3.60 FTE 
5.40 FTE 
2.80 FTE 
0.40 FTE 
1.00 FTE 
0.40 FTE 
0.40 FTE 
0.40 FTE 
59.20 FTE 

 

 

7. 

On February 11, 2019, the Board passed Resolution 18/19-40, identifying the 
criteria to be applied to resolve ties in seniority between certificated employees.  The criteria 
are: 
 

1. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 
6. 

Possession of a currently valid and properly filed 
credential authorizing service in special education 
programs 

Possession of a currently valid and properly filed 
BCLAD certificate 

Possession of a currently valid and properly filed regular 
credential (clear, professional clear, or preliminary) 

Possession of a currently valid and properly filed CLAD 
or other valid certificate authorizing instruction to 
English Learners 

Possession of a currently valid and properly filed 
credential or supplemental subject authorization 
permitting instruction in math or science 

Possession of a currently valid and properly filed 
credential or supplemental subject authorization 

3 

 
7. 

 
8. 
 
9. 

 
10. 

 
11. 

 
12. 

permitting instruction in the designated subject area of 
industrial and technology education 

The certificated employee whose currently valid and 
properly filed regular credentials authorize a broader 
scope of service.  (This tie-breaker is to be repeated as 
applicable.) 

Possession of National Board Certification 

The certificated employee holding the highest current 
placement on the salary schedule.  (This tie-breaker is to 
be repeated as applicable.) 

The certificated employee who has taught in the most 
different grade levels while employed in the District not 
as a day-to-day substitute.  (This tie-breaker is to be 
repeated as applicable.) 

The certificated employee who has taught in the most 
different subject areas while employed in the District not 
as a day-to-day substitute.  (This tie-breaker is to be 
repeated as applicable.) 

If a tie still exists after application of criteria 1 to 11, the 
tie shall be broken by lot.  Numbers shall be drawn with 
the lowest number drawn winning the tie and continuing 
until all remaining tied individuals are ranked in order.  

  
The District’s employer-employee relations specialist, Laura Emily Frizzell,2 

8. 

9. 

Prior to the application of the tie-breaking criteria and the sending out of 

and a representative of the District’s teachers’ union applied the tie-breaking criteria to 
employees with the same seniority date.  Ties between teachers with the same seniority date 
were resolved via lottery, and rank order was determined.    
 
 
preliminary notices, the District requested teachers to verify their first date of paid service in 
a probationary or permanent position, credentials, and other requested information in order to 
prepare the District’s seniority list.  Employees with concerns about the accuracy of District 
information raised them on the form and met with Frizzell.  Frizzell conducted the District’s 
research, made changes in the system, and notified the employee of changes.  Following 
application of the tie-breaking criteria, the seniority list was created.   
 

                                                 

2 At the District, she goes by the name Emily Lopez Frizzell.  

 

4 

10. 

In Resolution No. 18/19-44 the Board identified a “direct and specific need” 

for certificated employees qualified to serve the needs of students with respect to the 
following: 

 

 
11. 

 
12. 

 
13. 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

Courses requiring Bilingual Cross-Cultural Language 
and Academic Development (BCLAD) certificates, 
which are highly specialized programs requiring the 
possession and utilization of additional specialized 
certificates and/or credentials. 
 
Bilingual School Counselors  
 
International Baccalaureate Training and Experience 
 
Adaptive Physical Education credential or supplementary 
authorization  

 
And in this resolution, the Board adopted the following competency criteria for this 

layoff:   
 

“Competency” for the purpose of Education Code section 44955 
shall be determined solely upon current possession of a 
preliminary or clear credential for the subject matter or grade 
level to which the employee will be assigned at the beginning of 
the 2019-2020 school year.  

Before issuing the preliminary layoff notices, the District took into account all 

positively assured attrition.   

Since issuing the preliminary layoff notices, the District reduced the number of 

noticed certificated employees based on being informed that four additional certificated 
employees will be retiring or resigning from the District.  (Finding 2.)  This reduces the 
reduction in services affected by this proceeding to 55.70 FTE. 

The District will take into account any additional attrition before issuing final 

layoff notices.  
 

14.   Kathleen Koch is a probationary 1 employee of the District with a seniority 

Classification of Kathleen Koch as a probationary teacher 
 
 
date of August 9, 2018.  For 2018-2019 school year, Koch held a 1.0 FTE position as a 
secondary school teacher.  Koch was assigned to teach work experience, cyber high, and 
physical education at Concord High School.  Koch received a preliminary layoff notice.   
 

 

 

5 

15.  Koch started her very lengthy career with the District in August 1974.  She 

 
retired from the District after the 2009-2010 school year in order to provide full-time care to 
her mother, and began to draw retirement benefits through the California State Teachers’ 
Retirement System.  When she retired, Koch did not understand and believes she was not 
told that in order to retain her permanent status with the District she would have to return to 
work full-time within 39 months of retirement.  (Ed. Code, § 44931.) 
 
16.  During her retirement, Koch worked as a temporary employee for the District 
 
teaching work experience at Concord High School.  Koch worked on a 0.40 FTE temporary 
contract each year from November 2010 through the 2017-2018 school year.  
 
 
District in the 2018-2019 school year.  Koch made the decision to un-retire after performing 
due diligence regarding consequences to, if any, past or future retirement income and social 
security, and confirming her employment status with the District.  Koch’s goal was to work 
two more years in order to increase her years of service with the District and thereby increase 
her retirement benefit.3  At that time, she made more money being retired, and working part-
time, than she would by working full-time and not drawing retirement and social security.  
 

17.  Koch rescinded her retirement and returned to full-time employment for the 

18. 

19.  On November 26, 2018, Oates notified Koch that the District had made a 

The District advised Koch that she would maintain her employee number, be 
paid at the top of the salary schedule, and most importantly to her, would be classified as a 
permanent employee.  According to Koch, being a permanent employee was the final piece 
for her decision to un-retire.  The District confirmed she would be classified as a permanent 
employee in a Certificate Personnel Assignment signed by Lisa Murphy Oates, Executive 
Director of Human Resources, on July 9, 2018.  
 
 
mistake in her classification.  Since more than 39 months had passed since she retired, by 
law, the District was required to classify her as a new probationary employee.   
 
 
20.  Had Koch known of the 39-month rule, she would have and could have 
unretired within that time frame.  Koch feels that she was misled by the District, and that she 
should be reclassified as permanent.   
 
Seniority of Katherine Koch 
 
 
Seniority List.  In addition to holding a clear career technical education teaching credential, 
Koch holds a life standard designated subjects teaching credential in public safety education; 
a life standard elementary teaching credential, in physical education (academic) and social 
science (sociology); and a life standard secondary education credential, physical education 
                                                 

21.  Koch’s seniority date is August 9, 2018, and she is ranked No. 201 on the 

3 Koch understood that her retirement benefit would increase by $1,100 per month for 

the remainder of her life, and that she would not have any pay back requirement for the 
retirement she had drawn.  

 

6 

(academic) and social science (sociology).  Koch also has a Cross-Cultural Language and 
Academic Development (CLAD) Certificate.  Koch testified that, and there is no evidence to 
the contrary, that she is credentialed and competent to be an elementary teacher for the 
District. 
 

22.  Koch has the same seniority date as elementary teacher Jennie Jenkins, who is 

placed higher than her on the seniority list at rank No. 191.  Jenkins was not issued a 
preliminary notice.   

 
Koch argues based on the tie-breaking criteria she should have had seniority over 

Jenkins.  Jenkins holds a clear Multiple Subject credential, a CLAD certificate, and a 
supplemental subject authorization to teach math.  The supplemental authorization to teach 
math is the fifth highest tie-breaking criteria, and is ranked higher than Koch’s subject 
authorizations.  The evidence does not establish that Koch’s placement on the seniority list 
was the result of an erroneous application of the tie-breaking criteria.   

 
23.  Koch has the same seniority date as elementary teachers Armita Marshall and 

Amanda Oscamou.  Marshall is No. 214 on the seniority list, Oscamou is ranked No. 215.  
Neither Marshall nor Oscamou was issued a preliminary layoff notice.   Marshall occupies a 
0.20 FTE position.  She holds a clear Multiple Subject credential and a CLAD Certificate.  
Oscamou occupies a 1.0 FTE position.  She holds a clear SB 2042 multiple subject teaching 
credential and a CLAD certificate.   

The undisputed evidence is that Koch is credentialed and competent to teach 

elementary school.  The undisputed evidence is that Koch is senior to Marshall and 
Oscamou, who are being retained.  The District is thus violating the seniority rules in 
noticing Koch while retaining teachers that are junior to her.  
 
Seniority dates of certificated employees hired for the 2018-2019 school year  
 

25.  A certificated employee’s seniority begins with the date he or she “first 

rendered paid service in a probationary position.”  (Ed. Code, § 44845.)    

Teachers new to the District were expected to attend a New Staff Orientation 

on August 9, 2018.  Sign-in sheets were circulated at the various workshops held that day.  It 
was considered by the District to be the first day of paid service, and is the seniority date of 
many District teachers, including Jenkins.   

Respondents’ argue that Jenkins was given an incorrect seniority date because 

she did not attend the New Staff Orientation.  As proof of her nonattendance, respondents 
rely on the sign-in sheets which were not signed by Jenkins.  That Jenkins did not sign-in, 
does not prove that she did not attend the training; she could have attended and not signed in.  
But even if Jenkins did not attend the New Staff Orientation, it does not mean that the 
District erred in assigning her an August 9, 2018 seniority date:  the District may well have 
approved Jenkins absence from this orientation.  

 
24. 

 
26. 

 
27. 

 

7 

Leslie Ellingson attended the New Staff Orientation on August 9, 2018, and 

that is her seniority date.  She does not claim any error associated her seniority date.  
Ellingson is an elementary teacher, and was given a layoff notice.  

Ellingson identified three other new teachers to the District, teachers that she 

did not see in attendance at the New Staff Orientation.   Each of the teachers Ellingson 
identifies were also given a lay-off notice.  Therefore, if there are errors in seniority dates, it 
impacts Ellingson’s rehire rights, something she cannot raise in this layoff proceeding.  As a 
point in fact, however, two of the teachers Ellingson identified as not attending the New Staff 
Orientation have been assigned a later seniority date of August 14, 2018.4   

 
28. 

 
29. 

 

Conclusion 
 
 
to be without merit and rejected.  
  

30.  All additional contentions made by respondents not addressed above are found 

31.  Other than Koch, no certificated employee junior to any respondent is being 
retained to perform services which any respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 

32. 

The reduction or discontinuance of services is related solely to the general 

welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.   
 
 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 
1. 

 

 
Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955.5  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were 
satisfied.  (Findings 4 & 5.) 
 

2. 

The services listed in the Board’s resolution (Finding 6) are the kind which 
may be reduced or discontinued in accordance with applicable statutes and case law.  (See 
Ed. Code § 44955; Campbell Elem. Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 
Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)  The decision to reduce or 
discontinue the services is neither arbitrary nor capricious but rather a proper exercise of the 
District’s discretion.   
 
Katherine Koch:  Classification  
 

3. 

Koch contends that the District improperly classified her as a probationary 

teacher for the 2018-2019 school year.  Because her break in service was more than 39 
                                                 

4 Respondents Rakel Cromwell and Paul Hassel. 
 
5 All further statutory citations are to the Education Code. 

 

8 

months, she does not retain her seniority rights.  (Ed. Code, § 44931; San Jose Teachers 
Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 614.)  Koch is required to complete two 
consecutive years in a position requiring certification qualifications in order to be classified 
as permanent the following year.  (Ed. Code, § 44929.21, subd. (b).)   

Koch contends that the District should be precluded from classifying her as 

probationary because it promised her orally, and in writing on Certificated Personnel 
Assignment, that she would be classified as a permanent employee of the District.  Teaching 
classifications are set by the Education Code, not the District.  While there is no question that 
Koch was misinformed by the District about her classification upon un-retiring, teacher 
classification is determined by law.  (Campbell v. Graham-Armstrong (1973) 9 Cal.3d 482, 
488; Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Assn. v. Bakersfield City School Dist. (2006) 145 
Cal.App.4th 1260.)  The District was acting in accordance with the requirements of the 
Education Code when it corrected the classification error and classified Koch as a 
probationary employee.  There is no legal basis for changing that classification in this 
proceeding.  
 
Katherine Koch:  Seniority  
 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides:  

 
4. 

5. 
 

Except as otherwise provided for by statute, the services of no 
permanent employee may be terminated under the provisions of 
this section while . . . any other employee with less seniority, is 
retained to render a service which said permanent employee is 
certificated and competent to render. 

 
The District must follow the requirements of this section in issuing its final notices to 
effectuate the reduction in elementary teaching services.  It is undisputed that Koch is senior 
to two other elementary teachers who did not receive a layoff notice.  It is undisputed that 
she is credentialed and competent to render this service.  Under these circumstances, Koch’s 
services to the District may not be terminated.  (Ibid.) 
 
New Teacher Orientation/Seniority Date Issues 
 
Respondents contend that the District failed to correctly set the seniority date 
 
of some of the new teachers hired for the 2018-2019 school year.  Seniority dates are based 
on the first day of paid service in a probationary position.  (Educ. Code, § 44845.)  The 
evidence failed to establish that the District improperly set seniority dates as claimed.   
 
Conclusion  
 

6. 

7. 

Cause exists because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of 
services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents, other than 
those identified in Finding 2 and Legal Conclusion 5, that their services will not be required 

 

9 

for the ensuing school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the 
pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.   
 
 

RECOMMENDATION  
 

1. 

 
2. 

By reason of the matters set forth in Finding 2 and Legal Conclusion 5, 

Except as provided above, notice may be given in reverse seniority order to 

 
respondents Kelly Duncan, Kathleen Koch, Juan Paez, Linda Ruiz, and Terri Shamroukh, are 
dismissed from this reduction in force proceeding.  These certificated employees must be 
retained for 2019-2020 school year.    
 
 
respondents occupying up to 55.70 full-time equivalent positions that their services will not 
be required for the 2019-2020 school year because of the reduction of particular kinds of 
services.   
 
 
 
DATED:  May 2, 2019 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
MELISSA G. CROWELL  
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

10 

Attachment A 

3/26/2019 1:45 PM 
RECEIVED BY OAH 

