BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE RANCHO SANTA FE SCHOOL DISTRICT  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force  
of Certain Certificated Employees of the 
Rancho Santa Fe School District 
Identified in Appendix A. 
 

 

 

 

 

    

     
    
     
 

 
 

OAH No. 2019030657 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Richa Amar and Stephanie Joseph, Attorneys at Law, California Teachers 

Richard J. Currier and Kendall C. Swanson, Attorneys at Law, Currier & Hudson, 

Abraham M. Levy, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
State of California, heard this matter in Rancho San Diego, California, on April 4, 2019. 
 
 
APC, represented Rancho Santa Fe School (“District”).   
 
 
Association, represented respondents Julie Green, Allison Munson, Elena Colvin and Andrea 
Grillot.  
 
 
The remaining respondents identified in the attached Appendix A either did not 
request hearings, elected to not participate in this hearing, or withdrew their election to 
participate.  
 
 
briefs.  Both parties submitted briefs, which have been made part of the hearing record.  The 
matter was submitted on April 26, 2019. 
 
 

The record was left open until April 26, 2019, to allow the parties to submit closing 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Jurisdiction  
 

1. 

On February 25, 2019, the Governing Board of the Rancho Santa Fe School 
District (Board) approved the “Resolution Reducing or Discontinuing Particular Kinds of 
Services for the 2019-2020 School Year Implementing Education Code Section 44955.”  The 
resolution directed the District Superintendent to initiate layoff procedures and give 
appropriate notices under the Education Code to certificated employees.  This resolution 
stated that “no permanent employee will be terminated while any probationary employee, or 

any other employee with less seniority, is retained to render service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.”   

 
The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a matter reserved to 
the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this proceeding.  (Rutherford 
v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-
179.)  A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not be 
fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal. 
App. 3d 627, 637.)    

The Governing Board determined that it will be necessary to reduce or 

discontinue, by 13.45 FTE, the following services beginning the 2019-2020 school year:  

 
2. 

 

PKS 
Literacy Support Teacher 
Literacy Support Teacher 
Literacy Support Teacher 
Literacy Support Teacher 
Literacy Support Teacher 
Literacy Support Teacher 
K-5 Literacy Coach    
K-5 Math Coach      
Media Center Specialist 
K-5 Art Teacher     
K-5 Classroom Teacher     
3-5 Science Teacher    
1-5 Computer Science Teacher   
Physical Education Teacher   
Middle School Earth Science Teacher   
Middle School English Language Arts   
Middle School Dance Teacher 

FTE 
  .52   

             .52 
 .52 
.68 
.68 
.68 
1 
1  
1 
.5 
3 
.5 
.35 
.65 
1 
.5 
.35 

 
To determine which certificated employees, for tie breaking purposes, would be laid 

off the Board approved on February 25, 2019, “Resolution on Criteria to Determine the 
Order of Termination as Between Certificated Employees Who First Rendered Paid Service 
on the Same Date Implementing Education Code Section 44955, subdivision (b).  The 
District did not apply these criteria.  The District also did not adopt competency standards 
that would allow it to “skip” any of the respondents.   
 

Based on the Board’s direction to reduce full time certificated employee 
positions, on February 27, 2019 Donna Tripi, Superintendent, Rancho Santa Fe School 
District, in her official capacity, utilizing a Credential and Seniority List of 
Permanent/Probationary certificated employees (seniority list) from February 8, 2019, 

 
3. 

 

2

recommended to the Board that 17 certificated employees be given notices that their services 
would not be required for the 2019-2020 school year.1    

 
4. 

 
5. 

The District timely served these employees with preliminary layoff notices 

pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.  All respondents were properly 
noticed of the date, time and location of the April 4, 2019, hearing.  

 
Ten of these respondents timely filed Requests for Hearing with the District and the 
District in turn provided each of these employees with Notice of the District’s Statement of 
Reduction in Force, including a copy of the District’s Statement of Reduction in Force, 
relevant Government Code sections, Notice of Hearing, and Notice Participation form.  The 
District advised each respondent that failure to request a hearing would waive their right to a 
hearing and they would not be able to contest the District’s recommendation that their 
positions be reduced or eliminated.  (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b).)   

 
Six respondents timely filed Notices of Participation.  Two withdrew their Notices of 
Participation, including Brenda Carlson, who holds a .68 FTE position as a Literacy Support 
Teacher.  The following four employees participated in this hearing and testified:  Elena 
Colvin, Julie Green, Andrea Grillot, and Allison Munson.  

 
The District met all prehearing jurisdictional requirements.   
 

Testimony of Superintendent Tripi  

Ms. Tripi testified that the reductions are necessary because of declining 

enrollment in the elementary school and that the District is not reducing services that it is 
required to provide.  Regarding the science teacher reduction specifically, Ms. Tripi stated 
that all elementary school teachers can teach science at the elementary school level because 
elementary school science is not a “departmentalized” position that would prevent a senior 
teacher whose position is discontinued to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is 
certificated and competent to fill.   

 
In a PowerPoint presentation she gave to teachers on March 14, 2019, entitled 
“Realign and Reset,” Ms. Tripi explained the District’s plans for the 2019-2020 school year 
in light of “declining enrollment” and “rising costs.”  With reference to science instruction 
specifically, Ms. Tripi described the plan for science instruction for the 2019-2020 school 
year as follows:  “Plan to continue with a specialist at the lower grades, look at team model 
at upper elementary.”   

 
Ms. Tripi testified that that the District released all temporary teachers and took into 

account all positively assured attrition when it issued preliminary layoff notices.  In 
determining the actual number of layoff notices to be delivered to its employees the District 
                                                

1 Appendix A identifies 16 of these employees.  As found in this decision, the 

preliminary notice of layoff issued to Ms. Colvin is rescinded.   

 

3

properly considered all known attrition, resignations, and retirements.  (San Jose Teachers 
Association v. Allen, supra.) 

 
Ms. Tripi further stated that the District did not “over-notice” teachers for layoffs.  
She testified that the District reassigned an administrator back to the classroom which the 
District argued in its closing brief caused another teacher to receive a layoff notice.  In their 
closing brief, respondents disputed this contention but did not point to anything in the record 
to counter it.   
 

Testimony and Arguments of Teachers 
 
 

  

ELENA COLVIN  
 
6.  

Elena Colvin holds a Single Subject - Biological Science credential and is a 

part-time permanent employee with a .40 FTE assignment.  Ms. Colvin testified that she 
teaches 11 K-3 science classes a week, 19 periods a week, and she loves her work as a 
teacher.   

 
Ms. Colvin does not understand why she is being laid off and she asks that the 
proposed notice be rescinded.  She has worked at the District since August 23, 2005, and she 
would be willing to work full time next year if given that option.  Ms. Colvin disagreed that 
she is less senior than other employees who are full-time employees.  She also disagreed with 
Ms. Tripi’s testimony that science instruction in elementary school is not “departmentalized” 
and that to teach science at the elementary school level it is not necessary for a teacher to 
have a science credential.   

 
7. 

In her Closing Brief Ms. Colvin asserts that the district improperly issued a 

layoff notice to her, and the district did not meet its burden to show the reduction was 
authorized and justified.  More specifically, Ms. Colvin made the following arguments:  first, 
the district is not proposing to eliminate her specifically itemized .4 FTE Science Teaching 
position; the board is proposing to eliminate a .5 FTE Science Teaching position.  Also, the 
district is not “really” eliminating the position, and the science teaching position requires a 
credentialed science teacher per the District’s plan as detailed in Ms. Tripi’s March 14, 2019, 
PowerPoint presentation.    
 
 
and justified because a more senior part time employee, Brenda Carlson, is “bumping” Ms. 
Colvin.  In the resolution, Ms. Carlson’s .68 FTE Literacy Support Position is identified for 
elimination.  Ms. Carlson’s hire date is August 25, 2000, and she holds a Multi-Subject 
Teaching Credential.  If the layoff notice to Ms. Colvin is affirmed, the District states that 
Ms. Carlson will be given the opportunity to “bump” into Ms. Colvin’s .4 FTE position as 
she has the seniority and competency to do so.  The District noted in its argument that if the 
proposal to layoff Ms. Colvin is not affirmed, Ms. Carlson will be released.   
 

In its Reply Brief, the District argues that its layoff notice to Ms. Colvin is authorized 

 

4

The District argues further that, per Ms. Tripi’s testimony, because District 
 
elementary school students will continue to have science instruction the District “was not 
required to list this position on the Governing Board’s PKS Resolution because it is not 
being reduced or discontinued.”  This statement made no sense because the resolution 
identified a .5 FTE 3-5 Science Teaching Position for elimination, which, presumably, could 
encompass the .4 FTE Science Teaching Position held by Ms. Colvin.   
 

Additionally, the District disputes Ms. Colvin’s contention that science instruction is 

“departmentalized.”  The District asserts that “the Administrator’s Assignment Manual” does 
not support her “departmentalization” position because it does not require a credentialed 
science teacher for instruction in the elementary school setting.  Further, the District argued 
that it did not adopt a competency standard that would allow it to “skip” Ms. Colvin.   

 
8. 

After considering the parties’ arguments, it is found that the District failed to 

show that its proposed layoff notice to Ms. Colvin was justified.   

 
Although the District correctly notes that its Administrator’s Assignment Manual did 
not require a credentialed science teacher for instruction in the elementary school setting, the 
District elected for many years to have Ms. Colvin, who holds a single subject science 
credential, teach elementary school science.  The District did not have a teacher without a 
single subject science credential teach science.  For the 2019-2020 school year the District 
plans to “continue with a specialist” to teach science.2  The evidence established that Ms. 
Colvin is a “specialist” who can teach science.  The District did not explain how Ms. Carlson 
qualified as a “specialist” to justify “bumping” Ms. Colvin, and Ms. Carlson, as noted, did 
not participate in this hearing.  The District’s arguments that it did not adopt a competency 
standard to allow it to skip Ms. Carlson is not persuasive.  It is also not necessary to address 
the “departmentalized” argument given the “specialist” finding. 

 
ANDREA GRILLOT 
 
9. 

Andrea Grillot is a Literacy Support Teacher, has worked at the District since 

August 31, 2009, and is a permanent .52 FTE.  Ms. Grillot holds a Multiple Subject 
Credential - General and Single Subject English credential.  Ms. Grillot testified that she has 
worked as a full-time teacher for the District in the past.  As documented in a letter she wrote 
to the District Superintendent dated May 14, 2013, she elected to resign 50 percent of her 
position.  Ms. Grillot disagreed that she should be laid off because she is not a full-time 
employee.  She stated that, as a matter of fairness and due process, had she been told that she 
could lose her position with the District she would have elected to work full time.   

 
Ms. Grillot seeks to “bump” into a full-time position and cites Hildebrandt v. St. 

Helena School District, 172 Cal. App. 4th 334 (2009) and Ferner v. Harris (1975) 45 
                                                

2 At the hearing Ms. Tripi was given the opportunity to explain what she meant by 

“specialist” as referenced in her PowerPoint presentation.  Ms. Tripi did not explain what she 
meant or why Ms. Colvin was not considered a “specialist.”     

 

5

Cal.App.3d 363 in support of her position.  Neither case, however, stands for the proposition 
that a part time teacher may bump a junior full-time teacher.   

 
In Hilldebrandt, the court addressed whether two-part time psychologists could 
require the school district to split the single full-time position held by a junior psychologist.  
(Id. at 343-344.)  That court noted that it was not deciding whether either part time 
psychologist was entitled to the full-time psychologist position for the simple reason that that 
issue was not before the court.  (Id. at 345.)  After hearing evidence regarding the school’s 
“programmatic” need to have a full-time psychologist, the court concluded that the District 
was not required, “in effect,” to split the full-time psychologist position into two-part time 
positions.  (Ibid. at 345-346.)  In its analysis, the court emphasized that a district has broad 
discretion to define a service in terms of the hours required to perform the service.  (Id.)  

 
The court’s decision in Ferner also does not advance Ms. Grillot’s argument.  In 

Ferner, a community college teacher held a full-time position and his position was reduced.  
After a full-time position opened, he sought reemployment to his pre-layoff full time status 
under his right of reemployment and the court found that he was entitled to reemployment 
based on his full-time pre-layoff status.  (Ferner, supra, 45 Cal.App.3d at 369-370.)  The 
facts involving the teacher in Ferner are distinguishable from Ms. Grillot’s situation.  Unlike 
the community college teacher in Ferner, Ms. Grillot cannot claim her pre-layoff status was 
as a full-time teacher.   

 
In its Reply Brief, the District argues that Ms. Grillot is not entitled to “bump” a 
junior teacher.  In support of its position, the District principally relies upon Waldron v. 
Sulphur Springs Union School Dist. (1979) 96 Cal. App.3d 503.  That case involved a part 
time teacher with a .4 assignment.  After a hearing, she was reemployed in a .2 service status.  
On her petition for a writ of mandate, the trial court ordered her employed full-time with the 
next vacancy.  (Id. at pp. 504-505.)  The court of appeal reversed and in so doing found that 
the teacher subject to layoff was entitled to “the same employment rights that she would have 
had if no layoff had intervened, but to no greater rights.”  (Ibid. at p. 505.)  Accordingly, the 
teacher was entitled to her .4 pre-layoff assignment but not to a full-time position.  

 
10. 

Consistent with these decisions, Ms. Grillot is not entitled to “bump” a junior 

full-time teacher; her argument to the contrary is not accepted.3  Ms. Grillot’s rights under 

                                                

3 The decision in Murray v. Sonoma County Office of Education (1989) 208 
Cal.App.3d 456 is also instructive on the issue of a part-time employee’s right to a “bump” a 
junior employee.  That court concluded that a school nurse who held a .60 FTE position was 
not entitled to reinstatement to a .16 FTE position held by a full-time nurse for one day of 
work at the school where the appellant nurse had worked.  The court found that the .16 FTE 
as a “service” was one day of nursing per week, the Office of Education could use this 
“service” as it “saw fit,” and the nurse was entitled to “the same” employment rights prior to 
the layoff but not “‘greater rights.’”  (Id. at pp. 460-461, citing Waldron v. Sulphur Springs 
Union School Dist., supra, at p. 505, emphasis not included.) 

 

6

Section 44955 apply only to the .52 FTE position she holds and not to a full-time FTE 
position.   

 
ALLISON MUNSON  
 
11.  Allison Munson holds a Multiple Subject - General credential and holds a 

permanent 1 FTE assignment.  She has worked at the District since August 19, 2015.  She is 
a K-5 reading intervention teacher.  Ms. Munson was assigned this position after she returned 
from maternity leave.  She previously was a second-grade teacher.  Ms. Munson requested 
this hearing for assurance that the District is following the law regarding its proposed layoffs.   

 
In her Closing Brief, Ms. Munson asserts that only five of the six K-5 teachers should 

have received preliminary layoff notices and the notice to her should be rescinded.  The 
District responded that Ms. Munson’s position is incorrect and per Ms. Tripi’s testimony the 
District did not over-notice one teacher.   

 
Ms. Munson’s assertion here is not accepted.  Ms. Tripi testified that the District 

reassigned an administrator to the classroom which caused a classroom teacher to receive a 
preliminary layoff notice.  Accordingly, the District did not over-notice K-5 teachers by one 
notice.   
 
JULIE GREEN  
 
12. 

Julie Green is a full-time education specialist and teaches physical education.  
She holds a Single Subject Physical Education credential.  The District is proposing reducing 
her services from a 1 FTE assignment to a .35 FTE assignment and she wants to remain at a 
1 FTE assignment.  This action would, in effect, eliminate her as a District employee because 
she needs full-time employment.  Ms. Green has 21 years of experience as a physical 
education teacher and wants the opportunity to be able to retire from the District.  

 
Ms. Green challenges her proposed layoff because the District failed to provide 

sufficient evidence that the Board understood that when it approved the reduction of 
“Physical Education,” it was also approving the reduction of “Health, Fitness, and Nutrition.”  
Ms. Green characterized the “Heath, Fitness, and Nutrition” class as an “elective.”  The 
District disputed Ms. Green’s contention that “Health, Fitness, and Nutrition” is an elective 
class.  Ms. Tripi testified that it is a required class that students must take to fulfil their 
required physical education minutes required by the Education Code.   

 
Ms. Green’s argument is not persuasive.  Courts have allowed school districts leeway 

in describing the particular kinds of services being reduced.  (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. 
Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d at p. 638 [holding that “‘classroom teaching’” is a particular 
kind of service at the elementary level which is subject to PKS reduction].)  In this case, 
“Physical Education” is included in the “Heath, Fitness, and Nutrition” service and the Board 
is deemed to have understood this in its resolution when it identified “Physical Education” 
for reduction by .65 FTE.   

 

7

Other Matters 
 
13.   During their testimony the teachers expressed sincere concerns regarding the 
District’s budgetary decisions in light of the District’s reserve funds.  As noted, the Board’s 
decision regarding the budget and its allocation are properly within its discretion.   

 
14.     The evidence of record shows that no permanent employee will be terminated 

while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to 
render service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to render. 

   
15.  No evidence was presented that the layoffs will reduce any of the District’s 

 
offerings in Education Code mandated courses.         

 
 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

2. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections have been 
provided as required. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178.)   
 
 
The district has identified the certificated employees who are providing the 
particular kinds of services that the board directed be reduced or discontinued.  Because of 
the reduction of particular kinds of services, except for Elena Colvin, cause exists pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2019-2020 school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.     
 
Cause Does Not Exist to Affirm the Preliminary Layoff Notice Issued to Elena Colvin 
 

  
3. 

4. 

Cause does not exist to affirm the preliminary layoff notice issued to Elena 

Colvin under Section 44955, subdivision (b).  The evidence established that the District plans 
to have a specialist teach science and Ms. Colvin is certificated and competent to teach 
science as this specialist.  No evidence established that a more senior employee was 
competent to teach science given the District’s “specialist” designation.   
 
 
 
// 

 

 

8

Cause Exists to Reduce or Eliminate Particular Kinds of Services 
 

5. 

Cause exists to reduce or eliminate 13.45 FTE of particular kinds of services 

and to give notice to the remaining respondents that their services will be reduced or will not 
be required for the 2019-2020 school year because of the reduction or elimination of 
particular kinds of services.  The services of no permanent employee shall be terminated 
while any other employee with less seniority is retained to render a service the permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render.  
 
 

ORDER  

1. 

The preliminary layoff notice issued to Elena Colvin is rescinded.  The 

District’s Statement of Reduction in Force against Ms. Colvin is dismissed.   
 

2. 

According to, and within the limits of, the Resolution identifying PKS for 

reduction or elimination by Full Time Equivalents, notices may be given to the remaining 
respondents identified in Appendix A that their services will be reduced or will not be 
required for the 2019-2020 school year.   

 
 
 

DATED: May 2, 2019 
 
 
 
                                                                     ___________________ 
ABRAHAM M. LEVY 
                               
Administrative Law Judge 
 
 
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9

Appendix A 
 

1. 
HALEY CAMERON 
2. 
BRENDA CARLSON 
3. 
REBECCA CARP 
4. 
JAMIE FONTAINE 
5. 
MIRANDA FORD 
6. 
NICOLE GERBARG 
7. 
APRIL GOODSPEED 
8. 
JULIE GREEN 
9. 
ANDREA GRILLOT 
10.  KIMBERLEY KORNMANN 
11.  ALEXANDRA KURN 
12.  KIMBERLIE McCOWAN 
13.  ALLISON MUNSON 
14. 
CAITLIN RHODES 
15.  ANNELIESE ROBERTS 
16.  KARINA SALMON 

 

10

