BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of  
Certain Certificated Employees of San Diego 
Unified School District, identified on  
Exhibit “A.” 
 

 
 
OAH No. 2019040577 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 

Patrick D. Frost, Assistant General Counsel II, Legal Services, represented the San 

Administrative Law Judge Vallera J. Johnson, State of California, Office of 

 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter in San Diego, California, on April 19, 2019. 
 
 
Diego Unified School District. 
 
 
respondents identified in Exhibit “A.”   
 
 
 
 

Fern M. Steiner, Attorney at Law, Smith, Steiner & Vanderpool, represented 

The matter was submitted on April 19, 2019. 

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 
 
 
The Governing Board of the San Diego Unified School District determined (it 
needed) to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services provided by teachers for 
budgetary reasons.  The decision was not related to the competency or dedication of the 
individuals whose services are proposed to be reduced or eliminated.   
 

The San Diego Unified School District (District) staff carried out the Governing 

Board’s decision by using a selection process involving review of credentials and seniority 
and “bumping.”  The selection process was in accordance with the requirements of the 
Education Code.  

 
 

 
 
On March 5, 2019, because of the financial constraints resulting from revenue 
being insufficient to maintain the current levels of programs and necessary program changes 

1. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

resulting therefrom, the Governing Board of the San Diego Unified School District 
determined to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services for the 2019-2020 school year.  
According to the Resolution, the Governing Board determined that it was “in the best 
interests of the District, and the welfare of the students thereof, to reduce or discontinue 
certain particular kinds of services hereinafter enumerated.” 
 

In the Resolution, the Governing Board directed the Superintendent to send timely 

and appropriate notices to all employees affected by the reduction and elimination of 
particular kinds of services (PKS). 
 
 
Full Time Equivalent (FTE) for a total of 97 FTEs and 37 noticed employees. 
 

The Resolution identified the following PKS for reduction or elimination by 

2. 

Total FTE in PKS Layoff 
Group 
2.00 
12.00 

Number of Notices 

PKS Area 

Business Education 
Child Development 
Computer Concepts and 
Applications 
Foreign Language: French 
Foreign Language: Japanese 
Foreign Language: Spanish 
General 
Subjects/Elementary 
Social Science 
Central Office 
Administrators 
TOTAL 

2 
11 

1 

1 
0 
4 

2 

4 

12 

37 

 
 
Because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services, it was 
necessary to terminate certificated employees equal in number to the positions affected in the 
reduction or elimination of the particular kinds of services. 
 

3. 

On March 6, 2019, Acacia Thede, Chief Human Resources Officer, sent 

preliminary layoff notices to the certificated employees identified for layoff.  A copy of the 
Resolution, relevant sections of the Education Code and information concerning the right to 
request a hearing were enclosed with the preliminary layoff notices. 
 
 
Little, Jennifer Pickering, Ronald Runyan and Patricia Tigli) each requested a hearing. 
 
 
 

In response to the preliminary notices, four certificated employees (Michael 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were satisfied. 

5. 

4. 

4.00 

1.00 
1.00 
6.00 

59.00 

8.00 

4.00 

97.00 

2

 

 

6. 

7. 

The Governing Board considered and continues to consider all known 

On April 17, 2019, the Chief Human Resources Officer notified respondent 
 
Little to disregard his layoff notice and that he would not receive a final layoff notice.  In 
addition, on April 18, 2018, respondents Runyan and Tigli withdrew their requests for 
hearing.  The remaining was respondent Pickering. 
 
 
attrition, including deaths, resignations, retirements and other permanent vacancies, in 
determining the actual number of final layoff notices to be delivered to its certificated 
employees.   
 
 
8. 
 
implementing the technical aspects of the layoff.  She developed a seniority list for 
permanent certificated staff that included, among other matters, the name of the certificated 
employee, job title, current site/department, employee class, seniority date, FTE, pay status, 
and credentials. 
 

Erin Houston, the District’s Director of Human Resources, was responsible for 

The seniority date was based on the first date of paid service rendered.1  A teacher 

hired as a probationary employee who worked as a substitute or temporary employee for at 
least 75 percent of the school days during the previous year and performed the duties 
normally required of a certificated employee of the school district, was deemed to have 
served a complete school year as a probationary employee if employed as a probationary 
employee for the following school year.  The teacher was entitled to have that earlier year 
counted as a year of probationary service.  The prior year was “tacked” on for seniority 
purposes,2 but only one year could be tacked on.  

 
Ms. Houston used the seniority list to develop a proposed order of layoff to determine 

 
the least senior employees currently assigned to provide the service being reduced.  Then, 
she determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in another area that 
would entitle them to “bump” other junior employees.  In determining who would be laid off 
for the service reduced, Ms. Houston counted the number of reductions and determined the 
impact on incumbent staff in inverse order of seniority.  After this, she checked the 
credentials of each affected individual and determined whether he/she could “bump” another 
employee.   
 
 
of termination of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the Governing 
Board in a probationary position on the same date.  In this case, it was not necessary to apply 
the criteria. 
 

The Governing Board established specific criteria to be used in determining the order 

1 (Education Code §44845.).  Hereinafter, all reference is to the Education Code 

                                                 

unless otherwise stated. 
 

2 Code section 44918. 

3

 

 

9. 

Respondent Pickering’s seniority date is August 30, 2001.  She holds a 

During the 2018-2019 school year, respondent Pickering was assigned to San Diego 

 
Business Education credential which authorizes her to teach business education.   
 
 
High School, a complex composed of the following three schools:  Business and Leadership, 
SciTech and the School of International Studies.  Respondent Pickering taught two sections 
of Business Law and three sections of AVID in the Business and Leadership School.  During 
the 2018-2019 school year, it was her understanding that the classes that she was teaching 
would be taught during the 2019-2020 school year; in addition, during the 2018-2019 school 
year, two temporary teachers taught classes in the Business and Leadership School who did 
not hold a Business Education credential.  She was concerned that a temporary teacher would 
be allowed to teach her classes while she was laid off.  However, after hearing Ms. 
Houston’s testimony, respondent Pickering understood that she would be recalled prior to a 
temporary teacher, even for a temporary position. 
 
 
The Governing Board elected to exempt certain certificated employees from 
the order of certified layoff because of special training, experience or credentials that others 
with more seniority do not possess.  According to the Resolution, relevant to this proceeding, 
are “certification qualifications (including appropriate authorizations such as the English 
Learner Authorization or Autism Authorization).  In no event may a more senior employee 
displace a less senior employee unless the more senior employee is both competent and 
credentialed for the entire assignment of the less senior employee.” 
 

10. 

11. 

The services that the Governing Board proposed to reduce were “particular 

12. 

The Governing Board’s reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of 

kinds of services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955.  The Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular 
kinds of services was not arbitrary or capricious but constituted a proper exercise of 
discretion.  
 
 
services related to the welfare of the District and its pupils.  The reduction or discontinuance 
of particular kinds of services was necessary to decrease the number of certificated 
employees of the District as determined by the Governing Board.  
 
 
mandated by state or federal statute or regulations. 
 
 

There was no evidence that the District proposes to eliminate any services 

13. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 

 
 
44955.  All notices and jurisdictional requirements contained in these sections are satisfied. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

2. 

4

 

 

thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford vs. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)  
 
 
Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the San 
Diego Unified School District to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services.  The 
cause for the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services is related solely to 
the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof.  
 

3. 

4. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
continuing position that he/she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior 
employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Poppers 
v. Tamalpais Union High School Dist. (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399, 405.) 
 
 
perform a service that she is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 

No employee with less seniority than respondent Pickering is being retained to 

5. 

ORDER 
 

1. 

The layoff notice issued to Michael Little is rescinded.  The Preliminary 

Notice of Recommendation that Certificated Services Will Not Be Required and Statement 
of Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of Services against Michael Little is 
dismissed. 
 

2. 

Except as provided in paragraph one of this Order, the Preliminary Notice of 

Recommendation that Certificated Services Will Not Be Required and Statement of 
Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of Services against Jennifer Pickering is 
sustained.  The San Diego Unified School District shall give notice to Jennifer Pickering on 
or before May 15, 2018, that her service will not be required for the 2019-2020 school year 
because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 26, 2019 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 

_______________________________________ 
VALLERA J. JOHNSON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

5

