 

 
 

 
 

 

BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
COACHELLA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of  
Certain Certificated Employees of Coachella 
Valley Unified School District. 
 
 

 
 
OAH No. 2019030673 

Margaret A. Chidester and Leslie J. Kim, Attorneys at Law, Law Offices of Margaret 

PROPOSED DECISION 
 
 
Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in Thermal, California, on April 8, 2019. 
 
 
A. Chidester & Associates, represented the Coachella Valley Unified School District. 
 
 
respondents identified in Appendix 1, attached hereto.   
 
 
Larios, Edward McLachlan, Yvette Ossinalde, Anna Rodriguez, and Sarit Saig.1  Mr. 
Vanderpool did not represent these seven individuals.   
 

There was no appearance by or on behalf of Ricky Anderson, Mia Frimtzis, Patricia 

Jon Y. Vanderpool, Attorney at Law, Smith, Steiner, Vanderpool & Wax, represented 

The matter was submitted on April 8, 2019.   

The district rescinded the layoff notices issued to Kenneth Draper, Rachel Flores, 
Jennifer Floryan, Marisa Gaytan, Rebecca Kay, Courtney KorenKiewicz, Jean Christina 
Martinez, Greg Nishimoto, Lisa Presley, Margaret Quigley, Judith Rodenbeck, and Alicia 
Serrano.  The reduction in forces filed against these individuals are dismissed.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 

1 Mr. Anderson resigned from the district.  Dr. Frimtzis withdrew her Request for 
Hearing prior to this hearing.  Despite being properly served, Ms. Larios, Dr. McLachlan, 
Ms. Ossinalde, Ms. Rodriguez, and Mr. Saig did not file requests for hearing and the matter 
proceeded as a default pursuant to Government Code section 11520 as to these five 
individuals. 

 

 

 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

      
2. 

 
3. 

1. 

On March 7, 2019, the Board of Education adopted Resolution Number 2019-
#37, reducing particular kinds of certificated services and directing the Superintendent or his 
designee to give appropriate notices to certificated employees whose positions would be 
affected by the reduction.  The resolution called for the reduction or discontinuation of 46 
full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.  The resolution referenced Exhibit “A,” which noted 
those positions that would be exempt from layoff (skipped), and Exhibit “B,” which 
established the tie-breaking criteria for employees who first rendered paid probationary 
service to the district on the same date. 

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a matter 

reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this proceeding.  
(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 
167.)  A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not be 
fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious.  (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal. 
App. 3d 627, 637.)      

Maria Gandera, Ed.D., Assistant Superintendent Human Resources and Risk 

Management, Coachella Valley Unified School District, testified in this proceeding.  She 
explained that financial considerations were the primary rationale behind the district’s layoff 
decision including a decline in average daily attendance of approximately 300 students per 
year for the last several years and deficit spending.  Dr. Gandera testified about the January 
14, 2019, letter the district received from the Riverside County Office of Education (RCOE) 
advising it that after RCOE reviewed the district’s First Interim Financial Report for the 
period ending October 31, 2018, RCOE “made a qualified certification that the district may 
not be able to meet its financial obligations for the current and two subsequent fiscal years.  
A qualified financial certification may be considered a material event requiring disclosure to 
bondholders.”  (Emphasis included.)  The RCOE letter identified the district information it 
had analyzed to reach that conclusion and highlighted “several areas of concern” it had with 
the district’s interim financial report.  Dr. Gandera explained that a “qualified” status could 
have negative consequences, including the district entering receivership.  Dr. Gandera 
testified that another factor used in the layoff determination was the decline in the number of 
students enrolled in physics due to the increased popularity of anatomy classes offered as 
part of the Health Academy which prepares students to become emergency medical 
technicians.   
 
4. 

 
layoff those employees with “special training, experience, or credentials that others with 
more seniority do not possess” who were (1) certificated personnel who possess 
administrative credentials who are currently assigned to administrative positions and who 
will be assigned to administrative positions for the 2019-2020 school year; (2) certificated 
personnel who possess a credential authorizing service in the following special education job 
descriptions all except mild moderate [sic] who are presently assigned within the scope of 
that credential and who will be assigned within the scope of that credential for the 2019-2020 

Exhibit A of the resolution exempted (skipped) from the order of certificated 

2

 

 

school year; and (3) dual immersion teachers who possess a valid Bilingual Cross-Cultural 
Language and Academic Development Authorization (BCLAD), Bilingual Certificate of 
Competence, or Bilingual Authorization in Spanish, who are presently assigned to teach dual 
immersion instruction, and who will be assigned to teach in a district dual immersion 
program in 2019-2020.    
 

5. 

The seminal case for the retention of less senior employees (skipping), Bledsoe 

6. 

Dr. Gandera explained the district’s rationale for skipping dual immersion 

v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, requires a district to not only 
establish a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study, but to also 
establish that the certificated employee it proposes to retain has special training and 
experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services.   
(Id. at p.138.)   
 
 
employees.  She described the district’s dual immersion program which results in students 
being bilingual and biliterate in both English and Spanish by the time they graduate.  Dr. 
Gandera’s testimony established that there was a specific need for these employees to teach 
the specific courses of study and that they possessed the special training and experience 
necessary to provide these services.  Although she did not testify about the district’s rationale 
for skipping administrators or special education teachers, no evidence established that the 
district’s skip of these two positions was arbitrary or capricious.  The evidence also did not 
demonstrate that any administrators identified for layoff had been improperly identified.   

Consistent with the board’s resolution, Dr. Gandera identified those teachers 
subject to layoff using the district’s seniority list of probationary or permanent certificated 
staff that included, among other matters, the name of the certificated employee, seniority 
date, status, assignment, credential(s) and authorization(s).  The seniority date was based on 
the first date of paid service rendered.2  Dr. Gandera used the seniority list to develop a 
proposed order of layoff to determine the least senior employees currently assigned to 
provide the service being reduced.  Dr. Gandera also determined whether any administrators 
could have their seniority dates adjusted because of prior service in the district as a school 
site administrator or teacher pursuant to Education Code section 44956.5.  At this hearing Dr. 
Gandera illustrated how she conducted her analysis, specifically referencing the seniority list. 

Dr. Gandera also determined whether the employees identified for layoff held 
any other credentials that would entitle them to “bump” into a position being held by a junior 
employee.  A senior employee whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a 
continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the 
senior employee is entitled to displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 
position.  (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.)  No 
evidence was introduced that the district improperly “bumped” any employees.   

 
7. 

 
8. 

 

                                                 

2 Education Code section 44845. 

3

 

 
 

 

9. 

Exhibit B of the district’s resolution established criteria for resolving ties in 
seniority pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), for those employees 
who share the same seniority dates.  There were 12 criteria identified to be used to break ties.  

 
10.  Dr. Gandera testified that the district’s tie-breaking criteria was used in 

 
making layoff decisions, including criteria L, which called for breaking the tie by use of a 
lottery which Dr. Gandera testified was a bingo game.  Exhibit 15 documented that the tie 
existing between respondent Blume and respondent De La Cruz was decided by lottery and 
Ms. Blume prevailed.  Dr. Gandera acknowledged that if certain respondents had their 
BCLAD or other credentials, they could have “bumped” into other positions thereby 
avoiding layoff.  She acknowledged that if individuals complete the BCLAD, are eligible to 
teach a dual immersion class, and there is an opening, they might be hired by the district for 
the dual immersion program in the future.   

 
11.  On March 22, 2019, Dr. Gandera, in her official capacity, sent Statements of 
Reduction in Force to 59 employees advising them that their services would not be required 
for the 2019-2020 school year.  The reasons for the recommendation were set forth in the 
notice.  On March 25, 2019, the district identified all respondents who requested a hearing in 
its jurisdictional documents.  Dr. Gandera explained that although the resolution sought the 
reduction of 46 FTEs, 59 employees were noticed out of an abundance of caution in the 
event the district’s determinations were not upheld and some of the notices were rescinded, 
as noted above, prior to the hearing.   

  
12. 

employee of the district.   

Respondents are identified in Appendix 1.  Each respondent is a certificated 

 
13.  All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 
 
14. 

The services identified in Resolution 2019-#37 are particular kinds of services 

that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955.  
The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue those services was neither arbitrary nor 
capricious.  It was a proper exercise of the board’s discretion.  The reduction and 
discontinuation of services was related to the welfare of the district and its pupils, and it 
became necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the 
board.  No particular kinds of services were lowered to levels less than those levels mandated 
by state or federal law.     
 
 
layoff decisions and will be used in making future rehire decisions.  She explained that after 
considering attrition, and those employees who did not request a hearing, the district 
proposed to reduce or eliminate 34 FTE positions.  
  

15.  Dr. Gandera testified that positively assured attrition was considered in the 

16.  With the exception of the employees being exempted (skipped) by Exhibit A 

of the resolution, no less senior teachers are being retained while more senior teachers 

4

 

 

17. 

18.  Dr. Gandera testified about the decrease in student enrollment in physics at the 

Respondent Fred von Preissig Ph.D., has been a physics teacher in the district 

credentialed to perform the same service are being laid off.  Dr. Gandera also noted that 
assignments for next year have not yet been determined.   
 
Physics Teacher Issue 
 
 
since 2011.  He is the chairman of the science department at his high school.  He holds a 
material science and engineering doctorate and a clear single subject physics (specialized) 
credential.  This credential only authorizes him to teach physics and is no longer issued 
because of recent changes in science credentialing, including implementation of Next 
Generation Science Standards (NGSS).   
 
 
high school where Dr. von Preissig teaches, with 28 students enrolled for the 2018-2019 
school year and 12 students enrolled for the 2019-2020 school year.  These enrollments are 
below the district’s 32:1 student: teacher ratio.  Dr. Gandera explained that teachers typically 
teach 5 to 6 classes and there are not even enough students enrolled to fill one class of 
physics.  She further explained that physics is not a requirement for graduation, describing it 
as an elective science course.   
 
 
high school, the tremendous increase in scores students achieved, the highest standardized 
test score increases ever observed in the district.  Dr. von Preissig explained that documents 
the district entered regarding his course were either outdated, not used, or he had never seen 
them before.  He also took issue with the district’s assertion that physics is an elective, 
because NGSS is moving towards implementation of combining biology, chemistry and 
physics in the high school science curriculum.  He has attended several conferences where 
the changes in the science curriculum and NGSS implementation have been studied and/or 
discussed.  Dr. von Preissig provided a letter from a student praising his teaching, explaining 
that this was one of many such letters he has received from students during his career.  In 
rebuttal, Dr. Gandera testified that these are just discussions and the district has not yet 
adopted the NGSS standards.  
 

19.  Dr. von Preissig testified about NGSS, the course curriculum he created at his 

20.  Dr. von Preissig’s testimony established that he is a caring, dedicated science 
teacher, who is extremely passionate about his profession.  However, he acknowledged the 
district’s declining enrollment in physics, even testifying that for the current school year he 
had hoped that the 47 students who initially indicated they would enroll in physics plus the 
55 additional students he “recruited” after making math class presentations would all be in 
physics classes, but only 28 students ended up taking physics this school year.  This was only 
enough for one physics class which he described as “disappointing.”  To combat his lack of 
classes, Dr. von Preissig has been teaching online courses.  His testimony about the number 
of students enrolled and teaching online courses supported the district’s position regarding 
the decline in enrollment of students taking physics.     
 
 

5

 

 

 

21. 

Respondent Mary Bakal questioned her seniority date of October 7, 2015, 

Seniority Date Issue 
 
 
arguing that her seniority date should be changed to August 29, 2014. 
 
 
her rights, benefits and burdens as a permanent employee were restored, but, for seniority 
purposes, her hiring date became her date of reemployment per Education Code section 
44848 and San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 630-631.   

22.  Dr. Gandera explained that Ms. Bakal retired, returned within 39 months, and 

 
 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

2. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections were provided as 
required. 
 
 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, 
thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that 
proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 
deal with the pupils involved.”  (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 
178-179.)   
 
 
district’s statements of reduction in force served on respondents concerning the services that 
will not be required.   
 
 
particular kinds of services that the board directed be reduced or discontinued.  Because of 
the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant to Education Code section 
44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be required for the 2019-2020 
school year.  The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof 
within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.   
 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the statements set forth in the 

The district identified the certificated employees who are providing the 

4. 

3. 

 

5. 

No employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to 

perform a service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
 
 
 
// 
 
 
 
// 

6

RECOMMENDATION 

It is recommended that before May 15, 2019, the Board of Education give notice to 
the respondents whose names are set forth below in Appendix 1, that their employment will 
be terminated at the close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed 
for the 2019-2020 school year. 
 
 
 
DATED:  April 23, 2019 
 
 
 
                               
                               
 
 

________________________________ 
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7

Appendix 13 

 
1. Aispuro, Inez 
2. Allen, Mark 
3. Bakal, Mary, De Luca 
4. Bauman, Patricia  
5. Blume, Shelley 
6. Camacho, Lisa 
7. Carrasco-Lau, Eduardo 
8. Cervantes, Elizabeth 
9. Cota, Roxanne 
10. Damian-Romo, Virginia 
11. De La Cruz, Cesar 
12. Frimtzis, Mia 
13. Fu, Shan 
14. Garcia, Adalila 
15. Larios, Patricia  
16. Leon III, Arthur 
17. Magalong. Arnold 
18. Marquez-Trujillo Luz, Maria 
19. Martinez, Alejandra 
20. Martinez, Maribel 
21. McLachlan, Edward 
22. Milton, Stephanie 
23. Moser, Elyse 
24. Ossinalde, Yvette 
25. Quintero, Rigoberto 
26. Rodriguez, Anna 
27. Rodriguez, Lucia 
28. Saenz, Analilia 
29. Saig, Sarit 
30. Serrato, Daisy 
31. Stein, Emily 
32. Steele, Ericka, L. 
33. Von Preissig Fred J. 
34. Wang Qimin 
 

 

 

                                                 

3 The numbers used in this Appendix reflect nothing more than the number of 
respondents being laid off, these numbers have no bearing on rehire or recall rights.    

8

