BEFORE THE  
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
BEVERLY HILLS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE BEVERLY HILLS UNIFIED 

SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

SAMANTHA ICKES AND MARISSA TERRANOVA, 

Respondents 

OAH No. 2020040035 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Chris Ruiz, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on May 11, 14-15, and 18, 2020, in Los 

Angeles, California. The matter was heard by way of telephone due to the COVID-19 

pandemic. 

The District was represented by Jabari A. Willis and Alexandria Davidson, Esqs., 

of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud, and Romo, PLC. Luke Pavone (Pavone), Executive 

Director for Human Resources, served as the District’s representative and attended 

each day of hearing. 

Respondents Samantha Ickes (Ickes) and Marissa Terranova (Terranova) were 

represented by Tamra M. Smith, Esq., of Egality Law, LLP. Ickes and Terranova attended 

each day of hearing. Penny Sevoian, Field Staff, of the California Teachers Association, 

also attended each day of hearing. 

This matter was submitted for decision on May 18, 2020. Immediately prior to 

the matter being submitted, the parties stipulated that this proposed decision is due 

no later than June 11, 2020, and that complainant’s final notice of layoff is due no later 

than June 19, 2020. The parties and the ALJ considered and discussed the multiple 

continuances of previously scheduled hearing dates which were granted in this matter 

pursuant to Government Code section 11524. The total number of continuance days 

was counted and considered in connection with Education Code section 44949, 

subdivision (e), which resulted in the above-stated deadlines. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS  

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On March 10, 2020, the Governing Board (Board) of the Beverly Hills 

Unified School District (District) adopted Resolution number 2019-2020-17, entitled 

“Resolution to Reduce or Discontinue Particular Kinds of Services” (Reduction 

Resolution or Resolution).  The purpose of the Resolution was to reduce and 

discontinue particular kinds of certificated services by no later than the beginning of 

the 2020-2021 school year. 

2. 

The Resolution requires the reduction of 10.8 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) 

positions by reducing various types of services.  The Resolution did not state the 

Board’s reasons for passing the Resolution. At hearing, the District offered evidence 

2 

that it may face a 15 percent loss in revenue from the city of Beverly Hills for the 

upcoming 2020-2021 school year. 

3. 

The 10.8 FTE positions to be eliminated are set forth in the Resolution as 

follows: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TK-5 Teacher  

TK-5 Music 

 

Grade 6-8 Science    

Grade 6-8 Music 

 

 

 

 

Technology   

  

2 FTE 

2 FTE 

1 FTE 

1 FTE 

.2 FTE 

Grade 9-12 Science      

           1 FTE 

Grade 9-12 Language Arts  

           .8 FTE 

Grade 9-12 Math      

                      1 FTE 

Grade 9-12 French    

.6 FTE   

Coordinator of Medical Science Academy 

.2 FTE 

Coordinator of Categorical Funding  

1 FTE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                      Total FTE to be reduced: 

 

          10.8 FTE 

4. 

The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are 

particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education 

Code section 44955. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

5. 

All jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

The History of the Case 

6. 

The initial decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was 

neither arbitrary nor capricious, but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s 

discretion because of the uncertainty regarding the District’s financial resources for the 

2020-2021 school year. 

7. 

Pavone credibly testified that the District may lose 15 percent of the 

funding it receives from the City of Beverly Hills before the 2020-2021 school year.  

Respondents offered conflicting evidence that suggested the District may not have an 

actual budget shortfall for the 2020-2021 school year. Pavone testified that the District 

requires “maximum flexibility” during these uncertain times. The District established 

that it was acting in good faith and in anticipation of a potential budget shortfall. It 

was not established that the District acted in an arbitrary and capricious manner in 

deciding to eliminate the 10.8 FTE teaching positions. 

8. 

The District originally identified and listed 10 teachers for layoff in exhibit 

2 (“Recommendation not to Reemploy Permanent or Probationary Employees”). 

9. 

The District later rescinded some of the preliminary layoff notices and the 

District reached settlement with some of the 10 respondents. Prior to the first day of 

hearing in this matter (or immediately after the hearing was commenced) all issues 

were resolved as to eight of the 10 teachers listed in exhibit 2. 

10. 

The District rescinded the preliminary notice of layoff for the following 

teachers: John Castle, Nicole Goshen, Camille Mosby and Nicole Snijdewind. 

4 

11. 

The District reached a settlement with the following teachers, who 

therefore waived their right to a hearing: Ivan Alcantar, Tanya Guerra, and Deanne 

Wong. 

12. 

The evidence did not establish whether the preliminary layoff notice was 

rescinded, or whether the District reached a settlement, with teacher Loredana 

Mitescuin (Mitescuin), who was also listed as a respondent in exhibit 2. In either case, 

by March 31, 2020, the District had removed her name from the updated list of 

respondents, which was attached to the District’s “Statement of Reduction in Force 

Packet” (exhibit 6). 

13. 

The hearing in this matter then proceeded with Ickes and Terranova as 

the remaining respondents. 

The District’s Schools and Organization 

14. 

The District currently operates two Transitional Kindergarten (TK)-5th 

elementary grade schools, one middle school for grades 6-8, and one high school for 

grades 9-12. Those schools are Beverly Hills High School, Beverly Vista Middle School, 

and Horace Mann and Hawthorne Elementary Schools. El Rodeo Elementary school is 

closed. 

15. 

The District recently changed its organizational structure. Prior to the 

2018-2019 school year, the District operated three K-8th grade schools and one high 

school. In 2018-2019, the District transitioned two elementary schools from K-8 to TK-

5. Beverly Vista school became a middle school for students in grades 6-8. 

5 

The Parties’ Contentions 

16. 

The District contends that Ickes’ and Terranova’s positions are subject to 

layoff and that they are not credentialed and competent to teach any less senior 

teacher’s class. Ickes is subject to layoff under the category “Grade 6-8 Science” 

because she teaches Science to grades 6-8. Terranova is subject to layoff under the 

category “Grade 6-8 Music” because she teaches Music to grades 6-8. 

17. 

The Resolution eliminated .2 FTE Technology position. The District 

“skipped over” a total of six junior “technology” teachers: five i4coach/Teacher on 

Special Assignment (TOSA) positions and one makers space position. 28.  After the 

District skipped over the six FTE technology positions described above, the District 

eliminated .20 Technology FTE of more senior technology teachers, as more fully set 

forth in factual finding 28. The makers space position is a newly created positon for 

the 2019-2020 school year. The makers space teacher is responsible for developing 

and teaching new courses to meet state standards in Science, English, Robotics and 

Coding. The makers space teacher collaborates with the TK1-5 classroom teachers in 

developing ways to integrate technology into the teaching and learning process. For 

example, if the students were learning how to calculate the time it takes to travel from 

point A to point B in Math class, while at the same time they were learning about wind 

power and resistance in Social Studies, those two concepts could be combined by 

having the students build models with fans and also by teaching the students how to 

code the computer to process calculations involving time, distance and speed. 

                                              

1 “TK” is the acronym for Transitional Kindergarten. 

6 

18. 

The District contends that these six teachers, each of whom is junior to 

Ickes and Terranova, were skipped because they have special training and experience 

which is necessary to teach those positions. The District contends that Ickes and 

Terranova are not credentialed and competent to teach in any of the six skipped 

positions. 

19. 

Respondents contend that the District improperly skipped over these six 

positions and that respondents are competent and credentialed to perform in these 

positions. Specifically, Ickes contends that she is competent and credentialed to 

perform in the makers space position. Terranova contends that she is competent and 

credentialed to perform in an i4coach/TOSA2 position. 

The District’s Skipping 

20. 

The Reduction Resolution established “skip criteria” so that certain junior 

employees could be exempted from layoff.  The Resolution’s specific language is: 

Deviation from Seniority-based Layoffs and Displacement 

Rights 

 

That in selecting those probationary and permanent 

certificated employees who shall receive notice of 

termination pursuant to this Resolution, Education Code 

section 44955 allows the Governing Board to deviate from 

terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority by 

                                              

referenced as “i4coach.” 

2 The i4coach/Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA) will hereinafter be 

7 

virtue of their competence, credential(s), assignment, and 

the specific needs of the District and its students. 

 

That the criteria, which shall be established by 

testimony and other evidence, applied to deviate from 

terminating certificated employees who may otherwise be 

terminated by order of seniority, are based on the needs of 

the students of the District, and will ensure that, unless 

permitted by law, no employee will be terminated while a 

less senior employee is retained to render service, that the 

more senior employee is both certificated and competent 

to render. (Emphasis added.) 

21. 

The Resolution did not state any specific need for personnel to teach a 

specific course or course of study. The Resolution did not state that the less senior 

certificated employee being retained has special training and experience necessary to 

teach a course, or course of study, which other teachers with more seniority do not 

possess. 

22. 

Instead, the Resolution stated that the skipping criteria “shall be 

established by testimony and other evidence . . .” As a result, the District’s skipping 

criteria were revealed for the first time during the hearing. 

Date of Hire and Seniority 

23. 

In order to determine which teachers are subject to layoff, the District 

prepared a seniority list which lists every teacher currently employed by the District. 

The teachers’ names are listed with the most senior teacher listed as #2 and the most 

junior teacher listed as #281. 

8 

24. 

The District skipped six teachers who are junior to Ickes and Terranova in 

the following positions: five FTE i4coach positions and one FTE Makers Space Teacher. 

The District employs i4coaches as follows: two at the TK-5 level, one at the grade 6-8 

level, and two at the high school level, but one floats between middle and high school. 

25. 

Those positions that the District skipped are: 

#279   

Kelsall-Lagola, Karen 

i4coach 

Date of Hire 11/4/19 

#266    

Minicozzi, Nancy 

i4coach 

Date of Hire 8/8/2019 

#252   

Citizen, Leticia 

i4coach  

Date of Hire  9/17/18 

#241   

Gabreski, Gretchen   

i4coach 

Date of Hire  8/9/18 

#235   

Bozin, Alisa 

       Makers Space   Date of Hire  10/3/17 

#234    

Bieler, Lisa 

        i4coach             Date of Hire 9/7/17 

 

 

 

 

26. 

Ickes and Terranova have dates of hire which are senior to any of the five 

skipped teachers. Ickes’ date of hire is August 10, 2017. Terranova’s date of hire is 

August 6, 2014. 

27. 

Leticia Citizen is an i4coach at Hawthorne Elementary. Gretchen Gabreski 

is currently the i4coach at Beverly Vista Middle School. Nancy Minicozzi is an i4coach 

at Beverly Hills High School. Karen Kelsall-Lagola is the i4coach assigned to Beverly 

Hills High School, but she also “floats” to the middle school. Lisa Bieler is the i4coach 

at Horace Mann Elementary. 

28. 

After the District skipped over the six FTE technology positions described 

above, the District eliminated the .20 Technology FTE, identified in the District’s 

9 

Resolution, by eliminating .10 FTE from #173 Crane, Alexis (Crane) – Date of Hire 

August 8, 2013, and #166 Castanon, Alana Childs (Castanon) – Date of Hire August 22, 

2012. Both of these teachers were 1.1 FTE employees, with the .10 FTE portion being 

classified as “TOSA” and the 1 FTE being “STEM.”3 

29. 

Crane holds a Clear Single Subject credential in Foundational Level 

General Science, Biology, and she teaches Science at the middle school. 

30. 

Castanon holds a Clear Single Subject credential in Science: Biological 

Sciences, and she teaches Science at the middle school. 

31. 

It was not established why the .1 FTE positions held by Crane and 

Castanon were not skipped, as technology TOSA’s. The evidence did not establish 

what specifically Crane and Castanon did in their .1 FTE positions as TOSA. 

Nevertheless, neither Crane nor Castanon contested the loss of their .1 FTE positions 

during the hearing. 

32. 

Pursuant to Education Code4 section 44955, subdivision (d), the District is 

authorized to skip specific courses or courses of study. 

33.  However, the District did not establish that the i4coach position, or the 

makers space position, are specific courses or courses of study, as described in the 

statute. In both positions, the teacher does not have a classroom with students 

                                              

3 “STEM” is an acronym for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. 

4 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 

10 

assigned to her. The i4coach and makers space positon assist classroom teachers with 

integrating technology into their classrooms and teaching. 

34. 

Code section 51015 provides that “‘Courseʼ means an instructional unit 

of an area or field of organized knowledge, usually provided on a semester, year, or 

prescribed length of time basis.” Code section 51014 states that “‘Course of studyʼ 

means the planned content of a series of classes, courses, subjects, studies, or related 

activities.”  It is plain that, as used in Code section 44955, courses are offered to the 

students of a district, not to other employees of a district. 

35. 

The District may not create justifications for skipping; the only 

permissible justifications are those set out in Code section 44955, subdivision (d). The 

District's investment in hiring teachers with outstanding knowledge and experience in 

technology is laudable. However, that does not allow the District to skip personnel 

who are not retained to teach a course or course of study. The creation of other 

justifications for skipping, outside the statutory scheme, would provide discretion to a 

district outside that authorized by the statute, and it would deprive certificated 

employees of their seniority rights. 

The Effect of the District’s Improper Skip 

36. 

If the District had not skipped over the six junior teachers, one of them 

would have had .2 FTE of her position eliminated. However, that change would not 

have, in any way, directly improved Ickes’ or Terranova’s status, because they are not 

being laid off under the technology category, Rather, their positions are being 

eliminated under the categories grade 6-8 science teacher and a grade 6-8 music 

teacher, respectively. 

11 

37. 

Since the District’s skip of the i4coaches and makers space positions was 

invalid, it was established that if either respondent is credentialed and competent to 

perform the i4coach position or the makers space position, held by junior teachers, 

they as the senior teachers must be retained. In other words, Ickes and Terranova can 

“bump into” a less senior teacher’s position for which they are credentialed and 

competent. 

Bumping and Competency 

38. 

Education Code section 44955 provides that, “. . . no permanent 

employee may be terminated . . . while . . . any other employee with less seniority, is 

retained to render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and 

competent to render.” 

39. 

A senior teacher that is subject to layoff based on their current 

assignment, can “bump” a less-senior teacher out of their current position if the senior 

teacher is “certificated and competent” to teach the course currently being taught by 

the less-senior teacher. (Ed. Code § 44955, subd. (b)). 

40. 

 The Reduction Resolution states that “bumping shall be allowed only in 

cases where the senior employee is both competent and credentialed to assume the 

whole assignment of the more junior employee.” 

41. 

The Reduction Resolution defined competency as follows: 

That “competency” as described in Education Code section 

44955(b) for the purposes of bumping shall necessarily 

include:  (1) possession of a valid clear or preliminary 

credential in the subject(s) or grade level to which the 

12 

employee will be assigned at the beginning of the 2020-

2021 school year; (2) appropriate full (not emergency) EL 

authorization (if required by the position); (3) in the case of 

displacing junior employees teaching in a departmentalized 

setting, single subject credential(s) or subject matter 

authorization in that subject area; and (4) any training and 

experience necessary to meet the job requirements of 

specialized positions (such as Dual Immersion Teachers or 

Opportunity Teachers) as indicated in the relevant job 

descriptions. 

42. 

The job descriptions of both the i4coach position (exhibit 16) and the 

makers space position (exhibit 19) are in evidence. Each job description contains a 

section entitled “Minimum Qualifications.” These sections describe the required 

credential and other minimum qualifications that an applicant must possess, as set 

forth immediately below. 

Is Either Respondent “Credentialed and Competent” to Perform in the 

I4coach Position or the Makers Space Position? 

RESPONDENT ICKES – THE MAKERS SPACE POSITION 

43. 

Ickes contends that she is credentialed and competent to teach in the 

makers space position. If her contention is correct, Ickes could “bump” the less senior 

teacher currently in the makers space position and Ickes would avoid layoff. 

44. 

The District’s seniority list states that Ickes is a 1.2 FTE. The evidence 

presented did not establish in what capacity Ickes serves the extra .2 FTE assigned to 

her. 

13 

45. 

The Reduction Resolution, as relevant to Ickes, only authorizes the 

reduction of 1 FTE Science Teacher - middle school. The Resolution did not identify 

any other position reduction relevant to Ickes. 

46. 

Therefore, Ickes must be retained for .20 FTE portion of her position. 

47. 

The Makers Space job description states that the “Minimum 

Qualifications” for the position are: 

B.A. or B.S. required; Master’s Degree preferred (in 

Technology, Science or Engineering). 

Appropriate California Credential (either Multiple or Single 

Subject with experience in K-5); 3+ years teaching 

experience serving K-5 students preferred. 

Full clearance of TB test, livescan fingerprints, and any other 

state or federal requirements. 

48. 

Ickes holds a Clear Single Subject credential in Foundational-Level 

General Science. She also holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Science/Marine 

Biology. She does not have a master’s degree, but a master’s degree is only preferred, 

not required. 

49. 

Ickes taught STEM to grades 6-8 during the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 

school years, her first two years with the District. Ickes received STEM training during 

the summers of 2017 and 2018. She has performed some small coding projects and 

she is currently teaching at Beverly Vista middle school. 

14 

50. 

Ickes does not have any experience in performing credentialed teaching 

to K-5 students. Ickes offered evidence that she has some experience working with K-5 

students, but that experience occurred before Ickes obtained her teaching credential. 

A fair reading of the job description reveals that the experience sought by the District 

must have been achieved as a credentialed teacher. Therefore, Ickes is credentialed to 

teach the makers space position, but she is not “competent” as defined in the District’s 

Resolution. Ickes does not have any experience teaching K-5 students since she 

obtained her credential. 

51. 

Ickes contends that even though all of her teaching experience with the 

District has been at the 6-8th grade level, her credential nevertheless would allow her 

to teach grades K-5. Even if this contention is true, it does not change the fact that 

Ickes does not have all of the minimum qualifications required in order to perform the 

makers space position. 

52. 

Respondents Ickes is a well-educated and qualified teacher, dedicated to 

her profession and the District's students.  However, because Ickes does not have all of 

the minimum qualifications to perform the makers space position, she cannot “bump” 

into the position held by a less senior teacher. 

RESPONDENT TERRANOVA – THE I4COACH POSITION 

53. 

Terranova contends that she is credentialed and competent to teach in 

the i4coach position. If her contention is correct, Terranova could “bump” the least 

senior teacher currently in the i4coach position and Terranova would avoid layoff. 

54. 

The i4coach position/(TOSA) job descriptions states that the “Job/ 

Requirements/Qualifications” of the position are: 

15 

Experience: A minimum of five (5) years successful 

classroom teaching experience. 

Education: Bachelor of Arts/ Science Degree from an 

accredited institution of higher learning. Additional study in 

a technology field and Master’s Degree desirable. 

Credential: Possession of a valid California Credential 

authorizing elementary or single subject service. 

Other Licenses, Certifications, Bonding, and/ or Testing: 

English Learner Development Certificate; Compliance with 

No Child Left Behind Requirements (Original Documents); 

Department of Homeland Security I-9 Form completion; TB 

Test Clearance; Criminal Justice Fingerprint Clearance. 

Must possess a valid California Driver’s License during the 

course of employment. Must be insurable at standard rates 

and maintain such insurability during the course of 

employment. 

55.  Much evidence was offered by the District regarding the training, 

experience, certification, knowledge, and required qualifications that the i4coach 

position requires. However, a substantial portion of the District’s claimed job 

requirements are not listed in the District’s own job descriptions. 

56.  Dustin Seemann (Seemann), Assistant Superintendent for Education 

Services, testified that the i4coach position requires additional training and 

certifications that are not stated in the job descriptions. He testified that the i4coach 

16 

job description fails to state all of the required qualifications that an applicant must 

possess. 

57. 

According to Seemann, the i4coach job requirements “morph” on an 

almost daily basis due to technology changes. The District’s evidence regarding the 

required qualifications for i4coaches was offered to justify the District’s skipping over 

the junior teachers holding these positions and also as the qualifications that the 

District contends Terranova must satisfy in order for her to perform as an i4coach. 

58. 

It was established that the District has full control over the i4coach job 

description. That is, the District could have modified the i4coach job description at any 

time before the hearing. 

59. 

Between 2017 and 2019, the District hired five current i4coaches. 

Nevertheless, the District did not modify the i4coach job description during that time 

period. The District asserted that the i4coach position requires that Terranova have far 

more qualifications and certifications than are stated in the job description. For 

example, while the job description states that a master’s degree is “preferred,” 

Seemann testified that a master’s degree is now required. 

60. 

The District’s evidence regarding the additional “requirements” for an 

i4coach applicant are deemed to be the desirable qualifications (rather than minimum 

requirements) that the District wants its i4coaches to possess so they can perform at a 

very high level. If these additional qualifications were viewed by the District as 

important and substantial additions to the minimum qualifications required of an 

i4coach applicant, the District would have added them to the required qualifications in 

the job description, at some point during the past three years, when the District was in 

the process of hiring the five i4coaches. 

17 

61. 

The District contends that Terranova, who possesses a Music credential, 

is not qualified to move into an i4coach technology position. This contention, on its 

face, seems reasonable. However, the i4coach job description does not state that a 

degree in technology is required. Rather, the job description states that a Bachelor of 

Arts degree is acceptable. Therefore, Terranova’s Bachelor of Arts degree in Music 

satisfies this element. 

62. 

In order for Terranova to bump into a i4coach position, she must satisfy 

the minimum requirements specified in the job description, as set forth in factual 

finding 52. 

TK-5 students. 

63. 

Terranova’s position of Grade 6-8 Music is being eliminated. She is a 1.0 

FTE employee. After the District’s reorganization, Terranova is now assigned to teach 

64. 

Terranova meets the minimum requirements of the i4coach job 

description. She holds a Bachelor of Arts in Music and Clear Single Subject credential 

in Music. Terranova has over five years of successful classroom teaching with the 

District. She has had significant technology training through the District. Terranova is 

also currently enrolled in a master’s degree technology program. 

65. 

The District did not contend that Terranova lacks any of the required 

qualifications described in the “Other Licenses, Certifications, Bonding, and/ or 

Testing” section of the job description. 

66. 

Therefore, Terranova may not be laid off in favor of a junior employee 

who is in the i4coach position for which Terranova is credentialed and competent. 

18 

67. 

Since the District did not add any of the additional qualifications for the 

i4coach that the District now contends are required, it is reasonable and fair to use the 

job description in assessing whether Terranova possesses the qualifications required to 

perform as an i4coach. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction was established to proceed in this matter, pursuant to 

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, based on Factual Findings 1-5. 

2. 

The District is properly reducing particular kind of services (PKS) within 

the meaning of Code section 44955, subdivision (b), as identified in the Reduction 

Resolution, as set forth in Factual Findings 1-5. 

3. 

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 

neither arbitrary nor capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion, as set forth 

in Factual Findings 1-7. 

4. 

A senior teacher whose position is eliminated has the right to transfer to 

another position which she is certificated and competent to fill.  In doing so, the senior 

employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position.  (Lacy 

v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.) 

5. 

On the other hand, in appropriate cases, a junior teacher may be given 

retention priority over one or more senior teachers. The junior teacher may be 

exempted or “skipped” to the detriment of more senior employees, if the District 

demonstrates a need to teach a course or course of study, and if the junior teacher 

possesses credentials and skills and training not possessed by more senior colleagues, 

19 

which skills and training are necessary to teach that course or course of study. 

(Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; Santa 

Clara Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board of Santa Clara Unified School Dist. 

(1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.). 

6. 

The District’s skip of the five i4coach and one makers space positions was 

improper. The District may only skip over positons where a course, or course of study, 

is taught by the teacher, which the i4coach and makers space positions do not satisfy, 

as set forth in factual findings 20-35. 

7. 

It is fundamental that no junior teacher can be retained when there is a 

senior teacher who is credentialed and competent to fill the junior teacher's position. 

8. 

Ickes’ position as a 1 FTE Grade 6-8 Science teacher has been properly 

reduced and Ickes is not credential and competent, within the meaning of Code 

section 44955, subdivision (b), to perform as a makers space teacher, as set forth in 

factual findings 43-52.  Ickes’ must be retained as a .2 FTE for the reasons set forth in 

factual findings 43-46. 

9. 

Terranova must be retained as a District employee because she is 

credentialed and competent to perform as an i4coach and she has seniority over the 

most junior i4coarch, as set forth in factual findings 56-67. 

1. 

The District may send a final notice of layoff to respondent Samantha 

Ickes for the 1 FTE Grade 6-8 Science teacher positon which she performed during the 

2019-2020 school year. 

ORDER 

20 

2. 

The District may not send a final notice of layoff to respondent Samantha 

Ickes with respect to the .2 FTE assigned to her. Samantha Ickes is retained as a .2 FTE 

employee. 

DATE: 

June 11, 2020

3.  

The District may not send a final notice of layoff to respondent Marissa 

Terranova. Marissa Terranova is retained as an employee of the District. 

 
CHRIS RUIZ 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

21 

