BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
OXNARD SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 

CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE OXNARD SCHOOL 

DISTRICT,  

Respondents 

OAH No. 2020040364 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Irina Tentser, Administrative Law Judge with the Office of Administrative 

Hearings, heard this matter on May 21, 2020, in Los Angeles, California. 

Erika D. Anderson, Attorney at Law, appeared and represented complainant 

Karling Aguilera-Fort, Superintendent for the Oxnard School District (District). 

Amy Jo Cannon and Alejandro Gutierrez, Attorneys at Law, appeared and 

represented the following respondents, Donna Bragg; Davina Cardone; Diana DeMars; 

Justin Donovan; Rochelle Ford; Tricia Henry; Brett Lane; Joan Louth; Laura Mason; 

Brennan Pope; Kimberly Sharp; Patty Peterson; Andrew Browning; Maribel White; 

Nicole Espinoza; Lauren Dann; Claudia Medrano; Debra Milne; Gabriela Ambriz; 

Deanna Romero; Arlene Jimenez; James Sisco; Breanna Varela; Christian Velarde; 

Sandra Alonso; Diana Donovan; Cassandra Ferris; Eder Fuentes; Susan Green; Sandra 

Hammond; Maleah Lopez; Mary Lang; Belinda Garcia; Mary Garcia; Richard Raddas; 

Wendy Sanchez; and Yocelin Valencia (Represented Respondents). All Represented 

Respondents were present at the hearing, except Sandra Alonso, Gabriela Ambriz, 

Donna Bragg, Andrew Browning, Alyxandra Dudley, Cassandra Ferris, Mary Garcia, 

Susan Green, Laura Mason, Deborah Milne, Brennan Pope, Deanna Romero, Wendy 

Sanchez, Yocelin Valencia, and Christina Velarde. 

Respondent Carmen Serrano (Respondent Serrano) was not represented and 

did not appear at hearing. 

The parties presented evidence and argument at the hearing. At the conclusion 

of the hearing, the administrative law judge closed the record and took the matter 

under submission. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Jurisdictional Matters 

Respondents are all certificated employees of the District. 

1. 

2. 

On March 9, 2020, Dr. Karling Aguilera-Fort, Superintendent with the 

District, mailed to all respondents by certified United States mail, with return receipt 

requested, a written notice that he would be recommending to the Board that notice 

be given to each respondent that his or her services may not be required in the 2020-

2021 school year, and that each respondent had the right to request a hearing 

pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. (Ex. 3.) 

3. 

On April 8, 2020, complainant filed the District Statement of Reduction in 

Force in his official capacity as the Superintendent for the District. 

2 

4. 

By April 14, 2020,1 all Represented Respondents except Yocelin Valencia 

acknowledged service of the District Statement of Reduction in Force and delivered to 

the District a Notice of Participation requesting a hearing. On April 23, 2020, an 

Amended Notice of Participation was delivered to the District which added Yocelin 

Valencia to the list of Represented Respondents who acknowledged service of the 

District Statement of Reduction in Force and requested a hearing. 

5. 

On a date not established by the evidence, Respondent Serrano 

requesting a hearing and filed a Notice of Participation. 

6. 

On April 20, 2020, the District filed and served on each respondent a 

Notice of Hearing. 

Reduction Resolution 

7. 

On March 4, 2020, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted 

Resolution No. 19-21, Reduction or Discontinuation of Particular Kinds of Service 

(Reduction Resolution).  The purpose of the Reduction Resolution was to reduce or 

discontinue particular kinds of certificated services no later than the beginning of the 

2020-2021 school year. Specifically, the resolution required the reduction of 68 Full 

Time Equivalent (FTE) positions by reducing various types of services. The FTE positions 

that the Board determined to reduce or discontinue are described as follows: 

Kind of Service 

 

 

FTE positions 

K-6 Multiple Subject Teachers 

 

 

43.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                              

Participation. 

1 The District did not object on the grounds of untimeliness to the Notice of 

3 

Single Subject – Physical Education 

Single Subject – Social Science Teacher   

Single Subject – Science Teacher   

Single Subject – Music Teacher 

 

Teacher on Special Assignment – Newcomer 

School Counselor 

 

Assistant Principals   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.0 

2.0 

2.0 

3.0 

1.0 

8.0 

3.0 

Teacher on Special Assignment – Dual Language Immersion  

1.0 

TOTAL FTE POSITIONS 

68.0 

8. 

The services which the District seeks to reduce or discontinue are 

particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education 

Code section 44955. Except as otherwise provided by law, the services of a permanent 

employee may not be terminated under the provisions of Education Code section 

44955 while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is 

retained to render a service which the permanent employee is certificated and 

competent to render. (Legal Conclusion 6.) 

9. 

 Represented Respondents’ argument that Education Code section 

44955.5, rather than Education Code section 44955, is applicable to the employee 

reductions; that the District’s RIF notices were premature because they were based on 

potential budgetary shortfalls for the 2020-2021 school year; and that the Board did 

4 

not properly account for the District’s prospective pandemic employee needs, are 

unconvincing. (Ex. B.) 

10.  On the contrary, the decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue 

services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the 

District’s discretion, governed by Education Code section 44955. At the time of the 

Reduction Resolution, the District faced ongoing declining enrollment and a budget 

shortfall of 13 million dollars. Accordingly, the reduction and discontinuation of 

services are related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become 

necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees as determined by the 

Board. 

11. 

The Reduction Resolution was furnished to each respondent with the 

notification mailed on March 9, 2020, as set forth in Factual Finding 2. All jurisdictional 

requirements have been met. 

The Tiebreaking, Skipping, and Bumping Criteria 

12. 

As part of its Reduction Resolution, the Board determined that the 

District has a specific need for personnel to teach specific courses of study or provide 

pupil personnel or health services, and to retain certificated employees possessing the 

special training and experience needed to teach such courses or provide such services 

that other employees with greater seniority do not possess (Skipping Criteria). The 

Board determined to exclude from the Reduction Resolution any permanent or 

probationary certificated employee who satisfied the Skipping Criteria. Specifically, the 

Board determined to retain the employment of any certificated employee in the 

particular kind of services identified in the Reduction Resolution, regardless of 

seniority, to the extent the certificated employee possessed either of the following 

5 

credentials, is presently assigned within the scope of that credential, and will be 

assigned within the scope of that credential for the 2020-2021 school year: (1) a 

credential authorizing the teaching of special education classes; or (2) a Bilingual 

Cross-Cultural Language and Academic Development (BCLAD) certificate. 

13. 

As part of its Reduction Resolution, the Board determined that the 

District shall retain employees who are certificated and competent to render services 

over more senior employees who are not certificated or competent to render the same 

services. (Skipping Rights.) For these purposes, the District defined “competent” as 

follows: “(1) The employee has actually rendered instruction or service in the subject 

matter area in which s/he claims to be entitled to render instruction or service in or 

after the 2009-2010 school year, whether for the District or another school district; and 

(2) the employee possesses a BCLAD, CLAD, SB 1969, or other certificate authorizing 

him/her to instruct English Learner students.”  (Ex. 2, p. 7.) 

14. 

As part of its Reduction Resolution, the Board identified criteria to be 

applied to resolve ties in seniority between certificated employees (Tiebreaking 

Criteria). Employees sharing the same first date of paid probationary service to the 

District were awarded points based on the following Tiebreaking Criteria: 

1.  Possession of credential(s) authorizing service for the District on 

March 15, 2020 

the District 

2.  Subject matter authorization held on March 15, 2020, including 

supplemental authorizations, on credential(s) authorizing service for 

3.  Possession of Bilingual Cross-Cultural Language and Development 

certificate or its equivalent on March 15, 2020 

6 

4.  Column placement on salary schedule as of March 15, 2020 

5.  Service as BTSA Mentor teacher within 2019-2020 school year and/or 

two immediately preceding school years 

6.  Service as Department Chairperson or Instructional Team Leader 

7.  Possession of a License through the Board of Behavioral Sciences 

(Educational Psychologist) 

(Ex. 2, p. 12.) 

Implementation of Reduction Resolution 

15.  Dr. Ed Bond, Director of Certificated Human Resources for the District, 

testified about how the District carried out the Reduction Resolution. 

16. 

The District created a seniority list, taking into account each certificated 

employee’s first date of paid service, job class description, school assignment, and 

permanent status. (Ex. 9.) The seniority list ranked District employees, including 

respondents, in order of seniority. After applying the Tiebreaking Criteria to the 

seniority list, Dr. Bond created a chart of the employees whose services would be 

terminated pursuant to the Reduction Resolution. (Ex. 10.) 

17. 

The lay-off notices of Amelia Taylor-Gonzalez, Tracy Gordon, and 

Yolanda Pandolfi were rescinded using the BCLAD Skipping Criteria. (Ex. 10.) Natalie 

Arceo’s lay-off notice was rescinded based on her reassignment to Special Education. 

Robert Paul Brown’s lay-off notice was rescinded based on his reassignment to 

Science. Rusty Lanning’s and Thomas Gonzalez’s lay-off notices were rescinded after 

applying Tiebreaking Criteria. The lay-off notices of Patrick Price, Yvonne Garcia, Jovan 

7 

Mosby, Cecilia Arredondo, and Maureen Aryeetey were rescinded. None of the 

foregoing employees are respondents in this case. 

18.  No certificated employee junior to any respondent was retained by the 

District to render a service for which a respondent was certificated and qualified to 

render. No respondent claimed bumping rights. 

Tiebreaking Criteria Based on Service as Department Chairperson or 

Instructional Team Leader 

19. 

 Represented Respondents challenged the District’s seniority Tiebreaking 

Criteria awarding one point based on a teachers’ service as department chairperson or 

instructional team leader as being capricious and arbitrary. They argued that the 

means of choosing teachers to serve in these capacities was inconsistent from site to 

site, with some positions being offered to volunteers while others were not. (Ex. B.) 

District argued, in turn, that service as a department chairperson or instructional team 

leader is relevant to the continuing needs of the District and its students, and in 

breaking a tie among employees with the same first date of probationary service, it is 

appropriate to award higher seniority to employees who have served in such 

leadership positions. During his testimony Dr. Bond admitted that while he collected 

information from sites about which employees subject to lay-off served in the 

tiebreaking positions for purposes of awarding a point potentially leading to higher 

seniority, he did not know how various school sites chose their department 

chairpersons or instructional team leader. 

20.  Here, all the respondents who challenged the seniority Tiebreaking 

Criteria are subject to layoff even after the application of those criteria, regardless of 

whether a respondent was awarded a point for serving as a department chairperson or 

8 

instructional team leader. Accordingly, this decision need not and does not address 

whether awarding a tiebreaking point to a teacher who served as a department 

chairperson or instructional team leader was arbitrary or capricious, because it is not 

relevant in this matter. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Statutory Framework 

1. 

The District’s teacher layoff process, also referred to as a reduction in 

force, is governed by Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. Education Code 

section 44955.5, based on an anticipated budget shortfall, is inapplicable in this 

matter, as set forth in Factual Findings 9 and 10. 

2. 

Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a), states in pertinent part: 

“No later than March 15 and before an employee is given notice by the governing 

board that his or her services will not be required for the ensuing year for the reasons 

specified in Education Code section 44955, the governing board and the employee 

shall be given written notice by the superintendent of the district or his or her 

designee . . . that it has been recommended that the notice be given to the employee, 

and stating the reasons therefor.” 

3. 

Notice to the employee is sufficient “when it is delivered in person to the 

employee to whom it is directed, or when it is deposited in the United States 

registered mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the last known address of the 

employee.” (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (d).) 

9 

4. 

A respondent must file his or her notice of participation, if any, within five 

days after service of the District’s Statement of Reduction in Force. (Ed. Code § 44949, 

subd. (d).) 

5. 

The parties complied with the notice and jurisdictional requirements set 

forth in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, or compliance was waived, as set 

forth in Factual Findings 1 through 6, and 9 through 11. 

Reduction Resolution 

6. 

A school district cannot terminate the services of a permanent or 

probationary employee for causes other than those specified in the Education Code. 

(Ed. Code § 44955, subd. (a).) Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), authorizes 

a school district to terminate the services of permanent or probationary teachers 

under the following circumstances and subject to the following conditions: 

Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 

discontinued not later than the beginning of the following 

school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the governing 

board of the district it shall have become necessary by 

reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number 

of permanent employees in the district, the governing 

board may terminate the services of not more than a 

corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of 

the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close 

of the school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, 

the services of no permanent employee may be terminated 

under the provisions of this section while any probationary 

10 

employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is 

retained to render a service which said permanent 

employee is certificated and competent to render. 

7. 

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of Education 

Code section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of 

service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may 

‘reduce services’ by determining that [proffered] services shall be reduced in extent 

because fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.”  

(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) 

8. 

Boards of education hold significant discretion in determining the need 

to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees, 

supra, 64 Cal.App.3d at p. 167.) Such policy-making decisions are not subject to 

arguments as to the wisdom of their enactment, their necessity, or the motivations for 

the decisions. (California Teachers Assn. v. Huff (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.) Such 

decisions and actions must be reasonable under the circumstances with the 

understanding that “such a standard may permit a difference of opinion.” (Santa Clara 

Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 845.) The 

process of implementing layoffs is very flexible and school districts retain great 

flexibility in carrying out the process. (Zalec v. Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified 

School Dist. (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.) 

9. 

In this instance, the Board’s decision to reduce services was a proper 

exercise of the District’s discretion. While Represented Respondents argued that the 

proposed reduction in force was based on anticipated, rather than existing, budget 

deficits and was premature based on potential future District employee needs related 

to the pandemic, no convincing evidence was presented to show that the proposed 

11 

reductions in services violated any statutory or regulatory requirement governing the 

District. (Factual Finding 10). The services to be discontinued are particular kinds of 

services within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. The Board’s decision to 

reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious, and 

the District has acted reasonably and within the scope of its flexible authority in 

carrying out the process. The reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to 

the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code 

section 44949. 

Tiebreaking Criteria 

10. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), states: 

As between employees who first rendered paid service to 

the district on the same date, the governing board shall 

determine the order of termination solely on the basis of 

needs of the district and the students thereof. Upon the 

request of any employee whose order of termination is so 

determined, the governing board shall furnish in writing no 

later than five days prior to the commencement of the 

hearing held in accordance with Section 44949, a statement 

of the specific criteria used in determining the order of 

termination and the application of the criteria in ranking 

each employee relative to the other employees in the 

group.  This requirement that the governing board provide, 

on request, a written statement of reasons for determining 

the order of termination shall not be interpreted to give 

12 

affected employees any legal right or interest that would 

not exist without such a requirement. 

11.  Here, the Board established a point system that gave more seniority to 

those employees who scored more points on a point system that served the needs of 

the District and its students. By sending a copy of the Reduction Resolution to each 

respondent at the time of the notice described in Factual Finding 2, the District 

property furnished respondents with a statement of the specific criteria used in 

determining the order of termination and the application of the criteria in ranking 

each employee relative to the other employees in the group. 

12.  No evidence was produced to dispute the analysis made by Dr. Bond in 

applying the Tiebreaking Criteria to the seniority list. 

13. 

Respondents introduced evidence that the Tiebreaking Criteria of 

awarding a point based on department chairperson or instructional team leader by the 

District may be arbitrary or capricious and may, therefore, result in errors in seniority 

dates for Represented Respondents who are challenging that Tiebreaking Criteria. 

However, adjustment of Represented Respondents seniority based on the elimination 

of the one point for department chairperson or instructional team leader will not 

impact whether any of the Represented Respondents are retained for the 2020-2021 

school year. (Factual Finding 19 and 20.) Because this adjudication is authorized by 

sections 44949 and 44955 of the Education Code, the scope of inquiry is limited to 

order of termination of a certificated employee subject to the lay-off notice. 

Accordingly, because seniority list adjustment of Represented Respondents who 

challenge the department chairperson or instructional team leader Tiebreaking Criteria 

will not impact their order of termination, this decision will not address whether the 

criterion is arbitrary and capricious. 

13 

14. 

Accordingly, the Board complied with Education Code section 44955, 

subdivision (b), in establishing the Tiebreaking Criteria to distinguish among 

certificated employees who first rendered paid probationary services on the same 

date. 

Skipping Criteria 

15. 

Education Code Section 44955, subdivision (d), provides additional 

requirements when a school district proposes to skip teachers in the layoff process. It 

states in pertinent part: 

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may 

deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of 

seniority for either of the following reasons: 

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel 

to teach a specific course or course of study . . . , and that 

the certificated employee has special training and 

experience necessary to teach that course or course of 

study . . . , which others with more seniority do not possess. 

16. 

Junior teachers may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the 

junior teachers possess the special training and experience to teach a specific 

necessary course that is not possessed by their more senior colleagues. (Ed. Code, § 

44949, subds. (b) and (d)(1); Poppers v. Tamalpais Union High School District (1986) 

184 Cal.App.3d 399.) 

17. 

The District has demonstrated a specific need to exclude from the layoff 

process and retain a junior employee to teach a specific course or course of study by 

14 

adopting Skipping Criteria for special education training and BCLAD certification. 

Consequently, the District complied with Education Code section 44955, subdivision 

(d), in establishing the Skipping Criteria to retain certificated employees possessing the 

special training and experience needed to teach such courses, or provide such services, 

that other employees with greater seniority do not possess. 

Bumping Rights 

18. 

According to Education Code § 44955, subdivision (b), a school district is 

prohibited from terminating the services of a permanent employee while retaining any 

probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, to render a service 

which the permanent employee is “certificated and competent to render.”  (Legal 

Conclusion 6.) Hence, if a school district notifies a senior teacher that his or her 

position is subject to reduction or discontinuance, the senior teacher has the right to 

transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. 

19. 

The term “certificated” is defined by the provisions of the Education Code 

pertaining to credentials, but “competent” is not specifically defined. School districts 

have broad discretion to establish competency standards for purposes of exercising 

bumping rights, limited by a reasonableness standard. (Duax v. Kern Community 

College District (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 564-65.) Competency may be defined in 

terms of skills and special qualifications for a position. (Forker v. Board of Trustees 

(1994) 160 Cal.App.3d 13.) 

20. 

In this instance, the Board’s definition of competence was reasonable and 

related to the special qualifications of the position. No respondent in this case, 

however, argued that they had the right to bump a junior employee pursuant to the 

15 

Reduction Resolution. No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to 

perform services that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 

Disposition 

21. 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the 

reduction of the particular kinds of service set forth in the Reduction Resolution, which 

cause relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils. (Factual Findings 

7-20.) The District may lay off Represented Respondents and Respondent Serrano, in 

reverse order of seniority, in order to reduce services, based on all the foregoing. 

1. 

The District Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained as to 

respondents Donna Bragg, Davina Cardone, Diana DeMars, Justin Donovan, Rochelle 

Ford, Tricia Henry, Brett Lane, Joan Louth, Laura Mason, Brennan Pope, Kimberly Sharp, 

Patty Peterson, Andrew Browning, Maribel White, Nicole Espinoza, Lauren Dann, 

Claudia Medrano, Debra Milne, Gabriela Ambriz, Deanna Romero, Arlene Jimenez, 

James Sisco, Breanna Varela, Christian Velarde, Sandra Alonso, Diana Donovan, 

Cassandra Ferris, Eder Fuentes, Susan Green, Sandra Hammond, Maleah Lopez, Mary 

Lang, Belinda Garcia, Mary Garcia, Richard Raddas, Wendy Sanchez, Carmen Serrano, 

and Yocelin Valencia. 

// 

// 

// 

ORDER 

16 

2. 

Notice shall be given to respondents in reverse order of seniority that 

their services will not be required for the 2019-2020 school year because of the  

reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.  Where necessary, that 

notice shall indicate if less than a full time equivalent position is affected. 

 

DATE: 

May 26, 2020

IRINA TENTSER 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 
 
 

 

17 

