BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
FONTANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force Concerning: 

ANTONIO C. ALVARADO, Respondent 

OAH No. 2020021106 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Kimberly J. Belvedere, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on April 21, 2020.1 

Margaret A. Chidester, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Margaret A. Chidester & 

Associates, represented the Fontana Unified School District (FUSD). 

                                              

1 In light of the President’s declaration of a national emergency over the COVID-

19 pandemic; the Governor’s proclamation of a State of Emergency and Executive 

Orders N-25-20 and N-33-20 pertaining to the pandemic; the declarations of county 

and city public health emergencies throughout the State; the directives from state and 

local officials to ensure social distancing and sheltering-in place; and in order to 

protect the health and safety of all public and OAH personnel, this matter was 

conducted telephonically. 

Jean Shin, Attorney at Law, California Teachers’ Association, represented 

respondent who was present. 

The parties exchanged exhibits prior to the hearing and ensured all witnesses 

were provided a copy thereof. Respondent did not offer any exhibits. The FUSD 

provided an electronic copy of its exhibits to OAH, which were marked electronically 

and admitted at hearing. 

The matter was submitted on April 21, 2020. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background 

1. 

Tracey Vackar is the Executive Director for College Careers and Economic 

Development for the district, and has been employed in that capacity for 

approximately six and a half years. Her duties include acquisition and maintenance of 

equipment, instructional development, professional development, accountability 

support, funding oversight, and local and state reporting. Ms. Vackar testified at the 

hearing. Her testimony, and documents she referred to during her testimony, are 

summarized as follows: 

There are three high schools in the district where automotive technology classes 

are offered – Kaiser, Summit, and AB Miller. There are three teachers who teach the 

automotive technology classes: Ray Brinkle, George Mendoza, and respondent. Several 

years ago, a decision was made to ensure that all automotive technology classes were 

certified by the National Automotive Technicians Education Association (NATEA). In 

order to become certified, all teachers who teach automotive technology classes must 

 

2 

be Automotive Service Excellence (ASE) certified in at least four areas. An instructional 

program certified by the NATEA and taught by teachers who are ASE certified would 

deliver a higher quality of education and would permit district students who complete 

an automotive technology course to test for and receive ASE certifications upon 

graduation. This opportunity, in turn, would allow students to find work immediately 

upon graduation and also expand the employment opportunities available to them, as 

many positions and internships will only accept applicants that hold ASE certifications. 

E-mail communications provided by the district showed that all three teachers 

have been working for the past several years to obtain and/or maintain ASE 

certifications. Over the past four years, the district set aside a large sum of money in 

order to assist in not only getting its automotive technology programs into 

compliance such that they could become certified, but also providing respondent and 

the other two automotive technology teachers the resources necessary to obtain 

and/or maintain ASE certifications. Other resources provided included: 

• College, Career and Economic Department paid for course 

materials for respondent to use for the ASE certification. 

Study guides were also purchased for him to assist with 

obtaining a passing grade for ASE certification. 

• Additional hours were paid to respondent to study for the 

exam at the teacher hourly rate. 

• The principal at AB Miller High School paid for some 

release days for respondent to study and prepare himself 

for the ASE exams. 

 

3 

• A teacher colleague was paid additional teacher hourly 

funds to assist respondent in preparing for the exam and to 

assist him in getting his automobile shop ready for the ASE 

certification. 

• The College, Career and Economic Development 

Department paid for the ASE certifications team to come to 

the school site to inspect the automobile shop. The ASE 

certifications team was going to certify the shop until they 

discovered respondent had not passed the ASE certification 

test. A time extension from the ASE Team was given to the 

site while respondent retook the certification exam. 

• Paid externship opportunities were offered to respondent 

to take when classes were not in session to enable him to 

stay current with industry knowledge. 

To date, Mr. Brinkle and Mr. Gomez have the required four ASE certifications 

necessary for the high schools to obtain their certification.2 Respondent is still missing 

one ASE certification. 

                                              

2 Summit High School has already become certified; the other two high schools 

are currently awaiting certifications but their final certifications were delayed, in part, 

due to respondent not having the required ASE certifications and, in part, because the 

COVID-19 pandemic has slowed and/or stopped the certification process. The district 

also had to shut down all campuses on March 21, 2020, due to the ongoing pandemic. 

 

4 

Board Resolution and Related Testimony 

1. 

On February 9, 2020, the board adopted Resolution No. 20-07, 

determining that it would be necessary to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of 

services at the end of the current school year. The board determined that the 

particular kinds of services that must be reduced for the 2020-2021 school year were 

the following full time equivalent (FTE) positions: 

1 Auto CTE Teacher (For Classes Not Certified by the 

National Automotive Technicians Education Association) 

2. 

3. 

The proposed reduction totaled one FTE position. 

Exhibit A to the Resolution stated: 

The Governing Board will seek to exempt from the order of 

certificated layoff, pursuant to Education Code section 

44955 because of special training, experience, or credentials 

that others with more seniority do not possess: 

1. 

Certificated personnel who possess CTE 

Auto/Transportation credentials and are certified by the 

National Automotive Technicians Education Foundation, 

who are currently assigned to CTE/auto positions, and who 

will be assigned to CTE/auto positions requiring NATEA 

certification for the 2020-2021 school year. 

4. 

The official job description for automotive technology teachers was 

revised following the adoption of Resolution No. 20-07, consistent with the need for 

teachers in those positions to have the required ASE certifications. 

 

5 

5. 

Linda Young is the Director of Certificated Human Resources for the 

district. Ms. Young testified at the hearing. Her testimony corroborated the testimony 

of Ms. Vackar. Ms. Young also testified that, following the adoption of Resolution No. 

20-07, the district identified all certificated persons in the district whose authorizations 

included automotive technology positions. They obtained a seniority list, which 

identified Mr. Brinkle, Mr. Gomez, and respondent. Neither of the other two teachers 

have submitted letters of resignation and the district does not have any indication of 

positively assured attrition. There was no need to engage in any skipping process 

because respondent is the most junior of all three teachers and also does not have the 

required certifications. 

6. 

On or before March 15, 2020, the district timely served on respondent 

notice that his services would not be required for the upcoming school year, and 

included all pertinent legal documents (i.e. the March 2, 2020, Statement of Reduction 

in Force; a copy of Resolution No. 20-07; Statement of Respondent; Notice of 

Participation; Notice of Hearing; Request for Discovery; and applicable law). 

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. All pre-hearing jurisdictional 

requirements were met. 

Respondent’s Testimony 

7. 

Respondent’s testimony is summarized as follows: respondent did not 

receive a deadline by which he had to obtain his ASE certifications and does not 

believe it is fair that he is being terminated. It was unethical to work with him all this 

time and not provide a deadline to obtain a certification, and then simply terminate his 

employment. Respondent has obtained three out of the four required ASE 

certifications, but all further testing has been suspended due to the COVID-19 

 

6 

pandemic. Respondent has also had personal family difficulties over the past nine 

months that have made obtaining his last ASE certification difficult. 

Other Findings 

8. 

The services addressed in Resolution No. 20-07 were “particular kinds of 

services” that can be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 

section 44955. The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue these particular kinds of 

services was not arbitrary or capricious, but constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 

9. 

The recommendation that respondent be terminated from employment 

was not related to his competency or performance as a teacher. 

10. 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related to 

the welfare of the district and its pupils. 

11. 

The reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services was 

necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees of the district as 

determined by the board. 

12.  No particular kinds of services were lowered to levels less than those 

levels mandated by state or federal law. 

13.  No certificated employee junior to respondent was retained to perform 

any services that respondent was certificated and competent to render. 

 

7 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Law 

satisfied. 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 

and 44955. All notice and jurisdictional requirements contained in those sections were 

2. 

Education Code section 44955, subd. (b), provides, in part: 

[W]henever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 

discontinued not later than the beginning of the following 

school year . . . the governing board may terminate the 

services of not more than a corresponding percentage of 

the certificated employees of the district, permanent as well 

as probationary, at the close of the school year. Except as 

otherwise provided by statute, the services of no permanent 

employee may be terminated under the provisions of this 

section while any probationary employee, or any other 

employee with less seniority, is retained to render a service 

which said permanent employee is certificated and 

competent to render. 

3. 

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a 

matter reserved to the discretion of the Superintendent and is not subject to second-

guessing in this proceeding. (Rutherford v. Bd. of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 

167.) The decision to reduce a particular kind of service must not be fraudulent, 

 

8 

arbitrary or capricious. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 

627, 637.) 

4. 

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the 

district and establishing requirements for employment. (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena 

Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) This discretion encompasses 

determining the training and experience necessary for particular positions. (Ibid.) 

Similarly, school districts have the discretion to determine particular kinds of services 

that will be eliminated, even though a service continues to be performed or provided 

in a different manner by the district. (Ibid.) 

Conclusion 

5. 

Cause exists under Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 for the 

FUSD to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services. The cause for the reduction 

or discontinuation of particular kinds of services related solely to the welfare of the 

schools and the pupils thereof. No employee with less seniority than any respondent is 

being retained to perform a service that any respondent is certificated and competent 

to render. 

6. 

It is recommended that the board give respondent notice before May 15, 

2020, that his services are no longer required by the district. 

ORDER 

The Statement of Reduction in Force is affirmed. The Fontana Unified School 

District may notify respondent that his services will not be needed or will be reduced 

 

9 

during the 2020-2021 school year due to reduction or discontinuance of particular 

kinds of services consistent with Board Resolution No. 20-07. 

DATE: May 1, 2020

 

KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

 

 

10 

