BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE NEVADA JOINT UNION  
HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF NEVADA 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of Certificated 

Employees: 

Julie Campbell1, Cassandra Frieden, Kristina Knox, Margarite 

Meja-Jordana, Laurel Phillips, Anthony Pisenti, Elizabeth 

Renteria, and James Wise, Respondents2 

OAH No. 2020030807 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Erin R. Koch-Goodman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by telephone on April 21, 2020. 

                                              

1 Exhibits refer to respondent Julie Campbell as both Julie Campbell and Julie 

Campbell-Coffin. In this Proposed Decision, she will be referred to as Julie Campbell. 

2 The District also served layoff notices to Paul Haas and Margaret McFadden-

Shopp. Mr. Haas did not request a hearing. Ms. McFadden-Shopp requested a hearing 

and then withdrew her request prior to hearing. 

Nevada Joint Union High School District (District) was represented by John 

Dietrich, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, Sacramento, 

California. 

and Price, LLP. 

Julie Campbell, Cassandra Frieden, Kristina Knox, Margarita Mejia-Jordana, 

Laurel Phillips, Anthony Pisneti, Elizabeth Renteria, and James Wise (collectively, 

respondents) were represented3 by Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp, Curtis 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was held open for 

simultaneous closing briefs. On April 30, 2020, the District submitted a Closing Brief, 

marked Exhibit 19, and the respondents submitted a Closing Brief, marked Exhibit G. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

Brett W. McFadden is the Superintendent of the Nevada Joint Union High 

School District (District). The actions of Superintendent McFadden, and those of the 

District’s staff and Board of Trustees (Board), were taken solely in their official 

capacities. 

2. 

On March 11, 2020, Superintendent McFadden recommended to the 

Board a reduction and/or elimination of particular kinds of services (PKS) and the 

                                              

3 Respondents were represented by Ms. Price to the extent no conflicts existed 

between them. Where conflicts did exist, the respondent testified on his/her own 

behalf, in the narrative.  

2 

termination of services of a corresponding number of certificated employees. The 

same day, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2019/20-12, entitled “Reduction of 

Particular Kinds of Services of Certificated Services” (Resolution), mandating the same, 

“in the best interests of the District and the welfare of the schools and the pupils.” The 

Resolution mandated a reduction or discontinuation of PKS in the amount of 9.2 full-

time equivalent (FTE) positions for the 2020-21 school year; the method to determine 

teacher layoffs; and the authority for Superintendent McFadden to do so. More 

specifically, the Resolution identified the 9.2 FTE to be eliminated, as follows: 

Nevada Union High School 

English 

 

Social Science 

Science – Biology 

Science – Ecology 

Science – Chemistry  

Science – Physics 

 

Sports Medicine 

Mathematics  

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.80 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

0.20 FTE 

0.20 FTE 

0.40 FTE 

0.20 FTE 

0.40 FTE 

0.80 FTE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Science – Earth and Space  

0.20 FTE 

TV Production/Communication Arts 

0.20 FTE 

Foreign Language – Spanish 

0.80 FTE 

Bear River High School 

English 

 

Science – Chemistry  

Integrated Science   

Mathematics  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.60 FTE 

0.20 FTE 

0.20 FTE 

0.80 FTE 

1.60 FTE 

9.2 FTE 

Foreign Language – Spanish 

0.40 FTE 

Silver Springs High School 

Business Math 

0.20 FTE 

North Point Academy 

Independent Study   

Total FTE 

 

3. 

The Resolution specified the method to determine teacher layoffs, 

including:  

C. That the reduction of certificated staff be achieved by the 

termination of regular employees and not by the 

termination of temporary and substitute employees. 

D. That “competency” as described in Education Code 

section 44955(b), for purposes of bumping, shall necessarily 

include all credentials, authorizations, training and 

experience possessed by the employee to be bumped that 

4 

are relevant to the subject matter area of the position to be 

filled, including [Bilingual, Crosscultural, Language, and 

Academic Development] BCLAD authorization. 

E. That, as between certificated employees with the same 

seniority date, the order of termination shall be determined 

solely by the Board-adopted criteria. 

4. 

Finally, the Resolution directed Superintendent McFadden to initiate 

layoff procedures and give appropriate notices to all employees whose services would 

be terminated as a result of the Board’s action to reduce or discontinue PKS. On March 

12, 2020, Superintendent McFadden served each respondent with a written notice, 

entitled “Notice of Recommendation That Services Will Not be Required” (Notice), of 

his recommendation to the Board that the respondents’ services be terminated at the 

close of the 2019-20 school year. A copy of the Resolution was served with the Notice. 

5. 

Respondents timely filed Requests for Hearing. On April 6, 2020, Lesa St. 

Germain, District Human Resources Coordinator, served respondents with a March 30, 

2020 OAH Order Regarding Telephonic Hearing and a Notice of Hearing for Tuesday, 

April 21, 2020, at 9:00 a.m. Jurisdiction for the subject proceedings exists pursuant to 

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 

Cause for Reduction or Discontinuance of Services 

6. 

The District serves a poor, rural population of 2,600 students in Nevada 

County, a 600-square mile area on the south western slope of the Sierra Nevada 

mountains. The District maintains seven high schools: Bear River and Nevada Union 

(comprehensive), Ghidotti (early college), North Point Academy and Nevada Union 

Adult School (independent study), and NU Tech and Silver Springs (continuation). 

5 

Approximately 40 percent of District students take part in the free or reduced-price 

lunch program.  

7. 

Currently, the District is operating in a budget deficit of 2.5 million 

dollars. Future budget projections are not good. Based on Governor Gavin Newsom’s 

latest budget, the District has a projected budget deficit of 1.2 million for 2020-21, and 

1.3 million for 2021-22. Further, Governor Newsom has cautioned the District that, 

following the COVID-19 pandemic, substantial cuts should be expected for the next 

several years. As a result, the District has already eliminated the projected cost of living 

adjustment (COLA) for next year. In addition, the District is uncertain of the future of 

instruction: whether in-person or distance learning will be offered for the 2020-21 

school year; the certificated staff needed to serve the student population in either 

circumstance; and the costs of both. 

Seniority  

8. 

Seniority is established by the date upon which an employee first 

rendered paid services in a probationary position. (Ed. Code, § 44845.) Ms. St. Germain 

created and maintains the seniority list for the District, collecting relevant information 

from teacher personnel files and the California Teaching Commission. The District’s 

seniority list contains 173 teachers. Respondents are all certificated employees ranked 

on the seniority list.  

TIE-BREAKING 

9. 

On February 12, 2020, the Board adopted Resolution No. 9-19/20, 

entitled “Determination of Seniority Among Certificated Employees with the Same 

Seniority Date” (“Tie-Breaker” Resolution), naming 10 criteria to determine the order of 

termination between employees who first rendered paid service to the District on the 

6 

same date, and the application and ranking of each employee relative to the other 

employees in the group. Further, the criteria “shall be applied based on information on 

file as of the employee’s first probationary paid day with the [District].” Ultimately, 

“[t]he employee with the highest number of points will have the highest seniority 

date.” The criteria are: (1) years of verified experience previous to current employment 

as a credentialed teacher in a probationary/permanent, K-12 certificated position in a 

public school – 1 point per year; (2) number of secondary (9-12) teaching credentials 

(including special education) – 1 point per credential; (3) number of secondary-level 

(9-12) supplementary authorizations – 1 point per supplementary authorization area; 

(4) number of secondary waivers, emergency permits, one-year non-renewable, pre-

internship or internship credentials – 0.5 point per credential; (5) number of 

elementary and middle school supplementary authorizations (i.e., introduction 

courses)  – 1 point per supplementary authorization area; (6) number of special service 

credentials or specialist credentials (i.e., Pupil Personnel Services, Library Media, 

Nursing, Reading or Agriculture Specialist) - 1 point per credential; (7) Crosscultural 

Language, and Academic Development (CLAD), BCLAD, Specifically Designed 

Academic Instruction in English (SDAIE) or English Leaner (EL) authorizations – 0.5 

point per authorization; (8) earned degrees beyond Bachelor’s Level – 1 point for a 

Master’s degree and 2 points for a Doctorate degree; (9) number of elementary or 

multiple subject credentials (anything less than full 9-12 authorization) - 0.25 points 

per credential or authorization; and, (10) in the event that employees have a common 

date of hire and have equal qualifications based on application of the above criteria, 

the following further criteria will be used based on the first year of hire with the 

District: Head Coach – 0.5 points per year; Assistant Coach – 0.25 points per year; and, 

Club Advisor - 0.25 points per year. Finally, “assuming that the preceding criteria do 

7 

not resolve all ties between employees having the same seniority date, then the 

relative seniority of the remaining employees shall be determined by lot.” 

10.  Ms. St. Germain created and maintains the tie-breaker data. The data was 

last updated approximately one-week prior to hearing. The tie-breaker data lists the 

most recently hired certificated teachers who first rendered paid service to the District 

on the same date: August 13, 2018 (13), August 1, 2019 (2), and August 12, 2019 (11). 

The District implemented tie-breaking criteria to internally rank the respondents hired 

on the above dates. Respondents Cassandra Frienden (rank 8) and Laurel Phillips (rank 

2) both began paid work for the District on August 13, 2018. Respondents Kristina 

Knox (rank 6), Margarite Meja-Jordana (rank 4), and Anthony Pisenti (rank 9) all began 

paid work for the District on August 12, 2019.   

11. 

At hearing, respondents Phillips and Frieden disputed the tie-breaker 

data. Respondent Phillips seeks to correct her years of verified teaching experience, 

noting she had 10 years, and not five years, of verified teaching experience prior to 

joining the District; as a result, respondent Phillips should be moved from rank 2 to 

rank 1 for the hire date of August 13, 2018. However, in rank 1, respondent Phillips 

would still have received a layoff notice. She was the only Spanish teacher hired by the 

District on August 13, 2018, and working at Nevada Union. (See discussion, infra). 

12. 

Respondent Frieden4 questioned the rationale for two of the tie-breaker 

criteria: limiting years of teaching experience to years completed and verified prior to 

                                              

4 Respondent Phillips also questioned the rationale for the tie-breaker criteria 

limiting the years of teaching experience to years completed and prior to teaching at 

the District.  

8 

teaching at the District; and limiting credentials to those held prior to teaching at the 

District. First, all teachers hired on August 13, 2018, and still employed by the District, 

earned the same additional year of teaching experience in the 2018-19 school year as 

respondent Frieden. As such, the change would require adding one point to all 

teachers on the list, rendering the adjustment meaningless. Second, respondent 

Frieden seeks an additional point for a second teaching credential she obtained while 

employed by the District, making her a more diverse asset. Respondent Frieden 

believes not counting her second credential is inapposite to the profession of 

teaching; teachers should be encouraged to continue learning, thereby helping the 

District and its students. Respondent Frieden’s argument is persuasive. Assuming 

respondent Frieden was given credit for her additional credential, she would have 

moved from rank 8 to rank 5 or 6, with a lot drawn to determine her ranking between 

the two. However, in rank 5 or 6, respondent Frieden would still have received a layoff 

notice. She was the only Science teacher hired on August 13, 2018, and working at 

Bear River. (See discussion, infra).  

LAYOFFS 

13. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides that no senior 

employee may be terminated while any less senior employee is retained to render a 

service which the more senior permanent employee is “certificated and competent” to 

render. “It [is] the district’s obligation under section 44955, subdivision (b), to 

determine whether any permanent employee whose employment is to be terminated 

in an economic layoff possess[es] the seniority and qualifications which would entitle 

him/her to be assigned to another position.” (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist. 

(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 137.) The Resolution identified the competency criteria as: 

“all credentials, authorizations, training and experience possessed by the employee to 

9 

be bumped that are relevant to the subject matter area of the position to be filled, 

including BCLAD authorization.”  

Competency 

14. 

Superintendent McFadden, Assistant Superintendent Dan Frisella, and 

Ms. St. Germain evaluated the competency of each teacher who was bumped, using 

the competency criteria. Ms. St. Germain created and maintains the bumping analysis.  

15. 

Uniformly, respondents each argued their competency to bump less 

senior teachers with assignments in Credit Recovery (Nicholas Montoya5 (0.20 FTE) 

Permanent #160, Silver Springs) and Independent Studies (Julie Campbell (0.80 FTE) 

Probationary #137, North Point Academy; Margaret McFadden-Shopp (0.80 FTE), 

Probationary #139, North Point Academy; and Margarita Mejia-Jordana (1.0 FTE) 

Probationary #163, NU Tech6). In addition, respondent James Wise (Permanent #106) 

argued his competency to teach the Get Focused, Stay Focus (GFSF) curriculum.  

16. 

In response, the District noted the following considerations. First, NU 

Tech and Silver Springs are continuation high schools and North Point Academy is an 

independent study school; these alternative schools offer an almost incomparable 

teaching environment, requiring District-specific experience teaching to, and an 

understanding of how to engage non-mainstream District students. For example, Mr. 

                                              

5 Mr. Montoya was not served a layoff notice. 

6 Ms. Campbell, Ms. McFadden-Shopp, and Ms. Mejia-Jordana were served 

layoff notices. By date of hire, the three are less senior to several other respondents.  

10 

Montoya’s Credit Recovery class at Silver Springs involves direct subject-matter 

instruction and not simply monitoring mainstream self-study students.  

17. 

Second, the GFSF curriculum is unique. The District began offering the 

GFSF curriculum in the 2018-19 school year at Ghidotti (early college) and Bear River 

(comprehensive), and in the 2019-20 school year at Nevada Union (comprehensive). 

GFSF teachers must have specialized training. For example, Jessica Lee (Permanent 

#103) teaches GFSF at Nevada Union. She attended a two-day GFSF training in 

Redding in June 2019, participated in the February 2019 one-day site-visit 

demonstration in Manteca, and has completed Academic Innovation webinar trainings 

throughout the year. Respondent Kristina Knox (Probationary #165) attended a three-

day GFSF workshop in Santa Barbara, taught by the GFSF author; participated in the 

February 2019 one-day site-visit demonstration in Manteca, and has completed online 

training throughout the year. In addition, respondent Knox and Josie Andrews 

(Permanent #120) have, together, adapted and implemented the GFSF curriculum to 

the needs of Bear River students. In sum, the District determined that a competent 

teacher had District experience in a teaching environment or particular subject matter. 

The District’s competency determinations properly considered all credentials, 

authorizations, training and experience of a bumped teacher.  

Bumping 

18. 

Respondent Frieden (#148) has a hire date of August 13, 2018. She is a 

probationary employee with 1.0 FTE in Science at Bear River. She holds a single subject 

credential in Biological Sciences - Health. She was identified for layoff on the basis of 

the PKS reduction in Science. Specifically, respondent Frieden will be laid off for 1.0 

FTE (0.20 FTE Science – Chemistry; 0.20 FTE Science – Integrated, Bear River; 0.40 FTE 

Science – Chemistry; and 0.20 Science – Physics, Nevada Union). Ms. Frieden was 

11 

bumped by Bear River teacher Peter Gammelgard (Permanent #114) for 0.20 FTE 

Science - Chemistry. Mr. Gammelgard is senior to her, and is certificated and 

competent to teach the relevant subject matter. Respondent Frieden was also bumped 

by Nevada Union teacher Christopher Bishop (Permanent #9) for 0.40 FTE Science - 

Chemistry. Mr. Bishop is senior to her, and is certificated and competent to teach the 

relevant subject matter. Ms. Frieden was also bumped by Nevada Union teacher 

William Meyer (Permanent #107) for 0.20 FTE Science - Physics. Mr. Meyer is senior to 

her, and is certificated and competent to teach the relevant subject matter. Given the 

above, Ms. Frieden properly received a layoff notice. 

19. 

Respondent Knox (#165) has a hire date of August 12, 2019. She is a 

probationary employee with 1.0 FTE in English at Nevada Union. She holds a single 

subject credential in English. Ms. Knox teaches English and GFSF at Nevada Union. She 

was identified for layoff on the basis of the PKS reduction in English. Specifically, Ms. 

Knox will be laid off for 0.40 FTE (minus 0.80 Nevada Union; plus 0.40 Bear River). Ms. 

Knox was bumped by Nevada Union teacher Devin Bradley (Probationary #161) for 

0.80 FTE in English. Mr. Badley is senior to her, and is certificated and competent to 

teach the relevant subject matter. However, respondent Knox then bumped 

respondent Anthony Pisenti (#168 Probationary) for 0.40 FTE in English at Bear River. 

Respondent Knox is senior to respondent Pisenti, and is certificated and competent to 

teach the relevant subject matter. Given the above, respondent Knox properly received 

a layoff notice. 

20. 

Respondent Laurel Phillips (#142) has a hire date of August 13, 2018. She 

is a probationary employee with a 0.60 FTE in Spanish at Nevada Union. She holds a 

single subject credential in Spanish and Geosciences. She was identified for layoff on 

the basis of the PKS reduction in Spanish. Specifically, respondent Phillips will be laid 

12 

off for 0.60 FTE. Respondent Phillips does not possess the seniority or qualifications to 

bump into another classroom assignment. Given the above, respondent Phillips 

properly received a layoff notice. 

21. 

Respondent Pisenti (#168) has a hire date of August 12, 2019. He is a 

probationary employee with a 1.0 FTE in English at Bear River. He holds a single 

subject credential in English. He was identified for layoff based on the PKS reduction in 

English. Specifically, respondent Pisenti will be laid off for 1.0 FTE (0.60 Bear River and 

0.40 Nevada Union). Mr. Pisenti was bumped by Nevada Union teacher respondent 

Knox (Probationary #165) for 0.40 FTE in English. Respondent Knox is senior to him, 

and is certificated and competent to teach the relevant subject matter. However, 

respondent Pisenti does not possess the seniority or qualifications to bump into 

another classroom assignment. Given the above, respondent Pisenti properly received 

a layoff notice. 

22. 

Respondent Elizabeth Renteria (#136) has a hire date of August 14, 2017. 

She is a probationary employee with a 1.0 FTE in Spanish at Nevada Union. She holds a 

single subject credential in Spanish. She was identified for layoff on the basis of the 

PKS reduction in Spanish. Specifically, respondent Renteria will be laid off for 0.60 FTE 

in Spanish (0.40 FTE Bear River and 0.20 Nevada Union). Respondent Renteria was 

bumped by Bear River teacher Daniel Bussinger (Permanent #82) for 0.40 FTE. Mr. 

Bussinger is senior to her, and is certificated and competent to teach the relevant 

subject matter. Given the above, respondent Renteria properly received a layoff notice. 

23. 

Respondent James Wise (#106) has a hire date of August 18, 2015. He is 

a permanent employee with a 1.0 FTE in Sports Medicine. He holds a Career Technical 

Education (CTE) single subject credential in Health Science and Medical Technology. 

He was identified for layoff based on the PKS reduction in Sports Medicine. 

13 

Specifically, respondent Wise will be laid off for 0.40 FTE in Sports Medicine. 

Respondent Wise does not possess the seniority or qualifications to bump into 

another classroom assignment. Given the above, respondent Wise properly received a 

0.40 layoff notice. 

24. 

Independent Studies. North Point Academy/NU Tech must eliminate 1.60 

FTE in Independent Studies. North Point Academy is a continuation school and NU 

Tech is an independent studies school. The three least senior Independent Studies 

teachers are: respondents Julie Campbell (Probationary #137) at North Point Academy 

with 0.80 FTE; Margaret McFadden-Shopp (Probationary #139) at North Point 

Academy with 0.80 FTE; and Margarita Mejia-Jordana (Probationary #163) at NU Tech 

with 1.0 FTE. 

a.  Respondent Campbell (#137) has a hire date of October 25, 2017. She is a 

probationary employee with 0.80 FTE in Independent Studies at North Point 

Academy. She holds a multiple subject credential. She was identified for 

layoff based on the PKS reduction in Independent Studies. However, 

respondent Campbell possesses the seniority and qualifications to bump 

respondent McFadden-Shopp (#139 Probationary) at North Point Academy 

for 0.80 FTE, and subsequently bump respondent Mejia-Jordana 

(Probationary #163) at NU Tech for 0.80 FTE, should she desire. Given the 

above, respondent Campbell properly received a layoff notice. 

b.  Respondent McFadden-Shopp (#139) has a hire date of January 30, 2018. 

She is a probationary employee with 0.80 FTE in Independent Studies at 

North Point Academy. She holds a single subject credential in Biological 

Sciences. She was identified for layoff based on the PKS reduction in 

Independent Studies. However, respondent McFadden-Shopp possesses the 

14 

seniority and qualifications to bump respondent Mejia-Jordana 

(Probationary #163) at NU Tech for 0.80 FTE, should she desire. Given the 

above, respondent McFadden-Shopp properly received a layoff notice. 

c.   Respondent Mejia-Jordana (#163) has a hire date of August 12, 2019. She is 

a probationary employee with 1.0 FTE in Independent Studies at NU Tech. 

She holds a single subject credential in Social Science. She was identified for 

layoff based on the PKS reduction in Independent Studies. Respondent 

Mejia-Jordana does not possess the seniority or qualifications to bump into 

another classroom assignment. Given the above, respondent Mejia-Jordana 

properly received a layoff notice. 

25. 

In sum, the District considered seniority, competency, and attrition, as 

well as properly applied criteria for tie-breaking and bumping, to implement the 9.2 

FTE PKS reduction for school year 2020-21. In other words, tie-breaking procedures 

were implemented as necessary between those employees who first rendered paid 

service on the same date, and bumping was employed to ensure that the more senior 

teachers, certificated and competent to render a PKS, were retained over those with 

less seniority.  

26. 

Any other assertions put forth by respondents at the hearing and not 

addressed above are found to be without merit and are rejected. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 

15 

2. 

The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next 

school year is an appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955. As 

stated in San Jose Teachers Assn v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the 

reduction of PKS on the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that 

section, and, “in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in 

certificated staff, section 44955 is the only statutory authority available to school 

districts to effectuate that reduction.” The District must be solvent to provide 

educational services, and cost savings are necessary to resolve its financial crisis. The 

Superintendent’s decision to reduce PKS was a proper exercise of his discretion. 

3. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 

subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall 

not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 

determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 

employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (Rutherford v. Board 

of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)  

4. 

The Layoff Notices sent to respondents indicated the statutory basis for 

the reduction of services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide them due 

process. (San Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara 

Federation of Teachers v. Governing Board (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The description 

of services to be reduced, both in the Board Resolutions and in the Layoff Notices, 

adequately described PKS. (Zalac v. Ferndale USD (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.) 

5. 

Education Code section 44955 provides that when certificated employees 

face layoffs due to reduction or elimination of PKS, the District has an affirmative 

obligation to reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions 

held by junior teachers, if the senior teachers have both the credentials and 

16 

competence to occupy such positions. The clear intent of the statute is to prevent 

school districts from laying off senior teachers while retaining junior teachers. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c) provides in pertinent part:  

Services of such employees shall be terminated in the 

inverse of the order in which they were employed . . . . The 

governing board shall make assignments and 

reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be 

retained to render any service which their seniority and 

qualifications entitle them to render . . . .  

6. 

The District appropriately considered all positively assured attrition which 

occurred during the computation period prior to submitting the PKS Resolution to the 

Board for its approval. In addition, the District appropriately applied tie-breaking 

criteria and bumping rules, and allowed bumping based upon the more senior 

employee’s competency (e.g., credential or authorization) to teach the assignment of 

the less senior teacher. 

7. 

The services identified in the Resolution are PKS that can be reduced or 

discontinued under Education Code section 44955. Cause exists for the reduction of 

the PKS and for the reduction of 9.2 FTE certificated positions for the 2020-21 school 

year pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. Cause for the reduction or 

discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and 

pupils within the meaning of section 44949. Therefore, cause exists to give 

respondents notice that their services will be reduced or will not be required for the 

ensuing 2020-21 school year. 

17 

RECOMMENDATION 

Cause exists for the reduction of 9.2 full-time equivalent certificated teaching 

positions for the 2020-21 school year. Notice shall be given to respondents that their 

services will be reduced or will not be required for the 2020-21 school year, because of 

the reduction and/or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. Notice shall be 

given in inverse order of seniority.   

DATE: May 7, 2020

 

ERIN R. KOCH-GOODMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

18 

