BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF  
MOUNT DIABLO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 

In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction in Force of: 

The Certificated Employees Identified in Attachment A, 

Respondents. 

OAH No. 2020030728 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Diane Schneider, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 23, 2020. This hearing was 

conducted telephonically and by videoconference. The participants appeared from 

various locations near Oakland, California. 

Attorney Joshua A. Stevens, Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP, represented the 

Mount Diablo Unified School District. 

Attorney Ernest H. Tuttle III, Tuttle & McCloskey, represented the respondents 

identified in Attachment A, with the exception of administrators Afsaneh Olinga, Craig 

Bocks, and Lisa Murphy Oates. The following respondents were present at hearing: 

Anjelika Saverio, Debra Niethold, Diana Castellanos, Erika Austen, Jeong Kinser, Tyler 

Mintzer, Jessica Moreno, Nancy Grabow, Rebecca Schnee, Tamara Prosise, Valerie 

Gallardo, Afsaneh Olinga, Craig Bocks, and Lisa Murphy Oates. 

The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 23, 2020. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Robert Martinez, Ed.D., made and filed the Statement of Reduction in 

Force in his official capacity as Superintendent of the Mt. Diablo Unified School District 

(District). 

Oates. 

2. 

The respondents listed on Attachment A, attached hereto and 

incorporated herein, are certificated employees of the District who were served with a 

Reduction in Force packet. Prior to hearing, the District rescinded the layoff notices 

issued to respondents Katherine Koch and Rebekah Anthon. At hearing, the District 

rescinded the layoff notices issued to respondents Erika Austen and Lisa Murphy 

3. 

On March 9, 2020, the Board of Education of Mount Diablo School 

District (Board) passed Resolution No. 19/20-42. Resolution No. 19/20-42,1 attached 

hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment B, sets forth the Board’s determination 

that is necessary and in the best interests of the District and its students, to reduce or 

discontinue particular kinds of services for 2020-2021 school year, for a total of 117.04 

full-time equivalent (FTE) certificated positions. Resolution No. 19/20-42 directed 

Superintendent Martinez or his designee, to give appropriate notices to all employees 

                                              

1The Board’s Tie-Breaker Resolution, No. 19/20-39, was attached to Resolution 

No. 19/20-42 and is included in Attachment B. 

2 

whose positions will or be may affected by the action, in accordance with the 

applicable provisions of the Education Code. 

4. 

By letter dated March 13, 2019, Superintendent Martinez gave written 

notice to 106 certificated employees of the recommendation that their services will not 

be required for the 2020-2021 school year. In his letter, Superintendent Martinez 

explained the reasons for his recommendation. He emphasized that the 

recommendation to reduce or eliminate services was based solely upon the District’s 

budgetary requirements and was not a reflection of the District’s esteem for its 

employees. The layoff notices were sent to the certificated employees at the addresses 

they provided to the District, by certified mail, return receipt requested.  

5. 

Ninety-seven of the certificated employees, respondents herein, filed 

timely requests for hearing to determine if there is cause for eliminating their services 

for the 2020-2021 school year. A Statement of Reduction in Force was served on 

respondents, all of whom are deemed to have timely filed Notices of Participation.  

6. 

All Notices were timely and properly served on respondents. All Notices 

and other jurisdictional requirements contained in Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955 have been timely provided or satisfied.  

7. 

Before issuing the layoff notices, the District took into account all 

positively assured attrition.  

8. 

Emily Lopez Frizzell is the District’s Senior Human Resource Specialist. In 

consultation with the District’s Associate General Counsel, Cesar Alvarado, and the 

Interim Director of Human Resources, Michael Gardner, Frizzell performed a number of 

tasks in connection with the layoff. The tasks included preparing and sending layoff 

3 

notices, Reduction in Force packets, and notices of hearing, and preparing the 

District’s seniority lists.  

Skipping Issues 

9. 

Resolution No. 19/20-42 authorizes the District to deviate from 

terminating certificated employees in order of seniority where the District 

demonstrates a specific need for employees with special training and experience to 

teach a specific course or courses of study which others with more seniority do not 

possess. The process of retaining junior employees if such conditions are present, is 

commonly referred to as “skipping.” The skipping criteria, set forth in Resolution 

19/20-42, provide: 

There is a direct and specific need within the District for 

certificated employees who possess special training and/or 

experience, or competency, necessary to teach specific 

courses or courses of study or to provide specific services to 

students of the District, which others with more seniority do 

not possess, as follows: 

a. 

Courses requiring Bilingual Cross-Cultural Language 

and Development (BCLAD) certificates, which are 

highly specialized programs requiring the possession 

and utilization of additional specialized certificates 

and/or credentials. 

b. 

Courses requiring IB: Completion of District 

Approved International Baccalaureate training, which 

4 

are highly specialized programs requiring the 

possession and utilization of additional training. 

C. 

Courses requiring Adaptive Physical Education 

credential or supplementary authorization which 

are highly specialized programs requiring the 

possession and utilization of additional specialized 

certificates and/or credentials. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955(d)(1), it will be 

necessary to retain the services of certificated employees in 

the 2020-2021 school year, regardless of seniority, who 

possess these qualifications as demonstrated by the 

possession of a valid certificate and/or credential or special 

training and experience and use that certificate and/or 

credential or that special training and experience in the 

employee's 2020-2021 assignment. 

10. 

Frizzell explained that the teaching assignments for the 2020-2021 

school year were not made on March 9, 2020, when the skipping criteria were adopted 

by the Board. According to Frizzell, teaching assignments for the 2020-2021 school 

year are made on April 27, 2020. No teacher, therefore, could meet the criterion that 

he or she would be using the specialized training and experience in their assignment 

for the 2020-2021 school year.  

11. 

Diana Castellanos: The District has a direct and specific need for 

certificated employees who possess specialized training and experience to teach the 

5 

International Baccalaureate (IB) curriculum, which is offered at some of the District’s 

elementary, middle and high schools.  

12. 

Castellanos completed District-approved IB training, and she taught IB 

curriculum at Ygnacio Valley High School during the 2018-2019 school year. 

Castellanos was involuntarily transferred from Ygnacio Valley High School to Concord 

High School for the 2019-2020 school year, where she currently teaches Spanish. 

According to Frizzell, the District determined that Castellanos did not meet the criteria 

to be skipped because although Castellanos taught IB curriculum during the 2018-

2019 school year, her current teaching assignment is not at an IB school. Castellanos 

would be happy to return to teaching IB curriculum. 

13. 

The District stipulated that it skipped teachers less senior to Castellanos 

who are teaching IB curriculum in their current assignments. Those teachers did not 

receive layoff notices. 

14. 

Debra Niethold: The District maintains separate Adaptive Physical 

Education (PE) classes that are different from General Education PE classes. Niethold 

currently teaches PE to fourth and fifth graders in a general education setting. 

Niethold also holds a credential to teach Adaptive PE. She believes that she should 

have been retained because she uses some of the knowledge that she gained from her 

Adaptive PE training in her work teaching PE in a general education setting. The 

District did not retain any teachers who had less seniority than Niethold to teach 

Adaptive PE.  

Administrators Bocks and Olinga 

15. 

Craig Bocks and Afsaneh Olinga are vice-principals who received layoff 

notices. Olinga holds a credential to teach foreign language, and her seniority date is 

6 

November 19, 2019. Bocks is credentialed to teach social science, and his seniority 

date is August 13, 2018.  

16.  Olinga and Bocks testified at hearing to their disappointment at losing 

their positions as administrators.  

17. 

Bocks and Olinga began working for the District as administrators, and 

they received seniority credit for the time that they worked as site administrators at 

their respective schools.2 The District took into account their placement on the 

District’s seniority list prior to issuing layoff notices to them. Bocks and Olinga impress 

as highly competent and dedicated professionals. The District, however, did not retain 

any junior employees to render services that either Bocks or Olinga are certificated 

and competent to perform.  

Notice to Tyler Mintzer 

18.  Mintzer claims that the District failed to comply with the notice 

requirements set forth in in section 44949, subdivision (d). That section provides that 

any notice sent by the District to the employee is “deemed sufficient” if it is sent to the 

last known address of the employee.  

19.  On January 20, 2020, Mintzer moved from Clayton to a new residence in 

Concord. He notified the United States Postal Service of his change of address on 

January 18, 2020. Because Mintzer was distracted by his move, he forgot to inform the 

District of his new address. Mintzer, however, thought that the postal service had 

notified the District of his new address in the end of January or the beginning of 

                                              

2 See Education Code section 44956.5. 

7 

February, and that the District would update his address based on information it 

received from the postal service.  

20. 

Prior to March 15, 2020, Frizzell sent the preliminary layoff notice to 

Mintzer, by certified mail, at the last known address that he provided to the District, 

which was in Clayton. Each employee is required to provide the District with his or her 

address and notify the District of any changes to the address. At the time the notice 

was sent, District had not been notified of any change in Mintzer’s address.  

21.  Mintzer first learned about the layoff on March 19, 2020, after receiving 

an email from the Mount Diablo Education Association. On March 20, 2020, after 

Frizzell learned that Mintzer had moved, she mailed him notice of the layoff to his new 

address. 

22. 

Because the District sent the preliminary layoff notice to Mintzer at his 

last known address, the notice provided by the District is deemed sufficient under 

Education Code section 44949, subdivision (d).  

Request by Jeong Kinser to Continue Employment  

23. 

Kinser testified at hearing. She is a kindergarten teacher with a seniority 

date of August 29, 2019, who received a layoff notice. Kinser has a multiple subject 

teaching credential and a single subject teaching credential. She also has advanced 

degrees in educational technology and teaching English to students who speak other 

languages. Kinser is passionate about teaching technology in an educational setting. 

She believes that there is currently a greater need than ever to train students to use 

remote learning technology. Her partner has medical conditions that make it hard for 

him to work. In light of her skills and the economic pressures her family faces following 

the outbreak of Covid-19, Kinser asked the District to allow her to continue teaching. 

8 

Ultimate Findings 
 

to perform.  

24.  With the exception of Castellanos, no certificated junior employee is 

being retained to perform services that any respondent is certificated and competent 

25. 

The reduction of discontinuation of services is related solely to the 

welfare of the District and of its pupils. 

26. 

Any contentions made by respondents not addressed above are found to 

be without merit and rejected. 

 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

44949 and 44955.3 Pursuant to Factual Findings 6 and 22, all notices and jurisdictional 

requirements contained in these sections have been satisfied.  

2. 

The services identified in Attachment B are particular kinds of services 

that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955 and 

pertinent case law. (See Campbell Elem. Teachers Assn., Inc. v. Abbott (1978) 76 

Cal.App.3d 796, Degener v. Governing Board (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.) The Board’s 

decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor 

capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion.  

                                              

3 All further statutory citations are to the Education Code. 

9 

3. 

In issuing its layoff notices to effectuate the reduction in teaching 

services, the District must comply with section 44955, subdivision (b), which provides:  

Except as otherwise provided for by statute, the services of 

no permanent employee may be terminated under the 

provisions of this section while . . . any other employee with 

less seniority, is retained to render a service which said 

permanent employee is certificated and competent to 

render. 

Additionally, section 44955, subdivision (c), requires the District to make assignments 

“in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which their 

seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.” 

Skipping Issues 

4. 

Although the Legislature mandates that teachers have a right to be 

retained and that assignments be made, according to seniority, a limited exception 

exists under section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), which allows the District to deviate from 

terminating certificated employees in order of seniority. Under section 44955, 

subdivision (d)(1), a District may retain a junior employee over a senior employee, if 

the District demonstrates a specific need for a teacher to teach a specific course or 

course of study for which special training and experience are necessary, and that no 

senior teacher has the necessary special training and experience to teach the specific 

course or course of study. If the District establishes the conditions described in section 

44955, subdivision (d)(1), the District may skip over a junior teacher who possesses the 

special training and experience to teach a specific course or course of study and may 

lay off a more senior teacher instead. It is the District’s burden to demonstrate that its 

10 

proposed skips comply with the statutory requirements set forth in section 44955, 

subdivision (d). (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School District (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127.) 

5. 

Castellanos: As established by Board Resolution 19/20-42, the District has 

a specific need to retain certificated employees who have special training and 

experience teaching IB curriculum. Castellanos completed the District-approved IB 

training and taught IB curriculum during the 2018-2019 school year. The District, 

however, issued Castellanos a layoff notice while retaining junior teachers to teach IB 

curriculum, in spite of the fact that Castellanos has the specialized training and 

experience to teach in the District’s IB programs.  

Castellanos asserts that the District’s retention of junior employees to teach IB 

curriculum was improper because it was inconsistent with its skipping criteria and 

contravened the provisions in section 44955, subdivision (d). She also asserts that 

pursuant to section 44955, subdivision (c), she is entitled to be assigned to an IB 

school by reason of her seniority and qualifications.  

The District contends that the layoff of Castellanos was consistent with its 

skipping criteria, because although Castellanos had previously taught IB curriculum, 

she was not teaching IB in her current position in the 2019-2020 school year. The 

skipping criteria contained in the Resolution adopted by the Board, however, do not 

contain any requirement that in order to be skipped, a teacher must utilize such 

specialized training, certification or credential in the teacher’s current assignment. 

The District’s argument is unpersuasive. The District erred when it determined 

that Castellanos did not satisfy its skipping criteria. As a result, the District improperly 

retained junior employees to teach in IB curriculum while laying off Castellanos. As 

such, the District’s layoff violated section 44955, subdivisions (b), (c), and (d)(1).  

11 

6. 

Niethold: Niethold claims that she should have been retained because 

she possesses an Adaptive PE credential and, although she does not teach Adaptive 

PE, she uses some of the skills she learned while obtaining this credential in her work 

as a regular PE teacher. She did not establish, however, that the District retained a 

junior employee to teach Adaptive PE or that she possesses special training and 

experience as an Adaptive PE teacher which others with more seniority do not possess. 

Accordingly, the District’s layoff of Niethold did not violate section 44955, subdivisions 

(b), or (d)(1). 

Conclusion 

7. 

Cause exists because of the reduction or discontinuance of particular 

kinds of services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to 

respondents, other than those identified in Finding 2 (layoff notices rescinded for 

Katherine Koch, Rebekah Anthon, Erika Austen, and Lisa Murphy Oates), and Legal 

Conclusion 5 (improper layoff of Castellanos), that their services will not be required 

for the 2020-2021 school year. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools 

and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949.  

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

By reason of the matters set forth in Legal Conclusion 7, respondents 

Katherine Koch, Rebekah Anthon, Erika Austen, Lisa Murphy Oates, and Diana 

Castellanos are dismissed from this Reduction in Force proceeding. These certificated 

employees must be retained for the 2020-2021 school year. 

 

12 

2. 

Notice may be given to the remaining respondents identified in 

Attachment A that their services will be reduced or eliminated for the 2020-2021 

school year because of the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 

DATE: May 5, 2020

 

DIANE SCHNEIDER 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

 

 

 

 
 
List of Attachments: 
Attachment A: List of Respondents 
Attachment B: Resolution No. 90/20-42 
and No. 19/20-39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 

