BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
BUENA PARK SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 

CERTAIN CERTIFICATED TEACHERS OF THE BUENA PARK 

SCHOOL DISTRICT, Respondents 

OAH No. 2020040036 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Jennifer M. Russell, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, held a telephonic hearing in the above-captioned matter in 

Los Angeles, California on April 21, 2020. 

Aaron v. O’Donnell and Mellissa Gallegos, Attorneys at Law, represented Buena 

Park School District (District). 

Marianne Reinhold, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Natalie Benda, 

Ivonne Chaikittirattana, Soo Jin Choi, Julie Hadfield, Tina Nguyen, Grace Park, 

Catherine Villavicencio, and Colin Woodward, all of whom appeared telephonically. 

Tizoc Perez-Casillas, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Polyn Spirtos, 

who appeared telephonically.1 

Testimony and documentary evidence were received. The record closed and the 

matter was submitted for decision on April 24, 2020.2 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Ramon Miramontes, the District’s Superintendent, and Russell Harrison, 

the District’s Chief Personnel Officer for Human Resource and Superintendent’s 

designee, acted in an official capacity at all relevant times to cause all pleadings, 

notices and other pertinent documents to be filed and served in accordance with 

Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 

2. 

Natalie Benda, Ivonne Chaikittirattana, Soo Jin Choi, Julie Hadfield, Tina 

Nguyen, Grace Park, Catherine Villavicencio, and Colin Woodward (collectively 

“respondents”) are certificated employees of the District. 

                                              

1 At the outset of the hearing, respondent Spirtos, a certificated employee of the 

District, withdrew from the proceedings without testifying or contesting the District 

Statement of Reduction in Force, which subjects her to non-reemployment for the 

2020/2021 school year. 

2 Pursuant to a Post-Hearing Order issued on April 22, 2020, the record remained 

open for submissions, including written closing arguments. Buena Park School District’s 

Post-Hearing Brief is marked for identification only as Exhibit 18. Closing Brief of Certain 

Respondents is marked for identification only as Exhibit H. 

2 

3. 

On March 9, 2020, the Governing Board of the District (Governing Board) 

adopted Resolution Number 19-20 (Reduction or Discontinuation of Particular Kinds of 

Service) (Resolution),which provides for the reduction or discontinuance of the 

following particular kinds of services no later than the beginning of the 2020/2021 

school year: 

SERVICE 

 

 

FULL TIME EQUIVALENT (FTE) 

Reduce K-6 Classroom Teaching Services 

14.00 

Reduce Teacher on Special Assignment-Technology 

  1.00 

Reduce Junior High School Science Teaching Services   1.00 

Reduce Counselor Services 

Reduce Program Specialist  

Discontinue Teacher of Special Assignment-Special Projects 

 

 

Learners  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Discontinue Teacher on Special Assignment-English 

Discontinue Elementary School Assistant Principal 

  1.00 

TOTAL CERTIFICATED POSITIONS 

23.00 

  2.00 

  1.00 

  2.00 

  1.00 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

4. 

The Resolution exempts from layoff certificated employees possessing 

credentials authorizing them to teach English Learner students. The Resolution states 

the following: 

[T]his Board has determined that due to a significant 

population of English Language learners with specialized 

educational needs, a specific and compelling need exists to 

employ and retain certificated employees who have 

authorization to teach English Learner (“EL”) students, as 

determined by the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing, and the special training and experience that 

comes therewith[.] 

[C]ompliance with the provisions of the Williams Settlement 

require that EL students be served by certificated 

employees with appropriate EL authorizations. Thus, each 

failure to staff a classroom containing one or more EL 

students with a certificated employee possessing an 

appropriate EL authorization is a “misassignment” subject to 

sanction by the County Superintendent of Schools[.] 

5. 

The Resolution addresses the ability of one employee serving in a 

position subject to reduction or discontinuance to displace another employee (i.e. 

bumping) as follows: 

[I]n order for an employee serving in a position identified 

for reduction or discontinuance to be eligible for bumping 

an employee with less seniority, the senior employee must 

be both credentialed and competent to render the service 

currently being performed by the junior employee pursuant 

to Education Code section[s] 44955, 44956, and 44957. For 

purposes of implementing this Resolution, a more senior 

4 

employee is defined as competent for reassignment into a 

position currently held by a more junior employee, if he or 

she: (a) currently possesses a clear or preliminary credential 

which authorizes instruction in each subject(s) or grade 

level to which the employee will be assigned at the 

beginning of the 2020-2021 school year; (b) has previously 

taught under the credential(s) required for the entire 

assignment to which the employee will be assigned at the 

beginning of the 2020-2021 school year in the District for 

one complete school year within the last 5 year[s]; and (c) 

has an appropriate EL authorization. In no event may a 

more senior employee displace a more junior employee 

unless the more senior employee is both competent and 

credentialed for the entire assignment of the more junior 

employee[.] 

6. 

Under the direction of the District’s Superintendent, a tentative seniority 

list containing seniority dates, current assignments, and credentials and certifications, 

was distributed to District’s certificated employees for their review and verification of 

pertinent information. 

7. 

The District used the seniority list to identify District certificated 

employees subject to and exempt from layoff and, in the case of certificated 

employees with equal seniority, their relative order of termination as provided for in 

Resolution Number 19-21 (Determination of Seniority Among K-8 and Management 

Certificated Employees with the Same Seniority Date) (Tie-Breaker Resolution), which 

the Governing Board also adopted on March 9, 2020. 

5 

8. 

The Tie Breaker Resolution sets forth criteria to resolve ties in seniority 

between certificated employees. It lists each criterion in priority order and provides for 

a “one step at a time” application to resolve ties in seniority between certificated 

employees. The Tie Breaker Resolution instructs each criterion shall be used only if 

application of the preceding criterion does not resolve all ties between employees 

having the same seniority date. The tie-breaking criteria are listed in priority order as 

follows: 

[1.] Credential status in the area of the current assignment, 

in order of priority: 

(a) Clear professional, standard, life, or general teaching 

credential; 

(b) Preliminary credential; 

(c) Intern credential; 

(d) Short-term staff permit (STSP), provisional internship 

credential (PIP), Education Code Option (i.e., Board 

authorization Sections 44256(b), 44258.2, 44258.3, 44258.7, 

44263, 44865) or waiver. 

[2.] Possession of a clear or preliminary authorization to 

teach English Language Learners, in order of priority: 

(a) Bilingual Cross Cultural Language and Academic 

Development (BCLAD), Bilingual Certificated of Competence 

(BCC), or Bilingual Specialist Credential (BCS) certification; 

6 

(b) Any other certification/authorization to teach English 

Language Learners (e.g., Cross Cultural Language and 

Academic Development (CLAD), SB 1969 or SB 395 

Certificate, Language Development Specialist Certificate, 

Supplemental Authorization for English as a Second 

Language, Specially Designated Academic Instruction in 

English (SDAIE). 

[3.] Breadth of clear and preliminary credentials and 

authorizations, permitting assignment in the widest range 

of teaching or service areas, in order of priority: 

(a) Multiple credentials, with the employee possessing the 

greatest number having greater seniority; 

(b) A single credential with specific subject matter 

authorization(s), with the employee possessing the greatest 

number having greater seniority; 

(c) A single credential with introductory subject matter 

authorization(s), with the employee possessing the greatest 

number having greater seniority; 

(d) A single credential with specific supplemental 

authorization(s), with the employee possessing the greatest 

number having greater seniority; 

7 

(e) A single credential with introductory supplemental 

authorization(s), with the employee possessing the greatest 

number having greater seniority; 

(f) A single credential. 

[4.] Number of verified years of certified employee 

experience, as a certificated employee for Buena Park 

School District and up to eight (8) years of certificate 

experience outside of the Buena Park School District, as 

determined by actual step placement on the Buena Park 

School District Certificated Salary Schedule(s), with the 

employee possessing the greatest number of years having 

greater seniority. 

[5.] Academic degrees from an accredited institution of 

higher education, in order of priority: 

(a) Possession of a Doctorate Degree, earliest date prevails; 

(b) Possession of a Masters Degree, earliest date prevails;  

(c) Two Bachelors degrees, earliest date prevails; 

(d) A single Bachelors degree, earliest date prevails. 

[6.] Number of total semester credits earned at an 

accredited institution of higher education after earning a 

Bachelors Degree, with the employee possessing the 

greatest number of credits having greater seniority. 

8 

[7] Assuming that the preceding paragraphs do not resolve 

all ties between employees having the same seniority date, 

the tie will be broken by drawing of lots with the employee 

drawing the highest number being regarded as most senior 

9. 

The District applied criteria set forth in the Tie Breaker Resolution to 

place Ester Choi (Seniority #194), Grace Park (Seniority #195), Tina Nguyen (Seniority 

#198), Maegan Shoemaker (Seniority #199) in an appropriate order on the District 

Seniority List. These four certificated employees share an assigned August 5, 2015 

seniority date among themselves as well as with other District employees. Ms. Choi, 

Park, Nguyen, and Shoemaker all hold a clear credential (Criterion [1](a)). Ms. Choi and 

Park hold bilingual authorizations (Criterion [2](a)), BAKO3 and BCLAD, respectively, 

thus, they are ranked higher above those employees without a bilingual authorization. 

Ms. Choi has a higher ranking than Ms. Park because Ms. Choi has two multiple 

credentials (Criterion [3](a)), which Ms. Park does not have. 

10. 

The District also applied criteria set forth in the Tie Breaker Resolution to 

place Soo Jin Choi (Seniority #220), Natalie Benda (Seniority # 221), and Ester Noh 

(Seniority #222) on the District Seniority List. All three certificated employees were 

assigned an August 8, 2017 seniority date with several other District employees. The 

August 8, 2017 seniority date assigned to Ms. Choi, Benda, and Noh was subsequently 

revised when, in early April 2020, Ms. Benda raised questions after discovering records 

stating she performed paid services prior to her contract start date. The District 

                                              

3 Chief Personnel Officer Harrison’s testimony established although BAKO or 

Bilingual Authority Korean is not specifically named or identified, the BAKO 

authorization is included in Criterion [2](a). 

9 

investigated and determined Ms. Benda was retained in late July 2017 as a Teacher on 

Special Assignment (TOSA). Ms. Benda’s correct seniority date is July 24, 2017. Ms. 

Choi and Noh also performed paid services as a TOSA commencing on July 24, 2017. 

The parties stipulated to re-assign a July 24, 2017 seniority date to Ms. Benda, Choi, 

and Noh and that the revised seniority date does not change their order of relative 

seniority on the District Seniority List or overturn any layoff notice. 

11.  On March 9, 2020, the District Superintendent and the Superintendent’s 

designee provided the Governing Board with a list identifying which permanent or 

probationary employees would receive notice their services would not be required for 

the 2020/2021 school year due to the reduction or discontinuation the of particular 

kinds of services set forth in the Resolution. 

12.  On March 12, 2020, the District served 16 permanent or probationary 

employees, in person or via certified mail, with a Preliminary Notice of 

Recommendation Not to Reemploy for the 2020-2021 School Year, the Resolution, a 

form Request for Hearing—Certificated Employee Layoff, and copies of Education 

Code sections 44949 and 44955. The District additionally served seven temporary 

employees with Release From Temporary Employment; Precautionary Layoff Notice, 

the Resolution, a form Request for Hearing—Certificated Employee Layoff, and copies 

of Education Code sections 44949, 44954, 44955. 

13. 

Thirteen permanent or probationary employees receiving preliminary 

layoff notices filed a timely request for hearing. Three permanent or probationary 

employees—Ester Park, Meagan Shoemaker, and Angie Sy—filed no request for 

hearing thereby waiving their rights to a hearing. Ester Park, Meagan Shoemaker, and 

Angie Sy are precluded from contesting the District’s recommendation for their non-

reemployment for the 2020/2021 school year. (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b).) 

10 

14.  None of the seven temporary employees receiving precautionary layoff 

notices requested a hearing or asserted a claim to permanent or probationary 

employment status. These seven temporary employees—Brianne Cavallaro, Claire 

David, Marisa Hopkins, Hannah Jaramillo, Megan Rodriguez, Karen Suh, and Megan 

Vanderwest—have no hearing rights. (Ed. Code, §§ 44954, subds. (a), (b), & 44949, 

subd. (b).) 

15.  On March 30, 2020, the District served the 13 permanent or probationary 

employees requesting a hearing a Certificated Reduction in Force Hearing Packet (RIF 

packet), which included a Notice of District Statement of Reduction in Force, a District 

Statement of Reduction in Force, a form Notice of Participation and pertinent statutory 

provisions of the Government Code. The 13 permanent or probationary employees 

were instructed to file a Notice of Participation on or before 4:00 p.m. on April 7, 2020, 

otherwise the Governing Board may proceed on the District Statement of Reduction in 

Force without a hearing. 

16. 

Eleven permanent or probationary employees filed a timely Notice of 

Participation. Marylee Adair and Ester Noh are among the 11 permanent or 

probationary employees filing a Notice of Participation; however, the District rescinded 

layoff notices to Ms. Adair and Noh after some of its permanent employees not 

subject to layoff accepted a retirement incentive. Two permanent or probationary 

employees—Ester Choi and Tai Lew—did not file a Notice of Participation because the 

District also rescinded their layoff notices after some of its permanent employees not 

subject to layoff accepted a retirement incentive. 

// 

// 

11 

17. 

In sum, after the filing and service of all required pleadings and notices, a 

total of nine permanent or probationary employees—the eight respondents identified 

in Factual Finding 2 and Polyn Spirtos4—were entitled to a hearing in connection with 

the District Statement of Reduction in Force. 

18. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements are satisfied. 

19. 

Ivonne Chaikittirattana (Seniority #180) holds a Pupil Personnel Services 

(PPS) School Counseling Credential, a Multi-subject Teaching Credential to teach in an 

elementary school classroom, and a BCLAD certification. Ms. Chaikittirattana has an 

August 4, 2014 seniority date. 

20. 

The District hired Ms. Chaikittirattana as a counselor, and she has worked 

six years in the District as such. Ms. Chaikittirattana has never taught under her multi-

subject credential in any K-6 classroom within the District. Ms. Chaikittirattana 

therefore has not met the competency requirement of previously teaching “one 

complete school year within the last 5 year[s]” set forth in the Resolution. (See Factual 

Finding 5.) Ms. Chaikittirattana is not both “competent and credentialed,” as the 

Resolution requires, for reassignment or “bumping” into a K-6 classroom position 

currently held by an employee with less seniority. 

21. 

At the hearing and in written closing argument, counsel contended Ms. 

Chaikittirattana should be nonetheless “slotted” into one of the remaining vacant 

                                              

4 As explained in footnote 1, respondent Spirtos withdrew from these 

proceedings. The hearing in this matter proceeded without respondent Spiritos’ actual 

participation. She offered neither evidence nor argument contesting the District 

Statement of Reduction in Force as it pertains to her non-reemployment. 

12 

positions created by the retirement of K-6 classroom teachers with multiple subject 

credentials. Chief Personnel Officer Harrison testified, after service of preliminary 

notices and RIF packets, eight of the District’s permanent employees not subject to 

layoff accepted retirement incentives. Five of the retirees were K-6 classroom teachers. 

The District rescinded a total of four layoff notices, three of which were for K-6 

classroom teachers—Marylee Adair, Tai Lew, and Ester Choi. (See Factual Finding 16.) 

The District determined not to fill the remaining four positions. Harrison credibly 

testified the District looked ahead and projected a likely reduction in funds during the 

2020/2021 school year due to declining inter-district transfers and the resulting 

decreased average daily attendance within the District. The District therefore 

determined “to be fiscally conservative and responsible” and not fill all eight positions 

vacated by employees accepting the its retirement incentives. 

22. 

So long as it acts in good faith, a governing board has wide discretion 

regarding its budget. (Hildebrant v. Helena Unified School District (2009) 172 

Cal.App.4th 334.) In determining whether a governing board exercised its discretion in 

good faith, the governing board’s action is measured by the standard set by reason 

and reasonable people bearing in mind that such a standard may permit a difference 

of opinion on the same subject. (Campbell v. Abbott (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.) 

No evidence offered at the hearing established the Governing Board lacked good faith 

exercising its discretion in this matter. The Governing Board’s judgment managing its 

fiscal affairs by statutorily permissible reduction or discontinuation of the particular 

kinds of services set forth in the Resolution, notwithstanding any subsequent 

employee retirement, is presumptively sound. Counsel’s contention on behalf of Ms. 

Chaikittirattana is rejected. 

13 

23. 

Colin Woodward (Seniority #205) holds a Single Subject Foundational 

General Science Teaching Credential. Mr. Woodward’s full-time assignment is to teach 

Science in a Junior High School Teacher position in the District. Mr. Woodward has a 

November 9, 2015 seniority date. 

24.  Mr. Woodward is the only science teacher at the District’s Beatty Middle 

School where he currently teaches two periods of required 8th-Grade Science, one 

period of required 7th-Grade Science, and three periods of “Medical Forensic: Project 

Lead the Way,” an elective course offered to both 7th and 8th grade students that is 

sometimes known as “Medical Detectives” or “Medical Forensics,“ or “Medical Science.” 

25. 

At the hearing and in written closing argument, counsel contended Mr. 

Woodward is not subject to lay off to satisfy the 1.0 FTE reduction or discontinuation 

of “Junior High School Science Teaching Services” set forth in the Resolution (see 

Factual Finding 3) because “the classes he teaches were for half or more than half his 

schedule not Middle School Science classes, but rather electives.” (Closing Brief of 

Certain Respondents at p. 4.). As stated in Factual Finding 23, Mr. Woodward’s full-

time assignment is to teach Science in a Junior High School Teacher position within 

the District. It is not relevant that the actual content of his full-time equivalent 

assignment is apportioned between required and elective courses offered at the 

District’s junior high school. Mr. Woodward’s status within the District providing junior 

high school science teaching services is properly determined and is uncontested. The 

particular kinds of services he performs for the District and its pupils—Junior High 

School Science Teaching Services—is subject to reduction or discontinuation. 

Counsel’s contention on behalf of Mr. Woodward is rejected. 

26. 

The Resolution enumerates particular kinds of services for reduction or 

discontinuation within the meaning of section 44955. 

14 

27. 

The Governing Board took action to reduce or discontinue services set 

forth in the Resolution based on the needs of the District and its students. The 

Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue services was not related to the 

capabilities and dedication of the individuals whose services are proposed to be 

reduced or discontinued. The Governing Board’s decision is neither arbitrary nor 

capricious. The Governing Board properly exercised its discretion to reduce or 

discontinue the particular kinds of services. 

28. 

The reduction or discontinuation of services enumerated in the 

Resolution is related to the welfare of the District and its pupils, and it has become 

necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees by the Governing Board. 

29.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Section 44949 provides in pertinent part the following: 

(a) No later than March 15 and before an employee is given 

notice by the governing board that his or her services will 

not be required for the ensuing year for the reasons 

specified in Section 44955, the governing board and the 

employee shall be given written notice by the 

superintendent of the district or his or her designee . . . that 

it has been recommended that the notice be given to the 

employee, and stating the reasons therefore. 

15 

2. 

Section 44955 provides in pertinent part the following: 

(a) No permanent employee shall be deprived of his or her 

position for causes other than those specified in Sections 

44907 and 44923, and Sections 44932 to 44947, inclusive, 

and no probationary employee shall be deprived of his or 

her position for cause other than as specified in Sections 

44948 to 44949, inclusive. 

(b) Whenever in any school year the average daily 

attendance in all of the schools district for the first six 

months in which school is in session shall have declined[,] 

whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 

discontinued not later than the beginning of the following 

school year, . . . and when in the opinion of the governing 

board of the district it shall have become necessary by 

reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number 

of permanent employees in the district, the governing 

board may terminate the services of not more than a 

corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of 

the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close 

of the school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, 

the services of no permanent employee may be terminated 

under the provisions of this section while any probationary 

employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is 

retained to render a service which said permanent 

employee is certified and competent to render. [¶ . . ¶] 

16 

As between employees who first rendered paid service to 

the district on the same date, the governing board shall 

determine the order of termination solely on the basis of 

the needs of the district and the students thereof. 

Upon the request of any employee whose order of 

termination is so determined, the governing board shall 

furnish . . . a statement of the specific criteria used in 

determining the order of termination and the application of 

the criteria in ranking each employee relative to the other 

employees in the group . . . . 

(c) [S]ervices of such employees shall be terminated in the 

inverse of the order in which they are employed, as 

determined by the board in accordance with Sections 44844 

and 444845. In the event that a permanent or probationary 

employee is not given the notices and a right to a hearing 

as provided for in Section 44949, he or she shall be deemed 

reemployed for the ensuing school year. 

The governing board shall make assignments and 

reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be 

retained to render any service which their seniority and 

qualifications entitle them to render . . . . 

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may 

deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of 

seniority for either of the following reasons: 

17 

(1) The district demonstrated a specific need for personnel 

to teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that 

the certificated employee has special training and 

experience necessary to teach that course or course of 

study or to provide those services, which others with more 

seniority do not possess. 

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance 

with constitutional requirements related to equal protection 

of the laws. 

3. 

The services set forth in Factual Finding 3 are particular kinds of services 

which may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 

44955. The Governing Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services 

was neither arbitrary nor capricious. The decision was a proper exercise of the 

Governing Board’s discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services 

relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of 

Education Code section 44949. 

4. 

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of Education 

Code section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of 

service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may 

‘reduce service’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent 

because fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” 

(Rutherford v. Board of Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) 

18 

5. 

The District properly identified the certificated personnel providing the 

particular kinds of services the Governing Board directed should be reduced or 

discontinued. 

6. 

Cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44945 to 

reduce or discontinue the services provided by respondents Natalie Benda, Ivonne 

Chaikittirattana, Soo Jin Choi, Julie Hadfield, Tina Nguyen, Grace Park, Catherine 

Villavicencio, Colin Woodward and Polyn Spirtos. 

ORDER 

Buena Park School District may give notice to respondents Natalie Benda, 

Ivonne Chaikittirattana, Soojin Choi, Julie Hadfield, Tina Nguyen, Grace Park, Catherine 

Villavicencio, Colin Woodward, and Polyn Spirtos that their services will not be 

required for the 2020/2021 school year due to the reduction or discontinuation of 

particular kinds of services. 

 

DATE: 

May 4, 2020

 

JENNIFER M. RUSSELL 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

19 

