BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
SAN BERNARDINO COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  

In the Matter of the Accusation Against:  

Patricia Menchaca, Respondent 

OAH No. 2020040264 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Debra D. Nye-Perkins, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on May 7, 2020.1 

David E. Robinett, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

represented the San Bernardino Community College District (district).  

 

1 In light of the Governor’s proclamation of a State of Emergency and Executive 

Orders N-25-20 and N-33-20 arising out of the COVID-19 pandemic; the declarations 

of county and city public health emergencies throughout the State; the President’s 

declaration of a national emergency over the outbreak; the directives from state and 

local officials to ensure and facilitate physical distancing and to shelter in place; and in 

order to protect the health and safety of all public and OAH personnel, this matter was 

conducted telephonically. 

Davide Velasquez, Attorney at Law, of the Law Offices of David Velasquez, 

A.P.C., represented respondent, Patricia Menchaca.  

The matter was submitted on May 7, 2020. This matter was originally set for 

hearing on April 27, 2020, and was continued for ten days to May 7, 2020, pursuant to 

a joint request of the parties.  

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

Respondent was hired in August 2012 as a STEM Pathway Coordinator 

for the district, a position that does not require any classroom teaching duties. The 

STEM Pathway Coordinator is an academic faculty position at the district. Respondent 

possesses a master’s degree in soil and water science.  

2. 

On May 14, 2019, the district provided written notification to respondent 

that the position of STEM Pathway Coordinator was being discontinued. The written 

notice further provided: 

Once your workdays shift to 177 days the following will be 

your assignment: Full-time tenured faculty member within 

the discipline of Environmental Science, in accordance with 

your identified FSA.  

3. 

On March 12, 2020, the Governing Board of the district adopted 

Resolution Number 2020-03-12-HR02, discontinuing particular kinds of certificated 

services and directing the Superintendent/Chancellor to give appropriate notices to 

academic employees whose positions would be affected by the discontinuation “in 

2 

accordance with the provisions of Section 87740 and 87743 of the Education Code.” 

The resolution called for the discontinuation or elimination of 1 full-time equivalent 

(FTE) position of STEM Pathway Coordinator. The resolution identified the particular 

kinds of service (PKS) and Full Time Equivalencies (FTEs) that were to be discontinued 

and reduced as “Elimination of Stem Pathway Coordinator – 1 FTE position.” 

4. 

The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a matter 

reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this 

proceeding. (Rutherford v. Board of Trustees of Bellflower Unified School District 

(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) School districts have the discretion to determine particular 

kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a service continues to be 

performed or provided in a different manner by the district. (Hildebrandt v. St. Helena 

Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) A school district’s decision to 

reduce a particular kind of service must not be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (San 

Jose Teachers Association v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 637.)  

5. 

On March 13, 2020,2 respondent was served with a letter notice advising 

her that her services would not be required for the 2020-21 academic year. The letter 

notice informed respondent of her right to request a hearing, and enclosed a copy of 

Resolution Number 2020-03-12-HR02, sections 87740 and 87743, a blank request for 

hearing form, and a memorandum regarding contract/statutory rights of 

reemployment and reinstatement. In response to the letter notice, on March 19, 2020, 

respondent through her attorney, sent a letter requesting a hearing regarding the 

2 The letter notice sent to respondent was dated March 13, 2019, which is 

 

presumed to be a typographical error in light of the fact that the letter attached the 

resolution which was dated March 12, 2020. 

3 

layoff with an attached signed request for hearing form dated March 19, 2020. On 

April 14, 2020, the district served the Notice of Accusation, Accusation, Notice of 

Hearing, Resolution No. 2020-03-12-HR02, copies of relevant sections of the 

Government Code, and blank Notice of Defense form on respondent. Respondent 

failed to complete the Notice of Defense form. However, the district admitted at 

hearing there was no prejudice to the district for her failure to do so, and did not 

oppose her participation at the hearing, particularly in light of the fact that she had 

already requested a hearing in writing on March 19, 2020.  

Faculty Service Area Designation 

6. 

Education Code section 87743.1 defines “faculty service area” (FSA) as 

follows: 

[A] service or instructional subject area or group of related 

services or instructional subject areas performed by faculty 

and established by a community college district. 

Education Code section 87743.2 further requires that each community college district 

must by July 1, 1990, establish FSAs in accordance with the Government Code and in 

consultation with the academic senate. Education Code section 87743.5 requires each 

community college district to establish competency criteria to determine competency 

to serve in a faculty service area for faculty members employed by the district. 

Education Code section 87743.3 provides in part:  

Each faculty member shall qualify for one or more faculty 

service areas at the time of initial employment. A faculty 

member shall be eligible for qualification in any faculty 

service area in which the faculty member has met both 

4 

minimum qualifications pursuant to Section 87356 and 

district competency standards. After initial employment, a 

faculty member may apply to the district to add faculty 

service areas for which the faculty member qualifies. . . .  

Education Code section 87743.4 provides as follows: 

Each district shall maintain a permanent record for each 

faculty member employed by the district of each faculty 

service area for which the faculty member possesses the 

minimum qualifications for service and in which he or she 

has established competency pursuant to district 

competency standards. The record shall be contained in the 

faculty member’s personnel file.   

7. 

The procedure for effectuating a reduction in the number of permanent 

employees is dictated by the terms of Education Code section 87743. Education Code 

section 87743 provides in relevant part: 

However, the services of no tenured employee may be 

terminated under this section while any probationary 

employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is 

retained to render a service in a faculty service area in which 

the records of the district maintained pursuant to Section 

87743.4 reflect that the tenured employee possesses the 

minimum qualifications prescribed by the board of 

governors and is competent to serve under district 

competency criteria.  

5 

(Italics and underlining added for emphasis). 

8. 

The district stipulated at the hearing that it has no written record or any 

documentation of respondent’s FSA or FSAs in her personnel file or any other 

administrative file at the district.  

Witness Testimony for the District  

9. 

Joe Opris, the district’s Director of Human Resources, testified in this 

proceeding. Mr. Opris’s duties include oversight of all recruitment, employer/employee 

relations, labor relations, benefits, and processes with the Governing Board and 

executive teams. Mr. Opris reports to his supervisor Kristina Hannon, Vice Chancellor 

of Human Resources and Police Services. Mr. Opris was the primary person in the 

Human Resources department of the district overseeing this layoff process. He 

explained that he worked with the Interim Chancellor, Jose Torres, to prepare 

documents related to the elimination of respondent’s position. On March 12, 2020, the 

Governing Board adopted Resolution No. 2020-03-12-HR02 in response to the 

Chancellor’s recommendation.  

Mr. Opris oversees the creation and maintenance of the “Academic Seniority 

List” which is a list of all full-time academic faculty members of the district. Mr. Opris 

explained that the list is updated annually to ensure that new hires are added, and 

people who have retired or left the district are removed. The document provides a 

“seniority number” that Mr. Opris testified reflects the ranking of that faculty member 

based on their “full-time, tenure track, academic, contract hire date.” Respondent is 

ranked with a seniority number of 137 out of 250 listed faculty members on the 

Academic Seniority List as of Fall 2019.  

6 

Mr. Opris also testified that he understands that the FSA assignment to a faculty 

member is important in the context of a lay-off because the district looks to the 

assigned FSA for a faculty member to determine whether or not the faculty member 

has “bumping3” rights, meaning the rights to displace a junior employee. Mr. Opris 

admitted that the district did not have any record of which FSA or FSAs respondent 

possesses and that the district was obligated under the Education Code to assign 

respondent the appropriate FSA at the initiation of her employment. Mr. Opris also 

stated that when respondent was initially hired by the district there was “no FSA 

assigned to her” because the STEM Pathway Coordinator is grant-funded. Mr. Opris 

acknowledged that the district’s failure to assign an FSA to respondent at the initiation 

of her employment and its failure to maintain records of her FSA was something that 

predated his employment and that the district “is working to correct.” Mr. Opris stated 

that he and Keith Wurtz, Vice President of Instruction at Crafton Hills College4, 

considered other FSAs to assign to respondent, specifically Earth Sciences, Geology, 

and the Tutoring Coordinator FSA5. Mr. Opris stated that he relied exclusively on Mr. 

3 A senior employee whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer to 

 

a continuing position in which he or she possesses the required FSA and is competent 

to fill. In doing so, the senior employee is entitled to displace or “bump” a junior 

employee who is filling that position. (Lacy v. Richmond Unified School District (1975) 

13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.)  

4 Crafton Hills College is one of the colleges within the district.  

5 The “Tutoring Coordinator FSA” is used in herein to mean the “Learning 

Assistance or Learning Skills Coordinators or Instructors, and Tutoring Coordinators 

FSA” as defined in the Minimum Qualifications Handbook as defined below.  

7 

Wurtz’s opinion as to whether respondent would be properly classified into the 

Tutoring Coordinator FSA. Mr. Opris stated that respondent could not be classified in 

the Tutoring Coordinator FSA because the district was not offering any tutoring in the 

field of environmental sciences. Mr. Opris also admitted that he relied solely on Mr. 

Wurtz’s opinion that respondent was not qualified for the Earth Sciences FSA, and as a 

result did not assign that FSA to her.   

Accordingly, in order to determine if respondent had bumping rights to any 

junior employee, Mr. Opris and Mr. Wurtz  “analyzed together” respondent’s transcript 

and compared it to the Minimum Qualifications Handbook6 to assign her an FSA. Mr. 

Opris admitted that respondent was never consulted during that analysis, and that he 

and Mr. Wurtz “agreed” that respondent possessed only the Ecology FSA based only 

on their analysis and not based on any record maintained by the district. Based 

exclusively on the Ecology FSA Mr. Opris and Mr. Wurtz assigned to respondent, Mr. 

Opris determined that the district did not retain any other employee with less seniority 

than respondent in the FSA of Ecology.  

The Academic Seniority List for Fall 2019 shows that respondent is more senior 

to at least two employees presumably possessing the Tutoring Coordinator FSA (listed 

at positions #235 and #238), and at least one employee presumably possessing an 

Earth Science FSA (listed at position #200). Accordingly, if respondent possesses either 

6 The “Minimum Qualifications Handbook” as used herein is the 2018 Handbook 

 

for Minimum Qualifications for Faculty and Administrators in California Community 

Colleges, which was received into evidence. The handbook provides the minimum 

qualifications as developed by the California Community College Chancellor’s Office 

that a person must meet to be placed in a particular FSA.  

8 

the Earth Science FSA or the Tutoring Coordinator FSA, she would be able to bump 

those employees.7  

On cross-examination, Mr. Opris acknowledged that he and Mr. Wurtz made the 

determination that the Ecology FSA was an appropriate one to be assigned to 

respondent prior to the drafting of Resolution No. 2020-03-12-HR02 in 2019. Mr. 

Opris also admitted that he had no factual basis to conclude that respondent had ever 

been informed of the assignment of the Ecology FSA to her at any time, but he 

believed that respondent “must have known” that her FSA was Ecology because at 

some point respondent taught environmental science courses at Crafton College and 

she would not have been able to do so without possessing an Ecology FSA.  

10. 

Kurt Wurtz testified at the hearing. Mr. Wurtz’s responsibilities as the 

Vice President of Instruction at Crafton Hills College include ensuring that the students 

in the district are able to obtain the proper curriculum needed to obtain their desired 

degree, including scheduling the courses and programs. Mr. Wurtz stated that he 

worked with Mr. Opris to ensure the district followed the appropriate process to 

effectuate the layoff at issue in this hearing and to “identify if there were any positions 

that respondent could back-fill into.” Mr. Wurtz stated that the STEM Pathway 

Coordinator position was the result of a grant that expired in 2012 to develop STEM 

pathways, which are a “series of courses a student can take to move from one segment 

to another” such as from a community college to a four-year university or 

7 Respondent only argued that her possession of the Tutoring Coordinator FSA 

 

allowed her to bump the two junior employees with the Tutoring Coordinator FSA. 

Respondent made no argument regarding any junior employee possessing an Earth 

Science FSA.  

9 

employment. Mr. Wurtz stated he was involved in the decision to eliminate the STEM 

Pathway Coordinator position because the grant had ended, the STEM pathways were 

already in place, and there was “not much to do” in the position as a result.  

Mr. Wurtz explained that Crafton Hills College is not planning on offering the 

courses of environmental science or ecology in the 2020-21 academic year because in 

August 2019 the Human Resources department determined that the instructors who 

were teaching those courses were not qualified and did not meet the minimum 

qualifications under the Minimum Qualifications Handbook to do so. Mr. Wurtz 

acknowledged that respondent is qualified to teach those courses, but she “already 

had a full-time position as the STEM Pathway Coordinator.”  

With regard to the assignment of the Ecology FSA to respondent, Mr. Wurtz 

admitted that he alone concluded that respondent’s appropriate FSA is in Ecology. He 

stated he made that conclusion based upon her transcript and master’s degree in soil 

and water science and compared it to the requirements in the Minimum Qualifications 

Handbook. Mr. Wurtz also stated that respondent has taught an environmental science 

course at Crafton College in the past, and she would not be able to do so without an 

Ecology FSA. Accordingly, he concluded that the Ecology FSA was the appropriate FSA 

to assign to respondent. On cross-examination Mr. Wurtz admitted that he simply 

assigned the Ecology FSA to respondent because she had taught the environmental 

science course in the past, and he was not aware if she had ever been informed of that 

decision. Mr. Wurtz also admitted that while he considered the Tutoring Coordinator 

FSA as a possibility for respondent, he determined that she did not qualify for that FSA 

because there was no tutoring in environmental science offered by the district. Mr. 

Wurtz admitted that if environmental science courses and tutoring for those courses 

10 

were being offered in the 2020-21 academic year, then respondent would qualify for 

the Tutoring Coordinator FSA in addition to the Ecology FSA based on his analysis.   

Mr. Wurtz also admitted that the Minimum Qualifications Handbook requires 

that a person have a “Master’s in ecology or environmental studies or the equivalent” 

in order to qualify for the Ecology FSA. Notably, respondent does not have a master’s 

degree in ecology or environmental studies, but instead as noted has a master’s 

degree in soil and water science. Mr. Wurtz opined that respondent did not qualify for 

an Earth Sciences FSA because the Minimum Qualifications Handbook requires that a 

person have a “Master’s in geology, geophysics, earth sciences, meteorology, 

oceanography or paleontology or the equivalent” or a “Bachelor’s in geology” for that 

FSA and in his opinion respondent’s degree is not one of those.8 However, Mr. Wurtz 

admitted that respondent “may very well meet” the requirements for an Earth Science 

FSA if she were to “go through the equivalency process” to determine if her degree is 

an equivalent. He stated “if she does not have one of the specifically listed degrees, 

she would have to go through the equivalency process” which involves submission of 

transcripts, course descriptions and faculty review and the academic committee will 

then vote to determine if she meets that FSA. Notably, none of those procedures were 

followed when Mr. Wurtz unilaterally assigned respondent to the Ecology FSA even 

though her degree is not listed in the Minimum Qualifications Handbook for that FSA.  

Mr. Wurtz testified that he “was under the assumption” that respondent “had 

gone through the equivalency process” for the Ecology FSA because respondent had 

8 Respondent testified she had a bachelor’s degree in geology, which is a 

 

specifically listed degree in the Minimum Qualifications Handbook to qualify for the 

Earth Science FSA.  

11 

taught the environmental science course in the past. He admitted it was possible that 

she had not gone through that process. Mr. Wurtz also admitted that he had never 

formally informed respondent that she was assigned to the Ecology FSA, and he was 

not aware of anyone else from the district doing so. He also testified that when 

respondent was initially hired by the district as a STEM Pathway Coordinator, it was not 

necessary to assign her an FSA because she was “non-instructional faculty.” Mr. Wurtz 

believes that respondent did not have an FSA assigned to her until she taught the 

environmental sciences course.  

11. 

Kristina Hannon testified at the hearing. Ms. Hannon’s responsibilities as 

the Vice Chancellor of Human Resources and Police Services include oversight of all 

Human Resource services for the district including employee relations, benefits, and 

worker’s compensation, as well as oversight of campus safety and risk management. 

Ms. Hannon testified that the job duties and formal job description for the STEM 

Pathway Coordinator are different than that of other coordinators such as tutoring 

coordinators. She stated that the formal job descriptions contain the minimum 

qualifications for the job.9  

9 There was a significant amount of testimony regarding the formal 

 

requirements for the job of a tutoring coordinator based on respondent’s assertion 

that she possessed the Tutoring Coordinator FSA. However, the determination of 

whether respondent qualifies for the Tutoring Coordinator FSA based on her degree 

are beyond the scope of this hearing, which is limited to a determination of whether 

the district followed the proper procedural requirements and laws to effectuate 

Resolution No. 2020-03-12-HR02.  

12 

Respondent’s Testimony 

12. 

Respondent testified that she has a master’s degree in soil and water 

science, as well as a bachelor’s degree in geology and anthropology. Prior to working 

at the district, she worked as the STEM Coordinator for one year and as an instructor 

for the courses of environmental science and biological science at Mount San Jacinto 

Community College. Thereafter, in 2012 she accepted her current position as STEM 

Pathway Coordinator at Crafton Hills College. When she was initially employed by the 

district, respondent specifically asked individuals in the Human Resources department 

of the college what would happen to her position if the grant funding for it was pulled 

and the position discontinued. In response to the question, she was informed that if 

this happened she would be placed in a position as an earth sciences instructor or 

alternatively as a learning coordinator, such as a tutor. Respondent understood from 

this response that she possessed an Earth Science FSA and a Tutoring Coordinator FSA 

at the initiation of her employment with the district. Respondent admitted that the 

district did not explicitly discuss with her or inform her of any specific FSA to which she 

was assigned at any point during her employment with the district, but based on the 

discussions regarding the courses she would teach she understood that she held the 

Earth Science FSA and Tutoring Coordinator FSA. She also stated that no person ever 

told her that she was not assigned to an FSA at the time she was initially hired.  

13. 

Respondent stated that during her first two years working at Crafton Hills 

College she taught courses in Ecology, and has always been qualified to teach earth 

sciences courses. In 2014 she requested to teach the environmental science course 

from the Human Resources department and received a response from the Human 

Resources department that she was approved to do so. Respondent believes that she 

may also qualify for the Biology FSA, but has not requested to add that FSA to those 

13 

she believes she already possesses, namely Ecology FSA, Earth Sciences FSA, and 

Tutoring Coordinator FSA. Respondent stated that she believes she was assigned the 

Earth Science FSA and Tutoring Coordinator FSA when she was initially hired, and in 

2014 when she began teaching the environmental science course she would have been 

given the Ecology FSA. Respondent also explained that tutoring coordinators do not 

actually tutor students, but their job duties include collaboration between departments 

to ensure the course catalog is current, facilitation of planning documents to guide the 

direction of the department, recommendation of preliminary budgets, coordination of 

the use of facilities, recommendation of candidates for employment, and coordination 

with the district administration. Respondent understood that at the time she was hired 

at the district she was qualified and assigned the Tutoring Coordinator FSA.  

14. 

Respondent has also been a member of the academic senate at Crafton 

Hills College from 2016 to 2019. She stated that the academic senate functions to 

oversee the academic and professional matters at the college to ensure district policies 

are followed. Respondent stated that she is familiar with the process that a faculty 

member must undertake to add an FSA to those already possessed. Specifically, the 

faculty member must make a request for the additional FSA, a committee is formed for 

consideration of the faculty member’s qualifications and to make a decision on 

whether the faculty member is qualified. She stated that there is also an appeals 

process if the faculty member disagrees with the decision.   

Education Code section 87743.3 provides that a faculty member may apply to 

the district to add FSAs for which the faculty member is qualified and if “a dispute 

arises from an allegation that a faculty member has improperly denied” an FSA the 

dispute “shall be classified and procedurally addressed as a grievance. Education Code 

section 87743.3 further provides: 

14 

If the district has no grievance procedure, fair and equitable 

procedures for the resolution of the disputes shall be 

developed by the academic senate and representatives of 

the governing board.  

15. 

Respondent testified that if she had known or ever been informed that 

she was only assigned to the Ecology FSA she would have made a formal request to 

add the FSAs for Earth Science and Tutoring Coordinator. However, respondent 

reiterated that she believed she already possessed those FSAs.  

Parties’ Arguments 

16. 

The district argued that the district’s failure to document and maintain a 

record of each FSA respondent possesses as the minimum qualifications for service in 

her personnel file was a minor error on the part of the district. However, the district’s 

failure to maintain that record does not allow respondent to “have whatever FSA she 

wants” because she must still meet the minimum qualifications for the FSA. The district 

argued that its decision to assign respondent the Ecology FSA was not arbitrary and 

capricious, and the services being reduced were the kinds the board may reduce. The 

district is not offering environmental science courses in the 2020-21 academic year 

and as a result respondent does not qualify for the Tutoring Coordinator FSA. The 

district asserts that because respondent only possesses the Ecology FSA, there is no 

employee with less seniority being retained to render a service that she is qualified to 

render, and the district correctly implemented the layoff.   

17. 

Respondent argued that the district admitted to its failure to abide by 

the terms of Education Code section 87743.4 to maintain a permanent record of the 

FSAs possessed by respondent and its failure to do so resulted in a serious 

15 

depravation of respondent’s due process rights. Respondent relied on the 

representations of the district when she was hired that she was qualified for the Earth 

Science FSA and the Tutoring Coordinator FSA. Respondent further argued that the 

district’s bad faith in its assignment of the Ecology FSA only to respondent deprived 

her of her bumping rights with regard to the Tutoring Coordinator positions at the 

district. If respondent had known that the district did not consider her to be in 

possession of the Earth Science FSA and Tutoring Coordinator FSA she would have 

taken advantage of the process to add those FSAs as stated in statute and district 

policy. Respondent acknowledges that she can’t simply assign herself an FSA based on 

her belief that she is so qualified, but also argues that the district may not simply 

assign an FSA to her based on what the district wants her to possess.  

Evaluation 

18. 

The district admitted that it failed to maintain a permanent record of 

respondents’ assigned FSAs based on her qualifications in violation of Education Code 

section 87743.4. Also, the testimony from Mr. Opris and Mr. Wurtz showed that the 

district believed that respondent was never assigned an FSA when she was initially 

hired in 2012, which would also be a violation of Education Code section 87743.3 that 

requires that each faculty member “shall qualify for one or more faculty service areas 

at the time of initial employment.” This statute does not make any exception for a 

“non-instructional faculty member” as Mr. Wurtz asserted. The district’s violations of 

these sections of the Education Code were not minor errors as argued by the district. 

To the contrary, the entire statutory scheme reflected in the Education Code for the 

procedure of layoffs depends on the proper assignment of FSAs. The Education Code 

lays out the requirements for how an FSA may be added as well as a grievance 

16 

procedure if a faculty member disputes the district’s conclusion regarding whether 

that faculty member is so qualified.  

The unilateral assignment of the Ecology FSA to respondent in 2019 based 

solely on Mr. Wurtz’s opinion was wholly inappropriate and in violation of the 

requirements of the Education Code. Notably, Mr. Wurtz’s testimony regarding how he 

made that conclusion that respondent only possessed an Ecology FSA was internally 

inconsistent. Specifically, Mr. Wurtz testified that he compared respondent’s master’s 

degree in soil and water science to the requirements in the Minimum Qualification 

Handbook to arrive at the Ecology FSA. Mr. Wurtz also stated that if her degree was 

not actually listed in the qualifications, then she would have to go through the 

equivalency evaluation process to determine if she possessed the necessary 

qualifications for that FSA. However, the master’s degree in soil and water science is 

not specifically listed as a degree for the qualifications of an Ecology FSA. Instead, Mr. 

Wurtz admitted on cross-examination that he simply saw that she had taught 

environmental science at some point and that course requires an Ecology FSA to 

teach. Mr. Wurtz even admitted that respondent could possess the qualifications 

necessary for other FSAs but she would have to go through the equivalency 

assessment process for that determination. This conclusion is in direct contradiction to 

the requirements of Education Code section 87743.3 that respondent be assigned at 

least one, but possibly more, FSAs at her initial employment. Respondent cannot be 

expected to undergo an equivalency assessment process for an FSA she believed she 

already possessed. The district utterly failed at ever notifying respondent what her 

assigned FSA actually was. The district also failed to provide any grievance procedure 

for respondent to dispute the district’s decision made in 2019 that she only possessed 

an Ecology FSA, particularly given she has been employed since 2012 and by law is 

required to have an FSA assigned to her at her initial employment.  

17 

Education Code section 87743 sets forth the procedural requirements for a 

reduction in the number of permanent employees at the district. That section dictates 

that no tenured employee may be terminated while a junior employee, or employee 

with less seniority, is retained to render a service “in a faculty service area in which 

the records of the district maintained pursuant to Section 87743.4 reflect that 

the tenured employee possesses . . .” (emphasis added) The fundamental first step in 

the layoff process depends on the proper identification of that FSA or FSAs in 

respondent’s personnel records showing her qualifications for which she is entitled to 

bump a junior employee with the same FSA. It is noted that there is at least one junior 

employee listed on the Academic Seniority List for Fall 2019 listed as an instructor for 

earth sciences, and there are at least two junior employees listed in the position as 

tutoring coordinators. If respondent possesses an Earth Science FSA or a Tutoring 

Coordinator FSA as she asserts, she would be entitled to bump those employees. The 

district’s violation of the applicable Education Code sections 87743, 87743.3, and 

87743.4 as discussed above prevents the appropriate application of the layoff 

procedure as set forth in Education Code section 87743. Without proper identification 

of all of the FSAs possessed by respondent at the time of her initial employment and 

thereafter, it is not possible to determine what if any bumping rights she may have 

with regard to junior employees. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 

sections 87740 and 87743, and all notices and other requirements of those sections 

were provided as required.  

18 

2. 

A district may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code 

section 87743, which provides, in part: 

Whenever in any school year the average daily attendance 

in all of the schools of a district for the first six months in 

which school is in session shall have declined below the 

corresponding period of either of the previous two school 

years, or whenever a particular kind of service is to be 

reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the 

following school year, and when in the opinion of the 

governing board of the district it shall have become 

necessary by reason of either of these conditions to 

decrease the number of tenured employees in the district, 

the governing board may terminate the services of not 

more than a corresponding percentage of the employees of 

the district, tenured as well as probationary, at the close of 

the school year. However, the services of no tenured 

employee may be terminated under this section while any 

probationary employee, or any other employee with less 

seniority, is retained to render a service in a faculty service 

area in which the records of the district maintained 

pursuant to Section 87743.4 reflect that the tenured 

employee possesses the minimum qualifications prescribed 

by the board of governors and is competent to serve under 

district competency criteria. . . .  

19 

3. 

A preponderance of the evidence sustained the statements set forth in 

the district’s Resolution No. 2020-03-12-HR02 served on respondent that the 

particular kind of service, namely the STEM Pathway Coordinator, be discontinued for 

the 2020-21 academic year. The district identified the employee, respondent, who is 

providing the particular kind of service that the board directed be reduced or 

discontinued.  

5. 

However, because of the district’s violations of Education Code sections 

87743, 87743.3, and 87743.4, for failing to assign at least one FSA upon initial 

employment of respondent and failing to maintain a permanent record of all FSAs 

possessed by respondent it is not possible to determine if any employee with less 

seniority than respondent is being retained to perform a service in a faculty service 

area in which the records of the district maintained pursuant to Section 87743.4 reflect 

that respondent possesses the minimum qualifications.  

6. 

Cause does not exist pursuant to Education Code section 87743 to give 

notice to respondent that her services will not be required for the 2020-2021 academic 

year based on the reduction or discontinuance of the particular kind of service 

because a determination cannot be made regarding whether respondent possesses an 

FSA for a service that is being rendered by a junior employee. 

RECOMMENDATION 

It is recommended that the Governing Board of the District rescind the Notice 

of Recommendation that Service Will Not Be Required served upon respondent and 

dismiss the Accusation.  

20 

Consistent with the above findings, the district shall properly evaluate 

respondent’s qualifications for all appropriate faculty service areas pursuant to the 

requirements of Education Code section 87743.3, including providing any required 

grievance procedure for fair and equitable resolution of any disputes related thereto.  

DATE: May 15, 2020 

 

DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

 

21 

