BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD 
OF THE FIELDBROOK ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
HUMBOLDT COUNTY, STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force Against: 

SANDRA POSTON, Respondent, 

OAH No. 2020030777 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Tiffany L. King, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically on April 30, 2020, in 

Sacramento, California.  

School District (District). 

Damara L. Moore, Attorney at Law, represented the Fieldbrook Elementary 

Respondent Sandra Poston represented herself. 

Testimony and documentary evidence were received, and oral arguments were 

made. The record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 30, 

2020. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Justin Wallace is the District Superintendent and Principal of Fieldbrook 

Elementary School. He is the sole administrator for the District. The actions of 

2. 

3. 

Superintendent Wallace, and those of the District’s staff and Governing Board (Board), 

were taken solely in their official capacities. 

Ms. Poston is a certificated permanent employee of the District. 

On March 9, 2020, based on Superintendent Wallace’s recommendation, 

the Board passed Resolution No. 2020-0002 (Resolution). The Resolution reduced the 

District’s certificated staff by 1.6333 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions for the 2020-

2021 school year. It also established the following criteria to deviate from terminating 

certificated employees in order of seniority (skipping) who: 

(1) By March 1, 2020, possess credentials or certifications 

authorizing single subject instruction in the subjects of 

English and/or Mathematics; and 

(2) In 2020-2021, are assigned within the scope of any one 

or more of the credentials or certifications authorizing 

instruction or services in the areas of English and/or 

Mathematics, including self-contained classrooms where 

English and/or Mathematics are part of the curriculum; and 

(3) Have experience teaching for at least five (5) years of 

instruction in the areas of English and/or Mathematics, 

including self-contained classrooms where English and/or 

Mathematics are part of the curriculum …. 

4. 

Superintendent Wallace prepared a seniority list of certificated 

employees. He skipped one certificated employee junior to Ms. Poston in determining 

to serve Ms. Poston with a Notice of Layoff. The certificated employee who was 

2 

skipped, Elizabeth Kadle, meets the skipping criteria in that she possessed a 

certification or credential in English as of March 1, 2020, and has at least five years’ 

experience in teaching the same. Ms. Poston does not possess a certification or 

credential in English or Mathematics. 

5. 

On March 10, 2020, Superintendent Wallace caused Ms. Poston to be 

timely served with a written Notice of Layoff. The Notice of Layoff advised Ms. Poston 

that her services would not be required for the 2020-2021 school year because of the 

discontinuance or reduction of particular kinds of services (PKS), as set forth in the 

Resolution, a copy of which was attached. Pursuant to Education Code section 44949, 

subdivision (b), Ms. Poston timely requested a hearing to determine if there is cause 

for not reemploying her for the ensuing school year. This hearing followed. 

6. 

The District is located in Humboldt County. It consists of one school, 

Fieldbrook Elementary, and employs eight certificated teachers on a full or part-time 

basis. Over the last three years, the District has suffered reduced funding based on a 

20 percent reduction in average daily attendance over the same period. Additionally, 

from 2015 to 2018, the District’s performance on state CAASPP1 testing has declined in 

the areas of English Language Arts (from 74 percent to 61 percent), and Mathematics 

(from 58 percent to 48 percent).  

7. 

CAASPP scores are reviewed annually by the California Department of 

Education (CDE) and are publically available. A school district’s performance on state 

measures, using comparable statewide data, is represented by one of five colors on 

the CDE’s California School Dashboard (Dashboard).2 A red, orange, or yellow rating 

                                              

1 California Assessment of Student Performance and Progress. 

2 https://www.caschooldashboard.org/about/accountability 

3 

indicates low performance and an area of concern; a green or blue rating indicates 

satisfactory performance. Where a school district has an area of concern, the CDE can 

require the school district to show improvement in those areas, limiting a district’s 

flexibility and autonomy in where to direct financial resources. 

8. 

The District’s 48 percent score in Mathematics earned a yellow rating on 

the Dashboard, making it an area of concern. Although the District’s performance in 

English Language Arts earned a green rating, the District nevertheless determined it an 

area of concern due to the 13-point drop in scores over a three-year span (2015-2018). 

Additionally, the percentage of the student population rated as “not meeting 

standards” in this area jumped from two percent to 11 percent.  

9. 

Every spring, the District sends a survey to student families, District staff, 

and community members requesting feedback regarding their perception of the 

school and any concerns these stakeholders may have. Superintendent Wallace 

personally reviews the survey answers. He noted that recent surveys reflect stakeholder 

concern regarding declining CAASPP scores and academic rigor, and a desire to see 

improvement in those areas. This stakeholder feedback is incorporated into the 

District’s annual local control and accountability plan, which helps the Board determine 

areas of need and where to direct funding and professional development for staff. 

10. 

For all of these reasons, Superintendent Wallace recommended the 

Board adopt the “skipping” criteria set forth in Factual Finding 3, above. At hearing, he 

explained that teachers with a single subject credential or certification are able to 

teach that lone subject in a classroom or small group setting, whereas teachers with a 

multiple-subject credential only cannot. While the District did not have intervention 

programs that focused solely on English Language Arts or Mathematics for the 2019-

2020 school year, the District is considering implementing such measures for the 

4 

2020-2021 school year. To do so, the District must have certificated teachers certified 

or credentialed in English or Mathematics to provide the specialized instruction. The 

five-year experience requirement is meant to identify those teachers who have 

demonstrated knowledge in teaching those subject areas while also honoring their 

seniority. 

11. 

At hearing, Ms. Poston asserted that the “skipping” criteria were invalid 

and inapplicable to her position. She also argued that the reasons proffered by 

Superintendent Wallace in support of the criteria were mere pretext for his favoring of 

Ms. Kadle over Ms. Poston. 

12.  Ms. Poston argued that the “skipping” criteria were invalid because the 

“general concept of improving CAASPP scores” does not constitute “a specific need for 

personnel to teach a specific course or course of study” as required by Education Code 

section 44955, subdivision (d). Certification or credentialing in English Language Arts 

or Mathematics is not required to teach in an elementary school classroom. Ms. 

Poston is certified and competent to render any services in a self-contained 

elementary school classroom and there is no cause to displace her with a junior 

teacher. 

13. 

Regarding pretext, Ms. Poston contended that Superintendent Wallace 

and Ms. Kadle were “cohorts,” and that retaining Ms. Kadle over Ms. Poston would 

reduce Superintendent Wallace’s overall duties and responsibilities. Specifically, Ms. 

Kadle serves as the Athletic Director for the District, attending to a myriad of duties 

including: attending meetings, setting game and practice schedules, acquiring 

referees, and staying late on game nights. Ms. Poston posited these duties are typically 

the responsibility of the school administrator, and the retention of the junior teacher 

will reduce Superintendent Wallace’s workload as well as give him more freedom to 

5 

leave campus. Additionally, for the last two years, both Superintendent Wallace and 

Ms. Kadle have served as members of the District’s Multi-Tiered System of Support 

(MTSS) group,3 a program designed to address the social, emotional, academic, and 

community needs of children entering the public school system. As members of the 

MTSS group, Superintendent Wallace and Ms. Kadle have spent time together 

attending out-of-town trainings, conferences, and school site meetings. Ms. Poston 

also witnessed Superintendent Wallace interact with Ms. Kadle on campus, and 

perceived his favoritism toward her. In sum, Ms. Poston argued that the “skipping” 

criteria, recommended by Superintendent Wallace and adopted by the Board, had 

more to do with the welfare of the administrator than that of the welfare of the school 

or its students. 

Analysis 

14. 

To deviate from the order of seniority and retain a junior teacher, the 

District must satisfy the requirements of Education Code section 44955, subdivision 

(d). That section provides a district may deviate from the seniority list for either of the 

following reasons:  

(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel 

to teach a specific course or course of study, … and that the 

certificated employee has special training and experience 

necessary to teach that course or course of study … which 

others with more seniority do not possess. 

                                              

3 https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/ri/mtsscomprti2.asp 

6 

(2) For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance 

with constitutional requirements related to equal protection 

of the laws. 

15. 

The reduction or discontinuation of PKS set forth in the Resolution are 

related to the welfare of the District and its students within the meaning of Education 

Code sections 44949 and 44955. There was no competent evidence the Board’s 

decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was arbitrary or capricious. 

Rather, the decision to reduce or discontinue these services was a proper exercise of 

the Board’s discretion. 

16. 

School districts have broad discretion in defining positions within the 

district and establishing requirements for employment. This discretion encompasses 

determining the training and experience necessary for particular positions. 

(Hildebrandt v. St. Helena Unified School Dist. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) Here, 

the Board properly exercised its discretion in creating “skipping” criteria for the 

purpose of improving its students CAASPP scores after experiencing a drastic decline 

in those scores over a three-year span. Based on the skipping criteria set forth in the 

Resolution, the District properly skipped Ms. Kadle as Ms. Poston does not possess a 

credential or certification in English Language Arts or Mathematics. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

An employee served with a notice of layoff may request a hearing to 

determine if there is cause for not reemploying her for the ensuing year. (Ed. Code, § 

44949, subd. (b).) Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c), provides, in relevant 

part: 

7 

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law 

judge who shall prepare a proposed decision, containing 

findings of fact and a determination as to whether the 

charges sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare 

of the schools and the pupils of the schools. The proposed 

decision shall be prepared for the governing board and 

shall contain a determination as to the sufficiency of the 

cause and a recommendation as to disposition. However, 

the governing board shall make the final determination as 

to the sufficiency of the cause and disposition. . . . 

2. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in sections 44949 and 

44955 were met. The Notice of Layoff sent to Ms. Poston indicated the statutory basis 

for the reduction of services and, therefore, was sufficiently detailed to afford her due 

process. (San Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; Santa Clara 

Federation of Teachers v. Governing Bd. (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The description of 

services to be reduced, both in the Resolution and in the Notice, adequately describes 

particular kinds of services. (Zalac v. Governing Bd. of Ferndale Unified School Dist. 

(2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838. See also, Degener v. Governing Bd. (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 

689.) 

3. 

The Board may reduce, discontinue or eliminate a particular kind of 

service and then provide the needed services to the students in another manner. 

(Gallup v. Bd. of Trustees (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1571; California Teachers Assn. v. Bd. of 

Trustees of Goleta Union School Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.) A school board may 

reduce services within the meaning of the statute either by determining that a certain 

type of service shall not be performed at all or by reducing the number of district 

8 

employees who perform such services. (Rutherford v. Bd. of Trustees of Bellflower 

Unified School Dist. (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) 

4. 

The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services 

that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The 

Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary 

nor capricious, and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause exists to reduce the 

number of the District’s certificated employees due to the reduction and 

discontinuation of particular kinds of services. Cause for reduction or discontinuation 

of services relates solely to the welfare of the District and students therein within the 

meaning of Education Code section 44949. 

5. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides in part:  

Except as otherwise provided by statute, the services of no 

permanent employee may be terminated under the 

provisions of this section while . . . any other employee with 

less seniority, is retained to render a service which said 

permanent employee is certificated and competent to 

render.  

6. 

Subdivision (d)(1) of section 44955 provides an exception to subdivision 

(b) where a district demonstrates specific need for personnel to teach a specific course 

of study and establishes that a junior certificated employee has special training and 

experience necessary to teach that course that the senior certificated employee does 

not possess. (Bledsoe v. Biggs Unified School Dist., 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 134-135.) 

Nothing in the statute requires such special needs be evidenced by formal, written 

policies, course or job descriptions, or program requirements. (Id., at p. 138.) 

9 

7. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, the Board properly 

exercised its discretion in creating “skipping” criteria. Pursuant to Education Code 

section 44955, subdivision (d), and based on the skipping criteria set forth in the 

Resolution, the District properly skipped Ms. Kadle for layoff. 

8. 

Based on the above, it is recommended the District issue a final layoff 

notice to respondent Sandra Poston. 

RECOMMENDATION 

The Fieldbrook Elementary School District shall issue a final layoff notice to 

respondent Sandra Poston.  

DATE: May 6, 2020

 

TIFFANY L. KING 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

10 

