BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
SAN FRANCISCO COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force Involving: 

163 CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES, 

Respondents. 

OAH No. 2021030465 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Juliet E. Cox, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter by videoconference on April 19 through 23 

and 27, 2021. 

respondents. 

Attorneys Kathryn E. Meola and Jacqueline D. Hang represented complainant 

Dianna Gonzales, Deputy Chancellor of Human Resources, Compliance, Risk 

Management, and Safety for the San Francisco Community College District. 

Attorneys Robert J. Bezemek, Patricia Lim, and David Conway represented all 

The matter was submitted for decision on April 27, 2021. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

At its meeting on February 25, 2021, the Board of Trustees (District 

Board) of the San Francisco Community College District adopted District Resolution 

No. 210225-9.C.25 (the PKS Resolution). The PKS Resolution declares the District s 

intention at the end of the 2020 2021 academic year to reduce services as stated on 

Exhibit A to the PKS Resolution and as reproduced on Exhibit A to this Decision. 

2. 

Acting in her official capacity as Deputy Chancellor of Human Resources, 

Compliance, Risk Management, and Safety for the District, complainant Dianna 

Gonzales gave timely notice in writing to 159 full-time District faculty members that 

the District s executive staff members would recommend to the District Board that the 

District not re-employ these faculty members for the 2021 2022 academic year. Each 

notice stated that this recommendation would occur  because you are serving within a 

particular kind of service, as listed [in the PKS Resolution], which is being discontinued 

or reduced, or because an employee with greater seniority and qualification is entitled 

to reassignment into the service you are currently providing.  

3. 

Acting in her official capacity, complainant also gave timely notice in 

writing to four other full-time District faculty members that that the District s executive 

staff members would recommend to the District Board that the District not re-employ 

these faculty members for the 2021 2022 academic year. These notices stated the 

same basis for this recommendation as the notices described in Finding 2. In addition, 

these four notices stated that each of these four faculty members  may possess the 

minimum qualifications and competence to render a service in a faculty service area of 

a different discipline.  Findings 75 through 82, below, describe these notices in greater 

detail. 

2 

4. 

All 163 faculty members who received the notices described in Findings 2 

and 3 requested hearings on their re-employment. Again acting in her official capacity, 

complainant signed an accusation alleging the District s grounds for not re-employing 

respondents for the 2021 2022 academic year. Each faculty member received timely 

service of the accusation, and each became a respondent by filing a timely Notice of 

Participation in the hearing. 

5. 

The names of these 163 faculty members are stated on Exhibits B (7 

people), C (4 people), and D (152 people) to this Decision. 

6. 

Complainant has rescinded the notices described above in Findings 2 or 

3, and withdrawn the accusations described above in Finding 4, with respect to the 

seven faculty members whose names appear on Exhibit B to this Decision (and who are 

described in greater detail in Findings 73 and 81 through 83, below). This hearing 

proceeded with respect to the remaining 156 full-time District faculty members whose 

names are listed on Exhibits C and D to this Decision, who had received notices and 

accusations stating the District s intent not to re-employ them for the 2021 2022 

academic year. 

7. 

As to the 156 full-time District faculty members whose names are listed 

on Exhibits C and D to this Decision, this Decision addresses all challenges these 

respondents identified (orally on the record or in written argument) to the accusations 

against each of them described in Finding 4. Any contentions not specifically 

addressed in this Decision are found to be without merit and are rejected. To the 

extent that other challenges may have been possible but were not identified during 

testimony or in oral or written argument, respondents have waived those challenges. 

3 

Particular Kinds of Service 

8. 

The California Community Colleges Chancellor s Office (CCCCO) regularly 

publishes and revises a handbook listing Minimum Qualifications for Faculty and 

Administrators in California Community Colleges (the MQ Handbook).1 The MQ 

Handbook lists many disciplines, corresponding roughly to academic subjects of study 

and instruction and to discrete types of non-instructional student service. For each 

discipline, the MQ Handbook identifies educational credentials, and in some cases 

professional experience, constituting the minimum qualifications to serve as a 

California community college faculty member teaching a course in that discipline or 

rendering student service in that non-instructional discipline. 

9. 

The District organizes its faculty members, courses, and student services 

into departments. These departments are long-standing administrative units. 

10. 

Some District departments combine several distinct MQ Handbook 

disciplines in one department. For example, faculty members in the District s Social 

Sciences department teach courses in history, economics, and political science, each of 

which is a distinct discipline according to the MQ Handbook. Other District academic 

departments, such as the Chemistry department, include only one discipline. A few 

disciplines occur in multiple departments; for example, the MQ Handbook identifies 

physics/astronomy  as a single discipline, but the District has separate Physics and 

Astronomy departments. 

                                              

1 MQ Handbooks published in both 2019 and 2020 were in evidence, but their 

differences were not material to the issues in dispute. 

4 

11. 

The PKS Resolution identifies service reductions with reference to the 

District s academic departments. Each  kind of service listed in Exhibit A to the PKS 

Resolution and in Exhibit A to this Decision corresponds to a single District 

department.2 The PKS Resolution does not subdivide any District department into 

multiple  kinds of service  (even if that District department embraces multiple 

disciplines according to the MQ Handbook) or combine multiple District departments 

into a single  kind of service (even if those District departments involve the same MQ 

Handbook discipline). 

12. 

For each department, Exhibit A to the PKS Resolution states the number 

of full-time faculty positions from which service will be unnecessary during the 

2021 2022 academic year, for a total of 160 full-time faculty positions. Within each 

department, complainant identified the specific faculty members who would receive 

the notices described above in Findings 2 and 3 by sorting each department s list of 

full-time faculty members according to seniority. Complainant then identified faculty 

members whose re-employment would not be necessary if the District reduced each 

department s services to the extent stated in Exhibit A to the PKS Resolution, 

beginning with the most junior full-time member of each department and accounting 

                                              

2 The District has two nursing-related departments: one for Licensed Vocational 

Nursing and one for Registered Nursing. The PKS Resolution identifies only  Nursing

as a service the District will reduce. In context, this reference is to the Licensed 

Vocational Nursing department. No respondent argued otherwise. 

5 

for the possibility that the four faculty members who received the notices described 

above in Finding 3 might change departments3 rather than leave the District.4 

RESPONDENTS WHO RENDER SPECIAL SERVICES 

13. 

Several respondents contend that the District abused its discretion by 

failing to distinguish in the PKS Resolution among faculty members who serve within 

the same department but who render distinct types of service. 

Guillermo Luzardo 

14. 

Respondent Guillermo Luzardo began teaching part-time in the 

Architecture department in 2014, and has been a full-time faculty member since 2018. 

15. 

Construction management is a discrete discipline, according to the MQ 

Handbook. The District offers construction management courses, certificates, and 

degrees, all though the Architecture department. The District also has a cooperative 

                                              

3 As described in greater detail in Findings 75, 78, 81, and 82, two of these 

faculty members might have moved to the Biological Sciences department, one to the 

Computer Science department, and one to the Physics department. 

4 Complainant provided the notices described in Findings 2 and 3 to a total of 

163 faculty members, rather than 164. The discrepancy is in the Counseling 

department, where complainant gave notices as described in Finding 2 to only 14 

full-time faculty members even though Exhibit A to the PKS Resolution states that the 

District intends to reduce services in this department by 15 full-time faculty members. 

This discrepancy does not require resolution in this proceeding. 

6 

construction management training program with the Mission Hiring Hall in San 

Francisco. 

16. 

Luzardo described his unique qualifications and role in teaching courses 

in construction management. He testified credibly and without contradiction that he 

teaches several courses that are necessary for construction management certificates 

and degrees, and that he currently is the only full-time Architecture department faculty 

member who teaches these courses. Luzardo also serves as co-coordinator for the 

Mission Hiring Hall program. 

17. 

Luzardo believes that the most senior full-time faculty member in the 

Architecture department, Olallo Fernandez, also is competent to teach some or all 

construction management courses the department historically has offered. Luzardo 

also believes, however, that Fernandez intends to retire at the end of the 2020 2021 

academic year. No evidence contradicts Luzardo s understanding of Fernandez s 

intentions; at the same time, however, no evidence establishes that Fernandez already 

has retired. 

18. 

If the District does not re-employ Luzardo as a full-time faculty member 

for the 2021 2022 academic year, it likely will reduce the frequency with which it offers 

construction management courses, and may reduce or discontinue the Mission Hiring 

Hall cooperative program. The evidence does not establish, however, that the District 

will be unable to offer construction management courses, certificates, or degrees 

without continuing to employ Luzardo as a full-time faculty member. 

19. 

Luzardo did not testify that his education or experience qualify him to 

teach any course that the District offers through any department other than the 

7 

Architecture department, or that he has believed at any time relevant to this 

proceeding that the District considered him so qualified. 

20. 

All full-time Architecture department faculty members junior to Luzardo 

also are respondents. 

Jeannette Male and Kirstin Williams 

21. 

Respondent Jeannette Male is a faculty member in the Physical Education 

and Dance department. Male is one of only two full-time faculty members in the 

Physical Education and Dance department to teach dance courses. 

22. 

The other full-time dance faculty member is respondent Kirstin Williams, 

who is less senior than Male. 

23.  Male testified credibly and without contradiction that she and Williams 

teach both lecture and technique courses regarding dance. The district offers a degree 

in dance performance and various dance-related certificates, and Male s and Williams s 

courses are necessary to those study programs. 

24. 

Dance is a discrete discipline, according to the MQ Handbook. 

25. 

If the District does not re-employ either Male or Williams as full-time 

faculty members for the 2021 2022 academic year, it likely will reduce the frequency 

or variety of its dance courses. The evidence does not establish, however, that the 

District will be unable to offer dance courses, certificates, or degrees without 

continuing to employ either Male or Williams as a full-time faculty member. 

26.  Male did not testify that her education or experience should qualify her 

to teach any course that the District offers through any department other than the 

8 

Physical Education and Dance department, or that she has believed at any time 

relevant to this proceeding that the District considered her so qualified. 

27. 

The evidence does not establish that Williams has education or 

experience that should qualify her to teach any course that the District offers through 

any department other than the Physical Education and Dance department. 

28. 

All full-time Physical Education and Dance department faculty members 

junior to Male, including Williams, also are respondents. 

Hideki Richard Uchida 

29. 

Respondent Hideki Richard Uchida has been a faculty member in the 

Business department for 33 years in total, and a full-time faculty member for 13 years. 

30. 

Uchida testified credibly and without contradiction that he is the only 

full-time faculty member in the Business department to have taught business law 

during the last several years. (A former colleague who also taught such courses has 

retired.) Business law courses are necessary for several degrees the Business 

department offers. 

31. 

Although law is a discrete discipline according to the MQ Handbook, 

business law is not. The 2020 MQ Handbook states specifically that law courses  for 

application to a particular discipline may be classified, for minimum qualifications 

purposes[,] in the discipline of the application rather than in law. 

32. 

Uchida holds a J.D. degree, and believes that he is the most senior 

full-time Business department faculty member to hold this degree. The evidence does 

not establish that a J.D. is necessary to qualify a faculty member to teach bu siness law. 

9 

33. 

If the District does not re-employ Uchida as a full-time faculty member 

for the 2021 2022 academic year, it likely will reduce the frequency with which it offers 

business law courses. The evidence does not establish, however, that the District will 

be unable to offer business law courses without continuing to employ Uchida as a 

full-time faculty member. 

34. 

Uchida did not testify that his education or experience should qualify him 

to teach any course that the District offers through any department other than the 

Business department, or that he has believed at any time relevant to this proceeding 

that the District considered him so qualified. 

35. 

All full-time Business department faculty members junior to Uchida also 

are respondents. 

Claudia Ferreira da Silva 

36. 

Respondent Claudia Ferreira da Silva has been a faculty member in the 

Computer Networking and Information Technology (CNIT) department since 2007 and 

has been a full-time faculty member since 2009. 

37. 

Ferreira da Silva teaches courses relating to web development, including 

a course in the Javascript programming language. Aside from respondent Maura 

Devlin-Clancy, Ferreira da Silva does not believe that any full-time CNIT department 

faculty members who are senior to her know Javascript well enough to teach a course 

on it. 

38. 

The MQ Handbook does not identify either Javascript or web 

development as a discipline. 

10 

Richard Wu 

39. 

Respondent Richard Wu also is a faculty member in the CNIT 

department. He has taught in the department since 2014 and has been a full-time 

faculty member since 2015. 

40.  Wu teaches various courses relating to computer networking. Several of 

Wu s courses are necessary for students to receive an industry-approved certificate 

confirming their knowledge and skill relating specifically to creating and maintaining 

networks using equipment manufactured by Cisco Systems. Wu is the only full-time 

faculty member qualified to teach courses leading to this industry certificate. 

RESPONDENTS WHO ARE THE ONLY FULL-TIME FACULTY MEMBERS IN THEIR 

DEPARTMENTS 

faculty members. 

41. 

During the 2020 2021 academic year, the District had at least one 

instructional department (Administration of Justice and Fire Science) with no full-time 

42. 

The faculty reductions stated in the PKS Resolution will leave four other 

departments (Aircraft Maintenance Technology, Fashion, Philippine Studies, and 

Women s and Gender Studies) without any full-time faculty members. 

Tanya E. Lyles and Kenyon Verbeckmoes 

43. 

The District has taken formal steps to wind down and discontinue its 

Aircraft Maintenance Technology department. 

11 

44. 

During the 2020 2021 academic year, the Aircraft Maintenance 

Technology department included only two full-time faculty members,5 respondents 

Tanya E. Lyles and Kenyon Verbeckmoes. 

45. 

If the District does not re-employ Lyles or Verbeckmoes as full-time 

faculty members for the 2021 2022 academic year, it likely will reduce the frequency 

with which it offers courses relating to aircraft maintenance. The evidence does not 

establish, however, that the District will be unable to wind down its Aircraft 

Maintenance Technology department without continuing to employ either Lyles or 

Verbeckmoes as full-time faculty members. 

46. 

The evidence does not establish that Lyles has education or experience 

that should qualify Lyles to teach any course that the District offers through any 

department other than the Aircraft Maintenance Technology department, or that Lyles 

has believed at any time relevant to this proceeding that the District considered Lyles 

so qualified. 

47. 

As described more fully in Findings 70 through 74, below, Verbeckmoes 

has not applied to the District for reassignment into any department in which 

Verbeckmoes would be senior to at least one non-respondent. 

                                              

5 Before the District Board adopted the PKS Resolution, District records stated 

erroneously that respondent Joseph Gumina also was a member of the Aircraft 

Maintenance Technology department. For this reason, Exhibit A to the PKS Resolution 

stated that the District would reduce services in this department by three full-time 

faculty members, rather than only two. 

12 

Natalie Smith 

48. 

The District has not taken formal steps to wind down or discontinue its 

Fashion department, or to discontinue any of the degree and certificate programs this 

department offers. 

49. 

During the 2020 2021 academic year, the Fashion department included 

only one full-time faculty member, respondent Natalie Smith. 

50. 

Smith teaches three to five courses each semester, focusing primarily on 

styling, merchandising, and fashion industry forecasting. She also serves as 

department chair, coordinating schedules for the department s other part-time faculty 

members and advising for its students. 

51. 

If the District does not re-employ Smith as a full-time faculty member for 

the 2021 2022 academic year, it likely will reduce the frequency with which it offers 

courses relating to fashion design, production, and marketing. The evidence does not 

establish, however, that the District will be unable to maintain a Fashion department or 

to offer fashion-related courses without continuing to employ Smith as a full-time 

faculty member. 

52. 

Smith did not testify that her education or experience should qualify her 

to teach any course that the District offers through any department other than the 

Fashion department, or that she has believed at any time relevant to this proceeding 

that the District considered her so qualified. 

13 

Lily Ann Villaraza 

53. 

The District has not taken formal steps to wind down or discontinue its 

Philippine Studies department, or to discontinue any of the degree and certificate 

programs this department offers. 

54. 

During the 2020 2021 academic year, the Philippine Studies department 

included only one full-time faculty member, respondent Lily Ann Villaraza. 

55. 

The Philippine Studies department has existed since 1970. It offers no 

degrees, although Villaraza has developed a degree program that the District Board 

has not yet approved. The department also offers certificates. Villaraza testified 

credibly and without contradiction that even though the department does not offer a 

formal degree, it exemplifies scholarship and leadership for the Filipino community not 

just in San Francisco but regionally, nationally, and internationally. 

56. 

If the District does not re-employ Villaraza as a full-time faculty member 

for the 2021 2022 academic year, it may reduce the frequency with which it offers 

courses leading to its certificates or, if approved, its degree. The evidence does not 

establish, however, that the District will be unable to maintain a Philippine Studies 

department or to offer related courses without continuing to employ Villaraza as a 

full-time faculty member. 

Adele Failes-Carpenter 

57. 

The District has not taken formal steps to wind down or discontinue its 

Women s and Gender Studies department, or to discontinue any of the degree and 

certificate programs this department offers. 

14 

58. 

During the 2020 2021 academic year, the Women s and Gender Studies 

department included only one full-time faculty member, respondent Adele 

Failes-Carpenter. 

59. 

Failes-Carpenter teaches courses regarding addressing and preventing 

sexual violence. She also coordinates a program training students both at San 

Francisco City College and in San Francisco s public high schools as peer educators to 

prevent sexual violence. Failes-Carpenter has not recently taught the introductory 

course that the department requires for its degree, although she believes herself 

qualified to teach it. 

60. 

If the District does not re-employ Failes-Carpenter as a full-time faculty 

member for the 2021 2022 academic year, it likely will reduce the frequency with 

which it offers some courses in the Women s and Gender Studies department, and 

may withdraw from or reduce participation in the peer educator training program. The 

evidence does not establish, however, that the District will be unable to maintain a 

Women s and Gender Studies department or to offer related courses, certificates, and 

degrees without continuing to employ Failes-Carpenter as a full-time faculty member. 

Cross-Service Qualifications  Bumping  

61. 

In identifying faculty members whose services may become unnecessary 

because of service reductions, the District must evaluate whether any faculty member 

qualifies for reassignment to a service in which that faculty member is relatively more 

senior. Because formal credentials from the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing are not necessary for community college faculty members, the Education 

Code requires the District to make this evaluation with reference to the faculty 

member s  faculty service area (FSA). 

15 

62. 

In accordance with the Education Code, the District has negotiated with 

its full-time faculty members exclusive representative, Local 2121 of the American 

Federation of Teachers (AFT), to establish FSA designations for the District. Under the 

most recent agreement between the District and AFT, 

The District s FSAs are established and shall be maintained 

according to the Disciplines List, as adopted by the State 

Board of Governors of California Community Colleges and 

contained in the latest [MQ Handbook], except that each 

foreign language shall be deemed a separate FSA. 

63.  No respondent who taught a non-English language at the District during 

the 2020 2021 academic year contends that she or he qualifies for assignment to a 

new department for the 2021 2022 academic year, or that complainant proposes to 

retain a full-time faculty member who is less senior to teach the same language. For 

this reason, any distinction between an FSA (as the agreement between the District 

and AFT defines it) and a discipline (as the MQ Handbook defines and categorizes 

disciplines) is immaterial to this proceeding. 

64. 

The agreement described in Finding 62 calls for the District to assign 

primary FSA s to faculty members at the time of hiring, reflecting the  teaching 

assignment(s) for which they were hired.

In addition, a faculty member may ask the 

District to confirm the faculty member s qualifications in one or more secondary FSA s, 

for the District to consider if it proposes to reduce services by declining to re-employ 

full-time faculty members. 

65. 

In late January 2021, all full-time faculty members received email from 

the District s human resources department inviting them to review a list of full-time 

16 

faculty members (the January List) that a District staff member had excerpted from the 

District s comprehensive personnel database. The January List stated one or more 

FSA s for each faculty member. 

66. 

For some faculty members, the FSA designations on the January List did 

not precisely match disciplines listed in the 2019 MQ Handbook or the 2020 MQ 

Handbook. In addition, for some faculty members, the January List included multiple 

FSA designations, some bearing little or no apparent relationship to those faculty 

members department assignments. Finally, for some faculty members (as described 

more fully below in Findings 85 through 124) the January List showed the same FSA 

designations even though these faculty members served in different departments, and 

in different disciplines according to the MQ Handbook. 

67. 

The January List drew its FSA designations from the District s personnel 

records. Because the CCCCO has revised the MQ Handbook many times since 1990, by 

adding, changing, and subdividing disciplines, the matters stated in Finding 66 do not 

rule out the possibility that some faculty members FSA designations in the District s 

personnel records correspond directly and accurately to disciplines that the MQ 

Handbook listed when the District first hired those people. At the same time, the 

evidence does not establish clearly when or how any District staff member recorded 

the FSA designations that appeared on the January List. 

68. 

The email presenting the January List to full-time faculty members 

encouraged them to review the January List s FSA designations. The District provided a 

mechanism for faculty members to request FSA additions or corrections, and directed 

them to submit any such requests on or before February 15, 2021. 

17 

RESPONDENTS WHOSE QUALIFICATIONS FOR REASSIGNMENT WERE 

REVIEWED BEFORE THE HEARING (33) 

69. 

For 33 respondents who were junior to all non-respondents in the 

departments in which they served for 2020 2021, complainant or other District staff 

members had reviewed specifically before the hearing whether any of these 

respondents qualified for assignment in 2021 2022 to a different department in which 

the respondent would be senior to at least one non-respondent. 

Respondents Who Initiated Reclassification Review (28) 

70.  More than 80 full-time faculty members submitted requests on or before 

February 15, 2021, to correct or add to the FSA designations on the January List. 

71.  Most faculty members who applied before February 15, 2021, to correct 

or add FSA designations did not become respondents in this proceeding. 

72. 

A committee comprising staff members from the District s human 

resources department and faculty members reviewed many of the FSA addition or 

correction requests, prioritizing requests from full-time faculty members who had 

received the notices described in Findings 2 and 3. At the time of the hearing, 

however, no decision in accordance with the agreement between the District and AFT 

(referenced above in Finding 62) had occurred with respect to any such request. 

73. 

Complainant has withdrawn the accusation with respect to four 

respondents (Alexandra Kaplan, Michael Needham, Adriana Rivera, and Erica Tom) who 

submitted requests before February 15, 2021, for secondary FSA evaluation. These 

respondents were junior to some or all other respondents in their 2020 2021 

18 

departments, but each is senior to at least one full-time non-respondent in a different 

department. 

74. 

Twenty-four additional respondents applied before February 15, 2021, to 

correct or add FSA designations, and are not among the respondents as to whom 

complainant has withdrawn the accusation. These respondents are: 

a. 

Lori Admokom, 

b. 

Elena Alvarado-Strasser, 

c. 

Claire Brees, 

d. 

Neela Chatterjee, 

e. 

Robert L. Del Vecchio, 

f. 

Robert Duncan, 

g. 

Adele Failes-Carpenter, 

h. 

Tanaka V. Gaines, 

i. 

j. 

Breana Hansen, 

Samuel Johnson, 

k. 

Jesse Kolber, 

l. 

Shuk-Han Lau, 

m. 

Kathleen Marquez, 

n. 

Thomas Menendez, 

19 

o. 

Patricia Miller, 

p. 

Michelle Nermon, 

q. 

Wynn Newberry, 

r. 

s. 

t. 

David R. Pieper, 

Caroline Priestley, 

Robin Pugh, 

u. 

Ronald Richardson, 

v. 

Kevin Sherman, 

w. 

Kenyon Verbeckmoes, and 

x. 

Lily Ann Villaraza. 

As to each of these 24 respondents, the evidence identifies no District department in 

which the respondent s FSA designation(s) (as stated in the January List or with the 

revisions the respondent requested) might have qualified the respondent to serve for 

the 2021 2022 academic year, and in which the respondent would have been senior to 

at least one full-time non-respondent. 

Respondents as to Whom Complainant Initiated 

Reclassification Review (5) 

75. 

Respondent Devlin-Clancy was a CNIT department faculty member 

during the 2020 2021 academic year, and received one of the notices described above 

in Finding 3. This notice alerted Devlin-Clancy that although her services would not be 

20 

necessary for the 2021 2022 academic year in the CNIT department, she might retain 

her full-time faculty position by demonstrating her qualification for reassignment to 

the Computer Science department. 

76. 

The evidence does not establish that complainant s offer to review 

Devlin-Clancy s qualification for reassignment was inadequate or illusory. The evidence 

also does not establish that Devlin-Clancy relied reasonably on any representation to 

her by any District representative, through the January List or otherwise, to the effect 

that she already qualified for reassignment to any FSA the District offers through any 

department other than the CNIT department. 

77. 

The evidence does not establish that Devlin-Clancy has education or 

experience that should qualify her to teach in any FSA that the District offers through 

any department other than the CNIT department. 

78. 

Respondent Christopher Lewis was an Earth Sciences department faculty 

member during the 2020 2021 academic year, and received one of the notices 

described above in Finding 3. This notice alerted Lewis that although his services 

would not be necessary for the 2021 2022 academic year in the Earth Sciences 

department, he might retain his full-time faculty position by demonstrating his 

qualification for reassignment to the Biological Sciences department. 

79. 

The evidence does not establish that complainant s offer to Lewis s 

qualification for reassignment was inadequate or illusory. The evidence also does not 

establish that Lewis relied reasonably on any representation to him by any District 

representative, through the January List or otherwise, to the effect that he already 

qualified for reassignment to any FSA the District offers through any department other 

than the Earth Sciences department. 

21 

80. 

The evidence does not establish that Lewis has education or experience 

that should qualify him to teach in any FSA that the District offers through any 

department other than the Earth Sciences department. 

81. 

Respondent Frederick Moore was a Chemistry department faculty 

member during the 2020 2021 academic year, and was the most senior member of the 

full-time Chemistry faculty to become a respondent. Moore received one of the 

notices described above in Finding 3. This notice alerted Moore that although his 

services would not be necessary for the 2021 2022 academic year in the Chemistry 

department, he might retain his full-time faculty position by demonstrating his 

qualification for reassignment to the Biological Sciences department. Complainant has 

withdrawn the accusation against respondent Moore. 

82. 

Respondent Melinda Weil was an Astronomy department faculty member 

during the 2020 2021 academic year, and was the most senior member of the 

full-time Astronomy faculty to become a respondent. Weil received one of the notices 

described above in Finding 3. This notice alerted Weil that although her services would 

not be necessary for the 2021 2022 academic year in the Astronomy department, she 

might retain her full-time faculty position by demonstrating her qualification for 

reassignment to the Physics department. Complainant has withdrawn the accusation 

against respondent Weil. 

83. 

Complainant issued the notice described above in Finding 2 to 

respondent Joseph Gumina because of the error in department identification 

described above in Finding 44, note 5. Gumina has for many years been a faculty 

member in the Automotive/Motorcycle, Construction, and Building Maintenance 

department. Complainant has withdrawn the accusation against respondent Gumina. 

22 

RESPONDENTS WHOSE QUALIFICATIONS FOR REASSIGNMENT WERE NOT 

REVIEWED BEFORE THE HEARING (130) 

84.  Most respondents neither submitted requests before February 15, 2021, 

asking the District to evaluate their qualifications for potential reassignment, nor 

received one of the notices described in Finding 3 inviting them personally to 

demonstrate such qualifications. Respondents contend that some respondents qualify 

regardless to change departments. 

Business, English, and Mathematics Department 

Respondents 

85. 

For nine of the 12 respondents who served in the Business department 

during the 2020 2021 academic year, the January List states the respondent s FSA as 

ACCOUNTING; BUSINESS; GENERAL BUSINESS  One of these nine respondents is 

Needham, as to whom complainant has withdrawn the accusation. 

86. 

For each of the 11 respondents who served in the English department 

during the 2020 2021 academic year, the January List states the respondent s FSA as 

BUSINESS; BUSINESS ENGLISH; ENGLISH  

87. 

For each of the four respondents who served in the Mathematics 

department during the 2020 2021 academic year, the January List states the 

respondent s FSA as  BUSINESS; MATHEMATICS  

88. 

The evidence does not establish that any of the nine Business 

department respondents described above in Finding 85, other than Needham, has 

education or experience that should qualify that respondent to teach any course that 

23 

the District offers through any department other than the Business department, and is 

senior to any non-respondent in that other department. 

89. 

Despite the matters stated in Findings 85 through 87, the evidence does 

not establish that any of the nine Business department respondents described above 

in Finding 85, other than Needham, has believed at any time relevant to this 

proceeding that the District considered that respondent qualified to teach any course 

that the District offers through any department other than the Business department. 

Moreover, none of these respondents reasonably could have held such a belief based 

solely on the January List. 

90. 

The evidence does not establish that any English department respondent 

has education or experience that should qualify that respondent to teach any course 

that the District offers through any department other than the English department, 

and is senior to any non-respondent in that other department. 

91. 

Despite the matters stated in Findings 85 through 87, the evidence does 

not establish that any English department respondent has believed at any time 

relevant to this proceeding that the District considered that respondent qualified to 

teach any course that the District offers through any department other than the 

English department. Moreover, no English department respondent reasonably could 

have held such a belief based solely on the January List. 

92. 

The evidence does not establish that any Mathematics department 

respondent has education or experience that should qualify that faculty member to 

teach any course that the District offers through any department other than the 

Mathematics department, and is senior to any non-respondent in that other 

department. 

24 

93. 

Despite the matters stated in Findings 85 through 87, the evidence does 

not establish that any Mathematics department respondent has believed at any time 

relevant to this proceeding that the District considered that respondent qualified to 

teach any course that the District offers through any department other than the 

Mathematics department. Moreover, no Mathematics department respondent 

reasonably could have held such a belief based solely on the January List. 

Biological Sciences Department Respondents 

94. 

For each of the nine respondents who served in the Biological Sciences 

department during the 2020 2021 academic year, the January List states the 

respondent s FSA as  ANTHROPOLOGY; BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE; EARTH SCIENCES  

95. 

The evidence does not establish that any Biological Sciences respondent 

has education or experience that should qualify that respondent to teach any course 

that the District offers through any department other than the Biological Sciences 

department, and is senior to any non-respondent in that other department. 

96. 

Despite the matters stated in Finding 94, the evidence does not establish 

that any Biological Sciences department respondent has believed at any time relevant 

to this proceeding that the District considered that respondent qualified to teach any 

course that the District offers through any department other than the Biological 

Sciences department. Moreover, no Biological Sciences respondent reasonably could 

have held such a belief based solely on the January List. 

Ferreira da Silva (CNIT) 

97. 

For respondent Ferreira da Silva, the January List stated her FSA s as 

COMPUTER INFO SYSTEMS; INSTRUCTIONAL ASSISTING; MICROCOMPUTER APPL  

25 

98. 

For every faculty member in the Computer Science department, the 

January List also states  COMPUTER INFO SYSTEMS; MICROCOMPUTER APPL as FSA s. 

99. 

The MQ Handbook identifies computer information systems and 

computer science as distinct disciplines. Faculty members meet minimum 

qualifications to teach in computer information systems with a bachelor s degree and 

relevant professional experience. To teach in computer science, the MQ Handbook 

states that a faculty member generally must have a master s degree in computer 

science or a closely related field, or have equivalent professional experience. 

100.  Ferreira da Silva began her career in the late 

s as a computer 

programmer and analyst for an oil company in Brazil. She immigrated to the United 

States in 1997 and worked for several years providing consulting services relating to 

the  Y2K problem. Between 2002 and 2007, she was a senior software engineer for a 

major international shipping company. She holds a bachelor s degree in computer 

engineering and a master s degree in adult education and distance learning. 

101.  Ferreira da Silva did not submit any request to the District s human 

resources department, whether before or after February 15, 2021, for an additional FSA 

designation in Computer Science. 

102.  Ferreira da Silva testified credibly that she understood from the January 

List that she would qualify for reassignment from the CNIT department to the 

Computer Science department without needing to apply for an additional FSA 

designation. She testified further, and also credibly, that she believes herself qualified 

to serve in the Computer Science department, and that the only reason she did not 

submit a request before February 15, 2021, for a Computer Science FSA designation 

was that she did not understand any such request to be necessary. 

26 

103. 

In light of the matters stated in Findings 97 through 100, Ferreira da 

Silva s reliance as described in Finding 102 was reasonable. 

104.  Ferreira da Silva is senior to one full-time Computer Science department 

faculty member who is not a respondent in this proceeding. She is junior in the CNIT 

department to respondent Devlin-Clancy. 

Richard Wu (CNIT) 

105.  For respondent Wu, the January List stated his FSA s as  COMPUTER 

INFO SYSTEMS; MICROCOMPUTER APPL  

106.  Wu did not submit any request to the District s human resources 

department, whether before or after February 15, 2021, for an additional FSA 

designation in Computer Science. 

107.  Wu testified credibly that he understood from the January List that he 

would qualify for reassignment from the CNIT department to the Computer Science 

department without needing to apply for an additional FSA designation. He testified 

further, and also credibly, that he believed (and believes) himself qualified to serve in 

the Computer Science department, and that the only reason he did not submit a 

request before February 15, 2021, for a Computer Science FSA designation was that he 

did not understand any such request to be necessary. 

108.  Wu holds a bachelor s degree in computer engineering and a master s 

degree in cybersecurity. 

109. 

In light of the matters stated in Findings 98, 99, 105 and 108, Wu s 

reliance as described in Finding 107 was reasonable. 

27 

110.  Wu is senior to one full-time Computer Science department faculty 

member who is not a respondent in this proceeding. He is junior in the CNIT 

department to respondents Devlin-Clancy and Ferreira da Silva. 

Lorenzo Ubungen (Counseling) 

111.  Respondent Lorenzo Ubungen served in the Counseling department 

during the 2020 2021 academic year. The January List stated his FSA as  COUNSELING; 

STUDENT SERVICES.  

Services) department. 

112.  The January List also states the same FSA,  COUNSELING; STUDENT 

SERVICES,

for every faculty member in the EOPS (Extended Opportunity Programs and 

113.  The MQ Handbook distinguishes general counseling from EOPS 

counseling, and prescribes minimum qualifications for EOPS counseling that are in 

addition to the minimum qualifications for general counseling. 

114.  Ubungen did not submit any request to the District s human resources 

department, whether before or after February 15, 2021, for an additional FSA 

designation in EOPS. 

115.  Ubungen testified credibly that he believes himself to meet the 

qualifications stated in the MQ Handbook for EOPS counseling. Academic documents 

in evidence confirm that his belief is reasonable. 

116.  Ubungen testified credibly that he understood from the January List that 

he would qualify for reassignment from the Counseling department to the EOPS 

department without needing to apply for an additional FSA designation. He testified 

further, and also credibly, that the only reason he did not submit a request before 

28 

February 15, 2021, for an EOPS FSA designation was that he did not understand any 

such request to be necessary. 

117.  Another faculty member who served in the Counseling department 

during the 2020 2021 academic year did apply before February 15, 2021, to add a 

secondary FSA in EOPS. This faculty member received a response within just a few days 

from an unidentified District staff member informing her that because EOPS was in 

effect a Counseling subdivision,  no changes will be made.  

118. 

In light of the matters stated in Findings 111, 112, 115, and 117, and 

despite the matters stated in Finding 113, Ubungen s reliance as described in Finding 

116 was reasonable. 

119.  Ubungen is senior to two full-time EOPS department faculty members 

who are not respondents in this proceeding. He is junior to five other Counseling 

department respondents (Jimmy Ly, Nixora Ferman, Alexander Lee, Gabriela Alvarenga, 

and Adriana Garcia). 

Other Counseling Department Respondents 

120.  The January List stated the same FSA,  COUNSELING; STUDENT 

SERVICES,

for each of the 14 respondents who served in the Counseling department 

during the 2020 2021 academic year. Three of these 14 respondents are Kaplan, 

Rivera, and Tom. Complainant has withdrawn the accusation with respect to Kaplan, 

Rivera, and Tom. 

121.  Despite the matters stated in Findings 112 and 120, the evidence does 

not establish that any respondent other than Ubungen who served in the Counseling 

department during the 2020 2021 academic year relied on any representation by any 

29 

District representative, through the January List or otherwise, to the effect that the 

respondent already qualified for reassignment to the EOPS department. 

122.  Some members of the Disabled Students Programs and Services (DSPS) 

department are instructors, and some are counselors. For the respondents who served 

in the DSPS department as counselors during the 2020 2021 academic year, the 

January List states the same FSA,  COUNSELING; STUDENT SERVICES, as for the 

respondents who served in the Counseling department during the 2020 2021 

academic year. 

123.  The MQ Handbook distinguishes general counseling from  community 

college counselor of students with disabilities, and prescribes different minimum 

qualifications for these two non-instructional disciplines. 

124.  Despite the matters stated in Findings 120 and 122, the evidence does 

not establish that any respondent who served in the Counseling department during 

the 2020 2021 academic year relied reasonably on any representation by any District 

representative to the effect that the respondent already qualified for reassignment to 

the DSPS department. 

Megan Sweeney (Social Sciences) 

125.  Respondent Megan Sweeney served in the Social Sciences department 

during the 2020 2021 academic year. The January List stated Sweeney s FSA as 

CRIMINOLOGY; POLITICAL SCIENCE.  

30 

126.  The evidence does not establish that Sweeney has education or 

experience that should qualify her to teach any course that the District offers, with 

full-time faculty,6 through any department other than the Social Sciences department. 

127.  Despite the matters stated in Finding 125, the evidence does not 

establish that Sweeney has believed at any time relevant to this proceeding that the 

District considered her qualified to teach any course that the District offers, with 

full-time faculty, through any department other than the Social Sciences department. 

Moreover, Sweeney could not reasonably have held such a belief based solely on the 

January List. 

Seniority 

128.  The January List also showed faculty members seniority dates. The 

District provided a mechanism for faculty members to identify potential seniority date 

errors and to request corrections. 

129.  Several faculty members identified seniority date errors, and provided 

information to the District supporting their claims to earlier seniority dates.  The only 

seniority date error relevant to this proceeding involves respondent Manuel Guillermo 

Romero, who served in the Automotive/Motorcycle, Construction, and Building 

Maintenance department during the 2020 2021 academic year. 

                                              

6 Sweeney may qualify to teach courses in the Administration of Justice and Fire 

Science department, but as stated in Finding 41 this department had no full-time 

faculty members during the 2020 2021 academic year. 

31 

130.  When complainant gave the notices described above in Finding 2, District 

records showed Romero s seniority date as August 16, 2018. District records at that 

time also showed seniority dates in and after 2017 for four other full-time faculty 

members in the Automotive/Motorcycle, Construction, and Building Maintenance 

department. Complainant used these records to identify Romero and these four other 

faculty members as potential respondents, and gave them notices as described in 

Finding 2. 

131.  Romero earlier had filed and resolved a grievance, however, confirming 

his seniority date as August 10, 2016. This date is the same as the seniority date for 

two other full-time faculty members in the Automotive/Motorcycle, Construction, and 

Building Maintenance department, Arcadia Maximo and Stephen Brady. With the 

correction, Romero is the most senior respondent from the Automotive/Motorcycle, 

Construction, and Building Maintenance department, because Maximo and Brady did 

not receive notices as described in Finding 2. 

132.  Complainant relied on the error described in Findings 130 and 131 to 

distinguish Romero from Maximo and Brady in this proceeding. 

133.  The January List also includes lottery numbers for each faculty member, 

for use if necessary to break seniority date ties. In this instance, however, complainant 

did not use these numbers to determine that Romero should be a respondent but that 

Maximo and Brady should not. Moreover, when the District corrected its records 

regarding Romero s seniority date, it did not change these lottery numbers to make 

them meaningful for establishing a seniority order, if necessary, among Maximo, 

Brady, and Romero. These lottery numbers provide no rational basis for distinguishing 

in this matter between respondent Romero and his equally senior non-respondent 

colleagues Maximo and Brady. 

32 

134.  Taking into account the corrections described in Findings 83 and 131, all 

respondents except for respondent Gumina and respondent Romero were the most 

junior full-time faculty members serving in their departments during the 2020 2021 

academic year. 

135.  Respondent Gumina is senior to several full-time faculty members in the 

Automotive/Motorcycle, Construction, and Building Maintenance department who are 

not respondents. Gumina is junior to respondent Lyles. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 87740 

and 87743. The District s and complainant s pre-hearing notices and actions, described 

in Findings 1 through 5, satisfied these statutes requirements, making all 163 

respondents proper respondents in this proceeding. 

2. 

The rights and status of any part-time faculty members the District may 

employ are not at issue in this proceeding. (

 (1989) 212 Cal.App.3d 909, 921.) 

Choice and Magnitude of Services to Reduce or Discontinue 

(160 Full-Time Equivalent Faculty Positions) 

3. 

Because of the matters stated in Findings 8 through 11, the services 

listed in the PKS Resolution are services that the District may reduce or discontinue. 

The District Board s identification of services in a manner corresponding directly to the 

District s departmental organization, rather than to the MQ Handbook, to District FSAs 

established in accordance with the agreement between the District and AFT, or to any 

33 

other potential service categories, is not arbitrary or capricious, and is not an abuse of 

the District Board s discretion. 

4. 

The matters stated in Findings 13 through 60 show that the District 

Board s decision to reduce District services in the manner the PKS Resolution describes 

is likely to cause significant changes in the District s course offerings and staffing. 

These matters do not show that this decision is fraudulent or dishonest, however, or 

that this decision will compel the District Board to act in the future in a manner 

violating any other law. The District Board s decision to reduce the services stated in 

the PKS Resolution by the amounts stated in that resolution is not arbitrary or 

capricious, and is not an abuse of the District Board s discretion. 

Withdrawn Accusations (7 Individual Faculty Members) 

5. 

Because of the matters stated in Findings 6, 73, and 81 through 83, the 

District must dismiss the accusation as to respondents Gumina, Kaplan, Moore, 

Needham, Rivera, Tom, and Weil. 

Seniority Within 2020 2021 Services 

6. 

The matters stated in Findings 130 through 133 establish with respect to 

respondent Romero that complainant proposes to retain equally senior faculty 

members to perform the same service that Romero performed. A decision by the 

District to terminate Romero instead of these equally senior faculty members would be 

arbitrary and capricious on this record. The District must not terminate Romero. 

7. 

The matters stated in Findings 12 and 83 establish that complainant has 

not notified any respondent that the respondent s services will not be necessary for 

the 2021 2022 academic year, while failing to give similar notice to any more junior 

34 

full-time faculty member who served within the same District department during the 

2020 2021 academic year. 

Potential Service Reassignments 

8. 

The District may not terminate any full-time faculty member s services 

while retaining a junior full-time faculty member  to render a service in a faculty 

service area in which the senior full-time faculty member qualifies to serve. (Ed. Code, 

 87743.) Because of the matters stated in Legal Conclusions 3 and 4,  to render a 

service with respect to this proceeding means to serve as a member of a District 

department, not to serve within a particular discipline according to the MQ Handbook. 

9. 

Because of the matters stated in Legal Conclusions 3 and 8, the matters 

stated in Findings 66, 67, and 72 are relevant in this proceeding only insofar as they 

may reflect errors or omissions in the District s records regarding respondents. These 

potential errors and omissions are not relevant in this proceeding to the extent they 

relate solely to full-time faculty members who are not respondents. 

10. 

Education Code section 87743.4 requires the District to  maintain a 

permanent record for each faculty member employed by the district of the faculty 

member s FSA or FSA s, and to maintain this record  in the faculty member s personnel 

file The Education Code further specifically directs the District to evaluate a faculty 

member s FSA at the time of a potential reduction in force with respect to  the records 

of the District maintained pursuant to [Education Code] Section 

 Finally, 

however, the Education Code permits the District also to consider requests by faculty 

members for additional FSA designations if the District received those requests  on or 

before February 15.  (Ed. Code,  87743.3.) 

35 

11. 

Taken together, Legal Conclusions 8 and 10 indicate that a respondent in 

this proceeding might qualify for retention and reassignment for the 2021 2022 

academic year under either of two circumstances: (1) the respondent s primary FSA, 

according to District records, is a discipline that occurs within more than one District 

department, or (2) the respondent qualifies, based on District records or on 

supplemental information the respondent submitted before February 15, 2021, for a 

secondary FSA that is a discipline occurring within a different District department from 

the department in which the respondent so far has served. In either case, however, the 

District would need to retain such a respondent only if reassignment would make that 

respondent senior to at least one non-respondent in the new department. 

12. 

The District has the obligation in the first instance to identify faculty 

members who qualify for reassignment. (Ed. Code,  87743; 

 (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 566-567.) 

13. 

Because of the matters stated in Finding 41 and in Legal Conclusion 11, 

the District need not reassign any respondent to the Administration of Justice and Fire 

Science department to avoid terminating the services of a full-time faculty member 

while retaining another employee with less seniority to render a service that the more 

senior employee can render. 

14. 

Because of the matters stated in Findings 12 and 70 through 74, none of 

the 24 respondents who applied before February 15, 2021, for a different or additional 

FSA qualifies, either on the basis of the respondent s 2020 2021 department 

assignment and FSA(s) as maintained in District records or on the basis of any 

potential different or additional FSA, for assignment to any District department in 

which that respondent is senior to at least one full-time non-respondent. 

36 

15. 

Because of the matters stated in Findings 75 through 80, neither 

respondent Devlin-Clancy nor respondent Lewis qualifies for assignment to any District 

department in which that respondent is senior to at least one full-time 

non-respondent. 

16. 

As stated in Findings 101, 106, and 114, respondents Ferreira da Silva, 

Wu, and Ubungen failed to apply to the District before February 15, 2021, for 

evaluation of their qualifications to serve in FSAs that the District offers through 

departments other than the departments in which these respondents served during 

the 2020 2021 academic year. 

17. 

As to each of these respondents, however, the matters stated in Findings 

97 through 103 (Ferreira da Silva), 105 through 109 (Wu), and 111 through 118 

(Ubungen) estop complainant to contend that these respondents

2021 

department assignments, in combination with their FSAs as maintained in District 

records, fail to qualify them for reassignment to other departments. 

18. 

The matters stated in Legal Conclusion 17 do not demonstrate 

conclusively that respondents Ferreira da Silva, Wu, and Ubungen meet minimum 

qualifications, according to the MQ Handbook, for service in disciplines other than the 

disciplines in which they served during the 2020 2021 academic year. With respect to 

these three respondents, however, the matters stated in Legal Conclusion 17 

demonstrate that complainant should have given these respondents notices similar to 

the notices described in Finding 3, and should have undertaken affirmatively before 

the hearing in this matter to confirm whether these respondents qualify for 

reassignment. Because complainant did not do so, the District cannot conclude on this 

record with respect to Ferreira da Silva, Wu, and Ubungen that complainant does not 

37 

propose to retain anyone junior to these three respondents to serve in a department 

and FSA for which these three respondents qualify. 

19. 

The burden of proving facts necessary to support an estoppel rests with 

the person asserting it. The matters stated in Findings 18, 26, 27, 34, 46, 52, 74, 85 

through 96, and 120 through 124 confirm that Ferreira da Silva, Wu, and Ubungen are 

the only respondents who may estop complainant to contend that that they do not 

qualify, on the basis of their 2020 2021 department assignments and their FSAs as 

maintained in District records, for reassignment to other departments. 

20. 

Because of the matters stated in Finding 12 and in Legal Conclusions 14, 

15, and 19, no respondent as to whom complainant has not withdrawn the accusation, 

other than Ferreira da Silva, Wu, and Ubungen, qualifies for assignment to any District 

department in which that respondent is senior to at least one full-time 

non-respondent. 

21. 

Because of the matters stated in Legal Conclusions 5, 6, 7, 14, 15, and 20, 

complainant does not propose to terminate the services of any full-time faculty 

member other than Ferreira da Silva, Wu, and Ubungen, while retaining any other 

employee with less seniority to render a service in any FSA for which District records 

reflect that the more senior employee possesses the minimum qualifications and is 

competent. 

Summary 

22. 

The matters stated in Legal Conclusions 5, 6, and 18 do not constitute 

cause under Education Code section 87743 to give notice to respondents Ferreira da 

Silva, Gumina, Kaplan, Moore, Needham, Rivera, Romero, Tom, Ubungen, Weil, and Wu 

that their services will not be required for the upcoming 2021 2022 academic year. 

38 

23. 

The matters stated in Legal Conclusions 7, 14, 15, 20, and 21 constitute 

cause under Education Code section 87743 to give notice to all respondents other 

than respondents Ferreira da Silva, Gumina, Kaplan, Moore, Needham, Rivera, Romero, 

Tom, Ubungen, Weil, and Wu that their services will not be required for the upcoming 

2021 2022 academic year. In accordance with Education Code section 87740, the 

cause relates solely to the welfare of the District and the students thereof. 

24. 

If the District gives notices as described in Legal Conclusions 22 and 23, 

those notices may create future legal obligations for the District. Concerns over 

whether the District will violate those obligations, or will violate other laws, do not 

require resolution in this proceeding. 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

The San Francisco Community College District may not give notice to the 

seven respondents whose names appear on Exhibit B to this Decision that the District 

will not require respondents services for the 2021 2022 academic year. Instead, with 

respect to the seven respondents whose names appear on Exhibit B to this Decision, 

the accusation is dismissed. 

2. 

The San Francisco Community College District also may not give notice 

to the four respondents whose names appear on Exhibit C to this Decision that the 

District will not require respondents services for the 2021 2022 academic year. 

Instead, with respect to the four respondents whose names appear on Exhibit C to this 

Decision, the accusation also is dismissed. 

3. 

The San Francisco Community College District may give notice to the 152 

respondents whose names appear on Exhibit D to this Decision that the District will 

39 

not require respondents services for the 2021 2022 academic year. The District may 

give this notice to these 152 respondents in inverse seniority order within the 

departments in which they served during the 2020 2021 academic year, but only to 

the extent necessary to achieve the departmental service reductions stated in Exhibit A 

to District Resolution No. 210225-9.C.25. 

DATE: 

 

JULIET E. COX 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

40 

Exhibit A: Reduction or Elimination of Certain Particular Kinds of Services

Aircraft Maintenance Technology, 

Counseling, 15 FTE 

3 full-time equivalent (FTE) 

Architecture, 2 FTE 

Art, 3 FTE 

Astronomy, 1 FTE 

Auto/Moto/Constr & Bldg 

Maintenance, 5 FTE 

Behavioral Sciences, 5 FTE 

Biological Sciences, 7 FTE 

Business, 12 FTE 

Chemistry, 5 FTE 

FTE 

Cinema, 1 FTE 

CNIT, 4 FTE 

Broadcast Electronic Media Arts, 2 FTE 

Child Development & Family Studies, 2 

Culinary Arts & Hospitality, 3 FTE 

Earth Sciences, 2 FTE 

Engineering & Technology, 3 FTE 

Environmental Horticulture & Floristry, 

English, 11 FTE 

2 FTE 

ESL, 19 FTE 

Fashion, 1 FTE 

Health Education, 2 FTE 

Interdisciplinary Studies, 1 FTE 

Library & Learning Resources, 6 FTE 

Mathematics, 4 FTE 

Music, 3 FTE 

Nursing, 4 FTE 

Communication Studies, 1 FTE 

Computer Science, 3 FTE 

Philippines Studies, 1 FTE 

Physical Education & Dance, 6 FTE 

41 

Physics, 3 FTE 

Radiological Sciences, 1 FTE 

Social Sciences, 6 FTE 

Theatre, 1 FTE 

Transitional Studies, 3 FTE 

Visual Media Design, 1 FTE 

Women s & Gender Studies, 1 FTE 

World Languages & Cultures, 5 FTE 

Total, 160 FTE 

42 

Exhibit B: Faculty Members Whose Accusations Complainant Has Withdrawn (7) 

Gumina, Joseph 

Kaplan, Alexandra 

Moore, Frederick L. 

Needham, Michael 

Rivera, Adriana 

Tom, Erica 

Weil, Melinda 

 

 

Exhibit C: Faculty Members Whose Accusations the District Must Dismiss (4) 

Ferreira da Silva, Claudia P. 

Romero, Manuel Guillermo 

Ubungen, Lorenzo 

Wu, Richard 

 

 

44 

Exhibit D: Faculty Members Who May Receive Final Notices That the District Will Not 

Re-Employ Them for the 2021 2022 Academic Year (152) 

Admokom, Lori 

Carlson, Lennis J. 

Afshar, Golnar 

Cash, Raymond 

Alford, Marklin 

Cauthen, Alfred I. 

Alvarado-Strasser, Elena 

Cecil, Malcolm 

Alvarenga, Gabriela 

Cervantes, Consuelo 

Ancheta, Rebecca 

Chatterjee, Neela 

Arceneaux, Jacques 

Chu, Emily 

Bailey Burns, Cullen 

Collins, James 

Barone, Augustus 

Come, Julie 

Beard, Christine 

Compeon, Richard 

Blackwell, Angela 

Boudewyn, Susan 

Cox, Natalie 

Crow, Kelli J. 

Branagan, Laura 

D Aloisio, Michael 

Brees, Claire 

Del Toro Vazquez, Jose 

Buckley, Alissa 

Del Vecchio, Robert L. 

Cannon, Joseph 

Dellimore, Rhea 

45 

Demiray, Deniz 

Galampos, Marcia (Campos-

Dennehy, Ann 

Devlin-Clancy, Maura 

Diaz-Infante, Amy 

DiGirolamo, Lisa 

Duncan, Robert 

Dunn-Salahuddin, Aliyah 

Easa, Leila 

Epperson, Carla 

Evans (Johnsen), Jill N. 

Failes-Carpenter, Adele 

Feliciano, Anthony 

Feliu, Veronica E. 

Ferman, Nixora 

Frankel, Maggie 

Frei, Katherine 

Fung, Allen 

Gaines, Tanaka V. 

Rojas) 

Gallagher, Patricia 

Garcia, Adriana 

Gliniewicz, David 

Goodman, Marilyn 

Green, Erik 

Hamilton, Shawna 

Hansen, Breana 

Harrington, Timothy 

Harrison, Margaret A. 

Hartman, Catherine E. 

Heimer, Clare (Stinchcombe) 

Helmy, Anna-Lisa 

Hill, Kyle 

Hong, Bo 

Hong, Jennifer 

Huot, Bophany L. 

46 

Hurst, Diane 

Hurt, Mai T. 

Inomata, Kimiyoshi 

Johnson, Samuel 

Joshi, Aditi 

Jung, Paula 

Lewis, Christopher J. 

Lim, Benedict M. 

Lin, Carina 

Liu, Ying 

Luttrell, Maximilian 

Luzardo, Guillermo 

Jones, Tamika 

Lovadino-Crocomo, Carla 

Kamatani, Pamela M. 

Ly, Jimmy 

Kennedy, Thomas 

Lyles, Tanya E. 

Kienzle, Jennifer 

MacAndrew, Ann L. 

Kinney, Megan 

Male, Jeanette 

Kolber, Jesse 

Marquez, Kathleen 

Kumar, Shridevi 

Mbolo, Billington 

Kurpinsky, Annemarie 

McKenzie, Michelle 

Lau, Derek 

Meagher, Carole K. 

Lau, Shuk-Han 

Menendez, Thomas 

Law, Suk Fun Fanny 

Miller, Patricia 

Lee, Alexander 

Mullen, Dennis 

47 

Nermon, Michelle 

Rudd, Jennifer 

Newberry, Wynn 

Rusali, Mia E. 

Nguyen, Sean 

Salangsang, John 

Nunley, Patricia 

Scheffer, Johanna 

Oest, Nicole 

Schweitzer, David 

O Leary, Daniel 

Olmos, Christian 

Sen, Maya 

Shea, Lorna 

Peterson Jr., George 

Sheetz, Nuala 

Pham, Phong 

Sherman, Kevin 

Pieper, David R. 

Siekmann, Jonathan 

Potter, Jonathan 

Smith, Elizabeth 

Potts, David 

Smith, Natalie 

Prentice, Julian 

Somsanith, Darouny 

Priestley, Caroline 

Soneji, Hitesh M. 

Pugh, Robin 

Rahn, Katrina 

Stuart, Christina 

Sweeney, Megan 

Richardson, Ronald 

Swingle, Stephen 

Rosenberg, Stephanie 

Tabarracci, Jenny 

48 

Tang, Gayle 

Uchida, Hideki 

Varelas Bojnowski, Maria 

Verbeckmoes, Kenyon 

Viertel, Clayton T. 

Villaraza, Lily Ann 

Wang, Thomas 

Weyer, Andy 

Wiggins, Shawn 

Williams, Kirstin 

Wong, Brian A. 

Woo, Eliza 

Yanuaria, Christina 

49 

