BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
PASADENA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the District Statement of 

Reduction in Force Against: 

Certain Certificated Employees of the 

Pasadena Unified School District, 

Respondents. 

OAH No. 2021030752 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Erlinda G. Shrenger, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on April 15, 2021, by videoconference.

Jeff C. Marderosian, Esq., of the Law Offices of Jeff C. Marderosian, represented 

the Pasadena Unified School District (District). 

Carlos R. Perez, Esq., and Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Esq., of the Law Office of 

Carlos R. Perez, represented respondents Kevin Bice, Martin Dorado, Andrea Flores, 

Katherine Gilbreath, Elizabeth Korman, Veronica Martinez, Katherine Mickelson, Karla 

Orellana-Beltran, Felipe Perez, Alexandra Rozario, Sandra Salgado, Olivia Tu, and 

Samantha Woog. 

Eli Naduris-Weissman, Esq., of the law firm Rothner, Segall & Greenstone,

represented respondents Anthony Bonoli and Sara Dave. 

Respondent Billie Johnson represented herself. 

Christian Lozano of the California Teachers Association, and Allison Steppes, 

President of the United Teachers of Pasadena, were present during the hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record closed and the matter 

was submitted for decision on April 15, 2021. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Parties and Jurisdiction 

1. 

Brian McDonald, Ed.D., made and filed the District Statement of 

Reduction in Force in his official capacity as the District’s Superintendent.

2. 

Steven Miller, Ed.D., the District’s Chief Human Resources Officer, and 

Sarah Rudchenko, Ed.D., the District’s Director of Human Resources, acting in their 

respective official capacities, were responsible for the implementation of the technical 

aspects of the layoff.

3.

On February 25, 2021, the Governing Board of the District (Board) 

adopted Resolution No. 2593 (Resolution), which proposes to reduce or discontinue 

the particular kinds of services encompassing 18.6 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions 

by the close of the 2020-2021 school year.

4.

Before March 15, 2021, the District served 23 certificated employees with 

preliminary notice that their services would not be required for the next school year 

2

pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. Of the certificated employees 

given preliminary layoff notices, four of them, i.e., Anthony Bonoli, Sara Dave, Billie 

Johnson, and Stephanie Norton, were given what is referred to as a precautionary 

notice, because the employees who received them are subject to the Board’s skipping 

decisions, described in more detail below, and therefore would not be laid off if the 

skipping decisions pertaining to them are upheld.

5. 

Six certificated employees did not request a hearing and thereby waived 

their right to a hearing and cannot contest the recommendation of their non-

reemployment by the District. (Ed. Code., § 44949, subd. (b).) The six certificated 

employees are: Maricruz Castillo, Nancy Cruzat, Topaze Fraser-Lake, Barbara Ishida, 

Stephanie Norton, and Nidia Salazar.

6. 

Seventeen certificated employees, collectively referred to as 

Respondents, timely requested a hearing to determine if there is cause for not 

reemploying them for the 2021-2022 school year. Respondents were thereafter served 

with a District Statement of Reduction in Force and other related documents. 

Respondents timely filed Notices of Participation.

7. 

Respondents were at all times mentioned certificated employees of the 

District. They are: Kevin Bice, Anthony Bonoli, Sara Dave, Joyce Din, Martin Dorado, 

Andrea Flores, Katherine Gilbreath, Billie Johnson, Elizabeth Korman, Veronica 

Martinez, Katherine Mickelson, Karla Orellana-Beltran, Felipe Perez, Alexandra Rozario, 

Sandra Salgado, Olivia Tu, and Samantha Woog.

8. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 

3

9.

Prior to the hearing, the District rescinded the layoff notice to 

respondent Joyce Din (#846),1 a math teacher, as a result of a known vacancy.

The Board’s Resolution 

10. 

The Resolution provides for the reduction or discontinuance of the 

following particular kinds of services corresponding to a total of 18.6 FTE positions:

Elementary/Middle School (Multiple Subject): 13.0 FTE

High School (Spanish): 2.0 FTE

High School (Social Science): 1.0 FTE 

High School (English): 0.60 FTE

High School (Chemistry): 1.0 FTE

High School (Math): 1.0 FTE

TOTAL FTE TO BE REDUCED: 18.6 FTE

11. 

The decision to reduce or discontinue 18.6 FTE positions was due to the 

District’s budgetary situation, which has forced it to make cuts in several areas, and 

declining student enrollment. 

12. 

Exhibit A to the Resolution sets forth tie-breaking criteria to determine 

the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid probationary 

 

1 At times, Respondents and other certificated employees are identified by their 

number on the seniority list (Exhibit 9).

4

service on the same date. The tie-breaking criteria provide for points to be awarded 

for years of experience, credentials, authorizations, and college degrees. The more 

points awarded to a teacher, the higher their seniority within the shared first date of 

paid service. In the event of a tie after applying the tie-breaking criteria, the District 

would hold a random lottery. The tie-breaking criteria were used to resolve ties in 

seniority amongst certificated personnel. The validity of the tie-breaking process is not 

in dispute.

13. 

Exhibit B to the Resolution defines competency for purposes of 

determining a certificated employee’s competency to perform a service in accordance 

with Education Code section 44955, as when the employee subject to layoff has, under 

the appropriate credential, performed the service for one complete school year within 

the last 10 years. One complete school year is defined as actual service of at least 75 

percent of the number of days the regular schools of the District are in session. The 

validity of the competency criteria is not in dispute.

Skipping Criteria 

14. 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), permits a school 

district to deviate from the order of seniority in teacher layoffs when “the district 

demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of 

study . . . and that the employee [who is retained] has special training and experience 

necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which others with more seniority 

do not possess.”

15. 

Pursuant to the Resolution, the Board determined it was necessary to 

retain certificated employees for the following school year regardless of seniority 

5

(skipping) to teach a specific course or courses of study who possess the types of 

special training and experience that others with more seniority do not possess. 

16. 

The Resolution provides that the course or courses of study subject to 

skipping are those taught by certificated employees as follows: 

 

 

 

A. Currently assigned to at least four periods in an International 

Baccalaureate (IB) position and both (1) the District intends to assign the teacher to an 

IB position in the 2021-2022 school year; and (2) in the last 10 years the teacher 

participated in a minimum of 18 hours of IB training (hereinafter, IB skip). 

B. Currently assigned to a teaching position at the International Student 

Academy (ISA) at Blair Middle and High School and the District intends to continue the 

assignment in the 2021-2022 school year (hereinafter, ISA skip). 

C. Currently assigned to a teaching position at Altadena Arts Magnet 

Elementary, Eliot Arts Magnet Academy, Jackson STEM Dual Language Magnet 

Academy, John Muir High School Early College Magnet, Washington Elementary STEM 

Magnet School, or Washington STEAM Magnet Academy and both (1) the District 

intends to assign the teacher to a Magnet School in the 2021-2022 school year; and (2) 

in the last ten years the teacher participated in a minimum of 24 hours of training for 

the position (hereinafter, Magnet skip).

 

D. Current, valid Multiple Subject or Single Subject credential and 

possession of a current valid BCLAD in Mandarin, French and/or Spanish and both (1) 

is currently assigned to teach in a District dual immersion program and (2) the District 

intends to assign the teacher to a dual immersion program in the 2021-2022 school 

year (hereinafter, BCLAD skip).

6

E. Currently assigned to a teaching position in the Vanguard Program at 

McKinley Middle School and both (1) the District intends to assign the teacher to a 

teaching position in the Vanguard Program in the 2021-2022 school year; and (2) in 

the last three years the teacher participated in a minimum of 24 hours of training for 

the position (hereinafter, Vanguard skip).

17. 

The criteria of the IB skip, ISA skip, Magnet skip, and BCLAD skip, 

respectively, have been used in the District’s prior layoff proceedings and have been 

upheld. The District has a specific need for employees with the requisite special 

training and experience to provide instruction in these programs. These skips are valid 

under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). 

18. 

The Vanguard skip was included in the District’s layoff proceeding last 

year but its validity was not litigated because all respondents in that proceeding 

waived their right to a hearing as part of a settlement of the matter.

19. 

(A) Merian Stewart, Ed.D., is the Principal at McKinley Middle School 

(McKinley). Dr. Stewart testified the Vanguard Program is the “signature program” at 

McKinley for grades 6, 7, and 8. The Vanguard Program began as a pilot program in 

2016 and reached full implementation this year. All students in grades 6, 7, and 8 at 

McKinley are now taught using the Vanguard Program. The Vanguard Program is a 

completely online curriculum that involves direct teaching and project-based learning. 

Teachers must also provide weekly one-to-one mentoring for students. 

 

(B) Dr. Stewart testified that teachers in the Vanguard Program receive 

extensive training. They are required to complete an initial 40-hour, five-day training 

program over the summer before they can teach in the program. Thereafter, they 

receive annual formal training in the spring and summer from The Summit Learning 

7

Program (Summit), which is the actual name of the program McKinley uses and refers 

to as the Vanguard Program. Teachers have bi-weekly meetings to work with Summit 

coaches. The District’s internal records show that, over the past two school years, 

Vanguard teachers completed approximately 40 to 60 hours of training. The 

specialized training received by Vanguard teachers enables them to access the 

textbooks and materials, which are all online, through the Summit platform.

 

(C) Based on the foregoing, it was established the District has a specific 

need for employees with the requisite special training and experience to provide 

instruction in the Vanguard Program. The Vanguard skip is valid under Education Code 

section 44955, subdivision (d)(1).

20. 

Respondents Anthony Bonoli, Sara Dave, and Billie Johnson, are teachers 

in the Vanguard Program at McKinley. Dr. Stewart verified that they each satisfy the 

training criterion of the Vanguard skip stated in the Resolution. Respondent Bonoli 

received 60 hours of training this year, and 48 to 54 hours of training in the two years 

preceding that. Respondent Sara Dave received 40 to 54 hours of training over the 

past three years. Respondent Billie Johnson, who started in the Vanguard Program in 

2019, has received 40 to 52 hours over the past two years. 

21. 

Since the Vanguard skip set forth in the Resolution is valid, the 

precautionary layoff notices given to respondents Anthony Bonoli, Sara Dave, and 

Billie Johnson, should be rescinded and these respondents should not be laid off. The 

precautionary layoff notice given to certificated employee Stephanie Norton, who 

waived her right to a hearing, shall likewise be rescinded. 

8

The Seniority List

22.

The District maintains a seniority list that contains employees’ seniority 

dates (first date of paid service), credential information, and current assignments. Dr. 

Rudchenko testified to the accuracy of the seniority list and how it was compiled. In 

January 2021, certificated employees were notified in writing of the District’s records 

regarding their employment history with the District, and they were allowed to confirm 

or challenge the accuracy of that information. The seniority list was updated based on 

information obtained from certificated employees that was verified. 

23. 

The District used the seniority list to implement and determine the 

proposed layoffs. The District developed staff reduction worksheets of the least senior 

certificated employees currently assigned in the particular kinds of services to be 

reduced. The District then determined how many certificated employees assigned in 

the particular kinds of services are retiring or resigning; whether the least senior 

certificated employees in these particular kinds of services hold other credentials, can 

perform in other service areas, and are entitled to bump other more junior certificated 

employees; whether certain certificated employees should be skipped and retained; 

and how many certificated employees in each service area must be reassigned or laid 

off. 

24. 

The District used information from the seniority list to apply the tie-

breaking criteria to determine the relative seniority among three Spanish teachers and 

among two English teachers, respectively, who shared the same seniority date within 

their subject area. The teachers were re-ranked on the seniority list after application of 

the tie-breaking criteria. Respondent Samantha Woog (#816) was properly identified 

for layoff to account for the 0.60 FTE reduction in high school English. Respondent 

Felipe Perez was properly identified for layoff to account for a 1.0 FTE reduction in 

9

high school Spanish. (The remaining 1.0 FTE reduction in high school Spanish was 

accounted for by the layoff notice to Employee Nidia Salazar, who waived her right to 

contest her non-reemployment by the District.) 

25. 

The District properly considered all known attrition, resignations, and 

retirements in determining the actual number of necessary layoff notices to be given. 

26.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 

Individual Contentions

 

 

27. 

(A) Respondent Kevin Bice (#725) is a teacher at Blair High School. He

holds single subject credentials in Chemistry, Geosciences, and Biology. His seniority 

date is August 24, 2018, which he does not dispute. Bice was identified for layoff to 

account for the 1.0 FTE reduction in high school Chemistry.

(B) A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to 

transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. 

In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is 

filling that position. (

(1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.)

(C) Bice contends he is entitled to bump into the current assignment of 

Employee #842, who teaches middle school science. Employee #842 has a seniority 

date of October 12, 2020, and holds a single subject credential in Biology. Bice 

testified that middle school science has been redefined to require only a secondary 

science credential, which he has. Bice testified he has taught one section of middle 

school science every year he has been at Blair. After Bice’s testimony and further 

consideration, the District agreed to rescind the layoff notice given to respondent Bice. 

10 

28.

(A) Respondent Martin Dorado (#632) has a seniority date of October 20, 

2016, which he does not dispute. He holds a multiple subject teaching credential. He is 

currently assigned as a teacher at Madison Elementary School. Dorado was identified 

for layoff to account for a 1.0 FTE reduction in Elementary/Middle School (Multiple 

Subject) teaching. 

 

(B) Dorado contends he should be skipped from layoff because he is a 

teacher in the AVID program, which serves students of disadvantaged socio-economic 

backgrounds and promotes college readiness and community building. He testified 

the AVID program requires teachers to complete 24 hours (three full days) of training. 

Dorado testified he is one of two teachers at his school who have received AVID 

training. He contends he should be skipped from layoff to ensure continuity of the 

AVID program at his school. The AVID program, however, is not one of the programs 

identified for skipping in the Resolution. Therefore, Dorado remains a teacher subject 

to layoff. 

29. 

(A) Respondent Veronica Martinez (#845) has a seniority date of January 

4, 2021, which she does not dispute. She holds a multiple subject teaching credential. 

She is currently assigned as a teacher at Altadena Arts Magnet Elementary, one of the 

schools included in the Magnet skip. Dr. Rudchenko testified that, although Martinez 

meets the training criteria for the Magnet skip, she does not qualify for skipping 

because the District intends to reassign Martinez and not assign her to a magnet 

school in the upcoming school year.

 

(B) Martinez testified she was not made aware of the District’s intent to 

reassign her until she heard Dr. Rudchenko’s testimony in this proceeding. Martinez 

feels she should have been notified of the reassignment at the start of this year. 

However, she did acknowledge that notice of reassignments is typically given at the 

11 

end of the school year. The Magnet skip criteria does not specify any timing for the 

District to notify the employee of its intent to assign or not assign to a magnet school. 

Because Martinez does not meet both criteria under the Magnet skip, she is subject to 

layoff to account for a 1.0 FTE reduction in Elementary/Middle School (Multiple 

Subject) teaching. 

30. 

(A) Respondent Katherine Mickelson (#625) has a seniority date of 

September 19, 2016, which she does not dispute. Mickelson holds a multiple subject 

teaching credential, a BCLAD (Spanish), and a specialist instruction credential (reading). 

She is currently assigned as a teacher at Washington Elementary STEM Magnet School, 

which has a Language Arts program and STEM program. 

 

(B) Mickelson testified she was hired in 2016 as a Language Arts teacher 

at Washington Elementary STEM Magnet School. She testified STEM training is 

available only for the school’s math and science teachers. She has been unable to 

access STEM training offered in the summer because she was laid off at the end of the 

preceding school year. She feels it is unfair that the training needed to meet the 

criteria of the Magnet skip is not available to all teachers. No evidence was presented 

that Mickelson has the requisite training to qualify for the Magnet skip. Consequently, 

Mickelson remains a teacher subject to layoff to account for a 1.0 FTE reduction in 

Elementary/Middle School (Multiple Subject) teaching. 

31. 

(A) Respondent Andrea Flores (#687) is currently assigned as a Social 

Science teacher at Marshall Fundamental Secondary School, which serves students in 

grades 6 to 12. Flores was identified as an employee subject to layoff to account for 

the 1.0 FTE reduction in high school Social Science. 

12 

(B) Flores is shown on the seniority list with an assigned seniority date of 

August 7, 2018. Dr. Rudchenko testified that, based on new information showing that 

Flores worked as a long-term substitute teacher prior to August 7, 2018, the District 

has agreed to change her seniority date to October 10, 2017, going forward. Flores 

agrees with the revised seniority date. 

 

(C) Even with a revised seniority date, Flores remains subject to layoff. 

Four Social Science teachers with less seniority than Flores, i.e., Employees #812, #762, 

#713, and #685, are skipped from layoff under the Magnet skip. With her revised 

seniority date of October 10, 2017, Flores still has less seniority than the next two 

Social Science teachers on the seniority list, i.e. Employee #664 with a seniority date of 

August 9, 2017, and Employee #649 with a seniority date of August 8, 2017. 

 

(D) Flores contends she should be skipped from layoff because she is the 

only teacher at her school site who is trained and qualified to teach Advanced 

Placement (AP) U.S. History. If she is laid off, the school will lose its only teacher with 

AP training. However, AP courses are not one of the courses of study identified for 

skipping in the Resolution. Therefore, Flores remains a teacher subject to layoff. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955 were met. (Factual Findings 1-8.)

2. 

The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services 

that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The 

Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary 

nor capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or 

13 

discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and 

pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 

3. 

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 

44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students 

shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 

determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 

employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (

(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

4. 

Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of the 

District due to the reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The 

District identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services 

that the Board directed be reduced or discontinued. 

5.

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer 

to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing 

so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 

position. (

(1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.) Under 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), junior teachers may be given 

retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or 

capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack. (

 (1981) 

116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) 

6. 

A school district has discretion in determining whether an employee is 

certified and competent, as provided by Education Code section 44955, subdivision 

(b), to be reassigned and, as a result, displace a junior employee, as provided by 

14 

subdivision (c). (See 

(1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 

565.) The criteria used to determine a teacher’s competence must be reasonable. (

at p. 566.) Competency criteria that consider the skills and qualifications required of 

the teacher are reasonable. (

. at pp. 565-566.) It was established that the competency 

criteria adopted in the Resolution are reasonable. 

7. 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 

8. 

The District Statement of Reduction in Force shall be dismissed and the 

layoff notices rescinded as to respondents Kevin Bice, Anthony Bonoli, Sara Dave, 

Joyce Din, Billie Johnson, and Stephanie Norton, based on Factual Findings 4, 9, 18-21, 

and 27. 

1. 

Notice may be given to employees occupying 18.6 full-time equivalent 

certificated positions that their services will not be required for the 2021-2022 school 

year because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. Except as provided in paragraph 2 of 

this Order, such notice may be given to the Respondents listed in Factual Finding 7 

and to the certificated employees who did not request a hearing listed in Factual 

Finding 5.

///

///

/// 

ORDER 

15 

2.

The notice provided in paragraph 1 of this Order may not be given to 

Kevin Bice, Anthony Bonoli, Sara Dave, Joyce Din, Billie Johnson, and Stephanie 

Norton. The District shall rescind the layoff notices and/or dismiss the District 

Statement of Reduction in Force as to these individuals. 

DATE: 

 

ERLINDA G. SHRENGER 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

 

16 

