BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE  
LOMA PRIETA JOINT UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 

DAVID KISSNER, Respondent 

OAH No. 2021040076 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Danette C. Brown, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on April 26 and 27, 2021, by 

videoconference, from Sacramento, California.

Amanda Giorgino, Attorney at Law, Proactive Legal, The Bock Law Group, PC, 

represented the Loma Prieta Joint Union School District (District).

William J. Becker, Jr, Attorney at Law, Freedom X, and Jeremiah D. Graham, 

Attorney at Law, represented David Kissner (respondent).

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter was submitted for 

decision on April 27, 2021. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction and District’s Decision to Impose Layoffs 

1.

Linda Fraser is the Superintendent of Loma Prieta Joint Union School 

District (District). The District has two schools and serves approximately 490 students. 

Loma Prieta Elementary School serves kindergarten through fifth grade students, and 

C.T. English Middle School serves students in grades six through eight. The actions of 

Superintendent Fraser, and those of the District’s staff and Governing Board (Board) 

were taken solely in their official capacities. 

2. 

The District is facing a budget shortfall for the 2021-2022 school year 

and has projected declining middle school enrollment. The District’s Budget Advisory 

Committee (BAC) is a broad-based group of certificated and classified staff, 

administrators, parents, and community members at-large, who advise the 

Superintendent on potential financial strategies, practice, and/or budgetary actions to 

help to ensure a sustainable, long-term financial model for the District. The BAC met 

on a monthly basis from September 2020 to February 2021. During the BAC’s January 

11, 2021 meeting, it discussed budget reductions, goals, and strategies. The BAC 

presented its recommendations to the Board on January 13, 2021, setting forth its 

goals for fiscal stability, strategic planning, current challenges, budget cuts, program 

impacts, and proposed program solutions. The BAC provided a final tally of potential 

budget cuts estimated to be $437,400.  

3. 

The BAC’s recommended goals for the District’s fiscal stability included 

maintaining a 12 percent reserve, balancing the budget, actively pursuing revenue-

generating opportunities, and mitigating impacts of the recent Measure N defeat. Had 

Measure N passed, it would have authorized an annual parcel tax for seven years, 

2

generating an estimated $328,000 for academic programs in the Loma Prieta Joint 

Union Elementary School District.  

4. 

The BAC included in its recommended solutions “[shifting] 6th grade 

programming to self-contained English/history and math/science cores with PE and 

music pullout.” This shift in sixth grade programming directly affected respondent 

because he held a single subject credential in math.  

Billy Martin, Ed.D, Principal of both schools in the District, testified that “the 

main reason for the programming change [for the sixth grade] is reduced enrollment,” 

amounting to “at least a 0.2 [Full Time Equivalent (FTE)] reduction in the sixth grade” 

and a “reduction of 1.2 FTE over the whole system.” Shifting to a core program 

requires a multiple subject credential. It allows teachers to teach a broad range of 

subjects and electives that a single subject-credentialed teacher cannot. “The driving 

force is that a core program is a better model for kids. [Teachers] are expected to be 

jacks of all trades in this core model.” It provides “better support in transition from 

elementary [to] middle school.” Dr. Martin conceded that there are no teachers more 

junior than respondent with more experience teaching sixth grade math and science. 

However, Dr. Martin emphasized that “this is about their licensing,” not the amount of 

math teaching experience. The teachers that were skipped hold multiple subject 

teaching credentials, authorizing them to teach math despite having less experience 

than respondent.   

Superintendent Fraser testified that a core program “is pretty common in 

middle school structures” and “allows the District extra flexibility” in utilizing multiple 

subject credentialed teachers. Furthermore, “we have a math teacher who is single 

subject [credentialed]; if you have two single subject math teachers, that would be 10 

3

sections of math, but we don’t have 10 sections of math, thus the ultimate layoff [of 

respondent].” 

5. 

Cathy Vance, the District’s Chief Business Official (CBO) and BAC member, 

is responsible for preparing the District’s budget. She testified that the District has 

known over the past two years that it would have to make budget cuts for the 2021-

2022 school year because “the ongoing expenses exceed[ed] the ongoing revenues for 

the past couple of years, [extending] to the 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 [school years].” 

“Once the voters did not pass the extension of the parcel tax in November, the District 

knew that the cuts would have to be larger.” Ms. Vance determined the FTE reductions 

needed and “took it to the BAC.” The BAC worked through a prioritization process to 

determine “which cuts they thought were less painful and the things they did not want 

to cut.” The BAC recommended to cut 2.7 FTE at Loma Prieta Elementary School, and 

1.4 FTE at C.T. English Middle School, which included the 1.2 FTE for declining 

enrollment. In addition, “administrators and confidential staff took a one percent salary 

rollback, [and there were] some cuts to the consulting budget.”  

Consequently, the District determined that it must make significant budget 

reductions, and believes it is necessary to eliminate respondent’s certificated position, 

among other things, to address this budget shortfall.

6. 

On February 10, 2021, the Board adopted Resolution No. 21-XII, setting 

forth the criteria for the order of certificated layoff and reemployment for employees 

with equal seniority. The Board determined that, pursuant to Education Code section 

44955, subdivision (b), the order of termination between employees who first rendered 

paid service to the District on the same date “shall be established on the basis of the 

following criteria in order to meet the needs of the District and students thereof:” 

4

(1) Multiple Authorization Credentials; 

(2) Experience teaching different subjects; 

(3) Possession of a preliminary, clear, standard, or life 

teaching credential; 

(4) Possession of a CLAD/BCLAD/CTEL certificate;

(5) Experience teaching at different grade levels;

(6) NCLB Teacher Requirement: Certificate of Compliance;  

(7) Experience teaching in the District; 

(8) Experience teaching outside the District[.] 

The Board determined that the same criteria apply to determine the order of 

reappointment, and in the event of a tie.  

7. 

On March 10, 2021, the Board adopted Resolution No. 21-XIV, reducing 

or eliminating particular kinds of services (PKS) of the District, affecting 4.0 Full Time 

Equivalent (FTE) certificated positions. The Resolution states that it will be necessary to 

reduce the following PKS of the District, and to decrease a number of certificated 

employees in the District no later than the beginning of the 2021-2022 school year as 

follows: “4.0 FTE grades K-8 Classroom Teaching.” The Board determined to retain the 

following PKS:

(1) Mild to Moderate and Moderate to Severe Special 

Education Services; 

5

(2) Language, Speech and Hearing Special Education 

Services; 

(3) Resource Specialist Special Education Services; 

(4) Multiple Subject Teaching Credential. 

8. 

The services set forth in the PKS Resolution are “particular kinds of 

services” that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 

section 44955. The Board “considered anticipated certificated employee attrition 

(resignation, retirement, non-reelection, temporary teacher release, etc.),” and still 

found it “necessary to terminate the above-referenced certificated positions.” There 

was no evidence that the Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified 

services was arbitrary or capricious. However, this is disputed by respondent, discussed 

below. The Board concluded that the PKS reductions were in the best interests of the 

students. The reduction or elimination of the services set forth in the PKS Resolution 

constituted a proper exercise of the Board’s discretion, within the meaning of section 

44955.

therefor. 

9.

As a result of the above PKS reductions and/or eliminations, the Board 

determined that it was necessary to decrease 4.0 FTE positions for certificated 

employees in the District at the close of the 2020-2021 school year, in accordance with 

Education Code section 44955. On March 10, 2021, Superintendent Fraser gave the 

Board written notice of her recommendation that notice be given to respondent that 

his services would not be required for the ensuing school year, and the reasons 

10.

On March 12, 2021, Superintendent Fraser timely served a letter entitled 

“Notice of Intent to Layoff” (Notice) on respondent, a certificated employee affected 

6

by the PKS reductions and/or eliminations set forth in the Resolution. The Notice 

advised that it had been recommended to the Board that respondent be given the 

Notice that his services might not be required for the 2021-2022 school year. 

Respondent timely filed a Request for Hearing to determine whether there was cause 

for not reemploying him for the 2021-2022 school year.  

11.  On March 23, 2021, Superintendent Fraser made and filed the District’s 

Statement of Reduction in Force and caused it to be served on respondent. 

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Participation requesting a hearing in this matter. 

12. 

Respondent is a certificated permanent employee of the District. 

Jurisdiction for the subject proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

44949 and 44955.  

Implementation of Layoff Procedure 

13. 

In anticipation of the PKS reduction, Superintendent Fraser began 

updating the District’s seniority list. She notified all certificated teachers requesting 

that they confirm the accuracy of their seniority dates and credentials on file with the 

District and provided them with an opportunity to correct such information prior to 

finalizing the seniority list. Superintendent Fraser identified four individuals serving in 

the positions affected by the PKS reductions. She used the updated seniority list to 

identify vacant positions and to identify the least senior persons occupying the 

positions affected by the PKS reductions. She considered known attrition and existing 

vacancies. 

14.  When the least senior persons occupying the positions affected by the 

PKS reductions were identified, Superintendent Fraser looked at everyone’s credentials 

to determine whether she could displace any less senior certificated employees. On 

7

March 12, 2021, Superintendent Fraser served a Notice on respondent, identifying him 

as the most junior employee affected by the PKS reduction.

Respondent’s Challenges to District’s Layoff 

15. 

Respondent holds a single subject math credential. Respondent has 

taught at C.T. English Middle School since his date of hire on November 29, 2012. In 

the current school year, he taught “all of the sixth-grade math, two sections of seventh 

grade math, and one section of eighth grade science.” He taught science under a 

“Consent to Teach” waiver, allowing him to teach outside of his credential area.  

16.  On February 12, 2021, the District served respondent with a Notice of 

Proposed Intent to Dismiss with Statement of Charges. He believes that the District is 

attempting to remove him by first initiating dismissal proceedings, then by making 

him the only tenured certificated teacher to be subject to layoff. Respondent asserts 

that the District cannot justify its layoff under Education Code sections 44955 and 

44955.5 because there is no fiscal impact. Next, respondent asserts that the layoff is 

pretextual, in that the District’s layoff is an excuse for its retaliatory motive of 

attempting to terminate him for his political activity.  

FISCAL IMPACT

17. 

Petitioner works with his father as a financial advisor and understands 

budgets. He has studied the District’s budget very closely. Respondent does not 

dispute that the District must reduce its workforce due to declining enrollment and 

“deficit spending.” However, respondent disputes that the sixth-grade shift from a 

single subject model to a core model results in any savings. He asserts that the sixth-

grade schedule has always been the same dating back to when respondent was first 

hired and will not change for the upcoming year. Thus, there is no room to cut any 

8

sixth-grade sections. Respondent presented the District’s master schedule for the 

current year and next year, and his own charts to illustrate his point that “it is 

physically impossible to realize any budget savings in the sixth grade absent replacing 

a senior teacher with a junior teacher.” He asserts that CBO Vance was not able to 

provide an explanation for any savings realized through the sixth-grade shift to core 

programming.  

18. 

Respondent asserts that there is a very clear preference for a single 

subject math instruction because such credential holders are in short supply in 

California, and because C.T. English Middle School is a “high performing school and 

feeds into a high performing high school.” Students can follow a “math pipeline to 

accelerated math in high school.” “Math has been a priority; it always has been.”

Moreover, respondent asserts that the “nature of our District is that teachers have to 

teach outside of their credential and experience.” Respondent is concerned with the 

quality of math instruction that the students will get next year under the core model.

19. 

In addition, respondent asserts that the sixth-grade shift to a core model 

was never mentioned in any of the BAC’s materials and agendas until January 2021, 

after Measure N was certified as defeated, and after respondent called for a special 

election to fill a Board vacancy. If the special election occurs, respondent asserts that it 

will cost the District a large sum of money, and it has generated outrage in the school 

community.  

20. 

Respondent also asserts that at the Board’s March 10, 2021 meeting, the 

budget reduction line item showing the sixth-grade shift to a core program 

“disappeared immediately” after the District decided instead to dismiss him. The line 

item then reappeared during the Board’s March 10, 2021 meeting, showing a budget 

reduction of $12,000 for the “Electives at CT (6th grade self-contained).” Respondent’s 

9

assertion that Superintendent Fraser, CBO Vance, and the Board President had no 

explanation for this line-item discrepancy, and their failure to explain how the sixth-

grade program shift results in savings, is proof that the District acted arbitrarily to 

eliminate respondent’s position for reasons other than budget cuts or declining 

enrollment. 

LAYOFF A PRETEXT TO RETALIATION FOR POLITICAL ACTIVITIES 

21. 

Respondent asserts: (1) his constitutionally protected political speech

related to C.T. English Middle School’s walkout after the February 14, 2018 school 

shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School; (2) his vocal political stance 

against Measure N; and (3) his petition to force a special Board election to fill a Board 

vacancy, drove an ideological wedge between him and the District’s administrators, 

faculty, staff, and the Board. His unpopular positions caused him to be “singled out” as 

the only tenured certificated teacher to be subject to layoff. 

22. 

In support of his pretext argument, respondent submitted an August 16, 

2020 email from Sean Rokni, who worked with respondent on the No on Measure N 

campaign. Mr. Rokni did not testify at hearing, and his email was admitted as 

administrative hearsay. In his email, Mr. Rokni described a conversation with Board 

member Ben Abeln who made threats to everyone working on the campaign. Mr. 

Abeln’s statements to Mr. Rokni are inadmissible hearsay and not sufficient to support 

a finding that respondent was retaliated against by the Board. Mr. Rokni’s email is 

given little weight. 

23. 

Respondent also asserts that he is protected from viewpoint 

discrimination under the Federal Civil Rights Act (42 U.S.C. § 1983). He also relies upon 

Labor Code section 1101, which prohibits an employer to make, adopt, or enforce any 

10 

rule, regulation, or policy forbidding employees from engaging or participating in 

political activities, or controlling or directing the political activities of employees. In 

addition, Labor Code section 1102 prohibits employers from coercing or influencing 

employees through threats of discharge or loss of employment to follow or refrain 

from following any particular course of political activity. Respondent argues that his 

political activities are protected under the Federal Civil Rights Act, and that the District 

has violated Labor Code sections 1101 and 1102 by attempting to quash his political 

activities through loss of employment. 

24. 

Respondent also questioned the timing of the Notice of Intent to Dismiss 

with Statement of Charges, and the layoff notice, asserting that both occurred 

immediately after Measure N failed, and after respondent called for a special Board 

election. Respondent believes that his unpopular political advocacy created 

resentment and indignation “of the District political class,” who retaliated against him 

by instituting his layoff.  

IMPROPER SKIPPING OF JUNIOR TEACHERS

25. 

Respondent asserts that the District improperly “skipped over” junior 

teachers with less training and experience to lay him off. Citing 

 (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 138, (

) “a district must not 

only establish a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course of study, but 

establish the certificated employee it proposes to retain ‘has special training and 

experience necessary to teach’ that course or course of study or to provide those 

services[.]” Respondent asserts that none of the prospective teachers who have been 

retained to teach sixth-grade math next year have the experience to do so, and they 

are junior to him on the seniority list. He identified teachers Van Zante, Riccomini, and 

11 

Dudley, who are multiple subject teaching credential holders, as not qualified or 

experienced to teach middle school math.  

Analysis 

LAYOFF IS RELATED TO BUDGET REDUCTIONS AND REDUCED ENROLLMENT

26. 

Respondent’s keen observations into BAC’s budget discussions dating 

back to September 2020 shed light on the BAC’s active efforts to balance the budget, 

pursue revenue-generating opportunities, and mitigate the budgetary impacts of the 

Measure N defeat. He conceded that the District must reduce its workforce due to 

declining enrollment and “deficit spending.” While respondent may disagree with the 

BAC and the District regarding their budgetary decisions and management of the 

deficit, there was no evidence presented, other than respondent’s sole testimony and 

self-generated notes and charts, to show that his layoff was not directly related to 

budget reductions and reduced enrollment.  

Although respondent works with his father as a financial advisor, the job is 

substantially different from that of a budget analyst or Chief Business Officer in charge 

of a school district budget. Respondent did not call an expert to opine on the 

implementation of school budgets, decisions to consider when weighing budget cuts, 

the establishment of budget cuts, and analysis of the District’s FTE reductions and 

dollar figures. He was not privy to any of the BAC’s discussions, including the decision 

to shift sixth grade to a core program for the welfare of the District and its students. 

Respondent’s mere suspicions that the sixth-grade shift to a core program was never 

raised until after respondent was served with the Notice of Intent and Statement of 

Charges, that the District somehow hid this information, and that the District failed to 

12 

explain how the sixth grade shift to a core program would result in savings, is 

unpersuasive and not supported by the evidence.  

LAYOFF WAS NOT A PRETEXT FOR RETALIATION

27. 

There is no question that respondent is entitled to engage in 

constitutionally-protected political speech. He believes that he was “singled out” for 

layoff resulting from his political speech activities. He called no witnesses to support 

this assertion and presented a hearsay document purporting to establish that a Board 

member made threats against him. Other than respondent’s sole testimony, he 

presented no evidence to support his assertions that the District retaliated against him 

for opposing Measure N and calling for a special Board election. In addition, he 

presented no evidence, other than his sole testimony, that the Board engaged in 

viewpoint discrimination against him. Retaliation and viewpoint discrimination present 

legal standards that respondent must establish. Respondent’s sole subjective and 

biased testimony is not enough. Respondent failed to establish that the layoff was a 

pretext to retaliation by the District.

JUNIOR TEACHERS PROPERLY RETAINED 

28. 

The District presented the seniority list and the persuasive testimonies of 

Superintendent Fraser, CBO Vance, and Dr. Martin that support a finding that teachers 

Van Zante, Riccomini, Dudley, and others similarly situated, who are junior to 

respondent, possess the “special training and experience necessary to teach” in 

accordance with 

, despite having less experience than respondent. Their 

multiple subject teaching credentials authorize them to teach a broad range of 

subjects that respondent cannot. The evidence supports a finding that respondent 

13 

does not possess the special training and experience that the junior multiple 

credentialed teachers possess. 

Welfare of the District and Its Students 

29. 

The District’s layoff was not implemented for purpose of infringing on 

the private political views and activities of respondent. Rather, the layoff was 

implemented for the welfare of the District and its students. The Superintendent 

correctly identified the certificated employees providing the particular kinds of services 

that the Board directed to be reduced or discontinued. No junior certificated 

employees are scheduled to be retained to perform services which a more senior 

employee is certificated and competent to render.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955. All notices and other jurisdictional requirements of sections 

44949 and 44955 were met. 

2. 

The anticipation of receiving less money from the state for the next 

school year is an appropriate basis for a reduction in services under section 44955. As 

stated in 

 (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 638-639, the 

reduction of PKS on the basis of financial considerations is authorized under that 

section, and “in fact, when adverse financial circumstances dictate a reduction in 

certificated staff, section 44955 is the only statutory authority available to school 

districts to effectuate that reduction.” The District must be solvent to provide 

educational services, and cost savings are necessary to resolve its financial crisis. The 

Superintendent’s decision to reduce PKS was a proper exercise of her discretion.

14 

3. 

A District may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code 

section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to 

students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce 

services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because 

fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (

(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) The burden is on the District to 

demonstrate that the reduction or elimination of the particular kinds of services is 

reasonable and that the District carefully considered its needs before laying off any 

 (1978) 76 

certificated employee. (

Cal.App.3d 796, 807-808.) 

4. 

The layoff notice sent to respondent indicated the statutory basis for the 

elimination of services and, therefore, were sufficiently detailed to provide him due 

process. (

 (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627; 

 (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) The services 

identified in PKS Resolution No. 21-XIV are particular kinds of services that may be 

reduced or discontinued pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. The 

description of services to be reduced, both in the Board’s Resolution and in the layoff 

notice, adequately described particular kinds of services. (

(2002) 

98 Cal.App.4th 838; see, also, 

(1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689.)

5. 

Education Code section 44955 provides that when certificated employees 

face layoffs due to reduction or elimination of PKS, the District has an affirmative 

obligation to reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions 

held by junior teachers, if the senior teachers have both the credentials and 

competence to occupy such positions. The clear intent of the statute is to prevent 

15 

school districts from laying off senior teachers while retaining junior teachers. Section 

44955, subdivision (c) provides in pertinent part:

Services of such employees shall be terminated in the 

inverse of the order in which they were employed . . . . The 

governing board shall make assignments and 

reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be 

retained to render any service which their seniority and 

qualifications entitle them to render . . . . 

6. 

The District appropriately considered all positively assured attrition that 

occurred during the computation period prior to submitting the PKS Resolution to the 

Board for its approval. In addition, the District appropriately applied bumping and 

skipping rules, and allowed bumping/skipping based upon the more senior 

employee’s competency (e.g., credential or authorization) to teach the assignment of 

the less senior teacher. 

7. 

Legal cause exists to reduce or eliminate 4.0 FTE of particular kinds of 

services offered by the District as set forth in detail in the Factual Findings. The Board’s 

decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor 

capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or 

discontinuance of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and 

pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. No employee with less 

seniority than respondent is being retained to render a service that respondent is 

certificated and competent to render. The District may give final notice to respondent 

that his services will not be required for the ensuing school year, 2021-2022. 

16 

RECOMMENDATION 

Cause exists for the reduction of 4.0 full-time equivalent certificated positions at 

the end of the 2020-2021 school year. Notice shall be given to respondent David 

Kissner that his services will not be required for the 2021-2022 school year, because of 

the reduction and/or discontinuance of particular kinds of services.   

DATE: May 3, 2021

 

DANETTE C. BROWN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

17 

