BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF THE SANTA CLARA COUNTY 
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 
COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force Involving 27 

Certificated Employees, Respondents. 

OAH No. 2021030909 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Regina Brown, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter remotely on April 28, 2021. 

Adam J. Fiss and Michelle M. Holmes, Attorneys, Littler Mendelson P.C., 

represented the Santa Clara County Office of Education (SCCOE). 

Sarah Sandford-Smith, Attorney, Beeson, Tayer & Bodine, APC, represented the 

15 respondents listed on Attachment A1, including Veronica Ramos, Kristin Rivers, 

Michelle Oliver, Aeth Manuel-Biagtan, Rebecca Allswang, Pamela Ellis, and Lissa Thiele, 

who were present throughout the hearing. 

                                              

1 Attachment A, attached hereto and incorporated herein (also admitted into 

evidence as Exhibit 14), is an alphabetical list of the 15 respondents. 

The matter was submitted for decision on April 28, 2021. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background 

1. 

Larry Oshodi, Assistant Superintendent, Personnel Services, SCCOE, made 

and filed the Statement of Reduction in Force in his official capacity. 

2. 

On March 11, 2021, Mary Ann Dewan, Ph.D., SCCOE Superintendent of 

Schools, adopted a resolution entitled  Resolution of the Santa Clara County 

Superintendent of Schools Regarding the Reduction of Certificated Services (PKS 

Resolution) reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of services for the 2021-2022 

school year, and directing Assistant Superintendent Oshodi to send notices to all 

affected employees. 

3. 

The PKS Resolution identified the services to be reduced no later than 

the beginning of the 2021-2022 school year as: 

Teacher   Severe Disabilities (SD)  

Teacher   Emotionally Disturbed (ED) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.0 FTE2 

3.0 FTE 

Teacher   CTE/Career Readiness & Work (Community School) 

1.0 FTE 

Teacher   Special Education   Early Childhood   

2.0 FTE 

 

 

 

                                              

2 Full-Time Equivalent. 

 

2 

Teacher   Work Experience Education 

 

Teacher   Special Assignment   Parent Liaison   

Resource Specialist   

Counselor 

 

School Therapist 

 

 

Teacher   Court School 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.0 FTE 

2.0 FTE 

3.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

1.0 FTE 

5.0 FTE 

The services set forth in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of services that 

may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. 

The PKS Resolution also designated to retain particular kinds of service (otherwise 

known as skipping) including Math/Science Teachers and the Opportunity Youth 

Academy (OYA). 

4. 

SCCOE s decision to retain Math/Science Teachers (who must possess 

both a single subject and science credential) due to their specialized training and 

experience relating to their courses satisfies the requirements of Education Code 

section 44955, subdivision (d). 

5. 

On March 11, 2021, Superintendent Dewan also adopted a resolution 

entitled  Resolution of the Santa Clara County Superintendent of Schools Regarding 

the Establishment of Criteria for Order of Layoff and Reappointment for Employees 

with Equal Seniority  which established tie-breaker criteria. In determining which 

employees would receive a layoff notice, SCCOE applied tie-breaking criteria for 

employees and there are no issues with respect to the application of the criteria to 

respondents. 

 

3 

6. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), when a 

governing board reduces particular kinds of services resulting in a decrease in the 

number of certificated, permanent employees, the services of a permanent employee 

may not be terminated if another employee with less seniority is retained to render a 

service that the more senior employee is  certificated and competent to render.  In 

other words, a teacher with more seniority typically has greater rights to retain 

employment than a teacher with less seniority. A senior teacher whose position is 

discontinued has the right to a position held by a junior teacher if the senior teacher is 

properly credentialed which is known as  bumping.  

7. 

The seniority date of certificated employees is determined in accordance 

with Education Code section 44845, which provides:  Every probationary or permanent 

employee employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on 

the date upon which [s]he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.  

8. 

On or before March 15, 2021, SCCOE timely issued layoff notices to 27 

impacted employees pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 

9. 

SCCOE timely provided to all initial 27 respondents: a statement to 

respondent regarding the layoff process, the statement of reduction in force, copies of 

relevant Education and Government Code sections, a notice of participation and a 

notice of hearing. 

10. 

Prior to hearing, SCCOE rescinded 12 layoff notices. The 15 remaining 

respondents timely submitted hearing requests and notices of participation and are as 

follows (with their respective positions on the seniority list; dates of hire; and job 

titles): 

 

4 

1) 

Stacey McCabe (273, 10/12/2020, Teacher, Alternative Education)3 

2) 

Lissa Thiele (270, 8/15/2020, Teacher/Adult Reentry/AED4) 

3) 

Kristin Rivers (263, 8/30/2019, Teacher, Alternative Education) 

4) 

Eric Camilleri (266, 12/5/2019, Teacher, Alternative Education) 

5) 

Rolando Vital (243, 10/19/2018, Teacher, SD5) 

6) 

Gabriel Coffman (245, 11/8/2018, Teacher, SD) 

7) 

Rebecca Allswang (247, 1/30/2019, Teacher, ECSE6) 

8) 

Pamela Ellis (249, 8/5/2019, Teacher, SD) 

9) 

Zeeshan Hassan (252, 8/5/2019, Teacher, SD) 

10) 

Patrice Mcneal (256, 8/5/2019, Teacher, ED7) 

11)  Michelle Oliver (257, 8/5/2019, Teacher, ECSE) 

12) 

Alicia Arellano (213, 3/30/2017, Teacher, ECSE) 

                                              

outside of these proceedings. 

3 The parties have a stipulation that will update McCabe s seniority status 

4 AED means Alternative Education. 

5 SD means severe disabilities. 

6 ECSE means early childhood special education. 

7 ED means emotional disturbances. 

5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

13)  Winston Cole (216, 8/2/2017, Teacher, ED) 

14) 

Aeth Manual-Biagtan (219, 8/11/2017, Teacher, SDC8) 

15) 

Veronica Ramos (195, 7/1/2016, Teacher, Alternative Education) 

11. 

SCCOE timely issued an Amended Notice of Hearing to the respondents. 

12. 

All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

PKS Resolution and Skipping 

13. 

At hearing, Assistant Superintendent Oshodi explained that the proposed 

reductions in the PKS Resolution occurred after a review of SCCOE s needs and its 

ability to comply with federal and state mandated programs. 

14. 

The PKS Resolution skipped OYA because it is a unique program. Prior to 

issuing the layoff notices, SCCOE reviewed the specialized training and experience 

required for OYA teachers and staff and determined that no senior employees at 

SCCOE met the requirements for bumping purposes. 

15. 

Prior to issuance of the PKS Resolution, Assistant Superintendent Oshodi 

and his executive team considered other areas to skip in addition to skipping 

Math/Science and OYA. They assessed Adult Reentry, which is a mandated program. 

However, it was determined that it was unnecessary to skip Adult Reentry because 

SCCOE could continue to provide the service with the remaining skilled and 

credentialed employees. 

                                              

8 SDC means special day class. 

6 

 

 

 

 

Assistant Superintendent Oshodi also assessed whether to skip the Court School 

program which services students in the juvenile justice system and is a mandated 

program. SCCOE personnel spoke to the decisionmakers in the probation department 

before eliminating the five court school positions. SCCOE intends to reorganize the 

program for the upcoming school year. Oshodi is aware that the Department of 

Juvenile Justice s facilities will close on July 1, 2021. In the assessment of whether to 

skip Court School, Oshodi considered the expected increase in the number of students 

SCCOE would have to serve with the facilities  closures. SCCOE will be able to fulfill its 

mandate because four credentialed teachers will remain at the Court School at juvenile 

hall and provide special education services. 

Assistant Superintendent Oshodi also assessed whether to skip the Head 

Start/Early Head Start program which is a mandated program for incoming students 

who are three years old and may need special education services. SCCOE will continue 

to fulfill its mandate if there is an increase in students. 

Skipping of OYA Counselor 

16. 

SCCOE deviated from seniority order in deciding to retain an OYA 

counselor, Kipsia Jimenez-Mendoza, who was junior to another employee, Veronica 

Ramos. In order to deviate from seniority order and retain a junior teacher, SCCOE 

must satisfy the requirements of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), which 

provides in relevant part: 

Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may 

deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of 

seniority for either of the following reasons: 

 

7 

The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to 

teach a specific course or course of study, . . . and that the 

certificated employee has special training and experience 

necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which 

others with more seniority do not possess. 

For purposes of maintaining or achieving compliance with 

constitutional requirements related to equal protection of 

the laws. 

Therefore, in order to skip a junior teacher and layoff a more senior teacher, 

SCCOE must establish the following: that it has  a specific need for personnel to teach 

a specific course or course of study that the junior teacher possesses  special 

training and experience  necessary to teach such a course or course of study; and that 

teachers senior to the junior teacher do not possess those special qualifications. 

(

. 

. (2009) 170 Cal.App.3d 127.) 

17. 

Assistant Superintendent Oshodi applied the skipping criteria to OYA and 

proposes to skip Jimenez-Mendoza, who presently holds the Academic Counselor 

position at OYA. Oshodi concluded that Jimenez-Mendoza cannot be bumped by a 

more senior employee because of the skipping provision in the PKS Resolution and 

because she has the special training and experience for that position that more senior 

teachers at SCCOE do not possess. 

Assistant Superintendent Oshodi did not meet with any senior teacher, 

including respondent Veronica Ramos, to discuss his or her specific training and 

experience. In Oshodi s view, a specific analysis of respondent Ramos s training and 

experience was not required because  employers have the right of skipping. Oshodi 

 

8 

contends that respondent Ramos does not have the special training and experience 

that Jimenez-Mendoza has for the OYA Academic Counselor position. 

18. 

Phil Morales has been the Director of OYA for five years. OYA is a 

program for youth and adults ages 16 to 24 years old to reengage and assist them 

with completing their high school education and transition to either post-secondary 

school or careers. OYA is a dependent charter school with 10 teachers and one 

counselor with average enrollment of 350 students, but has enrolled up to 600 

students. It is a voluntary program comprised of a student population of low income 

and socioeconomic disadvantaged students and teen parents who have not been in 

school for extended periods of time, sometimes years. 

19.  Morales explained how the job description for OYA Academic Counselor 

differs from an SCCOE Academic Counselor. Generally, the OYA Academic Counselor 

provides all aspects of counseling and guidance services to students in SCCOE 

programs including supplemental academic intervention services to support 

underachieving students; provides informational services to parents, teachers, and 

administrators in order to promote a comprehensive decision-making process for 

student educational objectives; and is involved in development and school 

programming. 

Also, according to the job description, an OYA Academic Counselor is required 

to have a valid California Pupil Personnel Services Credential authorizing services as a 

School Counselor. An OYA Academic Counselor must demonstrate knowledge and 

experience in counseling 16-24 year old students in need of credit completion to earn 

a high school diploma, among other things. The essential duties of OYA Academic 

Counselor are to review student skills assessment/educational needs evaluation; assist 

 

9 

with individualized student programming/scheduling; monitor student graduation 

process; evaluate transcripts; refer students for support services; act as transfer liaison; 

provide individual student counseling, group counseling and parent conferencing; 

provide support services to teachers; develop and implement specialized curriculum; 

provide career counseling; monitor work experience; act as community liaison and 

provide in-service to employers working with students enrolled in county office 

programs. Also, the OYA Academic Counselor must have a flexible schedule to 

accommodate students who are not on site. 

20. 

According to Morales, OYA teachers must have special education or 

general education credentials; experience or training in Blended Learning and Blended 

Learning certification; and prior experience working with OYA because it serves a 

specific population and is not a traditional high school setting. 

21.  OYA provides training to teachers and staff through Connect Ed 

associated with the National Center for College and Career which has a sequenced set 

of activities and services to support the introduction and implementation of the Linked 

Learning approach. Connect Ed serves as coaches to OYA teachers and staff and has 

issued an assessment report and action plan that will be implemented in the 

2021-2022 school year. Jimenez-Mendoza is on the Connect Ed leadership team. 

22.  OYA differs from Alternative Education. Alternative Education (where 

Ramos is assigned) only serves students 18 and younger. Also, the Ingenuity 

curriculum is used in Alternative Education. OYA uses the SIATech curriculum. SIATech 

previously provided in-person training, which is now online, to teachers and staff. 

Morales states that the OYA Academic Counselor must be able to read transcripts to 

determine credits and how they are associated with the SIATech curriculum. 

 

10 

23.  OYA has adopted a flex model, comprised of 60 percent online and 40 

percent in-person small group setting for Math and English, instead of a 100 percent 

online learning model. Blended Learning is the online training platform for OYA 

teachers and staff. Online and Blended Learning Certification is provided by 

Professional Innovation Pathways and Leading Edge Alliance which provides a 

pedagogy of effective online instruction and strategies for enhancing the learning 

opportunities for online and blended learning classes. Morales explained that if a 

student is struggling, the OYA Academic Counselor can recommend that the student 

be placed in the 40 percent in-person cohort. 

24. 

Jimenez-Mendoza is a permanent full-time (1.0 FTE) certificated 

Academic Counselor at OYA and was hired on October 3, 2016. She has credentials in 

Pupil Personnel Services 

 Clear and Subject   School Counseling. Jimenez-Mendoza 

has been the only counselor at OYA since its inception. She has completed all 

necessary training and has experience for her position at OYA, including Blended 

Learning and Connect Ed. Jimenez-Mendoza has also had annual SIATech group 

training; however, a SIATech representative is available to provide individual training. 

She is also a Career Labs trained facilitator and facilitates a four-week job skills 

program for students. She has also had training in the Naviance College/Career Online 

Curriculum to assist student with career exploration and academic planning. 

VERONICA RAMOS 

25. 

Ramos is a permanent full-time (1.0 FTE) certificated teacher in 

Alternative Education and was hired on July 1, 2016. She is assigned to teach at Blue 

Ridge Ranch and Court School in Morgan Hill. She has credentials in Administrative 

Services   Clear; Multiple Subject Teaching   Clear; Pupil Personnel Services 

 Clear; 

 

11 

Subject-School Counseling; BCLAD; and Subject 

 General Subjects (Examination). She 

has 24 years in education and she is working on her doctorate. Currently, Ramos works 

with incarcerated youth who are disengaged and disinterested in completing high 

school and often have school credit deficiencies. She uses their transcripts to counsel 

and provide guidance to students on which courses to take. She has experience 

applying the Alternative Education curriculum, Ingenuity, to a student s transcript to 

avoid having the student retake entire courses. She develops relationships with the 

students and helps them set goals, develop interests, and transition back to school. 

She is a Gallop-Strength Finders Coach. She also provides assistance to the onsite 

counselor. 

26. 

Throughout her teaching career, Ramos has worked at Community High 

School. She worked on the Promise Youth initiative which is comprised of socially and 

economically disadvantaged students, dropouts, and teen parents. She worked at the 

Migrant Youth Education Program where she served as a teacher and performed 

counseling duties. She is familiar with the OYA student population as some of her 

students transitioned to OYA. Although she has never taught at OYA, Ramos is willing 

to be assigned to OYA and has a flexible schedule as she already works with students 

in the evenings. 

27. 

Ramos has had Blended Learning training, as a result of the COVID-19 

pandemic. She has not taken the training offered by Connect Ed or SIATech. She has 

never been employed as a SCCOE Academic Counselor. 

ANALYSIS OF RAMOS  TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE 

28. 

SCCOE maintains that Jimenez-Mendoza may be skipped because she 

has special training and experience necessary to provide services at OYA and that 

 

12 

Ramos, a senior employee, does not have the training and experience, by virtue of the 

fact that she never worked at OYA, did not receive the specialized training as 

Jimenez-Mendoza, and she was never a counselor. 

29. 

First, respondent Ramos contends that given SCCOE s affirmative duty to 

determine if she was competent for the OYA Academic Counselor position, SCCOE 

administrators were required to meet with her to review her qualifications. This 

argument is not persuasive. The hearing in this matter provided Ramos with the 

opportunity to present evidence of her training and experience. (See 

at 

170 Cal.App.4th at p. 143 [the court found that the District should have assessed 

Bledsoe s qualifications prior to issuance of the preliminary notice, but he was not 

prejudiced by this failure because his qualifications were assessed at the hearin g.].) 

30. 

Second, respondent Ramos persuasively contends that her training and 

experience meet the requirement of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), 

and therefore, voids the skipping of Jimenez-Mendoza for the OYA Academic 

Counselor position. 

It is undisputed that Ramos has not had the experience of working at OYA or as 

a SCCOE Academic Counselor. SCCOE has not established, however, that Ramos, who 

is more senior to Jimenez-Mendoza, does not have equivalent specialized training and 

experience. Regarding her experience, Ramos has worked with students (albeit not 

adults between the age of 18-24) who are at risk for not graduating and utilized many 

of the same alternative education resources. She reviews transcripts and works on 

class scheduling.  

Additionally, the job description for OYA Academic Counselor only requires 

credentialing in Pupil Personnel Services and School Counseling which Ramos 

 

13 

possesses. The evidence established that Ramos has substantially performed the 

essential duties, outlined in the job description, for an OYA Academic Counselor. 

Ramos s experiences are not identical to those of Jimenez-Mendoza, but it has not 

been demonstrated that she lacks equivalent experience. 

Also, the evidence established that the  specialized  training provided to 

Jimenez-Mendoza was minimal, and could be made available to Ramos. The evidence 

did not establish that Ramos could not easily obtain the same training in the summer 

(before the school year) or at the inception of the school year. In fact, the training on 

Connect Ed s Linked Learning approach does not go into effect at OYA until the 

upcoming school year. Also, SIATech training is available online or a SIATech 

representative is available to provide individual training. 

For these reasons, SCCOE s layoff of Veronica Ramos is not supported by the 

facts and applicable law and should be rescinded. 

Other Skipping Contention: Respondent Lissa Thiele 

31. 

Thiele is a permanent full-time (1.0 FTE) certificated teacher in Adult 

Reentry/Alternative Education and was hired on August 15, 2020. Thiele works with 

high risk adult parolees and probationers through a contract with the Office of Reentry 

Services. She also serves as the school office coordinator and registrar. Her position 

does not provide mandated services. 

Thiele believes that she should be retained because she was  hand selected  for 

the position to set up the entire school as it is hard as a teacher to relate to felons. She 

has attended courtroom trainings and spends a significant amount of time on the 

 

14 

phone talking to probation officers. She believes that her program should have been 

skipped. 

32. 

Again, Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 establish a 

seniority-based layoff procedure that mandates that employees shall be terminated in 

the inverse order in which they were employed. These statutes do not permit 

employees to establish that they should be skipped because their certifications and 

experience render them more valuable to SCCOE than other employees. (See 

(1983) 35 Cal. 3d 294, 299.) It is SCCOE s right and burden, not the 

employee s, to demonstrate a specific need for personnel or services such that those 

qualifications may be skipped in the layoff process. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d); 

170 Cal.App.4th at p. 135.) 

33. 

Thiele s argument does not raise a valid challenge to her layoff. The PKS 

Resolution reduced the service that Thiele provides and did not skip the Adult Reentry 

program. There is no permanent or probationary employee junior to Thiele who is 

being retained to render a service that she is credentialed and competent to teach. 

(Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) Thiele was properly bumped by a more senior employee. 

She may properly be given a final notice. 

Respondents Additional Contentions 

MANDATED SERVICES 

34. 

Respondents argue that the Statement of Reduction in Force should be 

dismissed in its entirety because of the  generally flawed nature and lack of 

determination of federal and other mandated services.

In other words, respondents 

argue that SCCOE did not demonstrate its ability to provide mandated services 

 

15 

because Assistant Superintendent Oshodi did not provide evidence of what services 

will be eliminated. 

35. 

This challenge to the layoff is rejected. SCCOE may properly reduce 

services in a statutorily mandated program as long as the mandated services do not 

fall below the statutory minimum. (

 

(1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796.) There was no evidence that SCCOE proposes to eliminate 

any services that are state or federally mandated. Furthermore, SCCOE was not 

required to present its post-layoff plan for providing mandated services at the layoff 

hearing; it is reasonable to expect SCCOE would have a plan for providing mandated 

services and would not act in a manner that invites federal or state scrutiny. 

Respondents  contention that SCCOE would be unable to provide mandated services is 

speculative and unsupported by the evidence. 

REDUCTION OF SERVICES 

36. 

Respondents also contend that SCCOE s discretion as to what particular 

kinds of services may be reduced is limited if it is not actually reducing services and 

plans to provide the same services in the upcoming school year. This argument is also 

speculative and unsupported by the evidence. There was no evidence that SCCOE will 

not actually reduce the services pursuant to the PKS Resolution. 

INDIVIDUAL TEACHERS 

Kristin Rivers 

37. 

Rivers is a permanent full-time (1.0 FTE) teacher in Alternative Education 

hired on August 30, 2019. Rivers is assigned to Blueridge Ranch, but she is currently 

 

16 

covering for another teacher at juvenile hall. Rivers is surprised by the layoffs because 

class sizes have not reduced. She believes that class sizes at juvenile hall cannot be 

collapsed due to security reasons, such as keeping rival gang members separated. In 

addition, Rivers expects an increase in the number of students in the upcoming school 

year because of the anticipated Department of Juvenile Justice closures. 

38. 

Rivers s argument is speculative and unsupported by the evidence. The 

PKS Resolution reduced the service that Rivers provides. (Factual Findings 3 and 10.) 

There is no permanent or probationary employee junior to Rivers who is being 

retained to render a service that she is credentialed and competent to teach. (Ed. 

Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) Rivers may properly be given a final notice. 

Michelle Oliver 

39.  Oliver is a permanent full-time (1.0 FTE) teacher hired on August 5, 2019, 

and works in Early Childhood Special Education, a federally mandated program for 

student intervention. Oliver asserts that SCCOE did not properly perform an 

assessment of the impact of the higher percentage of students expected to exit Early 

Start throughout the school year who are potentially eligible for special education 

services. Oliver acknowledged that she had no personal knowledge of the assessment s 

conducted by SCCOE. 

40.  Oliver s argument is speculative and unsupported by the evidence. The 

PKS Resolution reduced the service that Oliver provides. (Factual Findings 3 and 15.) 

There is no permanent or probationary employee junior to Oliver who is being 

retained to render a service that she is credentialed and competent to teach. (Ed. 

Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) Oliver may properly be given a final notice. 

 

17 

Aeth Manuel-Biagtan 

41.  Manuel-Biagtan is a permanent full-time (1.0 FTE) teacher for Special Day 

Class hired on August 11, 2017. Manuel-Biagtan works at juvenile hall. She contends 

that SCCOE is mandated to provide a special education teacher for 50 percent of the 

school day to students. She believes that she should be retained to maintain an equal 

number of special education teachers. 

42.  Manuel-Biagtan s argument that SCCOE would be unable to provide the 

mandated service is speculative and unsupported by the evidence. The PKS Resolution 

reduced the service that Manuel-Biagtan provides. (Factual Findings 3 and 15.) There is 

no permanent or probationary employee junior to Manuel-Biagtan who is being 

retained to render a service that she is credentialed and competent to teach. (Ed. 

Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) Manuel-Biagtan may properly be given a final notice. 

Rebecca Allswang 

43. 

Allswang is a permanent full-time (1.0 FTE) credentialed teacher in Early 

Childhood Special Education hired on January 30, 2019. Allswang works solely with 

blind/vision impaired infants and toddlers, with over 20 years of experience. She states 

that she has unique training and her position is distinguished from other special 

education preschool teachers. 

44. 

This argument does not raise a valid challenge to Allswang s layoff. The 

PKS Resolution reduced the service that Allswang provides. There is no permanent or 

probationary employee junior to Allswang who is being retained to render a service 

that she is credentialed and competent to teach. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) 

Allswang may properly be given a final notice. 

 

18 

Pamela Ellis 

45. 

Ellis is a permanent full-time (1.0 FTE) teacher in Severe Disabilities hired 

on August 5, 2019. Ellis works in the Alternative Education department at two 

locations. She believes she should be retained because she was  administratively 

moved  to work in two capacities. 

46. 

This argument does not raise a valid challenge to Ellis s layoff. The PKS 

Resolution reduced the service that Ellis provides. There is no permanent or 

probationary employee junior to Ellis who is being retained to render a service that 

she is credentialed and competent to teach. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) Ellis may 

properly be given a final notice. 

Remaining Respondents 

47. 

The other SCCOE employees not specifically identified above that 

received layoff notices did not possess sufficient seniority to permit them to bump any 

other employee, and it was not alleged or proved that any one of them were skipped 

in favor of any more junior employee. 

Other Matters 

48. 

Except as set forth above, no permanent or probationary certificated 

employee with less seniority than a respondent is being retained to provide a service 

for which a respondent is credentialed and competent to render. 

49. 

The reduction or discontinuation of the particular kinds of services set 

forth in the PKS Resolution is related to the welfare of SCCOE and the students thereof 

within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. The decision to 

 

19 

reduce or discontinue these services is neither arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a 

proper exercise of discretion of SCCOE. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

SCCOE complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth 

in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 

2. 

The services identified in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of 

services that can be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. 

SCCOE s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is neither arbitrary nor 

capricious, but rather a proper exercise of SCCOE s discretion. Cause exists to reduce 

the number of certificated employees of SCCOE due to the reduction or 

discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 

3. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 14 and 16-30, SCCOE shall rescind the 

layoff notice to respondent Ramos. On this record, SCCOE has not sustained its burden 

of proving that she, as a senior teacher it proposes to lay off, lacks the special training 

and experience of the junior teacher it proposes to retain. For these reasons, it is 

concluded that SCCOE has failed to establish all of the necessary elements set forth in 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), in order to justify deviating from 

seniority with respect to the junior certificated employee at OYA. 

As the most senior employee who received a layoff who has been affected by 

SCCOE s erroneous decision to skip Jimenez-Mendoza, the appropriate remedy for this 

error is that respondent Ramos may not receive a final notice. 

 

20 

4. 

Other than as set forth above, the evidence established that no 

certificated employees with less seniority than respondents are being retained to 

render services which they are certificated and competent to perform. (Factual 

Findings 10, 13, 33, 35, 36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46 through 49.) 

5. 

Because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services set 

forth in Factual Findings 2 and 3, cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 

44949 and 44955 to give notice to the respondents (except respondent Ramos) up to 

the number of the FTE reductions set forth in the PKS Resolution that their services will 

not be required or will be reduced for the 2021-2022 school year. This cause solely 

relates to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of 

Education Code section 44949. 

considered and are rejected. 

6. 

All other arguments of the parties not specifically addressed herein were 

1. 

The Statement of Reduction in Force against respondent Veronica Ramos 

is dismissed and the preliminary notice of layoff is rescinded. Final notice of layoff may 

not be provided to this employee. 

ORDER 

21 

 

 

 

 

2. 

Except as set forth above, the Statement of Reduction in Force is 

sustained. Notice may be given to the certificated employees in 14 FTE positions, as 

established in Factual Findings 3 and 10, that their services will not be required or will 

be reduced for the 2021-2022 school year because of the reduction or elimination of 

particular kinds of services. In issuing its final notices, SCCOE shall follow the seniority 

requirements of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), to effectuate all 

reductions in services. 

DATE:  May 6, 2021

 

REGINA BROWN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

 

22 

b4637375cd344779a3387b9169e3ed01b4637375cd344779a3387b9169e3ed01-1

A146A146

A146A146

Last NameFirst Name1Mc Cabe Stacey2ThieleLissa3RiversKristin4Camilleri, Eric5VitalRolando6CoffmanGabriel7AllswangRebecca8EllisPamela9HassanZeeshan10Mcneal Patrice11OliverMichelle12ArellanoAlicia13ColeWinston14Manuel‐ BiagtanAeth15RamosVeronicaList of Respondents ‐ Santa Clara County Office of Education