BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
BALDWIN PARK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 

CERTIFICATED TEACHERS OF THE 

BALDWIN PARK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Respondents. 

OAH No. 2021040018 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Joseph D. Montoya, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by video and telephonic 

Jeff C. Marderosian, Esq., represents the Baldwin Park Unified School District 

Jonah Lalas, Esq., Rothner, Segall & Greenstone, represented respondents Almaz 

Gebresellassie, Bounyou Paphatsarang, Linda C. Rodriguez, Derrick Spears, and 

Marta Hinestrosa and Katherine Favognano provided interpretation services 

conference April 29, 2021.

(District).

Josefina A. Thomas.

during the hearing. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed and the 

matter was submitted for decision on April 29, 2021. Respondents’ sole exhibit, a 

memorandum lodged as respondents’ exhibit 1, was referenced as exhibit A in the 

hearing, and will be received as such.

On May 12, 2021, the record was re-opened to receive a stipulation to the effect 

that the District issued preliminary notices and delivered them to respondents prior to 

March 15, 2021. The record was again closed on that day. The stipulation shall be 

identified as exhibit 8 for ease of reference.

The ALJ hereby makes the following factual findings and legal conclusions.

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

The Parties and Jurisdiction 

1. 

Froilan N. Mendoza, Ed.D., filed and maintained the Statement of 

Reduction in Force while acting in his official capacity as Superintendent of the District.

He caused each of the respondents identified hereafter to be served with a copy of the 

Statement of Reduction in Force, along with other related documents.

2.

(A) Respondents Edgar A. Cartagena-Cruz, Almaz Gebresellassie, 

Bounyou Paphatsarang, Linda C. Rodriguez, Derrick Spears, and Josefina A. Thomas are 

certificated employees of the District. All are assigned to the District’s Adult Schools.

All of the Respondents submitted a timely Notice of Participation, thereby requesting 

a hearing.

2

(B) Shortly before the hearing, Respondent Edgar A. Cartegena-Cruz 

withdrew his Notice of Participation as part of a settlement between him and the 

District. Respondent Derrick Spears did not participate in the hearing.

3. 

The hearing in this matter was originally set for April 14, 2021. The matter 

was continued, upon the District’s request with respondents’ concurrence and for 

good cause, to April 29, 2021. 

4. 

(A) On February 23, 2021, the Governing Board (Board) of the District 

adopted Resolution #27, 2020-2021, pertaining to the reduction of services within the 

District (Reduction Resolution). The purpose of the Reduction Resolution was to 

reduce and discontinue particular kinds of certificated services no later than the 

beginning of the 2021-2022 school year. Specifically, the resolution requires the 

reduction of 174.5 hours of service by eliminating or reducing several types of services.

 

(B) The Reduction Resolution was attached to the operative pleading in 

this matter (the District’s Statement of Reduction in Force) and incorporated therein by 

reference. The Reduction Resolution was drafted by Dr. Valenzuela, Director of the 

District’s Adult and Community Education program, along with Dr. Gray, the Assistant 

Superintendent for Human Resources. 

5. 

(A) The particular kinds of services (PKS) to be reduced, and the number 

of hours of reduction in each category, is as follows:

PKS 

 

HOURS ELIMINATED

Part-Time Evening Counselor 

 

20 hours

Adult Education Teacher, Post-Secondary Instructor: 

3

Transitions/Testing Center

31.75 hours

Adult Education Teachers Re-entry to the Workforce 

Program (previously Older Adults): 

General Elective/Clothing Construction All Levels 

34 hours

General Elective/Jewelry Casting All Levels

 

29.5 hours 

CTE-General Elective/Intro to Computers All Levels 

28 hours 

Culinary Arts: Restaurant Skills, Advanced 

Culinary/International Cuisines; Culinary Foundations 

11.25 hours 

Adult Education Teacher, Transportation Automotive 

Service Instructor 

 

10 hours 

Adult Education Teacher, Culinary: Food Service and 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hospitality Program  

10 hours 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(B) The total hours to be reduced are 174.5. The first five categories, 

totaling 154.5 hours, are for elimination of programs. The last two categories are a 

reduction in hours within the two programs identified, and total 20 hours. 

6. 

Prior to March 15, 2021, each Respondent was given written notice by 

the District that it had been recommended their services would not be required for the 

2021-2022 school year. 

4

7.

The services the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are particular 

kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 

44955.1 

budget shortfall.

8. 

The decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was neither 

arbitrary nor capricious, but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s discretion 

given the uncertainty regarding the District’s financial resources. The District is facing a 

9. 

The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of 

the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of 

certificated employees as determined by the Board.

10. 

All jurisdictional requirements have been met.

The Competence Criteria and the Seniority List 

11. 

As part of the Reduction Resolution, the District established competency 

criteria, as follows:

A certificated employee subject to layoff shall be 

considered competent to perform a service if, and only if:

The certificated employee, has under the appropriate 

credential, performed the service for one complete school 

year within the last ten (10) years. One complete school 

 

noted.

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise 

5

year is defined as actual service for at least 75% of the 

number of days the adult education schools of the District 

are in session. 

(Ex. A to Reduction Resolution.) 

12. 

The District compiled a seniority list, which sets out the seniority date of 

each of the District’s certificated employees who are providing adult education. The list 

provides other information about the employees, such as whether they are permanent 

or probationary teachers, their current assignment, their credentials and 

authorizations, and what degrees they hold. 

13. 

There was no claim made, or evidence adduced, to the effect the 

Seniority List was inaccurate. Therefore, it is found to be accurate and controlling in 

this reduction in force process. 

Respondents’ Contentions 

14. 

Respondents asserted that the reason for the layoffs was because of a 

decline in enrollment, and that as a result the Board was obligated to proceed with the 

type of layoff pertaining to a decline in average daily attendance. The District did offer 

evidence that some of the decision on what services to eliminate was influenced by 

declining enrollment in some courses, but it pointed to budgetary issues as well. The 

evidence established that budgetary considerations were a key component of the 

District’s decision to reduce particular kinds of services.

15.

Respondents argued that as to some of them, the Reduction Resolution 

did not clearly cover their position, so they should not be laid off. This assertion was in 

the main proffered by Respondent Gebresellassie, but argued on Respondent 

6

Thomas’s behalf as well. Respondent Linda Rodriguez pointed out that she is currently 

not teaching, and is acting in a clerical capacity. Mr. Paphatsarang testified that his 

course continues to have strong enrollment, having 42 students enrolled at this time, 

whereas he had 40 or more students in recent years.

16. 

(A) Regarding Respondent Gebresellassie, she holds a Career Technical 

Education Teaching Credential in Business and Finance and Marketing, Sales, and 

Service and she holds a Designated Subjects Adult Teaching Credential in Computer 

Applications, Computer Programming, Computer Systems Operation, and Computer 

Technology. She is tenured for 28 hours per week. As of October 12, 2020, she was 

assigned to teach a course titled General Elective/Administrative Assistant, three days 

per week, totaling 16.5 hours per week. She was also assigned to teach Introduction to 

Computers/VESL (Vocational English Second Language) in two classes, one in the 

morning and one in the evening. The total hours for the last two classes was 11.5. 

Thus, she was teaching 28 hours per week, spread across three classes. Prior to that 

date, she was teaching the General Elective/Administrative Assistant course for 16.5 

hours per week, and two classes entitled English as a Second Language Vocational ESL. 

 

(B) As found above, the Reduction Resolution reduces, by 28 hours, a 

category described as “CTE-General Elective/Intro to Computers All Levels.” (Ex. 1.) CTE 

stands for Career Technical Education. There is no reference in the Reduction 

Resolution to reduce courses or classes in “General Elective/Administrative Assistant,” 

the term used by the District to assign Respondent Gebresellassie her courses. 

 

(C) The administrative assistant course teaches students to become office 

assistants, in part by teaching them to use various computer programs or applications, 

including Microsoft Office Suite and Adobe. It also provides education in basic 

7

graphics techniques. The course was described as an advanced course by Respondent 

Gebresellassie, a claim that went unrefuted when Dr. Valenzuela testified in rebuttal.

17. 

Respondent Thomas holds a Designated Subjects Vocational Teaching 

Credential in Fashion Marketing and Fashion Manufacturing (Factory and Custom). Her 

testimony did not focus so much on whether the Reduction Resolution covered her 

assignments, but on the problems that have arisen in her classes as a result of the 

Covid 19 Pandemic. For example, her students could not, in many cases, participate 

remotely, lacking computers or internet access. Four classes she taught were reduced 

to two classes, and meanwhile, the District could not or would not supply the students 

with laptops and other technology that would assist in remote instruction. 

18. 

Respondent Rodriguez is tenured at 31.75 hours, and holds a Designated 

Subjects Adult Education Teaching Credential in Business Education, Health and Safety, 

Parent Education, and Spanish, Conversational. She is currently assigned to the 

Assessment Center student outreach, purportedly due to credential limitations. She 

testified that she has had some sort of clerical position for years, and has not taught in 

a classroom since 2011. 

19. 

Respondent Paphatsarang holds a Designated Subjects Vocational 

Education Teaching Credential in Jewelry Making. He is tenured at 29.5 hours and has 

been assigned all of those hours for General Elective/Jewelry Casting. He is the most 

senior teacher in the Adult Education Program. As noted above, he testified that 

enrollment has not declined in his course. 

20. 

There were no claims that junior teachers were being retained to teach 

the courses taught by any of the respondents. There were no claims that any of the 

respondents was credentialed and competent to teach courses assigned to more 

8

junior teacher. There were no claims that junior teachers had been improperly 

retained. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction was established to proceed in this matter, pursuant to 

sections 44929.5, 44949, and 44955, based on Factual Findings 1 through 10. 

2. 

(A) The governing board of a school district may reduce particular kinds 

of services (PKS) within the meaning of section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by 

determining that a certain type of service to students shall not, thereafter, be 

performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered 

services shall be reduced in extent because fewer employees are made available to 

deal with the pupils involved.” (

s (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 

167, 178-179.) The Court of Appeal has made clear that a PKS reduction does not have 

to lead to fewer classrooms or classes; laying off some teachers amounts to a proper 

reduction. (

(2002) 98 

Cal.App.4th 838, 853-85 (

); see also

(1983) 144 

Cal.App.3d 627, 631, 637 (

) [reduction of classroom teaching can be 

a reduction of a PKS; as long as there is a change in the method of teaching or in a 

particular kind of service in teaching a particular subject any amount in excess of the 

statutory minimum may be reduced]; 

(1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 32.)

 

(B) The services to be discontinued by the District are particular kinds of 

services within the meaning of section 44955. The Board’s decision to reduce or 

discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious and was a 

9

proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services 

relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and pupils within the meaning of 

section 44949. This Legal Conclusion is based on Factual Findings 4, 5, 7, 8, and 9 and 

the foregoing authorities. 

3. 

(A) Respondents assert that because reduced enrollment has played a 

part in the District’s decision to reduce services, it must proceed with an ADA—

Average Daily Attendance—layoff proceeding. That contention must be rejected. 

 

(B) Section 44955, subdivision (b), provides four scenarios that may justify 

a school district in decreasing the number of permanent or probationary teachers it 

employs. Those scenarios are: 

 

 in any school year the average daily 

attendance in all of the schools of a district for the first six 

months in which school is in session shall have declined 

below the corresponding period of either of the previous 

two school years, 

 the governing board 

determines that attendance in a district will decline in the 

following year as a result of the termination of an 

interdistrict tuition agreement as defined in Section 46304, 

a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 

discontinued not later than the beginning of the following 

school year, 

the amendment of state law 

requires the modification of curriculum, . . . 

(Emphasis added.) 

10 

Thus, one of four circumstances must occur to allow a school district to 

decrease the number of certificated employees: (1) average daily attendance in all of 

the schools in a district must have declined in certain respects; (2) it is determined that 

attendance (not average daily attendance) will decline due to termination of a tuition 

agreement defined by section 46304; (3) a particular kind of service will be reduced or 

discontinued; or, (4) where amendments in the law requires a modification of 

curriculum. Furthermore, one of those four circumstances must be accompanied by 

the school board’s opinion that “it shall have become necessary by reason of 

 to decrease the number of permanent employees in the district, . . .” 

(§ 44955, subd. (b), emphasis added.) At that point the governing board may terminate 

the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated 

employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school 

year.

(C) Case law supports the proposition that a school district may respond 

to budget shortfalls by reducing or eliminating particular kinds of services. In 

 98 Cal.App.4th at pp. 853-854, it was held that the district in that case could 

reduce services in the face of a shortfall of funds. Other cases support the rule that a 

loss of funds may lead to a reduction in services, without an analysis of average daily 

attendance. (

1846; 

. (1994) 24 Cal.App.4th 

 (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) Respondents cited no 

case holding that in cases of declining enrollment, a school district is barred from 

reducing or eliminating services as a response to such circumstances. 

4. 

(A) A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to 

transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. 

In doing so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is 

11 

filling that position. (

(1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.) At 

the same time, a junior teacher may be given retention priority by the District over one 

or more senior teachers, and that junior teachers may be “skipped”—that is not laid off 

while more senior employees are laid off—if the junior teacher possesses superior 

skills or capabilities not possessed by more senior colleagues, which must be 

necessary to teach a course or course of study that is specifically needed in the 

District. (

(1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 399; 

(1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831 (

).) 

 

(B) There were no contentions that any of the respondents were 

improperly bumped or that they should have bumped a more junior teacher. The 

District did not skip any junior teachers. 

5.

The contentions of respondents Thomas, Rodriguez, and Paphatsarang 

do not provide defenses in this proceeding. Ms. Thomas mainly provided evidence 

that the classes she has taught, and taught well, have suffered serious attendance 

drops. That the District did not respond to the problems caused by the Covid 19 

Pandemic as she would have hoped is not a reason to retain her. Ms. Rodriguez is a 

certificated employee, and the District resolved to eliminate the position she has been 

employed in. It does not appear that there is a position she can bump into. Mr. 

Paphatsarang appears to be very good at what he does, and according to his 

testimony, lack of interest in his course or lack of enrollment in it is not an issue. 

However, it is within the District’s discretion to decide what sorts of subjects it will 

provide instruction in, and the ALJ may not substitute his judgment for the Board’s 

judgment. (See 

(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 174; 

, 116 Cal.App. 3d at 845.) Thus, if the District determines to stop 

12 

teaching jewelry casting to add courses in computer repair or automotive 

maintenance, it may do so. 

6. 

(A) The contentions of Respondent Gebresellassie bear closer scrutiny. 

Essentially, she argues that the Reduction Resolution cannot be read to apply to her. 

On the issue of the elimination of the two Introduction to Computers/VESL classes, the 

Reduction Resolution is reasonably clear that courses or instruction on “intro to 

computers” is contemplated. Such classes were assigned to her effective October 13, 

2020. On the other hand, Respondent Gebresellassie has been assigned to teach a 

course or subject titled “General Elective/Administrative Assistant” since at least July 

2020. (Exs. 7, A.) While the evidence was that the students in the administrative 

assistant class are taught computer skills, there was evidence it is also an advanced 

class, and not an introductory one. No specific reference is made in the Reduction 

Resolution to an administrative assistant course. 

 

(B) Essentially, the District would have the ALJ construe the designation in 

the Reduction Resolution “Introduction Intro to Computers All Levels” to include the 

Administrative Assistant course because the latter involves computer instruction, and 

because the Reduction Resolution would eliminate 28 hours, the total of Respondent 

Gebresellassie’s hours. That does not appear to be sufficient. The Board appears to 

have acted on an inexact resolution, and if the ALJ cannot substitute his judgment for 

the Board’s discretion, he cannot rewrite the pertinent portion of the Reduction 

Resolution. 

 

(C) In the circumstances, the 11.5 hours allotted to the two courses 

Introduction to Computers/VESL may be eliminated. However, Respondent’s 

assignment to teach 16.5 hours in Administrative Assistant will not be eliminated. As a 

result, Respondent Gebresellassie’s hours shall be reduced to 16.5. 

13 

7.

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to perform. 

8. 

The District may lay off respondents Spears, Thomas, Rodriguez, and 

Paphatsarang. The District may lay off Respondent Gebresellassie to the extent of 11.5 

hours, but it must retain her as to 16.5 hours to instruct the course “Administrative 

Assistant.” 

DATE:

ORDER 

Final lay-off notices may be issued to respondents Spears, Thomas, Rodriguez, 

and Paphatsarang. A final lay off notice may be issued to Respondent Gebresellassie to 

the extent of 11.5 hours for teaching Introduction to Computers/VESL.

JOSEPH D. MONTOYA

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

14 

