BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE 
SANTA MARIA-BONITA SCHOOL DISTRICT 
COUNTY OF SANTA BARBARA 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the District Statement of Reduction in Force 

Against: 

AMANDA GREGORY, JANE MADDOX, and SHERIL VIAU, 

Respondents. 

OAH No. 2022030922 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Thomas Heller, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on April 28, 2022.

Paul Z. McGlocklin, Esq., Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented 

the Santa Maria-Bonita School District (District). 

Justin M. Crane, Esq., The Myers Law Group, represented respondents Amanda 

Gregory, Jane Maddox, and Sheril Viau. 

The parties presented witness testimony and documentary evidence. The record 

was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 28, 2022. 

SUMMARY

The District’s Board of Trustees (Board) resolved to reduce or eliminate three 

limited assignment teacher positions by the end of the 2021-2022 school year. 

Respondents are the only three limited assignment teachers in the District, and the 

Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources notified them their services will not be 

required for the upcoming school year. All three respondents requested a hearing to 

determine if there was cause for the layoffs. The District proved there was, and 

respondents may therefore be notified their services will not be required for the 

upcoming school year. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Procedural History 

1. 

The District serves just under 17,000 students at 17 elementary schools

and 4 junior high schools. It currently employs permanent, probationary, 

temporary/categorical, and substitute certificated employees. Respondents are 

certificated permanent employees who are limited assignment teachers, a part-time 

position in which they fill different teaching roles as needed. Each of their positions is 

0.462 full-time equivalent (FTE), and each of them currently works as an English 

Language Development (ELD) teacher at a different junior high school. Respondents 

are the only three limited assignment teachers in the District.

2. 

On February 23, 2022, the Board adopted Resolution No. 21-18 to reduce 

or eliminate 1.386 FTE limited assignment teacher positions, consisting of three 

positions at 0.462 FTE per position. The Board determined this action was necessary no 

2

later than the end of the 2021-2022 school year based on the Interim Superintendent’s 

recommendation that particular kinds of services be reduced or eliminated. The Board 

also determined the decision would require termination of certificated employees 

equal in full-time equivalents to the positions, and it directed the Interim 

Superintendent or a designee to send appropriate notices to all probationary or 

permanent employees possibly affected by the decision. The resolution stated that, 

unless permitted by law, “no employee will be terminated while a less senior employee 

is retained to render a service in a position for which the more senior employee is both 

certificated and competent for the entire assignment of the less senior employee (no 

fractional bumping).” (Exhibit 1.) “Fractional bumping” refers to splitting a full-time 

position held by a less senior employee to afford “bumping” rights to a more senior 

part-time employee. 

3. 

On March 9, 2022, each respondent’s school principal delivered a written 

notice from Bijou Beltran, Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources, that 

respondent’s services would not be required for the upcoming school year. Beltran 

enclosed a copy of the Board’s resolution and wrote, “You may avoid being laid off by 

exercising your right to ‘bump’ the least senior certificated employee in the District, 

serving in a position (1) for which you are credentialed and competent, and (2) whose 

position has an FTE equal to or less than the 0.462 FTE of the position you presently 

hold. In this case, the position you would ‘bump’ into is a 0.46154 FTE Teacher Tutor 

within the District.” (Exhibit 2.) Teacher tutors provide supplemental services to 

students as needed within the District on a different schedule and at a different pay 

scale than limited assignment teachers. Beltran also stated respondents could request 

a hearing to determine if there was cause for not employing them as limited 

assignment teachers next year. 

3

4.

All three respondents requested a hearing. On March 30, 2022, the 

District filed a Statement of Reduction in Force requesting that the Board give notice 

to respondents that their services will not be required for the 2022-2023 school year. 

Beltran signed the pleading in her official capacity. Respondents were hand delivered 

notices enclosing the pleading, a blank Notice of Participation form, and copies of 

Education Code and Government Code statutes describing the teacher’s hearing 

rights. Each teacher timely submitted a Notice of Participation to request a hearing, 

and the hearing was originally scheduled for April 14, 2022. On April 4, 2022, the 

District filed an unopposed motion to continue the hearing. The motion was granted, 

and the hearing was continued until April 28, 2022. The District provided timely notices 

to respondents of the original and continued hearing dates. 

Hearing 

DISTRICT’S CASE

5. 

Beltran has been the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources 

since 2019. She testified the recommendation to eliminate the three limited 

assignment teacher positions originated in the District’s Instructional Services Division. 

According to Beltran, the positions were determined not to meet the District’s local 

control and accountability plan (LCAP). (See Ed. Code, §§ 52060, 52064 [describing 

LCAP requirements].) Beltran is unaware of how the positions did not meet the plan.

6.

Beltran also testified the District has employed limited assignment 

teachers for at least 15 years, but respondents are the only remaining teachers in that

position. The Board’s resolution reflects that the District no longer wishes to continue 

employing limited assignment teachers. The District has five vacant and available 

teacher tutor positions, and each respondent was given the option to move into one 

4

of the vacant positions in lieu of a layoff. Given the existing vacancies, the District 

would not have to lay off anyone if respondents became teacher tutors. 

7. 

The District also presented a seniority list in support of the layoff 

decision. On the list, Gregory is ranked number 369 of 946 with a seniority date of 

August 8, 2011. Maddox is ranked number 613 with a seniority date of September 8, 

2016, and Viau is ranked number 615 with a seniority date of March 3, 2017. Teacher 

tutors are the only other employees on the list with part-time (i.e., less than 1 FTE) 

positions. All the other teachers on the list are full time. There are full-time ELD 

teachers on the list who are less senior than respondents, but Beltran testified the 

District did not propose to lay them off because it was not using fractional bumping. 

RESPONDENTS’ CASE 

8. 

Viau testified she was hired as a teacher tutor in January 2015. She 

became a limited assignment teacher in 2017. She has multiple subject, special 

education, and resource specialist credentials. She wants to remain a limited 

assignment teacher rather than return to a teacher tutor position.

9.

Maddox testified she was hired as a teacher tutor in 2011. After that, she 

was a long-term substitute for two years, became a teacher tutor again, and then 

became a limited assignment teacher in 2016. She has a multiple subject teaching 

credential. She would be willing to switch to a full-time or job-share position, but 

returning to a teacher tutor position would be “taking a step down.”

10.

Gregory testified she started working as a teacher tutor in 2007. In 2011, 

she was offered a limited assignment teacher position. She has a multiple subject 

teaching credential. Gregory testified that returning to a teacher tutor position would 

5

change her work hours and give her less time with her son than her limited 

assignment teacher position. 

ANALYSIS OF EVIDENCE 

11. 

The evidence indicates the Board’s decision is reasonably based on the 

recommendation of the Interim Superintendent, which in turn came from the 

Instructional Services Division. The Board regularly considered and adopted the 

resolution, and the District gave prompt and detailed notices to respondents of the 

proposed layoffs and their rights. No evidence indicates the Board’s decision is 

fraudulent, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of its discretion to govern the manner of 

teaching in the District.

12.

Respondents argue the Board is not eliminating a particular kind of 

service but only eliminating the job title and position of limited assignment teacher, 

which they argue is not allowed in a layoff. But by eliminating the three positions, the 

District is eliminating a particular kind of service. Limited assignment teachers perform 

teaching services in a particular manner, and the proposed layoffs will change the 

manner and method of providing teaching services. While some services similar to 

what respondents perform will continue to be performed next year, different types of 

teachers will perform the services in different ways. 

13. 

Each respondent testified she began working for the District earlier than 

their respective seniority dates on the District’s seniority list. But the differences 

between the testimony and the list do not affect the proposed layoffs because teacher 

tutors are the only other teachers on the list who have less than full-time positions. No 

employee will be terminated while a less senior employee is retained to render a 

service in a position for which the more senior employee is both certificated and 

6

competent for the entire assignment of the less senior employee to provide. The 

Board’s resolution does not permit respondents to split a full-time position held by a 

less senior employee to afford fractional bumping rights to respondents, who do not 

work full time. Furthermore, no less senior teacher tutors need to be bumped because 

there are already vacant teacher tutor positions available for respondents to fill. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

“[W]henever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or discontinued 

not later than the beginning of the following school year” and a school district’s 

governing board deems a resulting layoff to be necessary, “the governing board may 

terminate the services of not more than a corresponding percentage of the certificated 

employees of the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close of the school 

year.” (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) In such a layoff, “[e]xcept as otherwise provided 

by statute, the services of no permanent employee may be terminated while any 

probationary employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is retained to 

render a service which said permanent employee is certificated and competent to 

render.” (

) “Essentially this language provides ‘“bumping”‘ rights for senior 

certificated and competent employees, and ‘“skipping”‘ authority for a district to retain 

‘junior employees who are certificated and competent to render services which more 

senior employees are not. [Citations.]’” (

(2008) 

170 Cal.App.4th 127, 135, quoting 

(1983) 139 

Cal.App.3d 567, 571.) 

2. 

“[N]o later than March 15 of the school year preceding dismissal, the 

district must give a notice (preliminary notice) to each certificated employee of the 

decision recommending he or she not be reemployed for the ensuing year, stating the 

7

reasons therefore and the employee’s entitlement to a hearing.” (

(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 631-632 (

).) “The employee may request 

a hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying him or her for the ensuing 

year.” (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b).) If a hearing is requested, the school district files 

and serves a District Statement of Reduction in Force, which the employee answers 

with a Notice of Participation. (Gov. Code, §§ 11503, subd. (b), 11505.) “The hearing 

takes place before an administrative law judge who prepares a proposed decision 

which the board may or may not accept.” (

, 

, 144 Cal.App.3d at p. 632; see 

Ed. Code, §§ 44949, 44955.) 

3. 

“Copies of the proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing 

board and to the employee on or before May 7 of the year in which the proceeding is 

commenced.” (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (c)(3).) If a governing board decides to 

terminate a teacher’s services, “[n]otice of such termination of services shall be given

before the 15th of May in the manner prescribed in Section 44949.” (Ed. Code, 

§ 44955, subd. (c).) But where, as here, “a continuance is granted pursuant to Section 

11524 of the Government Code, the dates prescribed in subdivision (c) that occur on 

or after the date of granting the continuance and the date prescribed in subdivision (c) 

of Section 44955 that occurs after the date of granting the continuance shall be 

extended for a period of time equal to the continuance.” (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (e).)

“Any employee not given the preliminary and final notices and the right to the hearing 

is deemed reemployed for the following year. [Citations.]” (

, 

, 144 Cal.App.3d 

at p. 632; see Ed. Code, §§ 44949, 44955.) 

4. 

The layoff decision of a governing board need only be reasonable under 

the circumstances. (

(1978) 76 

Cal.App.3d 796, 807-808 (

).) “‘In determining whether the decision of a school 

8

board is reasonable as distinguished from fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious, its action 

is measured by the standard set by reason and reasonable people, bearing in mind 

that such a standard may permit a difference of opinion on the same subject.’ 

[Citation.]” (

at p. 808.)

Analysis

5. 

The limited assignment teacher positions identified in the Board’s 

resolution are “particular kind[s] of service[s]” that may be reduced or eliminated as 

proposed. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) The proposed layoff of limited assignment 

teachers will change the manner and method of providing teaching services. While 

some services similar to what respondents perform will continue to be performed next 

year, the way in which they will be performed will change. The change in the types of 

teachers performing the services is a change in the particular kind of service within the 

meaning of Education Code section 44955. (See 

(1934) 

2 Cal.2d 770 [discontinuing the services offered by traveling art teachers in lieu of art 

instruction by regular departmental teachers was allowable]; 

(1934) 2 Cal.2d 152, 159 [dismissal of teacher in one of three types of 

kindergarten teacher positions was a discontinuation of a particular kind of service]; 

, 76 Cal.App.3d at p. 812.) 

6. 

The Board’s layoff decision is reasonable under the circumstances. 

(

, 

, 76 Cal.App.3d at pp. 807-808.) The Board’s decision is based on a 

recommendation of the Interim Superintendent originating from the Instructional 

Services Division to reduce or eliminate the limited teacher assignment positions. The 

decision to reduce or eliminate a type of part-time teacher position in the District is 

within the Board’s discretion. No evidence indicates either the decision or the 

underlying recommendation is fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious. Respondents’

9

disagreement with the Board’s decision does not compel a conclusion that the 

decision is unreasonable. (See 

, 

, 76 Cal.App.3d at p. 808.)

7. 

The District satisfied the jurisdictional and notice requirements for the 

proposed layoffs.

8.

No permanent or probationary employee with less seniority is being 

retained to render a service that respondents are certificated and competent to 

perform for the entire assignment of the less senior employee. Apart from teacher 

tutors, the teachers with less seniority than respondents all work full time. The Board’s 

resolution does not permit respondents to split a full-time position held by a less 

senior employee to afford fractional bumping rights to respondents, who do not work 

full time. The decision not to allow fractional bumping is within the Board’s discretion.

(

 (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 344-345.)

Furthermore, no teacher tutors with less seniority need to be bumped because there 

are already vacant teacher tutor positions available for respondents to fill. 

9. 

The proposed layoffs are “related to the welfare of the schools and the 

pupils of the schools.” (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b)(3).) Eliminating positions based on 

the teaching needs of the District is related to the welfare of the schools and the 

pupils of the schools. 

10. 

Based on the above, there is sufficient cause for not reemploying 

respondents as limited assignment teachers for the ensuing school year. (Ed. Code,  

§ 44949, subd. (b).) 

/// 

/// 

10 

ORDER

1.

The District Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained.

2. 

Notice may be given to respondents Amanda Gregory, Jane Maddox, and 

Sheril Viau that their services will not be required for the 2022-2023 school year.

DATE:

THOMAS HELLER

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

11 

