BEFORE THE GOVERNING BOARD 
SAN FRANCISCO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction in Force of: 

212 FULL-TIME EQUIVALENT CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES, 

Respondents. 

OAH No. 2022030651 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Karen Reichmann, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 11 and 12, 2022, by 

videoconference. 

William M. Quinn, Jr., Senior Deputy General Counsel, represented the San 

Francisco Unified School District. 

Attorney Stewart Weinberg represented the United Educators of San Francisco

(UESF), and all respondents who are in the UESF bargaining unit.

Attorney Robert D. Links represented the United Administrators of San 

Francisco (UASF), and all respondents who are in the UASF bargaining unit. 

The matter was submitted for decision on April 12, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Kristin A. Bijur made and filed the District’s Uniform Statement of 

Reduction in Force in her official capacity as the Chief Human Resources Officer of the 

San Francisco Unified School District (District). 

2. 

On March 1, 2022, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted 

Resolution No. 223-1SO3 (PKS Resolution), reducing or discontinuing particular kinds 

of services for the 2022-2023 school year, and directing the superintendent or his 

designated representative to send appropriate notices to all employees whose 

positions may be affected by the reduction or discontinuation of services. 

3. 

The PKS Resolution identified the services to be reduced by the 

commencement of the 2022-2023 school year as: 

  Administrative Services  

61 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) 

Instructional Reform Facilitator Program

  Resource Teachers - Literacy

  Academic Response to Intervention Specialists

3 FTE

3 FTE

3 FTE

  Elementary Instructional Program (Multiple Subjects)

90 FTE

  Bilingual Cantonese Language Program 

13 FTE

  Middle School Core Instructional Program (Multiple Subjects)  15 FTE 

  World Language Japanese 

JROTC Program   

2

1 FTE 

4 FTE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Counseling Program

  Wellness Counselors/Social Workers  

10 FTE

9 FTE

4. 

The services set forth in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of 

services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 

section 44955. The Board recommended the reduction of services because of a severe 

budget deficit. 

5. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), when a 

governing board reduces particular kinds of services resulting in a decrease in the 

number of certificated, permanent employees, the services of a permanent employee 

may not be terminated if another employee with less seniority is retained to render a 

service that the more senior employee is “certificated and competent to render.”

6. 

The seniority date of certificated employees is determined in accordance 

with Education Code section 44845, which provides: “Every probationary or permanent 

employee employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on 

the date upon which he first rendered paid service in a probationary position.” The 

District generated a seniority list.

7. 

The PKS Resolution states the Board’s determination that it is necessary 

to retain the services of certain certificated employees regardless of their seniority, 

pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). These employees are 

individuals possessing and committing to teach under Special Education or Spanish 

Bilingual Cross-Cultural Language and Academic Development (BCLAD) credentials, 

including clear, preliminary, emergency, or intern credentials.

3

 
 
8.

Also on March 1, 2022, the Board adopted Resolution No. 223-1SO4

(Tie-Breaking Resolution), which sets forth the District’s criteria to establish the relative 

order of seniority among employees with the same first date of paid service. The 

District and UESF applied these criteria in the course of a tie-breaking exercise on 

March 3, 2022, and again on March 24, 2022, after receiving additional information 

regarding the seniority dates and credentials of the impacted employees.

9. 

On March 7, 2022, Chief Human Resources Officer Kristin A. Bijur sent, via 

certified mail, a written “Notice of Recommendation That Services Will Not Be 

Required” (Preliminary Layoff Notice) to 308 teachers, counselors, and social workers, 

notifying them that their services will not be required for the 2022-2023 school year, 

pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. That same day, Bijur also sent, 

via certified mail, a written “Notice of Recommendation That Services Will Not Be 

Required” to 49 supervisory and administrative employees, including employees 

belonging to the UASF bargaining unit and unrepresented employees. The notices 

stated the reasons underlying the Board’s PKS Resolution. 

10. 

In determining the number of FTE to be reduced or eliminated, the 

District took into account all positively assured attrition by asking employees to notify 

the District of their intent to resign or retire. The District also released all temporary 

certificated employees who filled positions during the 2021-2022 school year for 

probationary or permanent certificated employees who were on leave or were working 

for categorically funded programs. 

11. 

The employees were provided with a “Request for Hearing” form and 

were directed that the form must be received by the District by March 16 at 5:00 p.m. 

This deadline was twice extended, first through March 18 and finally through March 

22, 2022, at 5:00 p.m. 

4

12.

By the March 22, 2022, deadline, 81 UESF-represented employees and 16 

UASF-represented employees requested a hearing. No unrepresented employees 

returned the request for hearing form.

13.

A memorandum of understanding between the District and both unions

provides for service of a Uniform Statement of Reduction in Force on UESF's and 

UASF's counsel, in lieu of individual service. It also provides for UESF and UASF to file a 

Uniform Request for Hearing and Notice of Participation in Reduction in Force Hearing 

on behalf of all respondents. Pursuant to that agreement, the District served the 

Uniform Statement of Reduction of Force packet on UASF and UESF counsel on March 

25, 2022. The packet contained the Statement to Respondents, the District Statement 

of Reduction in Force, copies of relevant Education and Government Code sections, a 

Notice of Participation, and a Notice of Hearing. 

14.  On March 28, 2022, UESF filed a timely uniform request for hearing on 

behalf of all teacher respondents. On April 1, 2022, UASF filed a timely uniform request 

for hearing on behalf of all administrator respondents. 

15. 

The parties stipulate that all prehearing jurisdictional requirements have 

been met. 

Administrators 

16.  Of the 16 UASF administrative employees who requested a hearing, 14 

have bumping rights into teaching positions. UASF argued that their layoff notices 

should be rescinded because they are entitled to continued employment with the 

District, albeit as teachers. The District disagreed and requested that the layoffs as to 

the administrators from their administrative positions be upheld.

5

UASF also contended that adjudication of the dismissal of administrators is 

precluded by Education Code section 44951, which establishes procedures for 

releasing administrators from employment. UASF did not establish that the District 

may not use the layoff process set forth in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 

Section 44951 specifically states that it does not apply to the termination of 

employment pursuant to section 44955. Accordingly, the District may issue final layoff 

notices to the 16 administrators, laying them off from their administrative positions. 

17. 

The remaining two administrators, Dalton Miranda and Janae Smothers, 

hold multiple subject teaching credentials but remain in the path of the layoff due to 

their seniority dates. 

18. 

Smothers testified at the hearing. She has a seniority date of March 15, 

2022, and is not entitled to a teaching position. Smothers expressed concerns about 

the District’s EMPowerSF employee information platform, stating that it caused errors 

when she was hired. For example, she stated that she was paid less than she was 

promised, and had been notified that she was not a UASF member, despite having 

signed up to be in the union. The District and UASF counsel assured Smothers that she 

had been represented by UASF throughout the layoff process. Smothers also 

expressed disappointment in what she views as the lack of respect and accountability 

shown by the District. Smothers did not establish cause for rescission of her layoff 

notice.

Educators 

19.  On the first day of hearing, Cantonese Bilingual language teacher Fong 

Chieng testified that all of the impacted Cantonese Bilingual language teachers have 

multiple subject teaching credentials, and inquired whether they had been properly 

6

evaluated for bumping rights into multiple subject credential positions. The District 

and UESF agreed that this evaluation had not occurred. As a result of Chieng’s inquiry, 

a new seniority list was generated and offered into evidence. All but three of the 

Cantonese Bilingual teachers are now on the rescission list. The District apologized for 

the error. 

Stipulations 

20. 

The parties agreed to rescind the layoff notices issued to the following 

UESF employees, as set forth in Joint Exhibit 4. Laura Espino is being retained because 

she holds a BCLAD credential and is committed to teach in a Spanish BCLAD 

assignment. The remaining employees are being retained based on seniority. These

employees are no longer respondents in this matter:

CANTONESE BILINGUAL

Shang Ying Chen

Jialing Zhu 

Della Yan Wong

Lai Yee Tse

Yong You Lin

Whitney Wing Kwan Lau 

ELEMENTARY AND MIDDLE SCHOOL INSTRUCTIONAL (MULTIPLE SUBJECT) 

Laura Espino 

7

Anthony Kevin Batiste

Devon Xavier Emmanuel Maynard

Carissa Angela Wong 

Hannah Ketturah Logsdon

Jennifer Chieh Suen

Jason Yu

Beatriz Elina Solorio 

Elizabeth Chih-Ling Hsueh 

Raquel Roque 

Kimberly Elizabeth Gates 

Anaia Elise Gilliam

Anni Wen 

Kethmanee Bungo

Xiaoying Lun 

Brianna Margaret Dupper

Tina Chan 

Emily L. Chandler

Kitty Yuk Kit Jiang 

8

Emily Ann Meyers

Yi Stephy Huang 

Codion Deshon Isom

Jessica Tin-Wai Lee 

Holly Anne San Miguel Beza 

Margaret Campbell Black 

Kamoljaree Wong 

Alexis Rochelle McCoy 

Jessica Arnott 

Erasmo Jose Martinez, Jr. 

Jennifer Marie Ryning 

Robert Vincent Costello 

Fletcher L. Cobbsek 

Julie Marie Pavlos 

Karen Wei Jan Wong 

Henry Lien Choi Gee 

Monica W. Woodworth 

Daney J. Espiritu 

9

Emma Rose Purkey

Heidi Schade Kerscher 

Kelly Anne Graber 

Veronica Marie Gleason 

Nicole C. Doumeng 

Yvonne Elisa Hidalgo-Miers 

Miriam Nichole Romero Gross 

Nidhi Kamlesh Solanki 

Tiffany M.S. Chen 

Hayley Katherine Lorenz 

Veronica Roying Tsuji 

Carrie G. Centeno 

Cassandra Anastasia Munoz

Thomas DeWayne Spalding

Robert Glenn McGarity 

Jenny J. Huang

Jeannie Wai Kwan Chan

Billy Jian Biao Li

10 

Mairin McCracken

Kandice Joy Horton-Gomez 

Vivien Hsieh 

Jennifer Fosia Sierra Guzman 

Megan Elizabeth Dukes 

Cindy Chung 

Vashti Lynn Ferguson 

Kendall Lynn Kincaid 

Sophia Moriah Eckert 

Jennea Marie Glenn 

Beverly A. Flisco 

Kyla Marie Langen 

Willie Fong 

Mary Alexandra Roy 

Danielle Monique Castillo 

Gretchen Diane Lan 

Alaycia R. Nelson 

Dorothy Paulina Phillips 

11 

Matthew Chung

Joseph Patrick Bly 

Elaine Wai Cho 

Ashley Ponnell Josias Sejour 

Santina Marie Delligatta 

Jonie Yun Jone Lau 

Yuet Yeung Lee 

Nancy Nguyen Yee 

Mariah Elena Murga 

Anand Vedawala 

Alexis Breanna Cortez 

Kelli A. Mekkelsen 

Jennifer Tori Chew 

Kyle Alexander Watkins 

Nina C. Schield 

Jiale Zhao 

Sevasti Konstandina Travlos 

Rebecca Parrish Beltramo 

12 

Traci M. Wrycza

Eric Dolan 

Alexandrea Monique Rawlings-Shen 

Alix Rose Snyder 

Jasmine Tarah Bell 

Nancy D. Keizer 

Sophia Yuk Yin Choi 

Sophia Meakalia Suzuki-Jones 

Santiago Manuel Cuevas 

Vicki Eun Cho 

Aaron Thomas Aguilar 

Anne Lynne Banchero 

Rose Marie Soto 

Melissa O. Ramirez 

Erin Nicole Hamson 

Christopher Antonio Martinez Johnson 

Andrea Nicole Fontenot 

Fong Sai Chieng 

13 

Devina Alexis Owens

Erin Patricia Flathers 

Sharon K. Thilges 

De Trice Rodgers 

Charyl P. Dalapit 

Angela Marie Rocha Owens 

Lynn Hu Hatamiya 

Amanda Emily Preston 

Nathan David Bernhard-Beckman 

Brittany Rose Navarre 

Samantha Nikole Levy 

Adam Matthew Johnson 

WORLD LANGUAGE: JAPANESE 

Eriko Matsuura-Schnurrpusch

Arisa Hiroi

JROTC ARMY PROGRAM

Gregory Lewis Jenkins

Leonel Nascimento

14 

Stephen S. Hardee

Michael Collier 

Doug Bullard 

COUNSELING PROGRAM

Daesean Kevin Jones

Bethany Lin Kwan

Jennifer N. De Renzi 

Erinn Jennifer Tumbokon Perez

John R. Moreno

Stephan Anh Khoa Nguyen

Edith Abigail Melendez

Shelby Lee Steinfeld

Christopher Herrera

Nadia Irteimeh Talbot

Francis Jose Vinas-Reyes

Hazel Barrera

Steven James McDaniel

Marissa E. Rossman

15 

Amber DeShun Mosby

Mariana Libeth Verdin 

Diana Carolina Marroquin 

Marcela Yerena-Avellan 

Erika Carmen Thieu 

SOCIAL WORKERS

Albert Rogers III

Hannah Jael Dorman Epstein

Nicole M.K. Kaaina 

Natalie Gomez 

Michelle R. Vidal 

Teresa Keiko Anderson 

Rene Paul Kamm 

Naomi Violet Forsberg 

Jabril Demarcus Rollins 

Alyssa Nadene Casimiro 

Kniesha Renee Primes 

Rosario Beatriz Hayes 

16 

Rosa Isela Marcelo Huerta

Stefanie Noreen Eldred 

Summer Watkins Santarosa 

Maggie Marie Furey 

Grace Jon Yan Beaver 

Wade James King-Gallman 

Ashley Morgan Hildred 

LaTonya Evette Carpenter 

Denise Elizabeth Martell 

Yajaira Jamilette Cuapio 

Sarah Meghan Kearney 

Robin C. Navarro 

Marcus Christmas 

Individual Issues 

21. 

Alexandria Liston’s seniority date is listed as 8/10/2021 on the seniority 

list. She testified that she began teaching for the District on 8/11/2020. She taught for 

more than 75% of the days of the school year as a temporary teacher, filling in for two 

different employees on maternity leave. She held a district intern credential during the 

2020-2021 school year and was hired into an open position as a probationary teacher, 

17 

with a preliminary multiple subject credential, for the current school year. She 

contends that she is entitled to a seniority date of August 11, 2020, when she first 

performed services for the District. 

The District contends that the August 10, 2021 seniority date was properly 

calculated and therefore that the layoff of Liston is lawful pursuant to Education Code 

section 44911, which provides that “service by a person under a provisional credential 

shall not be included in computing the service required as a prerequisite to attainment 

of, or eligibility to, classification as a permanent employee of a school district.” 

Liston contends that a district intern credential is not the same as a provisional 

credential, and therefore she did not provide services under a provisional credential. 

The District failed to establish that a district intern credential is equivalent to a 

provisional credential, and the courts have found otherwise. (See 

Cal.App.4th 1260 and 

 (2006) 145 

 (2007) 149 

Cal.App.4th 135.) The District also failed to establish that services provided under a 

district intern credential are to be excluded when calculating seniority.

Pursuant to Education Code section 44885.5, individuals employed as district 

interns are to be classified as probationary employees. However, even if the District 

could properly employ district interns as temporary employees, Education Code 

section 44918, subdivision (a), provides that:

Any employee classified as a substitute or temporary 

employee, who serves during one school year for at least 75 

percent of the number of days the regular schools of the 

district were maintained in that school year and has 

18 

performed the duties normally required of a certificated 

employee of the school district, shall be deemed to have 

served a complete school year as a probationary employee 

if employed as a probationary employee for the following 

school year. 

Accordingly, because Liston was employed for more than 75% of the days of 

the 2020-2021 school year performing the duties of a certificated employee, she is 

entitled to be deemed to have served a complete year as a probationary employee. 

Her seniority date must be adjusted to 8/11/2020. The District may not lay off Liston if 

any employee with less seniority is being retained. 

22. 

Leah Sanchez testified that her circumstances are almost identical to 

Liston’s. The District’s seniority list reflects a seniority date of 8/10/2021. But like 

Liston, Sanchez worked more than 75% of the days of the 2020-2021 school year on a 

district intern credential, covering for two different teachers on maternity leave, 

beginning on 8/12/2020. She was hired as a probationary teacher for the current 

school year. 

Because Sanchez was employed for more than 75% of the days of the 2020-

2021 school year performing the duties of a certificated employee, she is entitled to be 

deemed to have served a complete year as a probationary employee. Her seniority 

date must be adjusted to 8/12/2020. The District may not lay off Sanchez if any 

employee with less seniority is being retained.

23. 

Pirssheng Dizaiy’s seniority date is August 10, 2021. Dizaiy noted that she 

signed a three-year commitment to teach for the District when she entered the 

District’s Pathway to Teaching program, and argued that this should prevent the

19 

District from laying her off. Other teachers hired through the Pathway program argued 

that their commitment to the District and willingness to teach at hard-to-staff school 

sites should protect them from layoff. These contentions are unpersuasive. Individuals 

hired through the Pathway to Teaching program are not entitled to be treated 

differently from any other employees during the layoff process, which is governed by 

the Education Code. This hearing is not the forum to resolve any potential contractual 

issues. 

24.  Matthew Moran’s seniority date is 8/10/2021. He noted that he was 

offered and accepted a position with the District by email in June 2021, and argued 

that his seniority date should reflect this. He acknowledged that he did not perform 

paid services until his August seniority date. Moran did not establish that his seniority 

date was incorrectly calculated. 

25. 

Latalya Cooper asserted that she never received the Preliminary Layoff 

Notice. She started with the District as a substitute teacher when she lived on Dakota 

Street in San Francisco. She moved in the summer of 2021. She was hired as a full-time 

teacher for the 2021-2022 school year and asserts that she provided her new address 

when filling out new teacher paperwork at the beginning of the school year. 

In January 2022, the District sent all employees an email advising them to 

update their addresses in the District’s Empower employee platform. Cooper does not 

recall receiving this email, but does not deny that she might have. She explained 

credibly that there was a Covid-19 outbreak and other pressing issues taking place at 

her school around that time, and that logging onto Empower did not seem like a 

priority. Cooper apparently did not confirm whether her address in Empower was 

correct. The District’s records as of March 7 reflected Cooper’s old address on Dakota 

Street, and the Preliminary Layoff Notice was sent there. 

20 

Cooper was aware that other employees received layoff notices in early March. 

She did not receive one and was unsure whether she was on the list of employees to 

be laid off. On March 11, she went into the Empower platform and updated her 

address information from the Dakota Street address to her current address. Cooper 

received an email from her teaching coach advising employees to request a hearing, 

and explaining that even if they were unsure about whether they were on the layoff 

list, to simply write, “If I’m on the list, I want a hearing.” Cooper did so. 

The Preliminary Layoff Notice was sent to employee Latalya Cooper at her last 

known address reflected in the District’s records, pursuant to Education Code section 

44949, subdivision (d). It is undisputed that Cooper did not actually receive the notice 

because she no longer lived at that address. Cooper asserts that she provided an 

updated address to the District in August 2021, but did not corroborate this assertion. 

Cooper did not update her address in the EMPowerSF platform when asked to do so 

by the District in January 2022. The District’s notification to Cooper by certified mail 

prior to March 15, 2022 to the address maintained in the District’s records, constituted 

sufficient notice. Cooper may be given a final layoff notice. 

26. 

Except as noted above in Factual Findings 21 and 22, no permanent or 

probationary certificated employee with less seniority is being retained to render a 

service which any of the remaining respondents are certificated and competent to 

render. The District may issue final layoff notices to all 121 UESF respondents and all 

16 UASF respondents listed in Joint Exhibit 3, with the exception of Alexandria Liston 

and Leah Sanchez, if it is determined that any employee with less seniority is being 

retained to render a service for which Liston or Sanchez is certificated and competent 

to teach. 

21 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The District complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set 

forth in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955.

2. 

The services referenced in the PKS Resolution set forth in Factual 

Findings 2 and 3 are the kind which may be reduced or discontinued in accordance 

with applicable statutes and case law. (See Ed. Code, § 44955; 

 (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796; 

(1976) 

64 Cal.App.3d 167.) The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the services is 

neither arbitrary nor capricious, but rather a proper exercise of the District’s discretion 

in light of a severe budget deficit. 

3. 

As set forth in Factual Finding 16, the District may issue final layoff 

notices to the 16 UASF-represented administrators laying them off from their 

administrative positions. Most of these employees have bumping rights into teaching 

positions within the UESF bargaining unit. 

4. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 21 and 22, the District did not sustain its 

burden of proof as to the seniority dates of employees Alexandria Liston and Leah 

Sanchez. Because the evidence established that both are entitled to tack on their prior 

year of service, their seniority dates must be adjusted to 8/11/2020 and 8/12/2020, 

respectively. The District may not issue final layoff notices to Alexandria Liston or Leah 

Sanchez, if it determines that any employee with less seniority is being retained to 

render a service for which Liston or Sanchez is certificated and competent to teach.

5.

Other than as established above, the evidence established that no 

certificated employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to 

22 

render services that the respondent is certificated and competent to perform. (Factual 

Findings 20, 23-26.)

6. 

In accordance with Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, cause 

exists for reduction of particular kinds of services by the District by the 

commencement of the 2022-2023 school year, as established in Factual Findings 2 

through 4. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the District and its students, within 

the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 

7. 

Cause exists because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of 

services pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to the remaining 

respondents that their services will not be required for the 2022-2023 school year. 

23 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION 

1.

The Statements of Reduction in Force against all respondents listed in 

revised Exhibit 36, as described in Factual Finding 20, are dismissed and the 

Preliminary Notices of Layoff issued to these employees are rescinded. Final notice of 

layoff may not be provided to any of these employees.

2.

The seniority date of Alexandria Liston is corrected to 8/11/2020 and the 

seniority date of Leah Sanchez corrected to 8/12/2020. Should it be determined that 

any employee with less seniority is being retained to render a service for which Liston 

or Sanchez is certificated and competent to teach, the Statements of Reduction in 

Force against respondents Alexandria Liston and Leah Sanchez will be dismissed and 

the Preliminary Notices of Layoff issued to them will be rescinded. 

3.

Notice may be given to the remaining respondents that their services will 

not be required for the 2022-2023 school year.

DATE:

KAREN REICHMANN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

24

