BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD 
SAN FRANCISCO COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Reduction in Force Involving: 

58 FACULTY MEMBERS, 

Respondents. 

OAH No. 2022030935 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Holly M. Baldwin, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 18 through 21 and 26, 2022, by 

videoconference.

Attorneys Kathryn Meola, Georgelle Cuevas, and Jacqueline Hang represented 

complainant David Martin, Chancellor of the San Francisco Community College 

District.

Attorneys Patricia Lim, Robert Bezemek, and Tanya Smith represented all 

respondents.

The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 26, 2022.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Board Resolution to Reduce Particular Kinds of Services 

1.

At its meeting on February 24, 2022, the Governing Board of the San 

Francisco Community College District (Board)1 adopted District Resolution No.

22.02.24 10.B.16 (the Resolution). The Resolution declares the District’s intention at the 

end of the 2021–2022 academic year to reduce particular kinds of services, as stated in 

the Resolution and as listed in Exhibit A to this Decision, in a total amount of 

50 full-time equivalent (FTE) faculty employee positions. 

2. 

The Board determined, consistent with the recommendation of 

Chancellor David Martin, that the reductions stated in the Resolution are in the best 

interests of the District and its students, based on the District’s financial concerns.

Prior to the Resolution, on April 7, 2021, the Fiscal Crisis and Management 

Assistance Team (FCMAT) reported to the California Community Colleges Chancellor’s 

Office (State Chancellor) that the District had experienced a 35 percent decline in 

student enrollment over a period of eight years without reducing staffing.2 California 

community colleges are funded mainly based on the number of full-time equivalent 

students. FCMAT noted the District’s ongoing structural deficit spending and other 

1 The San Francisco Community College District governs and operates City 

College of San Francisco, or City College.

2 The District engaged in a layoff proceeding last year, but no layoffs ultimately 

occurred, because the District and the union agreed to one-year salary concessions.

2

 
factors, and found that the District could no longer fulfill its commitments to its staff, 

faculty, administration, and students while also remaining solvent. FCMAT found that 

correctly sizing its staffing will be the largest factor in improving the District’s fiscal 

situation. 

On October 8, 2021, the Accreditation Commission for Community and Junior 

Colleges (ACCJC) reported that the District was assessed as an at-risk institution and 

was being placed on enhanced monitoring status for a second consecutive year based 

on concerns about its fiscal stability. In addition to declining student enrollment, 

deficit spending, and other financial factors, the ACCJC noted audit findings that the 

District was listed as a “going concern,” meaning its fund balance and historical 

structural deficit raise substantial doubt about the District’s ability to continue as a 

going concern. The District’s independent auditors have assigned a going concern 

finding for four consecutive years. 

3. 

In his testimony at hearing and in his recommendation to the Board, 

Chancellor Martin explained that staffing adjustments for 2022–2023 are critical, 

because that budget year will be considered by the ACCJC during its accreditation 

evaluation in Spring 2023. In order for City College to keep its accreditation, it must 

demonstrate an institutional plan to ensure solvency and financial stability, and to 

respond to the financial concerns identified by the ACCJC and auditors. If City College 

loses its accreditation, the credits earned by its students will not qualify for transfer to 

other institutions or be recognized by professions, and the institution would lose its 

ability to issue financial aid to students. 

4. 

For several years, the District has received “hold harmless” funding in 

excess of the enrollment-based funding formula, receiving about $10 million this year.

However, “hold harmless” funding is set to expire after the 2024–2025 academic year.

3

Notices to Faculty Member Respondents

5.

On March 9, 2022, Associate Vice Chancellor of Human Resources Clara 

Starr gave timely notice in writing to 50 full-time District faculty members that it had 

been recommended to the Board that the services of these faculty members will not 

be required for the 2022–2023 academic year. Each such preliminary layoff notice 

stated that it was being sent “because you are serving within a particular kind of 

service, as listed [in the Resolution], which is being discontinued or reduced, or 

because an employee with greater seniority and qualifications is entitled to 

reassignment into the service you are currently providing.” Each such notice also 

stated that pursuant to Education Code section 87740, the faculty member may 

request a hearing to determine if there is cause for discontinuing their services for the 

2022–2023 academic year. 

6. 

Also on March 9, 2022, Starr gave timely notice in writing to eight other 

full-time District faculty members that it had been recommended to the Board that the 

services of these faculty members will not be required and that they would be 

reassigned for the 2022–2023 academic year. Each of the eight “precautionary” layoff 

notices stated that it was being sent “because you are serving within a particular kind 

of service, as listed [in the Resolution], which is being discontinued or reduced, and as 

notification that you have bumping rights into another position and your reassignment 

for the ensuing 2022–2023 academic year will be in [name of Department].” Each such 

notice also stated that pursuant to Education Code section 87740, the faculty member 

may request a hearing to determine if there is cause for discontinuing their services for 

the 2022–2023 academic year. 

7. 

All 58 faculty members who received the notices described in Factual 

Findings 5 and 6 requested hearings. 

4

8.

Acting in his official capacity of Chancellor, on March 25, 2022,

complainant David Martin signed an accusation alleging the District’s grounds for not 

re-employing respondents for the 2022–2023 academic year. Each faculty member 

received timely service of the accusation, and each became a respondent in this matter 

by filing a timely notice of defense. The names of the 58 faculty member respondents 

are listed in Exhibits B (50 people) and C (8 people) to this Decision. 

Particular Kinds of Service and the Seniority-FSA List 

9. 

The State Chancellor regularly publishes and revises a handbook listing 

Minimum Qualifications for Faculty and Administrators in California Community 

Colleges (the MQ Handbook). The MQ Handbook lists many disciplines, corresponding 

roughly to academic subjects of study and instruction and to discrete types of 

non-instructional student service. For each discipline, the MQ Handbook identifies 

educational credentials, and in some cases professional experience, constituting the 

minimum qualifications to serve as a California community college faculty member 

teaching a course in that discipline or rendering student service in that 

non-instructional discipline. The MQ Handbook provides that community college 

districts may also establish local qualifications beyond the minimum standards 

prescribed in the MQ Handbook, and that districts have flexibility in how they organize 

courses within disciplines and in how to apply equivalency. The District has established 

local qualifications for some disciplines that are above those in the MQ Handbook.

10.

The District organizes its faculty members, courses, and student services 

into departments. These departments are long-standing administrative units.

11.

Some District departments include only one MQ Handbook discipline. 

Some District departments combine several distinct MQ Handbook disciplines in one

5

department. For example, faculty members in the District’s Social Sciences department 

teach courses in history, economics, political science, and philosophy, which are

distinct disciplines in the MQ Handbook. A few disciplines occur in multiple 

departments; for example, the MQ Handbook identifies “physics/astronomy” as a 

single discipline, but the District has separate Physics and Astronomy departments. 

12. 

District faculty members are assigned at least one faculty service area 

(FSA), which is to be considered in the event of a layoff. FSA’s are a construct of the 

statutory layoff process. In identifying faculty members whose services may become 

unnecessary because of service reductions, the District must evaluate whether any 

faculty member qualifies for reassignment to render a service in which that faculty 

member is relatively more senior. (Ed. Code, § 87743.) Because formal credentials from 

the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing are not necessary for community 

college faculty, the Education Code requires the District to make this evaluation with 

reference to the faculty member’s FSA, defined as “a service or instructional subject 

area or group of related services or instructional subject areas performed by faculty 

and established by a community college district.” (Ed. Code, § 87743.1.) The process of 

assigning FSA’s and considering them to determine whether a faculty member has 

reassignment (“bumping”) rights is discussed further in Factual Findings 18 through 28.

13.  Human Resources staff at the District compiled a list of all full-time 

faculty members (Seniority-FSA List), using information from the District’s personnel 

records. The Seniority-FSA List is sorted by department and seniority date. Each faculty 

member has an entry listing a department, seniority date, lottery number, and one or 

more FSA’s. The lottery numbers are for use if necessary to break ties in seniority dates 

for faculty members hired at the same time.

6

14.

The Resolution identifies service reductions with reference to the 

District’s academic departments, for a total of 50 full-time equivalent faculty positions. 

Each kind of service listed in the Resolution and in Exhibit A to this Decision 

corresponds to a single District department. Human Resources staff used the 

Seniority-FSA list in identifying the specific faculty members within each department 

who would receive the notices described above in Factual Findings 5 and 6. For each 

department, staff reviewed the department’s list of full-time faculty members 

according to seniority. Staff then identified faculty members whose re-employment 

would not be necessary if the District reduced the department’s services to the extent 

stated in the Resolution, beginning with the most junior full-time member of each 

department and accounting for the possibility that faculty members may have FSA’s

and sufficient seniority that would allow them to bump into another department. If a 

faculty member had an FSA and seniority to bump into another department, the least 

senior faculty member in the destination department was identified to receive a 

preliminary layoff notice. By this method, a list was prepared of 50 faculty members to 

receive preliminary layoff notices and 8 faculty members to receive precautionary 

layoff notices. 

15. 

The Resolution defined “competency” as described in Education Code 

section 87743.5 for the purposes of bumping as including: (1) an FSA in the relevant 

subject matter area; (2) a specific and compelling need to employ and retain faculty 

members who meet the minimum qualifications to serve as community college faculty 

members to teach students with disabilities pursuant to California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 53414; (3) a specific and compelling need to employ and 

retain faculty members who meet the minimum qualifications to serve as community 

college faculty members in the area of Foreign Languages in the language of Spanish; 

and (4) for faculty members with the same seniority date, the order of termination is 

7

determined by the lottery number recorded on the seniority list. The District used 

these criteria to “skip,” or exempt from layoff, faculty who teach Spanish. 

16.  No respondents claimed that their seniority dates were inaccurate.

17. 

District witnesses testified that while lottery numbers are generally 

assigned upon hiring faculty members, in some semesters if there were only a few 

probationary hires, the District might wait for two or three semesters before 

conducting a lottery drawing. The faculty member union, Local 2121 of the American 

Federation of Teachers (AFT or the union), is notified when the District conducts 

lotteries, and a union representative is present at lottery drawings. No respondents 

specifically claimed that their lottery numbers were inaccurate. 

FSA’s and Cross-Service Qualifications (Bumping) 

18. 

Article 23 of the 2015 collective bargaining agreement (CBA) between the 

District and the union governs FSA’s.

19. 

A faculty member’s primary FSA is assigned at the time of initial hiring, 

reflecting the teaching assignment for which they were hired. Article 23 provides that a 

faculty member is assumed to be competent in the primary FSA corresponding to the 

discipline in which the faculty member is hired and assigned to teach. When a full-time 

faculty member is being hired to fill a position, there is an analysis of the minimum 

qualifications required to teach that subject matter area, and those qualifications are 

listed on the job description. Human Resources staff confirm in the hiring process that 

the faculty member meets minimum qualifications. Article 23 also provides that faculty 

employed prior to the date of ratification of the 2015 CBA shall be assigned to one or 

more primary FSA’s based on qualifications as of their hiring. 

8

20.

Article 23 sets forth the process by which a faculty member can request 

the addition of one or more secondary FSA’s to be considered in the event of a layoff.

It is the faculty member’s responsibility to request a secondary FSA, and to provide the 

District with all records necessary to substantiate a claim of competency. Article 23 

states that the annual deadline for such secondary FSA applications is September 1, 

but at hearing the witnesses for all parties agreed that the statutory deadline set in the 

Education Code is February 15 of each year.

Article 23 provides that secondary FSA applications are to be evaluated by a 

Committee consisting of representatives from Academic Affairs, a Dean, the Academic 

Senate, and the union. The Committee decides by majority vote whether the applicant 

has demonstrated meeting the competency criteria for the requested FSA. Any denials 

shall be explained in writing. Any dispute about whether a faculty member has been 

improperly denied a secondary FSA is addressed through the CBA’s grievance process. 

(See also Ed. Code, § 87743.3.) Article 23 does not specify when the Committee is to 

conduct or complete its evaluation process. 

21. 

District witnesses testified that primary FSA’s and secondary FSA’s are 

recorded in the District’s human resources database. FSA assignments may or may not 

be reflected on documents contained in an individual faculty member’s personnel file, 

although the personnel file documents do reflect the teaching assignment into which 

the faculty member was hired. 

22. 

District staff posted a list of faculty member FSA’s on the District’s 

website in early February 2022. 

23. 

During the 2021–2022 academic year, 39 faculty members applied for 

secondary FSA’s prior to the deadline of February 15, 2022. Human Resources staff 

9

made a preliminary review of these secondary FSA applications and provided

recommendations to the Committee. The Committee convened after the application 

deadline to begin the review process, with a weekly meeting schedule. As of the dates 

of hearing in this matter, the Committee’s work was still in progress. The Committee 

prioritized its review of secondary FSA applications for those faculty members who had 

been identified as affected by this year’s layoff proceeding. That group of priority 

applicants consisted of approximately 20 faculty members. 

24. 

The preliminary and precautionary layoff notices described in Factual 

Findings 5 and 6 were issued based on the preliminary review of Human Resources 

staff regarding seniority and FSA’s for faculty members in departments affected by the 

Resolution. For some of those faculty members, a subsequent decision by the 

Committee was rendered after reviewing secondary FSA applications, and in some 

cases the Committee disagreed with the preliminary recommendation of Human 

Resources. All parties agreed at hearing that the decisions of the Committee 

supersede the recommendations of Human Resources regarding secondary FSA’s. 

SPECIALTY COUNSELING DEPARTMENTS: EOPS AND DSPS 

25. 

In addition to a general Counseling department, the District has two 

specialty counseling departments: EOPS (Extended Opportunity Programs and 

Services) and DSPS (Disabled Student Programs and Services). 

26. 

The MQ Handbook distinguishes general counseling from EOPS 

counseling, and prescribes minimum qualifications for EOPS counseling that are in 

addition to the minimum qualifications for general counseling. 

10 

27.

The MQ Handbook also distinguishes general counseling from 

“community college counselor of students with disabilities,” and prescribes different 

minimum qualifications for these two non-instructional disciplines. 

28. 

Some faculty members of the District’s DSPS department are instructors 

and some are counselors. The corresponding FSA’s are “DSPS-INSTRUCTOR” and 

“DSPS-COUNSELOR.” There are different minimum qualifications for serving as an 

instructor and as a counselor in the DSPS department. 

THE DISTRICT’S ANALYSIS OF WHICH FACULTY MEMBERS SHOULD RECEIVE 

FINAL LAYOFF NOTICES

29. 

At the close of the hearing in this matter, the District provided an 

updated list of which faculty members it contends should receive final layoff notices, 

based on a bumping analysis using the decisions of the Committee regarding FSA’s. 

This analysis of FSA qualifications and bumping rights is discussed as pertinent below.

Faculty Members Who Received Precautionary Layoff 

Notices 

30. 

Elaine Avrus is a faculty member in the Learning Assistance department. 

This department was not slated for a reduction in services based on the Resolution. 

However, Avrus received a precautionary layoff notice, because Human Resources staff 

determined that Avrus would be bumped out of the Learning Assistance department 

by Tanaka Gaines, but that Avrus also met minimum qualifications for Counseling and 

could bump into that department. The Committee has not issued any contrary 

subsequent decision. Thus, Avrus should not receive a final layoff notice and the 

District must withdraw its accusation. 

11 

31.

Tanaka Gaines is a faculty member in the Business department. She 

received a precautionary layoff notice, because Human Resources staff determined 

that she would be subject to layoff in Business based on seniority but that she met 

minimum qualifications for Learning Assistance and could bump into that department. 

The Committee agreed. Thus, Gaines should not receive a final layoff notice and the 

District must withdraw its accusation. 

32. 

Adriana Garcia is a faculty member in the Counseling department. She 

received a precautionary layoff notice, because Human Resources staff determined 

that she would be subject to layoff in Counseling based on seniority but that she met 

minimum qualifications for EOPS and could bump into that department. The 

Committee agreed. Thus, Garcia should not receive a final layoff notice and the District 

must withdraw its accusation. 

33. 

Tamika Jones is a faculty member in the Computer Networking and 

Information (CNIT) department. She received a precautionary layoff notice, because 

Human Resources staff determined that she would be subject to layoff in CNIT based 

on seniority but believed based on her FSA of “COMPUTER INFO SYSTEMS” that she 

met minimum qualifications for Computer Science and could bump into that 

department. However, a subsequent review of her transcripts revealed that Jones does 

not have the master’s degree required to teach in the Computer Science discipline. 

Jones did not apply for a secondary FSA. 

Because Jones does not meet the qualifications for the Computer Science 

department, Daniel O’Leary is not bumped out of Computer Science by Jones. The 

Computer Science department was not targeted for service reductions. Thus, O’Leary 

should not receive a final layoff notice and the District must withdraw its accusation. 

12 

34.

Paula Jung is a faculty member in the Counseling department. She 

received a precautionary layoff notice, because Human Resources staff determined she 

would be subject to layoff in Counseling based on seniority but believed she met 

minimum qualifications for DSPS and could bump into that department. However, the 

Committee subsequently reviewed Jung’s secondary FSA application and determined 

that she does not meet the minimum qualifications for DSPS Counseling. Jung also has 

an FSA in EOPS, but she cannot bump into that department based on her seniority. 

35. 

Kathleen Marquez is a faculty member in the Counseling department. 

She received a precautionary layoff notice, because Human Resources staff determined 

she would be subject to layoff in Counseling based on seniority but believed she met 

minimum qualifications for Sociology and could bump into the Behavioral Sciences 

department with a Sociology FSA. However, the Committee subsequently reviewed 

Marquez’s secondary FSA application and determined that she does not meet the 

minimum qualifications for Sociology, but that she does meet the minimum 

qualifications for both EOPS and Learning Assistance. While Marquez has FSA’s in 

EOPS and Learning Assistance, she cannot bump into either department based on her 

seniority. 

36.  Michael Needham is a faculty member in the Business department who 

received a precautionary layoff notice regarding bumping into the Social Sciences 

department to teach Economics. Human Resources staff determined that Needham 

would be subject to layoff in Business based on seniority but believed that minimum 

qualifications for an FSA in Economics had been met. However, the Committee 

subsequently reviewed Needham’s application for a secondary FSA in Economics, and 

determined that while the MQ Handbook requirements had been met, Needham did 

13 

not meet the additional City College local requirements to teach Economics.

Needham’s qualifications are discussed further in Factual Findings 62 through 65. 

If Needham does not meet the qualifications to bump into Economics, then 

Deniz Demiray is not bumped out of Social Sciences, a department that was not 

targeted for service reductions, and should not receive a final layoff notice. 

37. 

Lorenzo Ubungen is a faculty member in the Counseling department. He 

received a precautionary layoff notice, because Human Resources staff determined he 

would be subject to layoff in Counseling based on seniority but believed he met 

minimum qualifications to bump into EOPS. The Committee agreed that Ubungen 

meets minimum qualifications for both EOPS and Learning Assistance. Ubungen 

cannot bump into Learning Assistance based on his seniority, but he can bump into 

EOPS. Thus, Ubungen should not receive a final layoff notice and the District must 

withdraw its accusation. 

Faculty Members Who Received Preliminary Layoff Notices 

and Whose Secondary FSA Applications Were Reviewed 

38.

The Committee has reviewed secondary FSA applications for faculty 

members who received preliminary layoff notices, as discussed below.

39. 

Lori Admokom is a faculty member in the ESL (English as a Second 

Language) department. She applied for a secondary FSA in “Vocational ESL in 

Hospitality.” The Committee denied her application because this is not a separate FSA. 

40.  Gabriela Alvarenga is a faculty member in the Counseling department. 

The Committee determined that Alvarenga met minimum qualifications for FSA’s in 

both EOPS and Psychology, but denied her request to add Student Services because it 

14 

is not a separate FSA. Based on the Committee’s decision, Alvarenga can bump into 

the Behavioral Sciences department to teach Psychology. Thus, Alvarenga should not 

receive a final layoff notice and the District must withdraw its accusation. 

41. 

Alexandra Kaplan is a faculty member in the Counseling department. 

The Committee found that she met minimum qualifications for both EOPS and 

Learning Assistance. The Committee denied her request to add Health/Safety because 

it is not a separate FSA, and denied Work Experience because faculty already qualify 

for teaching work experience classes in their respective disciplines. While Kaplan has 

FSA’s in EOPS and Learning Assistance, she cannot bump into either department based 

on seniority. 

42. 

Carina Lin is a faculty member in the Counseling department. The 

Committee found that she meets minimum qualifications for EOPS, but denied her 

request to add Career Counseling because this is not a separate FSA. While Lin has an 

FSA in EOPS, she cannot bump into that department based on seniority. 

43. 

Patricia Miller is a faculty member in the Theatre Arts department. She 

has an FSA in “DRAMA/THEATRE ARTS.” Miller applied for a secondary FSA in “Film 

Broadcasting.” The Committee determined that this request does not directly 

correspond to any FSA in use, and asked her to clarify whether she would like to be 

considered for the FSA’s of “Film and Media Studies,” or “Broadcasting Technology,” or 

both. The record did not reflect that Miller had responded as of the date of the 

hearing. The Committee’s decision noted that Miller meets the standards for Film and 

Media Studies. The District stated that Miller meets the minimum qualifications for 

Cinema, but that she cannot bump into that department based on seniority. 

15 

44. Michelle Nermon is a faculty member in the Architecture department. 

The Committee granted her request to add secondary FSA’s in Building Codes, 

Drafting/CADD, and Interior Design. The record did not establish that these FSA’s 

would qualify Nermon to teach courses in any department other than Architecture. 

45.  Wynn Newberry is a faculty member in the ESL department. The 

Committee denied his request to add a secondary FSA in Architecture, finding he had 

not shown the work experience required to accompany his degree for this FSA. 

46. 

Adriana Rivera is a faculty member in the Counseling department. She 

applied for secondary FSA’s in several areas. The Committee determined that she was 

already assigned a Counseling FSA. The Committee granted her request to add 

Education. However, the record did not establish that an Education FSA would qualify 

Rivera to teach in another department than her current assignment. The Committee 

denied her request to add EOPS, based on lack of specific coursework for that FSA. The 

Committee also found that she did not meet the requirements for Economics or 

Interdisciplinary Studies. Lastly, the Committee denied her request to add Student 

Services and Veteran Counseling, because those are not distinct FSAs. 

47.  Mia Rusali is a faculty member in the Business department. The 

Committee granted her request to add a secondary FSA in Office Technology. The 

record did not establish that this FSA would qualify Rusali to teach courses in any 

department other than Business. 

48. 

Erica Tom is a faculty member in the Counseling department. The 

Committee found that she meets the minimum qualifications for both EOPS and DSPS. 

Based on the Committee’s decision, the District agrees that Tom can bump into the 

16 

DSPS department. Thus, Tom should not receive a final layoff notice and the District 

must withdraw its accusation. 

Tom bumping into the DSPS department results in Olga Galvez, the least senior 

faculty member in DSPS, receiving a final layoff notice. 

49. 

Kenyon Verbeckmoes is a faculty member in the Aircraft Maintenance 

Technology department. The Committee granted his requests to add Engineering and 

Engineering Technology as secondary FSA’s. However, there are no faculty members 

less senior to Verbeckmoes in the District’s Engineering and Technology department 

and thus he cannot bump into that department. 

Challenges Raised by Respondents to Layoff Process 

BUDGET AND FUNDING

50. 

Respondents argued that the District’s fiscal concerns based on declining 

student enrollment are undermined by the receipt of “hold harmless” funding. 

However, the evidence established that the “hold harmless” funding will expire soon, 

that the District still has a structural deficit, and that the District faces an accreditation

evaluation in the coming academic year that requires it to demonstrate a plan for fiscal 

stability. (Factual Findings 2-4.)

LOTTERY PROCESS 

51.  Malaika Finkelstein, the president of AFT Local 2121, testified regarding 

faculty member lottery numbers. During last year’s layoff proceeding, it was 

discovered that two faculty members have the same lottery number, leading 

Finkelstein to have concerns about the lottery process. Neither of those two faculty 

members received a preliminary layoff notice this year or is a respondent this year. 

17 

52.

Education Code section 87414 requires that a district assign new full-time 

faculty members lottery numbers within 30 days of hire. Respondents point to the 

evidence that this was not always done by the District, argue that this prejudiced 

faculty members for whom a lottery draw was delayed, and argue that the failure to 

comply with the deadline requires rescission of all layoff notices. However, 

respondents did not identify any specific respondent faculty member for whom this 

would have made a difference in this year’s layoff process. Finkelstein also confirmed 

that AFT has not filed any grievances regarding the lottery process. 

ASSIGNMENTS OF PRIMARY FSA’S AND MAINTENANCE OF FSA RECORDS

53. 

Education Code section 87743.3 provides that each faculty member shall 

qualify for one or more FSA’s at the time of initial employment, based on state 

minimum qualifications and district competency standards. Education Code section 

87743.4 states that the district shall maintain records of each faculty member’s FSA’s, 

in the faculty member’s personnel file. Respondents argue that the District has not 

properly followed these requirements. Respondents also point to confusion during last 

year’s layoff proceeding because there had been no layoff process in recent memory, 

and some faculty member FSA’s were based on old versions of the MQ Handbook or 

an FSA list from 1990 that does not neatly correlate with current discipline listings.

However, these issues do not require resolution in this Decision. No respondents 

claimed that their initial FSA or departmental assignments were improper.

SECONDARY FSA APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS

54. 

Last year, more than 80 faculty members applied by the deadline of 

February 15, 2021, for corrections or additions to their FSA designations. Many of 

those FSA applications were not resolved during the last academic year. AFT and the 

18 

Academic Senate requested that the District reconvene the Committee for review of 

pending FSA applications, but it was not reconvened until mid-February 2022. 

55. 

This year, 39 applications for secondary FSA review were submitted by 

the deadline of February 15, 2022. The Committee prioritized about 20 for review. 

However, the Committee had not yet rendered decisions by the time preliminary layoff 

notices were served based on the initial review of Human Resources staff. As discussed 

in this Decision, for some faculty members, the Committee’s later decision was 

contrary to and superseded the initial analysis of Human Resources. 

56. 

Respondents contend that the District was dilatory for not reconvening 

the Committee earlier, and that any inaccuracies in the initial FSA analysis create a 

situation in which all preliminary layoff notices must be rescinded. This argument is 

not persuasive. It is undisputed that under Article 23 of the CBA, the decisions of the 

FSA review Committee are controlling, and that any challenges to the Committee’s 

decisions go through the grievance process. Nor does Article 23 specify at what time 

the Committee must perform its evaluations. The District reviewed decisions rendered 

by the Committee for respondents in this matter and applied those decisions to the 

bumping analysis in order to identify who should receive final layoff notices. 

GABRIELA ALVARENGA (COUNSELING) 

57. 

Alvarenga contended that her preliminary layoff notice was issued in 

error because she can bump into another department. The evidence established that 

Alvarenga can bump into Behavioral Sciences to teach Psychology, as set forth in 

Factual Finding 40, and she should not receive a final layoff notice. 

19 

OLGA GALVEZ (DSPS)

58.

Olga Galvez is a counselor in the DSPS department, and currently serves 

as the department chair for DSPS. The Resolution did not target the DSPS department 

for a reduction in services. However, Galvez received a preliminary layoff notice due to 

another faculty member with more seniority and an FSA in DSPS bumping into the 

department.

59. 

The District did not use the skipping criterion described in Factual 

Finding 15 for faculty members qualified to teach students with disabilities to exempt 

Galvez from layoff, because the Resolution’s criterion is for instructors of disabled 

students, and not counselors. As set forth in Factual Findings 27 and 28, there are 

different minimum qualifications for serving as an instructor and as a counselor in the 

DSPS department. Galvez has an FSA of “DSPS-COUNSELOR” and does not have an 

FSA of “DSPS-INSTRUCTOR.” Galvez did not apply for a secondary FSA this year.

60. 

Galvez contends that the decision to lay her off is unreasonable under 

the circumstances. She testified that the DSPS department is funded by a separate 

budget directly from the state, and that the department had completed most of a 

hiring process to hire additional counselors. However, the evidence established that 

the hiring process has been frozen and that no offers have been made. No faculty 

member less senior to Galvez in DSPS is being retained.

MICHAEL NEEDHAM (BUSINESS) 

61.  Needham contends that he cannot be laid off because he is on sabbatical

leave this semester (Spring 2022), relying on the language of Education Code section 

87774, which states that after expiration of a leave of absence, an employee shall be 

reinstated to the position held at the time of granting the leave of absence.

20 

62.

Needham also disputes the Committee’s determination that he does not 

meet the requirements for an FSA in Economics, which would have allowed him to 

bump into the Social Sciences department. (See Factual Finding 36.) Needham has a 

bachelor’s degree in economics and a master’s degree in business administration with 

a concentration in finance. Human Resources staff believed that Needham met the 

requirements for an FSA in Economics based on the state minimum qualifications, and 

an FSA of Economics for Needham was included on the FSA list described in Factual 

Finding 22. However, the Committee subsequently determined that Needham had not 

met additional local requirements of a master’s degree in economics and graduate 

level coursework in statistics. Needham testified at hearing and admitted that he did 

not possess the additional local requirements relied on by the Committee, but 

contends that he should be found to meet equivalency for those requirements. 

63. 

Last year, Needham applied for FSA’s in Economics, Real Estate, and 

Small Business (Entrepreneurship), but never received a determination on those FSA 

requests. He filed three grievances regarding these FSA’s in March 2021, but has never 

received a formal response from the District. Needham contends that if the District 

had responded to his grievances, or to his requests to reconvene the Committee for 

consideration of FSA applications, he would have been able to timely provide further 

information about his qualifications to teach Economics. 

64. 

To the extent that Needham contests the Committee’s FSA decision, or 

the District’s failure to timely resolve his grievances, those issues should be resolved 

within the CBA’s grievance process and its subsequent provisions for arbitration. 

65. 

As of the time of hearing, the Committee had not yet made a decision 

regarding Needham’s applications for FSA’s in Real Estate and Small Business 

(Entrepreneurship). However, the evidence did not establish that if Needham were to 

21 

receive either of these FSA’s, it would provide qualification to teach in a department 

other than Business. 

IMPACT OF PROPOSED LAYOFFS ON INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAMS 

66. 

The District has established a Board Policy and Administrative Procedure 

(Number 6.17) governing the suspension or discontinuance of instructional programs. 

The District has engaged in the required process with respect to the Aircraft 

Maintenance and Technology department, although a final determination has not yet 

been made by the Chancellor. Respondents contend that other instructional programs 

will be discontinued as a result of the planned layoffs in this matter, and that the 

program discontinuance police and procedure should have been invoked.

Respondents argue that the District acted arbitrarily in seeking to lay off faculty 

members without first determining whether others in the affected departments can 

teach the courses students still need to graduate. 

67. 

Thomas Boegel, Vice Chancellor of Academic and Institutional Affairs, 

testified credibly regarding the District’s identification of departments for reductions in 

service. Boegel explained that the District tried to mitigate the impact on students and 

their ability to complete degree and certificate programs, and considered enrollment 

areas, class sizes, and numbers of students enrolled in degree programs. The District 

also considered whether proposed layoffs would affect the classes required for 

students to complete degree and certificate programs.

68. 

Boegel also testified credibly that some departments in the District are 

staffed with only part-time faculty members, and that there are no District courses that 

are reserved specifically for full-time faculty members and cannot be taught by 

part-time instructors. 

22 

69.

The evidence did not establish that the proposed layoffs will result in 

instructional programs being discontinued, or that courses required by students for 

graduation will not be offered. 

RESPONDENTS WHO ARE THE ONLY FULL-TIME FACULTY TEACHING 

COURSES REQUIRED FOR DEGREE OR CERTIFICATE PROGRAMS 

70. More specifically, four respondents contend that the District abused its 

discretion in issuing preliminary layoff notices to them, because they are the only 

full-time faculty that teach particular courses required by their departments’ degree or 

certificate programs, as set forth below.

Michelle Nermon (Architecture) 

71.  Michelle Nermon is a faculty member in the Architecture department, 

which also houses the Interior Design and Construction Management programs. 

Nermon testified credibly that she is the only full-time faculty member who can teach 

classes in the software programs AutoCAD and Revit that are required for the 

Architecture degree, the Interior Design degree, and four certificate programs. George 

Lin, the Architecture department chair, testified credibly that neither he nor any other 

full-time faculty in the department is qualified to teach these classes, because they 

have not used the software programs professionally in recent years. Nermon is 

qualified based on recent professional experience using these software programs as a 

practicing architect. Nermon has also signed a contract with the District to develop 

and teach an online AutoCAD course in the fall.

72.

The District has not taken formal steps to suspend or discontinue its 

Architecture department or any of the degree and certificate programs the 

department offers. 

23 

73.

If the District does not re-employ Nermon as a full-time faculty member 

for the 2022–2023 academic year, or if these courses were to be taught by a part-time 

instructor, they may not be offered as frequently or on schedules as convenient to 

students. The evidence did not establish, however, that the District will be unable to 

offer Architecture or Interior Design degrees or any certificates without continuing to 

employ Nermon as a full-time faculty member. 

74.  Nermon did not testify that her education or experience should qualify 

her to teach in any department other than Architecture. 

Mia Rusali (Business) 

75.  Mia Rusali is a faculty member in the Business department. Rusali 

testified credibly that she is the only full-time faculty member who is qualified to teach 

a number of the courses required for the degree and certificate programs in Human 

Resources Management, and Supervision and Management.

76. 

The District has not taken formal steps to suspend or discontinue its 

Business department or any of the degree and certificate programs the department 

offers.

77.

Rusali did not testify that her education or experience should qualify her 

to teach in any department other than Business.

Jenny Tabarracci (Environmental Horticulture & Floristry) 

78. 

Jenny Tabarracci is a faculty member in the Environmental Horticulture 

and Floristry department. Tabarracci teaches a number of floristry classes required for 

the department’s Floristry degree, Retail Floristry certificate, and Floral and Special 

Events Coordinator certificate. Tabarracci and department chair Steven Brown testified 

24 

credibly that Brown is the only other full-time faculty member in the department who 

can teach those floristry classes. 

79. 

Brown testified that without Tabarracci, the required floristry classes 

would not be offered as frequently, and it may take students longer to complete a 

degree. He reports that there are no other floral design programs at nearby schools. 

80. 

The District has not taken formal steps to suspend or discontinue its 

Environmental Horticulture and Floristry department or any of the degree and 

certificate programs the department offers. 

81. 

Tabarracci also runs the student chapter of the American Institute of 

Floral Designers, an industry group that provides scholarships and national student 

competitions. She believes that this student chapter would not continue if she were to 

be laid off from the District. 

82. 

Tabarracci did not testify that her education or experience should qualify 

her to teach in any department other than Environmental Horticulture and Floristry. 

Patricia Miller (Theatre Arts) 

83.

Patricia Miller is a faculty member in the Theatre Arts department. Miller 

testified credibly that she is the only full-time faculty member who can teach the 

performance classes required for the Theatre Arts degree and Acting certificate. 

Department chair Patrick Toebe testified credibly that he is the only other full-time 

faculty member in the Theatre Arts department, and that he is not qualified to teach 

acting classes because his expertise is in stagecraft and lighting. 

25 

84.

Toebe testified that the Theatre Arts department does not currently have 

any part-time instructors. Miller and Toebe are both presently teaching more than a 

full-time load, due to the retirement of a part-time acting instructor.

85.  Miller testified that if the performance classes she teaches are not offered 

by the District, students would need to commute to other schools to take such classes. 

86. 

The District has not taken formal steps to suspend or discontinue its 

Theatre Arts department or any of the degree and certificate programs the 

department offers. 

87.  Miller testified regarding her professional experience, including her 

experience in acting for the camera, as a voice-over actor, and in film and broadcast. 

Miller applied for a secondary FSA in Film Broadcasting. The Committee determined 

that this request does not directly correspond to any FSA in use, and asked Miller to 

clarify whether she would like to be considered for the FSA’s of Film and Media 

Studies, or Broadcasting Technology, or both. The record did not reflect that Miller 

had responded as of the date of the hearing. The Committee’s decision noted that 

Miller meets the standards for Film and Media Studies. The District stated that Miller 

meets the minimum qualifications for Cinema, but no one less senior is being retained 

in the Cinema department. 

OTHER MATTERS 

88. 

As to the 58 respondents, this Decision addresses all challenges these 

respondents have identified to the accusations against each of them. Any contentions 

not specifically addressed in this Decision are found to be without merit and are 

rejected. To the extent that other challenges may have been possible but were not 

26 

identified during testimony or in oral or written argument, respondents have waived 

those challenges. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 87740 

and 87743. The District’s and complainant’s pre-hearing notices and actions, described 

in Factual Findings 1, 2, and 5 through 8, satisfied these statutes’ requirements, making 

all 58 respondents proper respondents in this proceeding.

2. 

The rights and status of any part-time faculty members the District may 

employ are not at issue in this layoff proceeding. (

 (1989) 212 Cal.App.3d 909.)

3. 

The statutory re-hire rights of faculty members under the Education Code 

are also outside the scope of this layoff proceeding.

4. 

A district may consider its financial circumstances in deciding whether to 

reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service. However, the district’s decision to 

reduce a particular kind of service must not be fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious. (

(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 637.) The courts have held this 

standard permits “a difference of opinion on the same subject.” (

 (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.) 

5. 

The services listed in the Resolution and in Exhibit A to this Decision are 

services that the District may reduce or discontinue. (Factual Findings 1, 9-11.) The 

Board’s identification of these services for reduction is not arbitrary or capricious, and 

is not an abuse of the Board’s discretion. 

27 

6.

The Board’s decision to reduce District services in the manner described 

by the Resolution, in the amount of 50 full-time equivalent faculty positions, will likely 

cause changes to the District’s course offerings and staffing. (Factual Findings 67-87.) 

These matters do not, however, establish that the Board’s decision is fraudulent or 

dishonest, or that that it will compel the Board to act in the future in a manner 

violating any other law. The Board’s decision to reduce the services stated in the 

Resolution by the amounts stated in that Resolution is not arbitrary or capricious, and 

is not an abuse of the Board’s discretion. 

7. 

The matters raised by respondents regarding budget and funding 

(Factual Findings 50 & 60) do not establish that the Board’s decision to reduce the 

services stated in the Resolution by the amounts stated in that Resolution is 

fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious, or an abuse of the Board’s discretion. 

8. 

Respondents’ contention, that the District’s failure to assign lottery 

numbers to new full-time faculty members within 30 days renders all layoff notices 

invalid (Factual Finding 52), is rejected. In 

(1980) 108 Cal.App.3d 437, 443, the court of appeal

held that layoffs were not rendered invalid by the district’s failure to comply with the 

30-day deadline of Education Code section 87414, finding it to be directory and not 

mandatory.

9.

The matters raised by respondents regarding the assignment of primary 

FSA’s (Factual Finding 53) do not establish that the Board’s layoff decisions are 

fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious, or an abuse of the Board’s discretion.

10.

Respondents’ contention that Needham cannot be laid off while he is on 

sabbatical leave (Factual Finding 61) is rejected. A teacher employed but on a leave of 

28 

absence is still considered an employee, including for purposes of determining 

seniority rights. (

(1941) 17 Cal.2d 753, 759.) 

11. 

Respondents’ contentions regarding the effect of proposed layoffs on 

the District’s instructional programs (Factual Findings 66-87) are rejected. The evidence 

did not establish that the District’s decision was arbitrary or capricious. 

12. 

Complainant has not notified any respondent that the respondent’s 

services will not be required for the 2022–2023 academic year, while failing to give 

similar notice to any more junior full-time faculty member who served within the same 

District department during the 2021–2022 academic year. (Factual Findings 12-14.) No 

full-time faculty member with less seniority is being retained to render a service for 

which respondents are certificated and competent. 

13. 

The District may not terminate any full-time faculty member’s services 

while retaining a junior full-time faculty member “to render a service in a faculty 

service area in which” the senior full-time faculty member qualifies to serve. (Ed. Code, 

§ 87743.) To render a service with respect to this proceeding means to serve as a 

member of a District department. A respondent in this proceeding might qualify for 

retention and reassignment for the 2022–2023 academic year if the respondent 

qualifies for a secondary FSA that is a discipline occurring within a different District 

department from the department in which the respondent currently serves. However, 

the District would need to retain such a respondent only if reassignment would make 

that respondent senior to at least one non-respondent in the new department. 

14. 

School districts have broad discretion to establish competency standards 

for purposes of exercising bumping and reassignment rights. (

 (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 564-65.) This broad discretion is limited by a 

29 

reasonableness standard. The burden of proof is on the senior teacher to establish 

competence over a retained junior employee. (

(1980) 

109 Cal.App.3d 648.) 

15. 

Because of the matters stated in Factual Findings 30-32, 37, 40, 48, and 

57, respondents Avrus, Gaines, Garcia, Ubungen, Alvarenga, and Tom qualify for 

reassignment to a different department based on their FSA’s and seniority. The District 

must withdraw the accusations as to these six respondents. 

16. 

Because of the matters stated in Factual Findings 33-36, 39, 41-47, 49, 

58-60, 62-65, 74, 82, and 87, respondents Jones, Jung, Marquez, Needham, Admokom, 

Kaplan, Lin, Miller, Nermon, Newberry, Rivera, Rusali, Verbeckmoes, Galvez, and 

Tabarracci do not qualify for reassignment to a different department based on their 

FSA’s and seniority, and may receive final layoff notices. 

17. 

Because of the matters stated in Factual Findings 33 and 36, respondents 

O’Leary and Demiray are not bumped out of their departments, which were not 

targeted for reductions in service. The District must withdraw the accusations as to 

these two respondents. 

Summary

18. 

The matters stated in Legal Conclusions 15 and 17 do not constitute 

cause under Education Code section 87743 to give notice to respondents Avrus, 

Gaines, Garcia, Ubungen, Alvarenga, Tom, O’Leary, and Demiray that their services will 

not be required for the upcoming 2022–2023 academic year. 

19. 

The matters stated in Legal Conclusion 16 constitute cause under 

Education Code section 87743 to give notice to all respondents other than Avrus, 

30 

Gaines, Garcia, Ubungen, Alvarenga, Tom, O’Leary, and Demiray that their services will 

not be required for the upcoming 2022–2023 academic year. In accordance with 

Education Code section 87740, the cause relates solely to the welfare of the District 

and its students.

RECOMMENDATION

1.

The San Francisco Community College District may not give notice to the 

eight respondents whose names appear on Exhibit C to this Decision that the District 

will not require their services for the 2022–2023 academic year. Instead, with respect to 

the eight respondents whose names appear on Exhibit C to this Decision, the 

accusation is dismissed.

2.

The San Francisco Community College District may give notice to the 50 

respondents whose names appear on Exhibit B to this Decision that the District will not 

require their services for the 2022–2023 academic year. The District may give this 

notice to these 50 respondents in inverse seniority order within the departments in 

which they served during the 2021–2022 academic year, but only to the extent 

necessary to achieve the departmental service reductions stated in Exhibit A to District 

Resolution No. 22.02.24 10.B.16.

DATE:

HOLLY M. BALDWIN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

31

Exhibit A: Reduction or Elimination of Particular Kinds of Services

Aircraft Maintenance Technology,

English, 9 FTEs 

2 FTEs (Full-Time Equivalent) 

Environmental Horticulture & Floristry, 

Architecture, 1 FTE 

1 FTE 

Automotive, 2 FTEs 

ESL, 7 FTEs 

Biological Sciences, 2 FTEs 

Library & Learning Resources, 2 FTEs 

Broadcast Electronic Media Arts, 1 FTE 

Music, 1 FTE 

Business, 6 FTEs 

Physics, 1 FTE 

Chemistry, 2 FTEs

Theatre Arts, 1 FTE 

Computer Networking & Information, 

World Languages & Cultures (French), 

1 FTE 

1 FTE 

Counseling, 9 FTEs 

Engineering & Technology, 1 FTE 

TOTAL: 50 FTEs

 
 
 
Exhibit B: Faculty Members Who May Receive Final Notices That the District Will Not 

Re-Employ Them for the 2022–2023 Academic Year (50) 

Admokom, Lori 

Afshar, Golnar 

Frei, Kathryn 

Fung, Allen 

Arceneaux, Jacques 

Galvez, Olga 

Bailey Burns, Cullen 

Green, Erik 

Barone, Augustus 

Hamilton, Shawna 

Blackwell, Angela 

Branagan, Laura 

Buckley, Alissa 

Hill, Kyle 

Hong, Bo 

Hurt, Mai 

Bugayong, Arlene 

Jones, Tamika 

Chu, Emily 

Cox, Natalie 

Jung, Paula 

Kamatani, Pamela 

D'Aloisio, Michael 

Kaplan, Alexandra 

DiGirolamo, Lisa 

Easa, Leila 

Lin, Carina 

Lyles, Tanya 

Evans (Johnsen), Jill 

Marquez, Kathleen

Frankel, Maggie 

Meagher, Carole 

33 

Miller, Patricia

Rusali, Mia

Needham, Michael 

Salangsang, John

Nermon, Michelle 

Scheffer, Johanna 

Newberry, Wynn 

Sheetz, Nuala

Olmos, Christian 

Smith, Elizabeth 

Peterson Jr., George 

Tabarracci, Jenny 

Rahn, Katrina 

Verbeckmoes, Kenyon 

Richardson, Ronald 

Viertel, Clayton 

Rivera, Adriana 

Yanuaria, Christina 

34 

 
 
 
Exhibit C: Faculty Members Whose Accusations the District Must Dismiss (8)

Alvarenga, Gabriela

Avrus, Elaine

Demiray, Deniz 

Gaines, Tanaka 

Garcia, Adriana 

O'Leary, Daniel 

Tom, Erica 

Ubungen, Lorenzo 

35 

