BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
AZUSA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the District’s Statement of Reduction in 

Force Against: 

CERTIFIED TEACHERS OF THE AZUSA UNIFIED SCHOOL 

DISTRICT, Respondents. 

OAH No. 2022040285 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Ji-Lan Zang, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

of California, heard this matter on May 4, 2022, by videoconference. 

Melanie A. Petersen and Vanessa Lee, with Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP, 

represented the Azusa Unified School District (District). Carlos R. Perez, with the Law 

Offices of Carlos R. Perez, represented all respondents appearing at the hearing, who 

are identified as follows: Eileen L. Baly, Emily Bresee, Virginia Bonilla, Kevin Knight, 

Alondra Morton, Karla Nanez Castillo, Nirupama Parmar, and Gabriela Rodriguez. 

Respondent Mary MacDonaugh, who is also represented by Mr. Perez, did not appear

at the hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed and the 

matter was submitted for decision on May 4, 2022. This matter was originally set for 

hearing on April 22, 2022, but the hearing was continued until May 4, 2022. 

Accordingly, the dates prescribed in Education Code Section 44949, subdivision (c), 

and 44955, subdivision (c), have been extended for a period of time equal to the 

continuance.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

Respondents are certificated employees of the District.

2. 

On March 1, 2022, the Governing Board (Board) of the District adopted 

Resolution Number 21-22:22 (Resolution) to reduce or discontinue the following 

particular kinds of services provided by the District at the end of the 2021-2022 school 

year:

Services Being Reduced or Eliminated Number of Full Time Equivalent (FTE) Positions

K-6 

Secondary English Language Arts

Secondary Math

Secondary Social Science

Total FTE Reduction

3.0 

2.0

3.0

2.0

10.0

3.

The Board further determined that the reduction or discontinuance of 

particular kinds of services necessitated a decrease in the number of certificated 

employees by a corresponding number of FTE positions. The Board directed the 

2

 
 
Superintendent or his designee to send all appropriate notices to employees whose 

positions were affected, and to take all other actions necessary to implement the 

resolution. 

4. 

On March 4, the District served each respondent with a Notice of 

Recommendation That Services Be Terminated (preliminary layoff notice), informing 

him/her that his/her services would not be required for the ensuing 2022-2023 school 

year.

5. 

On March 23, 2022, Jorge A. Ronquillo, the District’s Assistant 

Superintendent of Human Resources, filed the Statement of Reduction in Force while 

acting in his official capacity. 

6. 

On that same date, the District served each respondent with the 

Statement of Reduction in Force, Statement to Respondent, blank Request for Hearing 

and Notice of Participation form, and copies of pertinent provisions of the 

Government and Education Codes (Reduction in Force packet). In addition to the 

respondents, Jennifer Wong was served with a preliminary layoff notice and with the 

District’s Statement of Reduction in Force packet. However, she did not submit any 

Request for Hearing and Notice of Participation, and she did not appear at the hearing 

either personally or through counsel. 

7. 

Respondents each timely submitted a signed Request for Hearing and 

Notice of Participation. 

8. 

The District timely served an Amended Notice of Reduction in Force 

Hearing on respondents, informing them that the hearing had been continued to May 

4, 2022. 

3

Propriety of Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services

9.

At the hearing, Assistant Superintendent Ronquillo testified regarding the 

District’s decision to reduce particular kinds of services. The District currently consists 

of 16 school sites, and it employs 1,300 staff members and 400 certificated teachers to 

serve approximately 7,200 students. The number of students enrolled in the District 

fills only 60 to 70 percent of the capacity of its facilities. Due to the low enrollment, the 

District is unable to offer some programs, such as early college level courses, to its 

students. To address this problem, the District has been in the process of reorganizing 

its schools. For example, the District plans to consolidate one of its high schools, 

Gladstone High School, with Azusa High School by the end of the 2023-2024 school 

year. This consolidation, however, will also result in a reduction in the need for 

certificated teachers. 

10. 

Therefore, the reduction or elimination of the identified particular kinds 

of services relates solely to the welfare of the schools in the District and its students. 

The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified particular kinds of services 

was neither arbitrary nor capricious and constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 

11. 

Additionally, prior to the adoption of the Resolution, the District 

considered all known attrition in determining the number of layoff notices to be 

served on its employees. In a layoff proceeding like this, a governing board need only 

consider positively assured attrition which occurs prior to the March 15 layoff notice 

deadline, not thereafter. (

 (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 

627, 635.) However, Assistant Superintendent Ronquillo assured the respondents that 

the District will take into consideration any resignation and retirement notices before 

issuing final layoff notices. 

4

Bumping Criteria and Skipping Criteria

12.

The Board’s Resolution established a definition of competency for 

purposes of allowing an employee currently assigned in a position subject to layoff to 

“bump” a less senior employee holding another position not subject to layoff. A senior 

teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to replace, or “bump,” into the 

position of a junior employee who is providing a service which the senior teacher is 

certificated and competent to fill, thus allowing the senior teacher to avoid layoff. (Ed. 

Code, § 44955, subd. (b); 

 (1975) 13 Cal.3d 

469.) The Resolution provided that “competency” shall mean possession of a valid 

clear or preliminary credential in the subject or grade level; possession of a full English 

Learner certificate; possession of a single subject credential if teaching in a 

departmentalized setting; and trainings, permits, and experiences to meet the 

requirements of specialized positions. Respondents did not challenge the District’s 

competency definition, and no respondent asserted the right to “bump” a junior 

employee. 

13.

The Board’s Resolution also established “skipping” criteria to retain 

certain employees for the following school year regardless of seniority. Specifically, the 

Resolution provides that certificated employees who possess a Bilingual, Cross-

cultural, Language and Academic Development (BCLAD) certificate to teach in dual 

immersion program positions are subject to skipping. Respondents did not challenge 

the District’s skipping criteria, and none of the respondents indicated that he or she 

possessed a BCLAD certificate.

//

// 

5

Seniority List and Tiebreaking Criteria

14.

The District maintains a seniority list that contains employees’ seniority 

dates (first date of paid service), credential information, and current assignments. 

Assistant Superintendent Ronquillo testified to the accuracy of the seniority list and 

how it was compiled. At the end of November 2021, certificated employees were 

notified in writing of the District’s records regarding their employment history with the 

District, and they were allowed to confirm or challenge the accuracy of that 

information. The seniority list was updated based on information obtained from 

certificated employees that was verified by the District. 

15. 

The District used the seniority list to implement and determine the 

proposed layoffs. The District developed staff reduction worksheets of the least senior 

certificated employees currently assigned in the particular kinds of services to be 

reduced. The District then determined how many certificated employees assigned in 

the particular kinds of services are retiring or resigning; whether the least senior 

certificated employees in these particular kinds of services hold other credentials, can 

perform in other service areas, and are entitled to bump other more junior certificated 

employees; whether certain certificated employees should be skipped and retained; 

and how many certificated employees in each service area must be reassigned or laid 

off. 

16. 

To determine the relative seniority of certificated employees who first 

rendered paid service on the same date, the Board, on January 11, 2021, adopted 

Resolution Number 21-22:11 establishing the tie-breaker criteria. The tie-breaking 

criteria provide for awarding priority based on credential status, breadth of the 

credential, number of years of experience, and possession of a clear or preliminary 

authorization to teach English Language Learners. In the event of a tie after applying 

6

the tie-breaking criteria, the District would hold a random lottery. Respondents did not 

challenge the tiebreaker criteria or their application. The District used information from 

the seniority list to apply the tie-breaking criteria to determine the relative seniority 

among two English teachers who shared the same seniority date within their subject 

area. Respondent Nirupama Parmar (#348 on the seniority list) was properly identified 

for layoff to account for the 1.0 FTE reduction in secondary English language arts. 

17.  No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. 

Testimony of Respondent Parmar 

18. 

At the hearing, respondent Parmar presented testimony regarding her 

experience as an English teacher. Respondent Parmar has been teaching English at 

Gladstone High School for the last four years. According to respondent Parmar, she is 

the only teacher at the school who has audit authorization from the College Board to 

teach Advanced Placement (AP) English language and AP English literature. 

Respondent Parmar has had audit authorization for AP English language since 2005 

and for AP English literature since 2011. Respondent Parmar also testified that in 

general, it takes three years for an AP English teacher to become proficient in teaching 

the subject matter.

19.

However, respondent Parmar did not dispute her seniority level on the 

seniority list. She also did not dispute the application of the tie-breaking criteria which 

allowed another English teacher who shared the same seniority date to avoid layoff. 

Moreover, AP courses are not one of the courses of study identified for skipping in the 

Resolution. Therefore, respondent Parmar remains a teacher subject to layoff.

20.

No other respondent testified at the hearing.

7

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955 were met. (Factual Findings 1-8.) 

2. 

The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services 

that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The 

Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary 

nor capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or 

discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District’s schools and 

pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 

3. 

A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 

44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students 

shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 

determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 

employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (

(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)

4.

Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), junior teachers 

may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess 

superior skills or capabilities which their more senior counterparts lack. (

(1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-843.) The District’s skipping criteria are not in 

dispute. 

5. 

A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer 

to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing 

8

so, the senior employee may displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that 

position. (

, 

, 13 Cal.3d 469.) A school 

district has discretion in determining whether an employee is certified and competent, 

as provided by Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), to be reassigned and, as 

a result, displace a junior employee, as provided by subdivision (c). (

(1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.) The criteria used to 

determine a teacher’s competence must be reasonable. (

at p. 566.) Competency 

criteria that consider the skills and qualifications required of the teacher are 

reasonable. (

at pp. 565-566.) It was established that the competency criteria 

adopted in the Resolution are reasonable, and the District’s bumping criteria are not in 

dispute. 

6. 

No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 

services which a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.

7.

Based on the above, there is sufficient cause for not reemploying 

respondents for the ensuing school year. (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b).)

ORDER 

1. 

The District’s Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained.

2. 

Notice may be given to employees occupying 10.0 full-time equivalent 

certificated positions that their services will not be required for the 2022-2023 school 

year because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 

Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. Such notice may be given to 

respondents Eileen L. Baly, Emily Bresee, Virginia Bonilla, Kevin Knight, Alondra 

Morton, Karla Nanez Castillo, Nirupama Parmar, Gabriela Rodriguez, and Mary 

9

MacDonaugh; such notice may also be given to Jennifer Wong, the certificated 

employee who did not request a hearing.

DATE:

JI-LAN ZANG

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

10

