BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
CONTRA COSTA COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT 

In the Matter of the Election Not to Re-Employ: 

JAMES CLARK, Respondent. 

OAH No. 2023030701 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Juliet E. Cox, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 24, 25, and 26, 2023, by 

videoconference. 

Attorneys Kathryn Meola and Mike Ambrose represented complainant Micaela 

Ochoa, Executive Vice Chancellor for Administrative Services of the Contra Costa 

Community College District. 

Attorney Derek K. Ulmer represented respondent James Clark, who was present 

for the hearing. 

The matter was submitted for decision on April 26, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent James Clark began his first year of full-time probationary 

employment as a teaching faculty member in the Contra Costa Community College 

District at the beginning of the fall 2019 semester. Respondent taught biology at Los 

Medanos College, a community college that is part of the District. 

2. 

When the 2019–2020 and 2020–2021 academic years ended, the District 

re-employed respondent for subsequent academic years. 

3. 

On February 15, 2023, the former President of Los Medanos College (Bob 

Kratochvil), the current Interim President of Los Medanos College (Pamela Ralston), 

and the Interim Chancellor of the District (Mojdeh Mehdizadeh) recommended to the 

District’s Board of Trustees that the District not re-employ respondent as a faculty 

member. On that date, the District’s Board of Trustees adopted District Resolution No. 

3C, stating the District’s intention not to re-employ respondent after the 2022–2023 

academic year. 

4. 

Before March 15, 2023, respondent received notice that the Board of 

Trustees had adopted Resolution No. 3C, along with copies of the resolution and of 

the documents the District Board relied on in considering and adopting it. 

5. 

Respondent timely requested a hearing. 

6. 

Acting in her official capacity as the District’s Executive Vice Chancellor 

for Administrative Services and as Interim Chancellor Mehdizadeh’s designee, 

complainant Micaela Ochoa signed an accusation against respondent, alleging cause 

not to re-employ him for additional academic years. As cause, the accusation alleges 

that the District’s Board has determined, based on evaluations and recommendations 

in accordance with the Education Code, that respondent’s performance as a faculty 

member does not justify continuing his employment. 

7. 

Respondent filed a timely notice of defense to the accusation. 

2 

Evaluation Procedure 

8. 

Through a collective bargaining agreement (CBA) with the labor 

organization representing the District’s faculty members, the District has agreed to a 

process for evaluating probationary classroom faculty members. 

9. 

In pertinent part, during a probationary faculty member’s first, second, 

third, fifth, and seventh teaching semesters, the CBA requires the District to assemble a 

three-member tenure review committee (TRC) to evaluate the faculty member. The 

committee members may change from one semester to another, but always must 

include at least one faculty member from the same department as the probationary 

faculty member and one person who is either the probationary faculty member’s 

immediate supervisor or a dean. The TRC members are not anonymous. 

10. 

Each evaluation must incorporate classroom observations of the 

probationary faculty member by each TRC member; information obtained through 

anonymous surveys of students in the probationary faculty member’s classes that 

semester; a self-evaluation by the probationary faculty member; and input from the 

department chair(s) or relevant dean(s), if those persons choose to provide it. 

11. 

The CBA requires the TRC to use an objective, evidence-based approach 

that evaluates the probationary faculty member with reference to a list of “observable 

or measurable” performance criteria. The criteria include factors relating to effective 

teaching and student support and also to participation in departmental management 

and curriculum-improvement tasks. 

12. 

The TRC must prepare a portfolio for that semester’s evaluation, 

including documents reflecting the information described in Finding 10 as well as a 

summary report. The summary report must distill the TRC’s evaluation into one of four 

3 

conclusions: “Consistently High Ratings,” “Satisfactory,” “Needs Improvement,” or 

“Unsatisfactory Performance.” 

13. 

Based on its portfolio and summary report, each semester’s TRC must 

make a recommendation to the college president regarding whether to continue the 

faculty member’s employment. 

a. 

If the TRC’s evaluation conclusion is “Consistently High Ratings” or 

“Satisfactory,” the TRC must recommend that the District continue the faculty 

member’s employment. It may (and in some circumstances must) recommend that the 

District grant tenure to the probationary faculty member. 

b. 

If the TRC’s evaluation conclusion is “Needs Improvement,” the TRC may 

recommend that the District terminate the faculty member’s employment, that the 

District continue the faculty member’s probationary employment, or that the District 

grant tenure to the faculty member. 

c. 

In addition, however, if the TRC’s evaluation conclusion is “Needs 

Improvement,” the CBA calls for the TRC to work with the faculty member to develop 

“a specific plan for performance-improvement.” The chair of the faculty member’s 

department must submit a progress report regarding the performance improvement 

plan to the college president at the end of the plan period. The CBA states that this 

progress report “is intended to help inform the [college president’s] decisions related 

to tenure and the probationary process,” but that the progress report “shall not 

include a specific recommendation” as to whether the faculty member’s probationary 

employment should continue or end. 

d. 

If the TRC’s evaluation conclusion is “Unsatisfactory Performance,” the 

TRC must recommend that the District terminate the faculty member’s employment. 

4 

14. 

The college president must receive and review the TRC’s 

recommendation and all related evaluation reports, such as classroom observation 

reports, student evaluations, the faculty member’s self-evaluation, and any 

performance improvement plans and progress reports. The college president must use 

this recommendation and reports to develop and forward a recommendation to the 

District’s Chancellor regarding whether the probationary faculty member’s 

employment should continue (and if so, whether in probationary or tenured status) or 

end. The Chancellor, in turn, must make a recommendation to the District’s Board. 

15. 

The CBA generally permits a probationary faculty member to file a 

grievance to assert any objection to the procedures the District has followed in 

evaluating that faculty member. The CBA does not make its grievance procedure 

available “to appeal discharge or a decision by the [District] Board not to renew his/her 

contract,” however. 

Respondent’s Evaluations 

16. 

TRC’s evaluated respondent several times during his four probationary 

employment years. Ryan Pedersen, who then was Dean of Instruction, Math and 

Sciences,1 served on all of respondent’s TRC’s. The other two TRC members varied 

from evaluation to evaluation during this time. 

1 Pedersen now is Senior Dean of Planning and Institutional Effectiveness. 

5 

 
FIRST THREE TEACHING YEARS (2019–2020, 2020–2021, 2021–2022) 

17. 

For the fall 2019 semester (respondent’s first), his TRC rated his 

performance “Satisfactory.” 

18. 

Respondent’s second teaching semester was the spring 2020 semester, 

which included the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and an abrupt shift to 

videoconference instruction. The evidence did not establish either that a TRC 

completed an evaluation of respondent for that semester or, if not, that respondent 

objected at the time that one should have occurred. 

19. 

For the fall 2020 semester (respondent’s third), his TRC rated his 

performance “Consistently High.” Despite this overall rating, the summary evaluation 

report noted that a few students had commented in surveys to the effect that 

respondent sometimes seemed “intimidating or condescending.” Pedersen also 

contributed a dean’s note describing: 

complaints from students and colleagues [who] felt that 

[respondent’s] communication was at times abrasive and 

aggressive. [Respondent] has been informed of these 

complaints and has been instructed that going forward, he 

should be aware of the potential for his communication to 

be perceived in this manner and work to prevent this from 

becoming a long-term pattern. During this Fall 2020 

evaluation semester, no such concerns or complaints have 

been brought forward. This is a good sign. 

20. 

For the spring 2021 semester (respondent’s fourth), his TRC rated his 

performance “Needs Improvement.” Following respondent’s spring 2021 evaluation, 

6 

the spring 2021 TRC and respondent developed a performance improvement plan for 

respondent. The plan called for several activities during the 2021–2022 academic year 

to help respondent avoid seeming harsh or impatient to students and colleagues. 

21. 

For the fall 2021 semester (respondent’s fifth), his TRC rated his 

performance “Satisfactory.” The TRC noted that respondent’s performance 

improvement plan was in progress during the fall 2021 semester. 

22. 

Early in the fall 2022 semester (respondent’s seventh), Pedersen prepared 

a progress report regarding the performance improvement plan respondent had 

undertaken during the 2021–2022 academic year. Pedersen’s report stated that the 

plan’s objective was for respondent “to be less abrasive and to respond to others with 

more patience, humility, and empathy.” Respondent had completed all activities the 

performance improvement plan required “in a timely, thoughtful and well-organized 

manner,” and seemed to be using “best practices . . . to offer more positive 

encouragement [and] more supportive direction.” Pedersen noted one student 

complaint “toward the beginning of the Fall 2022 semester” about respondent’s “tone 

and communication,”2 as well as some similar student comments in surveys for 

respondent’s fall 2021 evaluation. Pedersen encouraged respondent to “continue to 

improve in his reception of student and collegial criticism with patience and humility.” 

2 Finding 40.a describes this complaint in greater detail. 

7 

 
FOURTH PROBATIONARY YEAR (2022–2023) 

23. 

A TRC evaluated respondent again for the fall 2022 semester. The TRC 

members were chair Jancy Rickman, a fellow biology professor; mathematics professor 

Scott Hubbard; and Pedersen. 

24. 

Pedersen was a teaching faculty member in mathematics between 2008 

and 2017, and served on several TRC’s during this period. After becoming Dean of 

Instruction, Math and Sciences, he served regularly on TRC’s. He estimates that he has 

served on between 30 and 50 TRC’s during his career at Los Medanos College. 

25. 

Rickman has taught at Los Medanos College for 18 years. She has served 

on many TRC’s and recalls having chaired six. 

26. 

Rickman identified the three committee members to respondent in late 

August 2022, and the committee met with respondent in early September 2022 to plan 

the evaluation process. 

27. 

Rickman observed respondent in class on October 5, 2022; Hubbard 

observed him on October 12, 2022; and Pedersen observed him on October 20, 2022. 

The committee also received results from anonymous student surveys; a written 

self-evaluation from respondent; respondent’s course syllabi; and a statement from the 

biology department’s co-chairs, Jill Bouchard and Roy Kyle Hanks. Finally, Pedersen 

contributed a dean’s statement to add to his classroom observations of respondent. 

Rickman drafted the TRC’s summary report and recommendation, and Hubbard and 

Pedersen concurred in it after cooperating with Rickman to edit it. 

8 

28. 

The fall 2022 TRC concluded that respondent had demonstrated 

“Unsatisfactory Performance.” On that basis, the fall 2022 TRC recommended that the 

District terminate respondent’s employment. 

Classroom Observations 

29. 

Respondent taught three course sections during the fall 2022 semester: 

one section of Bio30 (an introductory human anatomy and physiology course), and 

two sections of Bio45 (a more in-depth human physiology course). Rickman and 

Pedersen observed respondent teaching Bio45, and Hubbard observed a session of 

Bio30. 

30. 

All three TRC members reported having observed respondent to be an 

effective, organized classroom instructor. The TRC summary evaluation report reflects 

this consensus. 

Student Surveys 

31. 

Twenty-seven of 58 students in respondent’s two fall 2022 Bio45 classes 

returned anonymous surveys about respondent. Most responding students gave him 

high ratings, although one stated that respondent “rarely . . . answers questions 

clearly.” The surveys also offer responding students the opportunity to describe what 

they “like best” about the instructor and to give “suggestions for improvement.” 

Several of respondent’s fall 2022 Bio45 students praised him for teaching, and testing, 

not just for memorization but for understanding. One student criticized an offensive 

remark the student believed respondent had made during class, but the criticism 

suggested that the student had misunderstood the remark rather than that 

respondent had intended the unkind meaning the student heard. 

9 

32. 

Seven of 28 students in respondent’s fall 2022 Bio30 class returned 

surveys. Most of these students also praised respondent, but at least one reported a 

very negative opinion.3 For example, although one student stated that respondent 

“never makes you feel bad about asking a question,” another commented that 

respondent rarely gave students the opportunity to ask questions, and “makes you feel 

stupid when you don’t understand something he has said, and you do ask a question.” 

Likewise, although one or more students described respondent as “respectful,” 

“encouraging,” and “kind,” another described respondent as “defensive” and 

“pompous.” One student called respondent “the best professor I’ve ever had,” but 

another regretted that the semester had advanced too far for the student to drop the 

class, and vowed never to “take another class from him again.” 

33. 

In testimony, Rickman acknowledged readily that the student surveys had 

produced positive reports about respondent’s skill both in teaching to a group and in 

working individually with students. In light of her experience serving on TRC’s and 

reading similar survey responses, however, Rickman described these positive answers 

and comments as qualitatively unremarkable; students who like their instructors and 

take time to respond to anonymous surveys frequently praise their instructors in 

similar terms. 

34. 

The negative comments from one or more of respondent’s Bio30 

students were more noteworthy to Rickman than the positive comments, for two 

3 Respondent believes that all negative answers and comments on the Bio30 

survey were from the same individual student. This belief is plausible; but because the 

surveys are anonymous, they offer no certain way to trace an individual person’s 

responses from one question to another. 

10 

 
reasons. First, the criticism was specific to respondent’s demeanor, and to his ability to 

communicate with students who had not understood his initial explanations. Second, 

the criticism was similar to the student criticism in previous semesters that had 

resulted in respondent’s “Needs Improvement” rating in spring 2021 and in his 

performance improvement plan. 

35. 

Rickman summarized the student survey results in the TRC’s evaluation 

report. The report describes the positive answers and comments, but gives greater 

emphasis to the negative comments. For the reasons stated in Findings 33 and 34, this 

qualitative rather than quantitative emphasis is reasonable. 

Self-Evaluation 

36. 

Respondent prepared a self-evaluation report for the fall 2022 TRC. It 

began by stating that respondent perceived the college to have offered him “limited 

support . . . forcing a need to become excessively self-reliant.” 

a. 

Respondent described his teaching methods, which emphasize 

encouraging students to learn by asking questions and by collaborating to find the 

answers, and which test conceptual understanding rather than memorization. 

b. 

He then went on to discuss poor working relationships with colleagues in 

the biology department, “where outside of general lack of support and hostility that I 

feel at times, it seems that no one in the department is aware of what I do” [emphasis 

original]. Respondent praised himself for having overcome “prejudicial objection” from 

other biology faculty to reclassify the Bio30 course as one eligible for transfer credit in 

the California State University system. He also described efforts, in cooperation with a 

national organization for undergraduate anatomy and physiology instructors, to 

develop disability accommodation strategies for laboratory courses. 

11 

c. 

Finally, respondent summarized his professional goals for the near future. 

He hoped to “work with my colleagues to improve the courses that we offer our 

pre-health students,” and to coordinate course offerings more closely among the 

biology, nursing, and kinesiology programs. Respondent criticized the biology 

department’s current anatomy and physiology courses as reflecting a “gross 

misunderstanding” of national standards and expectations for anatomy and 

physiology instruction. At the same time, he stated that he believed the chief obstacle 

to meeting his near-term professional goals was “a general lack of support (evident by 

the harassment and hostility that I feel when I voice an opinion that might be different 

from what a member of the [biology] department wants echoed).” 

37. 

Respondent’s self-evaluation is part of his fall 2022 TRC portfolio, but the 

TRC evaluation report also summarizes it. The summary highlights respondent’s efforts 

to revise and improve the curriculum and materials for his courses, both to prepare his 

students more effectively for health-care careers and to make their educations more 

affordable. The summary also emphasizes respondent’s perception that his colleagues 

in the Los Medanos College biology department are hostile and unsupportive, as well 

as his belief that some of the department’s courses need substantial revision. The 

summary in the TRC evaluation report is brief, but reasonable. 

Co-Chairs’ Statement 

38. 

Bouchard and Hanks provided a lengthy departmental co-chairs’ 

statement for the fall 2022 TRC evaluation report, and also sent Pedersen supporting 

documentation for several of the specific matters their statement described. Each 

testified about personal observations, including the observations that informed their 

statement. 

12 

39. 

As background information, the co-chairs’ statement described “student 

and colleague complaints” about respondent’s “communication style” that arose 

during his first few teaching semesters. In spring 2020, for example, two students 

complained that respondent had “yelled” at them. The biology professor who served 

on respondent’s fall 2020 TRC remarked that some students seemed to find 

respondent “intimidating or condescending.” In spring 2021, the semester for which 

respondent’s evaluation resulted in a performance improvement plan, students again 

called him “condescending,” “rude and abrupt,” and “[n]ot very approachable.” 

Bouchard and Hanks also described respondent’s 2021–2022 performance 

improvement plan, noting that despite his good-faith efforts to improve, some 

students in fall 2021 “continued to rate him low on treating students with respect.” 

40. 

Because of the history summarized in Finding 39, Bouchard and Hanks 

were especially attentive during fall 2022 to how respondent interacted with students. 

They received two noteworthy, unsolicited communications from students about 

respondent during this semester. Bouchard and Hanks included summaries of these 

student complaints and their responses with their statement to the fall 2022 TRC. 

a. 

In early September 2022, a student who was in respondent’s Bio30 class 

and also in a class taught by Bouchard complained to Bouchard that respondent had 

displayed anger to the Bio30 class. Bouchard and Hanks arranged a meeting with the 

student, at which the student stated that respondent had “yelled and slammed his 

hands on the desk” during a laboratory session and that he “answers questions in a 

rude way.” Bouchard and Hanks then met with respondent, who said that his student 

interactions so far that semester had been “nothing but positive and [I] feel that I am 

being slandered.” Later in the semester, the student told Bouchard that respondent’s 

communication style had improved during the semester. 

13 

b. 

In late September 2022, respondent emailed another student in his Bio30 

class, after overhearing the student complaining to classmates about the class.4 His 

email said that he had noticed “a pattern of behavior . . . that does not allow for the 

positive and open classroom environment that I have attempted to establish and 

maintain this term,” and invited the student to schedule a meeting with him. 

Respondent copied Pedersen and Dean of Student Success Dave Belman on this email 

(without indication to the student), explaining at the hearing that he wanted to alert 

them that the student might need additional support, or that disciplinary action such 

as removal from the class might become necessary. 

c. 

The student did not answer respondent’s email. Instead, the student 

emailed Bouchard and Hanks. The student complained about the heavy course 

workload, and acknowledged having voiced a similar complaint to classmates during a 

laboratory session. The student also stated that respondent “gives us information that 

is difficult for intro students to understand and then looks at us like we are idiots when 

we do not understand and says [it’s] our fault we do not attend the optional reviews.” 

d. 

Bouchard and Hanks met with the student, and later with respondent. 

They encouraged the student to bring concerns directly to respondent, such as by 

accepting his invitation to a meeting. They also encouraged respondent to avoid 

saying or implying that students needed to attend additional class review sessions to 

succeed in the course. Bouchard and Hanks did not document, or recall in testimony, 

4 Respondent described the student as “aggressive and combative” toward him 

as well as classmates; the student described “using my freedom of speech to state my 

feelings about the class.” 

14 

 
having addressed with respondent the student’s complaint that the course simply 

involved too much work.5 

41. 

Bouchard’s and Hanks’s statement offered a different perspective on 

respondent’s actions (described in his self-evaluation, as summarized in Finding 36.b) 

to make Bio30 a transfer-eligible course. According to them, respondent pursued this 

change unilaterally, without having first discussed it with and obtained agreement 

from other biology department faculty members. Although respondent’s self-

evaluation had presented this change as a positive achievement for respondent, the 

departmental co-chairs’ statement characterized it as having caused tension within the 

department. 

42. 

In their statement, Bouchard and Hanks also summarized, and included 

supporting documentation about, a conflict that arose during the fall 2022 semester 

among respondent and several other biology department faculty members including 

Rickman. 

a. 

Pedersen tasked the biology department with a comprehensive program 

review, with an initial phase of that review due in early October 2022. Bouchard and 

5 The co-chairs’ statement notes, however, that multiple instructors and TRC 

evaluators over several years repeatedly expressed concern that respondent, as the 

lead faculty member for the Bio30 course, presents and asks other instructors to 

present too much material in too much depth for an introductory course. They also 

emailed respondent about this issue, referencing a “recent faculty concern,” later in the 

fall 2022 semester, but the evidence did not reflect what discussion (if any) followed 

this email. 

15 

 
Hanks divided the department into committees for this initial phase, each of which 

would review a segment of the department’s overall program offerings. They assigned 

respondent to a committee with Rickman and faculty member Briana McCarthy. 

b. 

Respondent understood his committee’s task somewhat differently than 

did Rickman and McCarthy. They stated their views to him, in commenting on his 

initial contributions to their committee’s work, and he responded by explaining why he 

disagreed. Respondent later characterized McCarthy’s communication to him as 

“excessively hostile and borderline threatening,” which is an unreasonable 

interpretation of a polite though significant professional disagreement. 

c. 

McCarthy then emailed other biology department faculty members who 

were not on her, Rickman’s, and respondent’s committee, asking them for input on the 

committee’s work. They received input from at least one other faculty member. 

Meanwhile, respondent also attempted to revise his work to meet Rickman’s and 

McCarthy’s criticism. 

d. 

On Friday, October 7, Rickman emailed McCarthy and respondent again 

regarding her effort to pull together the committee’s work product for submission to 

the department chairs. She suggested discussing the work product further, or 

proposed that if respondent agreed without discussion the committee could substitute 

material some other faculty members had prepared for what respondent had written. 

e. 

The next morning, respondent replied: “Thank you for remind[ing] me 

that my contributions to this department is not wanted.” He followed up a few days 

later with further email to Rickman describing her and McCarthy as having shown him 

“general hostility and dismissiveness” during their committee’s work. Although the 

evidence did not show how Rickman and McCarthy behaved during any in-person or 

16 

videoconference meetings about the project, the email in evidence did not show either 

of them to have expressed hostility or dismissiveness to respondent despite their 

apparent disagreement with him. 

g. 

For the next phase of the comprehensive program review, the 

departmental co-chairs assigned respondent to a committee with Hanks and another 

faculty member. Respondent’s initial email to this committee about its work said that 

he hoped to follow the others’ lead, “given how I was treated in the previous group 

effort.” Respondent later sent a longer email to Hanks, complaining that the 

committee in the first phase had treated him disrespectfully and that Bouchard had 

compounded this slight in a later faculty meeting by calling attention to his group’s 

work “in what I take as an effort to further the hostility through humiliation.” 

h. 

In their statement to the TRC, Bouchard and Hanks characterized the 

conflict described in Findings 42.a through 42.g as having resulted chiefly from 

respondent’s inability to take criticism or disagreement constructively, his insistence 

on prioritizing his own views, and his haste to assume that colleagues harbor malice 

toward him. This characterization is reasonable in light of all evidence. 

43. 

Bouchard and Hanks concluded their statement by stating their concern 

that respondent’s uncooperative, argumentative 

behavior, which was recognized and noted by the Dean on 

the FA2020 evaluation summary form, will persist as efforts 

to coach and correct have not seemed to provide the 

desired results, and will ultimately hamper student learning, 

collegial civility, and departmental business. As chairs, we 

have already spent a significant amount of time, beyond the 

17 

usual expectations of chair duties, dealing with the 

multitude of issues that originate from this one colleague. 

Bouchard underscored this concern in testimony, noting regretfully that she did not 

expect when she drafted the statement that respondent’s collegiality would improve if 

he received tenure. 

44. 

Aside from offering their statement to the TRC, Bouchard and Hanks did 

not participate in the TRC’s deliberations or recommendation. Moreover, the 

recommendation is confidential until the District Board has acted on it. Hanks did not 

know until the District Board had adopted Resolution 3C that respondent’s fall 2022 

TRC had recommended terminating respondent’s employment, but now that he knows 

what the TRC recommended he agrees with that recommendation. Bouchard also 

agrees with the TRC’s recommendation, even though she had been “rooting for” 

respondent and had hoped earlier in their professional relationship that he would 

succeed at Los Medanos College. 

Dean’s Statement 

45. 

Pedersen also attempted in early November 2022 to discuss the fall 2022 

conflict described above in Finding 42 with respondent. When Pedersen emailed 

respondent to schedule a meeting, respondent replied that he hoped Pedersen’s 

“concern included excessively hostile emails that was sent to me pertaining to a 

collegial effort.” Pedersen told respondent that he “would absolutely encourage the 

discussion of any hostile emails you have received,” and asked respondent to forward 

them. Respondent again replied, accusing Pedersen of being “dismissive” to 

respondent’s reports of an “excessively hostile environment.” 

18 

46. 

Based on all his interactions with and observations of respondent over 

respondent’s career at Los Medanos College, Pedersen’s statement in the fall 2022 TRC 

evaluation summary report was critical of respondent’s communication skills. Pedersen 

stated that respondent “has demonstrated significant difficulties over the course of his 

tenure-track employment,” including complaints from students and colleagues 

regarding “unprofessional and abrasive communication.” Pedersen noted as well that 

such conflicts had persisted despite respondent’s performance improvement plan, and 

that respondent continued a defensive response to criticism, rather than taking 

“personal responsibility for his behavior toward students or colleagues.” In light of all 

evidence, this statement is reasonable. 

47. 

Pedersen also summarized these concerns in the “Non-Classroom 

Observations” section of his own portion of the TRC report. He noted that respondent 

“struggles to take what is intended as constructive feedback without being defensive,” 

and that respondent “had ongoing and significant difficulties working with and 

collaborating with his colleagues.” In light of the matters stated in Findings 19, 20, 41, 

and 42, these summary statements are reasonable. 

President’s and Interim Chancellor’s Recommendations 

48. 

After respondent learned that the fall 2022 TRC would recommend 

against granting tenure to him, he composed a 19-page, single-spaced letter disputing 

the TRC’s recommendation and asking the College President not to accept it. 

Respondent encouraged the President, Chancellor, and Board to give greater weight 

to positive student comments, and less to negative comments, than the fall 2022 TRC 

had given. He also described, from his perspective, several incidents over his four 

teaching years that he believed had contributed to the TRC’s overall conclusion that he 

was harsh or unsupportive toward some students. Finally, respondent disagreed with 

19 

the “unreasonable mischaracterization” that he is unable to collaborate politely or 

effectively with other faculty members. This letter accompanied the TRC evaluation 

report as the “Evaluatee comments.” 

49. 

Former College President Kratochvil received and reviewed the TRC’s 

recommendation and supporting documents, including the letter summarized in 

Finding 48. When Ralston assumed the role of Interim President, she also reviewed the 

TRC recommendation and supporting documents. In addition, Ralston discussed the 

TRC recommendation with Bouchard, Hanks, Pedersen, Rickman, and with Natalie 

Hannum, Los Medanos College’s Vice President of Instruction. 

50. 

As described above in Finding 4, Kratochvil, Ralston, and Mehdizadeh 

jointly recommended to the District Board that the District not re-employ respondent 

after the 2022–2023 academic year. Their recommendation included copies of the 

TRC’s fall 2022 evaluation summary report; the TRC members’ classroom observation 

reports; student evaluations from respondent’s fall 2022 courses; respondent’s written 

self-evaluation; and the performance improvement plan progress report. 

51. 

At the hearing, respondent attacked the fall 2022 TRC’s evaluation as 

having reflected bias against him rather than an objective consideration of available 

information. He also suggested that Rickman, Bouchard and Hanks, and Pedersen had 

manufactured or manipulated complaints against him to support a pre-determined 

effort to deny him tenure. No evidence supported these contentions. To the contrary, 

to the extent that any of these participants in the fall 2022 TRC’s decision began the 

fall 2022 semester with concerns about respondent’s fitness for tenure, the evidence 

established that these concerns arose not from unfair bias but from personal 

observations of and interactions with respondent over the previous three academic 

years. No evidence established any potential basis for the fall 2022 TRC’s 

20 

recommendation to the College President other than a concern that respondent’s 

inability to communicate effectively with some students and with most colleagues 

threatened the welfare of Los Medanos College and its students. 

52.  No evidence established any potential basis for Kratochvil’s, Ralston’s, 

and Mehdizadeh’s recommendation to the District Board other than the fall 2022 

evaluation resulting from the process described above in Findings 9 through 13 and 23 

through 47. No evidence established any potential basis for the District Board’s 

adoption of District Resolution No. 3C other than Kratochvil’s, Ralston’s, Mehdizadeh’s, 

and the fall 2022 TRC’s recommendations. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Because of the matters stated in Findings 1 and 2, the District needed at 

the conclusion of the 2022–2023 academic year to determine whether to re-employ 

respondent permanently or to terminate his employment. (Ed. Code, § 87609; cf. id., 

§§ 87608, 87608.5.) 

2. 

The matters stated in Findings 3 and 4 establish that the District gave 

proper initial notice to respondent that it proposed not to re-employ him after the 

2022–2023 academic year. (Ed. Code, § 87610, subd. (b).) The matters stated in 

Findings 5 through 7 also establish that the District properly arranged this hearing to 

give respondent an opportunity to challenge this proposed action. (Id., §§ 87610.1, 

subd. (b), 87740, subds. (a)–(c).) 

3. 

To make its decision regarding whether the District should continue to 

employ respondent, the District Board must rely on “statements of the most recent 

21 

evaluations” and on recommendations from the Interim Chancellor and the Los 

Medanos College President. (Ed. Code, § 87607.) 

4. 

The matters stated in Findings 49 through 52 establish that Mehdizadeh, 

Kratochvil, and Ralston based their recommendation to the District Board regarding 

respondent’s re-employment on the fall 2022 TRC’s evaluation portfolio, report, and 

recommendation, and that the District Board in turn based its adoption of District 

Resolution No. 3C on this same information. These matters do not establish that any 

factor other than the fall 2022 TRC’s evaluation portfolio, report, and recommendation 

influenced either the recommendation by Kratochvil, Ralston, and Mehdizadeh or the 

District Board’s decision. 

5. 

The District may decline to re-employ respondent only for cause relating 

“solely to the welfare of the colleges and the students thereof.” (Ed. Code, § 87740, 

subd. (d).) The District Board has discretion to determine whether such cause exists 

(id.), but it must act in accordance with “policies and procedures concerning the 

evaluation of probationary employees” (id., § 87610.1, subd. (b)). 

6. 

The matters stated in Findings 23 through 52 establish that the District 

complied substantially with the procedure (described in Findings 9 through 15) by 

which the District has agreed to evaluate probationary full-time faculty members. 

7. 

For probationary faculty members in their first three employment years, 

the Education Code limits judicial review of a governing board’s decision whether to 

continue or terminate probationary employment. (Ed. Code, §§ 87608, 87608.5 [both 

stating that “the governing board, at its discretion and not subject to judicial review 

except as expressly provided in Sections 87610.1 and 87611, shall elect” whether to 

continue or terminate probationary employment].) For a probationary faculty member 

22 

in the fourth probationary year, however, the Education Code says only that the 

college’s “governing board shall elect” whether to terminate employment or grant 

tenure. (Ed. Code, § 87609.) 

8. 

The parties agree that the statutory difference described in Legal 

Conclusion 7 limits the District Board’s discretion with respect to respondent, requiring 

that decision to be reasonable. Accordingly, complainant bears the burden in this 

proceeding of establishing the decision’s reasonableness through a preponderance of 

the evidence. Because of the matters stated in Findings 49 through 52 and in Legal 

Conclusions 4 and 7, the reasonableness of the District Board’s decision depends 

solely on whether the fall 2022 TRC’s recommendation is reasonable. 

9. 

The matters stated in Findings 23 through 47 confirm that over four 

academic years, respondent failed to develop cooperative working relationships with 

his biology department colleagues, largely because he refused to accommodate their 

views when he and they disagreed. Respondent was both thin-skinned and abrasive, 

and (as illustrated in Finding 48) responded frequently to disagreement or criticism by 

rehashing conflicts at length from his own perspective. Moreover, despite several 

years’ efforts, respondent continued to provoke complaints from students that he was 

irritable and impatient and that his introductory course was confusing and excessively 

demanding. The fall 2022 TRC’s recommendation is reasonable. 

10. 

The matters stated in Findings 23 through 52 and in Legal Conclusions 2, 

4, and 9 constitute cause to give notice to respondent that his services will not be 

required for future academic years. In accordance with Education Code section 87740, 

subdivision (d), the cause relates solely to the welfare of the District and its students. 

23 

RECOMMENDATION 

The Contra Costa Community College District may give notice to respondent 

James Clark that the District will not re-employ him following the 2022–2023 academic 

year. 

DATE: 

JULIET E. COX 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

24 

05/05/2023 
 
