BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
CENTINELA VALLEY UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction in Force 
Against: 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE 
CENTINELA VALLEY UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Respondents. 
OAH No. 2024030473 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Erlinda G. Shrenger, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on April 12, 2024, in Lawndale, 
California. 
Christine K. Hsu and Katie J. Oh, Olivarez Madruga Law Organization, LLP, 
represented the Centinela Valley Union High School District (District). 
Carlos R. Perez and Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Law Office of Carlos R. Perez, 
represented respondents Brianna Williamson, Derrick Hill, Crystal Gonzalez, Tracey 
Tran, and James Rollins, but did not represent respondent Linda Nguyen. Respondent 
James Rollins was the only respondent present at the hearing. 2Jeremy Zuniga, Executive Director of South Bay United Teachers, and Temisha 
Brame, President of the Centinela Valley Secondary Teachers Association, were present 
during the hearing. 
Oral and documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard.
Pursuant to the agreement of counsel, the ALJ redacted the student names and 
identification numbers contained in Exhibit D. The record closed and the matter was 
submitted for decision on April 12, 2024. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS
Board Resolution 
1. Stephen Nellman, Ed.D., Superintendent of the District, made and filed 
the Statement of Reduction in Force in his official capacity. Pamela Brown, Ed.D. (Dr. 
Brown), is the Assistant Superintendent of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion. Daniel 
Urrutia, Ed.D. (Dr. Urrutia), is the Assistant Superintendent of Business Services. Drs. 
Brown and Urrutia were involved in implementing certain aspects of the layoff.
2. On February 13, 2024, the Governing Board of the District (Board) 
adopted Resolution No. 23-24/015 (Resolution), which proposed a layoff of certificated 
employees corresponding to 5.6 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. (Exh. 1.) The 
Board determined that such action is in the best interest of the District and the welfare 
of the District’s schools and students. The Resolution provided for the reduction or 
discontinuance of the following particular kinds of services:
//
//3 PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICE FTE Reduction
Health Science 4.6 
Career Technical Education (CTE) - Public Service  1.0 
Total FTE Reduction 5.6
3. The Resolution established tiebreaker criteria for determining the relative 
seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid service to the District on 
the same date. (Exh. 1, pp. 4-5.) It provided that the order of termination shall be 
based on the needs of the District and its students in accordance with certain criteria. 
Specifically, the tiebreaker criteria required consideration of the type of credentials 
(preliminary versus clear), possession of any English Language authorizations, and 
possession of any advanced degrees (master’s or doctorate). In the event of a tie after 
reference to all the listed criteria, the tie would be broken by drawing lots. 
4. The Resolution was required because of the District’s need to reduce
services in order to address the District’s current and projected budget deficits, which 
are the amounts the District’s expenditures exceed its revenues. The District has 
declining enrollment and declining revenues, and is projecting deficit spending over 
the next three years. The District is projected to have budget deficits of $1.6 million in 
the 2024-2025 school year, and $4.3 million in the 2025-2026 school year. The District 
has determined the reduction in force proposed in the Resolution will stabilize the 
District’s fiscal health and enable it to meet its financial expenditures in the next school 
year. Dr. Urrutia explained the District’s budget deficit amounts would be larger if the
reduction in force is not implemented. The District’s budget determinations related to 
this layoff proceeding were reviewed and approved, as required, by the Los Angeles 
County Office of Education. 4Layoff Notices
5. Between February 14, 2024, through March 15, 2024, the District served 
six certificated employees (collectively, respondents) with written notice (March 15 
notice) that it had been recommended notice be given to them pursuant to Education 
Code sections 44949 and 44955 that they may be released from their current position 
at the close of the current 2023-2024 school year. (Exhs. 4, 5.) The March 15 notice 
explained the reasons for the recommendation and notified respondents of their right 
to request a hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the 
2024-2025 school year. 
6. Respondents are permanent certificated employees of the District. They 
are: Brianna Williamson (#296), Derrick Hill (#242), Crystal Gonzalez (#222), Tracey Tran 
(#216), Linda Nguyen (#211), and James Rollins (#187). The individual respondents are 
identified by their number on the District’s seniority list (Exhibit 13). 
7. Respondents Crystal Gonzalez (#222), Linda Nguyen (#211), and James 
Rollins (#187) were the only respondents who submitted written requests for a hearing 
to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them for the 2024-2025 school year. 
(Exh. 6.) By failing to submit a written request for a hearing, respondents Brianna 
Williamson (#296), Derrick Hill (#242), and Tracey Tran (#216) waived their right to a 
hearing to contest their status as employees subject to layoff. (Ed. Code, § 44955, 
subd. (b).) 
8. The District timely served a Statement of Reduction in Force with 
required accompanying documents on Ms. Gonzalez, Ms. Nguyen, and Mr. Rollins. 
(Exhs. 7, 9.) The District received timely Notice of Participation forms only from Ms. 
Gonzalez and Ms. Nguyen. (Exh. 8.) The District served a Notice of Hearing on Ms. 5Gonzalez, Ms. Nguyen, and Mr. Rollins. (Exhs. 11, 12.) The District did not object to Mr. 
Rollins participating in the layoff proceeding. 
Seniority List 
9. The District maintains a seniority list for certificated employees that
shows their seniority ranking, permanency description, job title, current assignment, 
work location, credentials, authorizations, and advanced degrees. (Exh. 13.) The 
District’s Governing Board adopted the seniority list on February 13, 2024, as part of 
the Resolution. 
10. Certificated employees, including respondents, were given access to the 
seniority list to update or correct their information. Certificated employees, including 
respondents, were requested by letter to verify their seniority list information. Dr. 
Brown testified none of the respondents involved in this layoff proceeding reported 
any errors with their information on the seniority list. 
11. The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the 
least senior employees currently assigned in the two services being reduced. The 
District then determined whether the least senior employees held credentials in 
another area and were entitled to “bump” other employees. A senior teacher whose 
position is discontinued has the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or 
she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior employee may displace 
or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position. (
 (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.) In determining who would be laid off for each 
kind of service reduced, the District counted the number of reductions not covered by 
the known vacancies, and determined the impact on incumbent staff in inverse order 
of seniority. 612. The District identified Linda Nguyen (#211) as an employee subject to 
layoff but who also had “bumping” rights allowing her to elect reassignment to 
another position she was certificated and competent to fill. Ms. Nguyen holds clear 
single-subject credentials in Health and CTE-Hospitality, Tourism and Recreation. Ms. 
Nguyen currently teaches at Leuzinger High School in a 0.6 FTE position in Health and 
a 0.4 FTE position in CTE-Hospitality, Tourism and Recreation. 
13. Ms. Nguyen is subject to layoff for her 0.6 FTE position in Health.
However, by letter dated April 8, 2024, the District notified Ms. Nguyen of her right to 
elect reassignment to a 1.0 FTE position in CTE Health and Hospitality, which she is 
certificated and competent to teach. (Exh. 14.) Ms. Nguyen agreed to the 
reassignment. Dr. Brown explained the 1.0 FTE position in CTE Health and Hospitality is 
currently a vacant position. The remaining 0.4 FTE of Ms. Nguyen’s current position will 
be increased to 1.0 FTE to implement her reassignment. 
14. Dr. Brown testified the District did not have to apply, in this layoff, the 
tiebreaker criteria adopted in the Resolution. The District considered all known 
attrition, resignations, and retirements in determining the actual number of necessary 
layoff notices to be delivered. 
PKS Reduction 
15. Dr. Brown explained the reason for the 4.6 FTE reduction in Health 
Science was because, in the 2024-2025 school year, Health classes will be embedded in 
Biology classes and will no longer be a separate elective. Dr. Brown explained Health 
was a separate elective when the District had an eight-period school day. The school 
day was changed to six periods in the current 2023-2024 school year and will remain 
at six periods in the next school year. With a six-period school day, the District 7determined Health could be embedded in Biology classes, thus reducing the need for 
certificated employees to teach stand-alone Health classes.
16. Dr. Brown explained the 1.0 FTE reduction in CTE-Public Service was due 
to declining enrollment and reduced student interest in the program. The District has 
approximately nine or 10 CTE programs that cover a variety of subjects. The District 
surveys students at middle schools that are feeder schools for the District’s high 
schools to determine the students’ level of interest in the various CTE programs. The 
survey results showed the CTE-Public Service program was one of the bottom three 
programs with low student interest. 
17. Dr. Brown also explained the CTE-Public Service program has greater 
issues with enrollment than other CTE programs. Typically, a teacher in a 1.0 FTE 
position teaches five class periods per school day, with 36 students per class, for a 
total of 180 students. In the current school year, the CTE-Public Service program has a 
total of 27 students enrolled, and two class periods have no students enrolled. 
18. Respondent James Rollins (#187) is a CTE teacher with a seniority date of 
August 17, 2015, which he does not dispute. He holds a clear CTE Teaching Credential 
in Public Service. Mr. Rollins is currently assigned as a CTE Teacher at Hawthorne High 
School. 
19. Mr. Rollins testified in detail regarding his involvement in developing the 
School of Criminal Justice (SCJ) Academy starting in 2015. Mr. Rollins used his law 
enforcement background, which included almost 10 years as a police officer, to 
develop a program of criminal justice related courses and experiences for his students. 
In September 2023, the SCJ Academy was renamed the School of Public Safety. The 
focus of the program changed from criminal justice to fire science. Mr. Rollins feels the 8refocusing of the program to fire science resulted in lower student interest. Mr. Rollins 
testified he is the only teacher at his school site and in the District with a CTE-Public 
Service credential.
20. Mr. Rollins disagrees with the District’s claim of declining student interest
in criminal justice related programs. At a recent career fair in March 2024, Mr. Rollins 
heard from 64 students (not from the SCJ Academy) expressing an interest in law 
enforcement and security. (See Exh. D.) Mr. Rollins reviewed the survey results 
presented to the Governing Board, which showed the School of Public Safety (formerly 
the SCJ Academy) as one of the three lowest enrolled Academies in the District. (Exh. 
C.) The survey indicated the School of Public Safety had an enrollment of 34 students 
in Fall 2023. Mr. Rollins attributes the low enrollment to the refocusing of the program 
to fire science. He feels criminal justice is a subject of high interest among students. 
21.  Mr. Rollins’ testimony reflected his passion and dedication to the SCJ 
Academy program he helped to develop, and his commitment to the well-being of 
students. However, Mr. Rollins was properly identified as an employee subject to layoff 
to account for the 1.0 FTE reduction in CTE-Public Service. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
1. All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. (Factual Findings 1-8.)
2. The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services 
which may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The 
Board's decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was not arbitrary or 
capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or 9discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and 
pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
3. A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 
44955, subdivision (b), "either by determining that a certain type of service to students 
shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may 'reduce services' by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved." (
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)
4. Boards of education hold significant discretion in determining the need 
to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services, which is not open to second-
guessing in this proceeding. ( 64 Cal.App.3d at 
p. 167.) Such policy-making decisions are not subject to arguments as to the wisdom 
of their enactment, their necessity, or the motivations for the decisions. (
(1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.) Such decisions and action 
must be reasonable under the circumstances, with the understanding that "such a 
standard may permit a difference of opinion." (
(1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.)
5. Cause exists, pursuant to Education Code section 44949 and 44955, to 
reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services. The District identified the certificated 
employees providing the particular kinds of services that the Board directed be 
reduced or discontinued. 
6. No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 
services that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.10 ORDER
1. Notice shall be given to employees occupying 5.6 full-time equivalent 
certificated positions that their services will not be required for the 2024-2025 school 
year because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
2. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. 
 
DATE:  
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 