BEFORE THE 
COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR OF THE 
INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Certificated Reduction in Force of: 
DEBORAH F. DECKER, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024040864 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Administrative Law Judge Deena R. Ghaly, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on May 7, 2024, in Inglewood, California.
Sharon J. Ormond, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo represented the 
Inglewood Unified School District (the District). The sole respondent, Deborah F. 
Decker, represented herself and was present throughout the hearing. 
At the hearing, documentary evidence and testimony were received. The record 
closed and the matter was deemed submitted on the hearing day.
Extension of Due Date of the Proposed Decision 
Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(3) provides that "[c]opies of the 
proposed decision shall be submitted to the governing board and to the employee on 
or before May 7. Subdivision (e) provides that, if a continuance is granted after a 2request for hearing, the due date will be extended by the number of days equal to the 
continuance. On April 24, 2024, OAH Presiding Administrative Law Judge Matthew 
Goldsby granted the District's motion for a continuance. The hearing was rescheduled 
from April 25, 2024, to May 7, 2024, a period of twelve days. The due date of the 
proposed decision in this matter is therefore May 19, 2024. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. The District is currently under the authority of a county administrator Dr. 
James Morris (County Administrator), appointed by the Los Angeles County 
Superintendent of Schools. The County Administrator has assumed all legal rights, 
duties, and powers of the District's Board of Education, in accordance with Education 
Code section 41326.
2. On March 6, 2024, the County Administrator adopted the Resolution 
Number 26/2023-2024, which proposed a layoff of certificated employees 
corresponding to 53 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions, including one Art Teaching 
Services FTE. (Exh. 1.) 
3. At the hearing, the District's chief human resources officer, Brian Coffey,
testified and stated the resolution is necessary because the District is facing declining 
student enrollment, a history of deficit spending, and other financial challenges. Mr. 
Coffey was involved in the budget and personnel analyses underlying the resolution. 
During his testimony, Mr. Coffey stated that, as many of the teachers in positions 
slated for layoff were able to move into vacant positions, there was a minimum of job 
losses associated with implementing the resolution. By the time of the hearing, 3respondent Deborah F. Decker (respondent) was the only employee who had not 
rescinded her request for a hearing.
4. Mr. Coffey stated respondent was slated for layoff because, among the 
FTE's listed in the resolution, was that of Art Teaching Services. Respondent is the sole 
art teacher in the District. Despite her long tenure, she is, as Mr. Coffey described her, 
"one of [a class of] one" and therefore there is no teacher in her classification more 
junior than she. Additionally, respondent's sole teaching credential is a clear single 
subject teaching credential in art. Under these circumstances, Mr. Coffey maintained 
respondent could not "bump," i.e., take the place of a more junior teacher teaching a 
different subject. The District provided its Seniority List reflecting respondent's 
seniority date, assigned school, teaching credentials, and layoff status. (Exh. 8.)
5. On March 11, 2024, the District served respondent with a letter notifying 
her she had been recommended to the County Administrator that her services will not 
be required for the ensuing 2024-2025 school year, the Notice of District Statement of 
Reduction in Force, the District Statement of Reduction in Force and attachments, a 
blank Request for Hearing and Notice of Participation form; and copies of applicable 
law by regular and certified mail. (Exhs. 3 and 4.) The notice required teachers seeking 
a hearing to file their request by March 25, 2024. Respondent served her executed 
Request for Hearing and Notice of Participation on March 24, 2024. (Exh. 5.) 
6. Respondent testified in detail regarding the studio art curriculum she has 
taught throughout the District. She noted that, as a teacher with over 27 years' tenure, 
she is the most senior of the teachers teaching subjects related to the arts and has a 
great deal to offer her students, her classes are always fully subscribed demonstrating 
a want and need for the subject she teaches, and she believes the professionalism and 4broad perspective she offers to her students have inspired many of them to pursue 
artistic careers.
7. Respondent's testimony reflected genuine passion and dedication to 
both the arts and her students. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
1. Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a) provides: 
No later than March 15 and before an employee is given 
notice by the governing board that his or her services will 
not be required for the ensuing year for the reasons 
specified in Section 44955, the governing board and the 
employee shall be given written notice by the 
superintendent, or in the case of a school district that has 
no superintendent, by the clerk or secretary of the 
governing board, that it has been recommended that the 
notice be given to the employee and stating the reasons 
therefor. 
2. As set out in Factual Finding 5, Respondent was timely served with the 
notices required by Education Code section 44949, subdivision (a). 
3. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b) provides among the 
reasons for teacher layoffs is "whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 
discontinued."54. Pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (b)(3), a hearing 
regarding a teacher layoff "shall be conducted by an administrative law judge who 
shall prepare a proposed decision containing . . . a determination as to whether the 
charges sustained by the evidence are related to the welfare of the schools and the 
pupils of the schools." 
5. A school district may reduce services within the meaning of Education 
Code section 44955, subdivision (b), "either by determining that a certain type of 
service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may 
'reduce services' by determining that [proffered] services shall be reduced in extent 
because fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved." 
(  (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)  
6. The process of implementing layoffs is very flexible and school districts 
retain great flexibility in carrying out the process. (
 (2002) 98 Cal.App.4th 838.) Such decisions must be reasonable 
under the circumstances with the understanding that "such a standard may permit a 
difference of opinion." (  (1981) 
116 Cal.App.3d 831, 838.) 
7. Here, the County Administrator’s decision to reduce services was a 
proper exercise within his discretion. No evidence was presented to show that the 
proposed reductions in services violated any statutory or regulatory requirement 
governing the District. The reduction or discontinuation of services relates to the 
welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44949. 68. Considering the circumstances and applicable law in total, cause exists to 
uphold the District's decision to lay off Respondent. Although respondent has 
significant seniority, her teaching credentials do not allow her to displace other, less 
senior teachers and teach another subject and, as noted above, the County 
Administrator's decision to eliminate the Arts Teaching Services is within his discretion.
RECOMMENDATION 
The District's Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained as to respondent 
Deborah F. Decker. Notice shall be given to respondent that her services will not be 
required for the 2024-2025 school year because of the reduction or discontinuance of 
particular kinds of service. 
DATE:  
DEENA R. GHALY 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 