BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ALVORD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of Certain 
Certificated Employees of the Alvord Unified School District. 
Respondents. 
OAH No. 2024030568 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Kimberly J. Belvedere, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 23, 2024, in Corona, California. 
Kerrie McNally, Attorney at Law, Adams, Silva & McNally LLP, represented the 
Alvord Unified School District (district).
Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, Law Office of Carlos R. Perez, represented 
respondents David Moreno, Kristal Pomerville, and Philip Ugalde.
Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed, and the 
matter was submitted for decision on April 23, 2024. 2FACTUAL FINDINGS
1. Nicholas Hilton, the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, 
testified on behalf of the district. The following factual findings are derived from his 
testimony and documentary evidence admitted at hearing.
2. On February 15, 2024, the Governing Board of the Alvord Unified School 
District adopted Resolution No. 39, reducing particular kinds of certificated services 
and directing the Superintendent or his designee to give appropriate notices to 
certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the reduction. The 
decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a matter reserved to 
the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this proceeding. 
(  (1976) 64 
Cal.App.3d 167.) A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of service must 
not be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (
(1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 637.)
3. The resolution called for the reduction or discontinuation of 45 full-time 
equivalent (FTE) positions in 18 different categories, and impacted employees across 
the district. The resolution referenced applicable provisions of the Education Code 
pertaining to competency and displacement rights (a.k.a. bumping) and indicated that 
any tie-breaking for individuals who have the same seniority dates would occur 
pursuant to board-adopted criteria set forth in a separate attachment to the 
resolution.
4. The reason that necessitated the reduction in particular kinds of services 
(according to Mr. Hilton) was because the district is currently deficit spending and 
projections show continued deficit spending for at least the next two years. The 3budget is expected to get worse through the 2026-2027 school year. The one-time 
COVID funds provided by the federal government are now running out, and staffing 
costs constitute about 85 percent of the district’s budget. Thus, in order to remain 
fiscally solvent, not reduce any mandated services, and meet minimum staffing 
requirements for kindergarten through twelfth grade, a reduction in force was 
warranted. 
5. The district took steps to verify the accuracy of the seniority dates of 
each employee. Notifications were sent to each employee advising them to let the 
district know if there were any issues with the accuracy of the seniority dates, and any 
concerns raised by employees were addressed. There are no issues concerning the 
district’s seniority list. There were no issues relating to the use of tie-breaking criteria. 
6. Notice regarding the reduction in force was timely served on affected 
employees. Thirty-three affected employees filed a request for hearing and notice of 
participation. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 
7. Following service of the reduction in force documents, the district 
rescinded a number of layoff notices. The district and some remaining employees also 
entered into a memorandum of understanding resulting in a number of employees 
withdrawing their request for hearing and consenting to the reduction in force. 
Documents provided by the district also showed a number of employees bumped 
junior employees to avoid the layoff. 
8. The only employees who remain as respondents are David Moreno, 
Kristal Pomerville, and Philip Ugalde, all of whom render certificated services affected 
by the reduction in force. 49. The services identified in the resolution are the particular kinds of 
services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955. The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue those services was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious. It was a proper exercise of the board’s discretion. The 
reduction and discontinuation of services was related to the welfare of the district and 
its pupils, and it became necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
as determined by the board. No particular kinds of services were lowered to levels less 
than those levels mandated by state or federal law.
10. Positively assured attrition was considered in the layoff decisions and will 
be used in making future rehire decisions. 
11. No less senior teachers are being retained while more senior teachers 
credentialed to perform the same service are being laid off.
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections 
were provided as required.
2. A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall 
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)53. A preponderance of the evidence sustained the statements set forth in 
the district’s statements of reduction in force served on respondents concerning the 
services that will not be required.
4. The district identified the certificated employees who are providing the 
particular kinds of services that the board directed be reduced or discontinued. 
Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not 
be required for the 2024-2025 school year. The cause relates solely to the welfare of 
the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 
44949.
5. No employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to 
perform a service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render.
RECOMMENDATION 
It is recommended that before May 15, 2024, the Governing Board of the Alvord 
Unified School District give notice to the individuals identified in Appendix 1 that their 
employment will be terminated at the close of the current school year, and that their 
services will not be needed for the 2024-2025 school year. This recommendation 
reflects nothing more than the number of respondents being laid off and has no 
bearing on rehire or recall rights.
DATE: May 6, 2024
KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative HearingsAppendix 11
1. Kevin Brooks
2. David Moreno 
3. Steven Sofka2 
4. Jason Webb 
5. Jennifer Ramirez
6. Kristal Pomerville
7. Brittaney Andrews 
8. Sophia Wayne 
9. Sierra Deap 
1 The employees identified in this list include not only the three respondents in 
this hearing, but also respondents who rescinded their request for hearing and who 
did not bump any junior employees to avoid layoff. Pursuant to Education Code 
section 44949, subdivision (b), these certificated employees waived their right to a 
hearing, and the matter proceeded as a default against them. 
2 Evidence presented at hearing indicated Mr. Sofka has already resigned from 
employment. 710. Jesse Diaz
11. Rachel Robbins
12. Savahna Cornett
13. Christopher Palomo
14. Erica Garcia
15. Paul Stotts
16. Philip Ugalde
17. Alexis Guzman
18. Anna Loomis