BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
IMPERIAL COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force Involving: 
21 Certificated Employees, Respondents 
OAH No. 2024030662 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Debra D. Nye-Perkins, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on April 23, 2024.
Gil Abed, Esq., Attorney at Law, represented the Imperial County Office of 
Education (ICOE).
Fern Steiner, Attorney at Law, Smith, Steiner, Vanderpool, A.P.C., represented 
the 12 respondents, Alejandra Barrios, Barbara McAndrews, Carlos Saldana, Elba Palma, 
Erika Baxter, Etna Quevedo, Evet P. Bresseas, Jerika Finnell, Luz Guerrero, Mariel 
Gomez, Sylvia Ramirez, and Thema Guerrero (collectively referred to herein as 
“respondents”).
Despite being properly served, the following certificated employees did not file 
a request for hearing: Octavio Ortiz, Monica Romero, Jesse Lovin, Oscar Gonzalez, Jr., 
Silvia Baltazar, Esteban Gonzalez, Maribel Gomez, Mireli Lopez, and Jazmin Carrillo 
Alvarez. Pursuant to Education Code section 44949, subdivision (b), these certificated 2employees waived their right to a hearing, and the matter proceeded as a default 
against them. 
Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed, and the 
matter was submitted for decision on April 23, 2024. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. On February 16, 2024, the Imperial County Superintendent of Schools of 
the Imperial County Office of Education (ICOE) adopted a resolution reducing or 
discontinuing particular kinds of services for the 2024-2025 school year and directing
the Senior Director of Human Resources to give appropriate notices to 21 certificated 
employees whose positions would be affected by the reduction. The resolution called 
for the reduction or discontinuation of 21 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions
consisting of: 15.0 FTE of Teacher of Severely Disabled-SPED, 1.0 FTE of School Nurse-
Support Services, and 5.0 FTE of Speech, Language & Hearing Specialist-Support 
Services. The February 16, 2024, resolution listed by name the 21 certificated 
employees (15 special education teachers, one school nurse, and five speech, language 
and hearing specialists) to be given layoff notices pursuant to Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955. The 15 special education teachers are listed by name in the 
resolution as: Silvia Baltazar, Alejandra Barrios, Erika Baxter, Evet Bresseas, Jerika 
Finnell, Mariel Garcia Gomez, Esteban Gonzalez, Oscar Gonzalez, Jr., Luz Guerrero, 
Jesse Lovin, Barbara McAndrews, Octavio Ortiz, Etna Quevedo, Monica Romero, and 3Carlos Saldana. The one school nurse is listed in the resolution as Sylvia Ramirez.1The 
five speech, language and hearing specialists are listed in the resolution as Savannah 
Contreras, Ivet Juarez Lemus, Ericka Pompa, Ruis Sanchez, and Adelaida Sandoval.2
2. On March 8, 2024, the Superintendent adopted an additional resolution 
reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of services for the 2024-2025 school year, 
incorporating and amending the prior resolution of February 16, 2024, and directing 
the Senior Director of Human Resources to give appropriate layoff notices to an 
additional five certificated employees, who are probationary certificated employees, 
namely Elba Palma, Maribel Gomez, Thema Guerrero, Mireli Lopez, and Jazmin Carrillo 
Alvarez. 
3. The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a 
matter reserved to ICOE’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this 
proceeding. (
 
1 As explained below, both resolutions at issue in this matter relate to the layoff 
of certificated employees and cite only to the applicable Education Code sections 
related to certificated employees. However, as established by testimony, the school 
nurse Sylvia Ramirez is not a certificated employee, but rather is a classified employee.
2 As explained below, none of the five speech, language and hearing specialists 
received layoff notices pursuant to the February 16, 2024, resolution. Instead, each of 
these five employees were probationary employees and were “non-reelected” to 
return to ICOE for the 2024-2025 school year. Accordingly, the five speech, language 
and hearing specialists listed in the February 16, 2024, resolution are not at issue in 
this matter. 4(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) Offices of Education have the discretion to determine 
particular kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a service continues to 
be performed or provided in a different manner. (
. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) The decision to reduce a particular kind 
of service must not be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (
 (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 637.)
4. On February 29, 2024, ICOE sent preliminary notification to employees 
advising them that their services would not be required for the 2024-2025 school year. 
The reasons for that decision were set forth in the preliminary notification letter, which 
provided that ICOE will transfer the Special Education Program, and the funding and 
work for the Special Education staff classifications will transfer with the remainder of 
the Special Education Program. Thereafter, the district served Statements of Reduction 
in Force and other documents on the employees (respondents) who requested a 
hearing. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.
Witness Testimony 
5. ICOE provided three witnesses at the hearing in this matter, namely 
Judith Bermudez, Martha Garcia, and Carlos R. Gonzales. None of the respondents 
testified at hearing. The following factual findings are made based upon the testimony 
of the three witnesses, as well as documents received in evidence.
TESTIMONY OF JUDITH BERMUDEZ  
6. Judith Bermudez is the Human Resources Manager with ICOE. Her duties 
include oversight of all hiring, recruitment, and layoffs at ICOE. Ms. Bermudez testified 
that as part of her job duties, she determined that ICOE must reduce some services 
offered by ICOE for the 2024-2025 school year because of a program transfer of the 5special education program from ICOE back to the individual school districts. Ms. 
Bermudez stated that the special education moderate/severe program was being 
transferred from ICOE to the individual school districts, meaning that the students in 
that program will return back to individual school districts and ICOE will no longer 
provide the services associated with that program. Ms. Bermudez explained that 
moving forward for the 2024-2025 school year, the students in the special education 
program will now be given the special education services at the local school district 
from which the student originates. The program transfer of the special education 
program from ICOE to the school districts impacts the financial situation of ICOE 
because the funding for the special education program will no longer be provided to 
ICOE, but will instead go to the school districts. Based on the program transfer, ICOE 
staff that provided services for the special education program need to be reduced 
because that funding will no longer be available to ICOE.
Ms. Bermudez made this recommendation to the Superintendent of ICOE, who 
thereafter issued the February 16, 2024, resolution. In her recommendation to the 
Superintendent, Ms. Bermudez provided him with the list of 21 certificated employees 
to receive layoff notices. She testified that she created that list of employees based 
upon their seniority from their first date of paid service as an employee with ICOE. The 
most junior employees were selected for layoff first. Ms. Bermudez prepared the list of 
all employees of ICOE and their first date of employment at ICOE, which she used to 
prepare the list of certificated employees to receive layoff notices. After the 
Superintendent issued the February 16, 2024, resolution, Ms. Bermudez sent out the 
layoff notices to the 21 listed certificated employees on the February 16, 2024, 
resolution. Ms. Bermudez testified that none of those 21 employees had displacement 
rights (also known as bumping rights), and all of the 21 employees have 
reemployment rights. Ms. Bermudez further testified that of the 21 employees that 6received layoff notices, there are no more junior certificated employees being retained 
while more senior certificated employees are receiving layoff notices. She stated that 
the reduction in staff is solely based on the program transfer and is to benefit the 
general welfare of the students of ICOE. 
7. Ms. Bermudez also testified about the additional March 8, 2024, 
resolution, wherein an additional five certificated employees were listed to receive 
layoff notices. She explained that those are five certificated employees, namely special 
education teachers, who are probationary employees on year one or year two of 
probation. ICOE had originally taken the position that probationary certificated 
employees should not be given notice and hearing rights under Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955. However, after ICOE met with representatives for the 
California Teacher’s Association, ICOE agreed to issue five of the probationary special 
education teachers layoff notices because they were in their year one or two of 
probation, as opposed to being in year zero of probation. Accordingly, the second 
resolution was issued. Ms. Bermudez noted that there was one special education 
teacher on probation year one, named Danitza Leal, who did not receive a layoff notice 
and instead was non-reelected as a probationary employee, but she was an exception, 
as explained below. 
8. During redirect, Ms. Bermudez clarified her earlier testimony regarding 
which employees received layoff notices. Specifically, she stated that the five speech, 
language and hearing specialists listed in the February 16, 2024, resolution as 
individuals who would receive layoff notices did not actually get layoff notices. Instead, 
each of those five employees received a “probationary release” because each of the 
five employees were probationary employees on year zero and “on a waiver,” and 
therefore those employees are “released on a yearly basis.” None of those five 7employees, namely Savannah Contreras, Ivet Juarez Lemus, Ericka Pompa, Ruis 
Sanchez, and Adelaida Sandoval, will be returning to ICOE for the 2024-2025 school 
year and none have hearing rights under Education code sections 44949 and 44955.
Furthermore, pursuant to the March 8, 2024, resolution, an additional five 
certificated employees did receive layoff notices. Those five employees were special 
education teachers and certificated employees. Ms. Bermudez clarified that the school 
nurse, who received a layoff notice pursuant to the February 16, 2024, resolution is a 
classified employee. Accordingly, the total number of certificated employees receiving 
layoff notices is 20, and one classified employee (the school nurse) received a layoff 
notice, making the total number of employees receiving layoff notices 21. 
9. Ms. Bermudez also testified that she understands that ICOE has an 
obligation to allow a certificated employee to “bump” another more junior employee 
with the same credentials. With regard to respondent Barbara McAndrews, a special 
education teacher, Ms. Bermudez is aware that Ms. McAndrews has multiple 
credentials, including Education Specialist Instruction, Pupil Personnel Services (PPS) 
credential, and Multiple Subject Teaching credential. Ms. McAndrews’s seniority date is 
August 24, 2007. Ms. Bermudez acknowledged that Ms. McAndrews’s PPS credential 
allows her to work as a school counselor. Comparison of Ms. McAndrews’s credentials 
and seniority date to the list of employees for ICOE shows there are multiple school 
counselors who are junior to Ms. McAndrews with a later seniority date and a PPS 
credential. Two such examples are Danielle Robinson, a school counselor with a PPS 
credential and seniority date of August 10, 2020, and Vivian Rodriguez-Velasquez, a 
school counselor with a PPS credential and seniority date of February 7, 2022. Ms. 
Bermudez acknowledged that there are more junior employees with Ms. McAndrew’s 
credential that did not receive layoff notices, and that while “it is the correct 8procedure” to allow Ms. McAndrews to bump those employees, ICOE, instead, offered 
Ms. McAndrews three3other vacant positions (two positions as a school counselor, 
and one position as an alternative education community teacher) in the alternative 
education program. Ms. Bermudez acknowledged that Ms. McAndrews remains on the 
layoff list, did not accept any of the vacant positions offered to her by ICOE, and was 
not assigned another position to bump another employee to avoid the layoff. Ms. 
Bermudez testified that when reviewing Ms. McAndrews’s ability to bump junior 
employees working as school counselors, ICOE did not “submit her for bumping” 
because she determined Ms. McAndrews lacks “competency” to be a school counselor 
because she had not worked as a school counselor previously. However, Ms. Bermudez 
then acknowledged that Ms. McAndrews was competent to perform the vacant school 
counselor job that ICOE offered to her and that ICOE “changed their position” on Ms. 
McAndrews’s competency to be a school counselor after the layoff notices were sent 
out. 
In addition to Ms. McAndrews, ICOE also offered other vacant positions to two 
other respondents who received layoff notices based on the credentials they hold. 
Specifically, two special education teachers, respondent Jesse Lovin and respondent 
Octavio Ortiz, were each offered positions. Respondent Jesse Lovin was offered a 
vacant position as an alternative education community teacher, and respondent 
 
3 Ms. Bermudez testified that Ms. McAndrews was offered four different vacant 
positions with ICOE. However, documents received in evidence provide a list of only 
three positions offered. However, Ms. Bermudez testified that Ms. McAndrews declined 
to accept any of the four positions offered. 9Octavio Ortiz was offered a vacant position of RSP4alternative education teacher.
According to the employee list received in evidence, respondent Jesse Lovin holds a 
general subjects (examination) credential and an education specialist instruction 
credential, and his seniority date is August 15, 2011. Respondent Octavio Ortiz holds 
an education specialist instruction credential with a seniority date of August 20, 2007. 
The employee list received into evidence shows that there are multiple 
employees working as an alternative education community teacher who are more 
junior than Jesse Lovin based on their seniority date. However, none of those more 
junior employees appear to have the same teaching credentials as Jesse Lovin, but 
presumably he is credentialed and competent to be an alternative education 
community teacher since ICOE offered him that position. Furthermore, there are at 
least two “RSP teachers” listed on the employee list (Carlos Chao with seniority date of 
August 16, 2021, and Alondra Flores with a seniority date of August 15, 2022) with the 
same teaching credential as Octavio Ortiz. No evidence was presented regarding 
whether Jesse Lovin or Octavio Ortiz accepted the vacant positions with ICOE offered 
to them, but if they have bumping rights, they are not required to do so. Instead, they 
can bump into those positions currently held by junior employees that they are 
credentialed and competent to perform. Ms. Bermudez testified that both Jesse Lovin 
and Octavio Ortiz were competent to perform the vacant jobs that ICOE offered to 
them. 
10. With regard to the school nurse, respondent Sylvia Ramirez, Ms. 
Bermudez testified that ICOE is not eliminating nursing as a service provided by ICOE. 
 
4 The RSP acronym stands for resource specialist program according to the 
testimony of Martha Garcia.  10 Presently there are two nurses working at ICOE, namely respondent Ramirez and 
Rebecca Barham, both of whom perform the same duties. Rebecca Barham’s seniority 
date with ICOE is August 24, 1998. By comparison, respondent Sylvia Ramirez’s 
seniority date with ICOE is March 5, 2009, making her the junior employee. Ms. 
Bermudez testified that because of the program transfer from ICOE to the districts, the 
number of students serviced by the nurse at ICOE will dramatically decrease. As a 
result, respondent Sylvia Ramirez’s nursing services will no longer be needed. 
TESTIMONY OF MARTHA GARCIA
11. Martha Garcia is the Senior Director of Human Resources at ICOE. Ms. 
Garcia was involved in the preparation and issuance of the layoff notices in this matter. 
Ms. Garcia testified that there was a second resolution regarding the layoffs dated 
March 8, 2024, because initially some special education teachers on probationary 
status for years one and two were given a non-reelect by ICOE not to return for the 
next school year. However, after discussions with legal counsel, ICOE decided to 
rescind the "non-reelect" for the probationary years one and two special education 
teachers and provide them with a layoff notice instead. This is the reason the March 8, 
2024, second resolution was made. Ms. Garcia noted that there was one exception to 
the probationary year one special education teachers who were given a layoff notice, 
which was Danitza Leal, a special education probationary year one teacher. With 
regard to Danitza Leal, ICOE provided her with a non-reelect as a probationary 
employee and “Ms. Leal’s attorney agreed with that.”
12. Ms. Garcia testified that the name of the program that was transferred 
from ICOE to the districts causing the requirement for the layoffs was the Community 
Based Classrooms, which relates to special education.11 13. With regard to respondent Barbara McAndrews, Ms. Garcia testified that 
ICOE issued a layoff notice to her, and thereafter offered Ms. McAndrews any one of 
four vacant positions, namely: community teacher in the alternative education 
program, RSP (resource specialist program) teacher position, alternative education 
program counselor, and HEAL (higher education and learning) counselor position. Ms. 
Garcia testified that she was aware that at the time layoff notices were sent to Ms. 
McAndrews, and some other teachers, that those teachers had more credentials than 
just their special education credentials. Ms. Garcia is also aware that at the time the 
layoff notice was sent to Ms. McAndrews, ICOE retained more junior employees as 
counselors and alternative education teachers, positions for which Ms. McAndrews had 
credentials. Ms. Garcia admitted that ICOE made the decision not to allow Ms. 
McAndrews to use her credentials to bump a less senior employee in those positions. 
Instead, ICOE offered Ms. McAndrews her choice of the four vacant positions 
mentioned above. Ms. Garcia explained that when ICOE made the decision to layoff 
Ms. McAndrews, ICOE looked at the Education Code’s definition of “competency,” 
which required Ms. McAndrews to have five years or work in the same service, but she 
did not. However, Ms. Garcia admitted, and ICOE stipulated, that neither of the 
resolutions set forth a competency requirement of at least five years of prior service. 
Additionally, Ms. Garcia admitted during her testimony that Ms. McAndrews is 
competent to perform the duties of the vacant positions offered to her by ICOE, which 
are the same positions from which she would have been able to bump junior 
employees. Accordingly, Ms. Garcia admitted that Ms. McAndrews is competent to 
bump junior employees, but she was not given the opportunity to do so. 
14. Ms. Garcia did not provide any testimony regarding the bumping rights 
of either Jesse Lovin or Octavio Ortiz. However, as noted above, neither Jesse Lovin 12 nor Octavio Ortiz filed a request for hearing in this matter, so they waived their rights 
to make those arguments. 
TESTIMONY OF CARLOS R.GONZALES 
15. Carlos R. Gonzales is the Associate Superintendent of ICOE. His duties 
include the oversight of several departments at ICOE, including business, curriculum, 
instruction, maintenance and operations, internal technology, Imperial Pathways 
Charter School, and migrant education. Mr. Gonzales testified that the community 
based program was being transferred from ICOE to the districts, which created a 
significant detrimental financial impact to ICOE. He explained that the program is 
being funded by “AB602” funds and because the program is being transferred to the 
districts, that funding will no longer be available to ICOE but will “follow the students” 
back to the districts. As a result, ICOE’s ability to employ the certificated employees 
that serve those students is impacted, and ICOE will have “far less” students for whom
ICOE will provide services. Mr. Gonzales testified that the financial impact to ICOE of 
the program transfer is a loss of about $13.3 million. 
16. Mr. Gonzales explained that the program transfer from ICOE to the 
districts impacts ICOE’s ability to retain both certificated employees, as well as 
“itinerant staff,” such as the school nurse. He noted that because of the program 
transfer, next year the community based program students will no longer be serviced 
by ICOE and, as a result, there is no need for two nurses.
The Parties’ Arguments 
17. ICOE argued that the program transfer of the community based program 
from ICOE back to the districts necessitated the layoff of certificated (and one 
classified) employees of ICOE, who provided services to those community based 13 program students. ICOE noted that “hopefully the districts who now need these 
services will hire these employees who received layoff notices.” ICOE admitted that 
“some opinions were changed” regarding Ms. McAndrews after the layoff notices were 
sent, and that she does have the ability to bump more junior employees and “maybe 
that decision [to issue a layoff notice] was a mistake.” ICOE stated that “other than 
that” ICOE properly followed all procedural requirements for this layoff. 
18. Respondents argued that whether the employees receiving layoff notices 
from ICOE will be offered positions at the districts is not relevant to the issues at hand. 
Respondents argued that three certificated employees, namely Barbara McAndrews, 
Jesse Lovin, and Octavio Ortiz,5 have the legal right to bump more junior employees 
with the same credentials, but that ICOE failed to bump them into those positions. 
With regard to Ms. McAndrews, ICOE admitted that it made a mistake by failing to 
allow her to bump a more junior employee for a position that Ms. McAndrews is 
competent to perform.
Evaluation 
19. The services identified in the February 16, 2024, Resolution, which was 
incorporated into the March 8, 2024, Resolution are particular kinds of services that 
may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 45117. 
ICOE’s decision to reduce or discontinue those services was neither arbitrary nor 
capricious. It was a proper exercise of the ICOE’s discretion. The reduction and 
discontinuation of services was related to the welfare of the district and its pupils, and 
 
5 As noted above, since Jesse Lovin and Octavio Ortiz waived their rights to a 
hearing, no findings regarding their bumping rights will be made. 14 it became necessary to decrease the number of certificated (and one classified)
employees as determined by the ICOE after the program transfer to the districts. No 
particular kind of service was lowered to levels less than those levels mandated by law, 
and other than with respect to respondent Barbara McAndrews, no respondent 
employee with less seniority was being retained to perform the service any of the 
respondent employees currently perform.6 With regard to all respondents other than 
respondent Barbara McAndrews, ICOE followed proper procedure regarding the 
layoffs. 
20. As to respondent Barbara McAndrews, ICOE incorrectly failed to bump 
her to other positions for which Ms. McAndrews is certificated and competent to 
perform. ICOE admitted during the hearing to this “mistake” in procedure. While ICOE 
did offer Ms. McAndrews other vacant positions, ICOE failed to follow proper 
procedures for the layoff with regard to Ms. McAndrews, and her layoff notice shall be 
rescinded. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, and with regard to the one classified employee pursuant to 
45308, and all notices and other requirements of those sections were provided as 
required. 
 
6 No findings are being made with regard to Jesse Lovin and Octavio Ortiz 
based on the fact that both of these employees failed to file a request for hearing in 
this matter. 15 2. Education Code sections 45117, subdivision (a)(1), authorizes a district to 
“reduce services due to lack of work or lack of funds.” 
3. A district may reduce services, “either by determining that a certain type 
of service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may 
‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent 
because fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” 
( (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)
4. A senior employee whose position is discontinued has the right to 
transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and competent to fill. 
In doing so, the senior employee is entitled to displace or “bump” a junior employee 
who is filling that position. ( (1975) 13 Cal.3d 
469, 473-474.) 
5. Except for Ms. McAndrews, a preponderance of the evidence sustained 
the statements set forth in the ICOE’s statements of reduction in force served on 
respondents concerning the services that will not be required.
6. With regard to Ms. McAndrews, a preponderance of the evidence did not 
sustain the statements set forth in the ICOE’s statements of reduction in force served 
on Ms. McAndrews based on the above findings.
7. ICOE identified the certificated (and one classified) employees who are 
providing the particular kinds of services that ICOE directed be reduced or 
discontinued. Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists 
pursuant to Education Code section 44955 to give notice to all respondents except Ms. 
McAndrews that their services will not be required for the 2024-2025 school year. The 16cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and the pupils thereof within the 
meaning of Education Code section 44949.
8. The services being reduced are the kind that ICOE may reduce.
9. Other than with regard to respondent Barbara McAndrews, no employee 
with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to perform a service that any 
respondent is certificated and competent to render.
RECOMMENDATION
It is recommended that before May 15, 2024, ICOE give notice to the 
respondents whose names are set forth below in Appendix 1, that their employment 
will be terminated at the close of the current school year, and that their services will 
not be needed for the 2024-2025 school year.
It is recommended that before May 15, 2024, the layoff notice issued to Ms. 
Barbara McAndrews be rescinded, and she be allowed to exercise her displacement 
rights.
DATE: April 29, 2024
DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
17 Appendix 17
1. Alejandra Barrios
2. Carlos Saldana 
3. Elba Palma 
4. Erika Baxter
5. Etna Quevedo 
6. Evet P. Bresseas 
7. Jerika Finnell 
8. Luz Guerrero
9. Mariel Gomez
10. Sylvia Ramirez
11. Thelma Guerrero 
 
7 The numbers used in this Appendix reflect nothing more than the number of 
respondents being laid off, these numbers have no bearing on rehire or recall rights. 