BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
COACHELLA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of Certain 
Certificated Employees of Coachella Valley Unified School 
District. 
OAH No. 2024030817 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Kimberly J. Belvedere, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 16, 2024, in Thermal, California.
Christine K. Shu and Katie J. Oh, Olivarez, Madruga Law Organization, LLP, 
represented the Coachella Valley Unified School District (CVUSD or district). 
Jon Y. Vanderpool, Vanderpool Griffith LLP, represented all 91 respondents, 
including those who filed a request for hearing but who did not file a notice of 
participation.1
Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed, and the 
matter was submitted for decision on April 16, 2024. 
 
1 The district did not object to allowing those respondents who did not file a 
notice of participation to participate in the hearing.2FACTUAL FINDINGS
Evidence Presented by the District 
1. Mayela Salcedo, Assistant Superintendent of Business Services and Chief 
Financial Advisor, and Maria McLeod, Interim Assistant Superintendent of Human 
Resources, testified on behalf of the district. The following factual findings are derived 
from their testimony and documentary evidence admitted at hearing. 
2. On March 7, 2024, the Board of Education for the Coachella Valley 
Unified School District adopted Resolution Number 2024-22, reducing particular kinds 
of certificated services and directing the Superintendent or his designee to give 
appropriate notices to certificated employees whose positions would be affected by 
the reduction. The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a 
matter reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in 
this proceeding. (
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) A school district’s decision to reduce a particular kind of 
service must not be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (
(1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 637.)
3. The resolution called for the reduction or discontinuation of 71 full-time 
equivalent (FTE) positions. Specifically, the resolution identified the FTE positions to be 
eliminated as follows: 
Multiple Subject Credential Teachers (K-8) 69 FTE 3TOSA2, K-8 Intervention 50 FTE
 TOSA, District Office 6 FTE
 Teachers, K-8 13 FTE
Pupil Personnel Services Counseling 1 FTE
Single Subject Art 1 FTE
Total Non-Management Certificated FTE: 71 FTE
4. The resolution referenced Exhibit “A,” which explained the board would 
deviate from the normal order of layoffs for personnel who had special training, 
experience, or credentials that others with more seniority did not possess (also known 
as skipping), in accordance with Education Code section 44955. The seminal case for 
the retention of less senior employees (skipping), 
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, requires a district to not only establish a specific 
need for personnel to teach a specific course of study, but to also establish that the 
certificated employee it proposes to retain has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those services. ( . at 
p.138.) The skipping criteria detailed in the resolution is: 1) certificated personnel who 
possess a valid bilingual cross-cultural language and academic development 
authorization (BCLAD), bilingual certificate of competence (BCC), bilingual 
authorization in Spanish (BASP), or a bilingual certificate of competence (BCES), and 
who will be assigned to teach in a district dual immersion program in the 2024-2025 
school year; 2) certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service in 
 
2 “TOSA” designates a teacher on special assignment. 4special education and who will be assigned within the scope of that credential in the 
2024-2025 school year; and 3) certificated personnel who will be assigned to teach 
transitional kindergarten (TK) for the 2024-2025 school year in combination with 
certain other criteria. 
5. The resolution also referenced Exhibit “B,” which established the tie-
breaking criteria for employees who first rendered paid probationary service to the 
district on the same date. The district provided a worksheet showing how it applied 
the tie-breaking criteria to four certificated personnel. No evidence showed the district 
improperly used the tie-breaking criteria, and no respondents raised any objections 
concerning tie-breaking criteria. 
6. Thereafter, the district timely provided notice to 120 certificated 
personnel advising them that their services would not be required for the 2024-2025 
school year. The reasons for the recommendation were set forth in the notice. Some of 
the notices were rescinded following the initial notice for various reasons not at issue 
here. Of the remaining certificated personnel, 91 requested a hearing, and this hearing 
followed. Respondents are identified in Appendix 1. 
7. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met. 
8. The reasons that necessitated the reduction in particular kinds of services 
were a decline in average daily attendance of students, a reduction in funding 
provided by the state, the end of COVID-era school funding, and the fact that not 
reducing particular kinds of services would result in continued deficit spending for 
years to come. A review of the exhibits pertaining to the budget, which included the 
2023-2024 Adopted Budget Financial Report dated June 22, 2023; correspondence 
between the Riverside County Office of Education (RCOE) pertaining to the 2023-2024 5budget, the First Interim Financial Report (dated January 12, 2024), and the Second 
Interim Financial Report (dated March 7, 2024); and a Fiscal Stabilization Plan; 
supported the district’s position that a reduction in force was warranted due to the 
district’s financial situation.
9. Ms. McLeod discussed the need for bilingual teachers and importance of 
having teachers with a BCLAD or other bilingual certifications. She indicated that there 
is a need in the district for such services, and positions that teach dual immersion 
classes are extremely hard to fill. Thus, it was determined that teachers with those skills 
and certifications would avoid layoff. In total, 21 teachers3were skipped based on the 
first skipping category identified in the resolution. No teachers were identified that 
could skip based on the second category identified in the resolution. Regarding the 
third category, concerning teachers who would be teaching transitional kindergarten 
and who met other specified criteria, three teachers were identified.4 Although there 
 
3 The teachers who were exempt from the reduction in force in accordance with 
the first skipping criteria identified in the resolution were: Anaya Gonzalez, Diana; 
Arredondo, Romina P.; Ayala, Angela Maria; Beltran-Lara, Crystel Alonda; Cardenas, 
Stephanie; Carrasco, Deisy; Castro Jr., Martin Loya; Covarrubias, Yuri Maria; Estrada-
Bribiesca, Cindy; Huerta, Laura Razo; Lino, Mirka Janette; Lopez, Patricia; Machuca 
Gonzalez, Marco Antonio; Marin Alcantar, Marlene; Padilla, Alma Rocio; Paez, Giselle; 
Robledo-Infante, Ruth Selene; Rodriguez, Imelda Diaz; Rodriguez, Maribel Hernandez; 
Rodriguez Mendoza, Jose; and Zavala, Talitha N.
4 The teachers who were exempt from the reduction in force in accordance with 
the third skipping criteria were: Brown, Justin D.; Coronel, Elisa; and Vieyra, Alicia 
Ericka.6was no testimony regarding the district’s rationale for skipping special education 
teachers or those who teach transitional kindergarten, no evidence established that 
the district’s skip of personnel in these two categories was arbitrary or capricious. The 
evidence also did not demonstrate that the district made any erroneous identifications 
with respect to any of the 24 teachers who were skipped.
10. Ms. McLeoud also determined whether the employees identified for 
layoff held any other credentials that would entitle them to “bump” into a position 
being held by a junior employee. A senior employee whose position is discontinued 
has the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is certificated and 
competent to fill. In doing so, the senior employee is entitled to displace or “bump” a 
junior employee who is filling that position. (  
(1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.) In total, 11 certificated personnel had the right to 
bump a junior teacher; eight chose to exercise their bumping rights.5 Three chose not 
to do so.6 No evidence was introduced that the district improperly “bumped” any 
employees.
11. Ms. McLeoud noted that Maria Dungao, who challenged her layoff 
because she is in a special assignment in the district office, has a multiple subject 
 
5 The certificated personnel who elected to bump junior teachers were: Castro, 
Evelyn Marie; Dixon, Gwendolyn Leann; Hernandez Flores, Deyci; Morales, Viridiana; 
Simoneau, Edward Joseph; Smith, Christopher Jon; Tejeda Beriguete, Kelvin R.; and 
Tinsley, Christine Marie. 
6 The three certificated personnel who chose to be laid off rather than bump a 
junior employee were: Bauman, Patricia Andrea; Ramos, Vianey; and Tittnich, Maricela. 7credential, which subjects her to the reduction in force regardless of her assignment. 
When selecting which certificated personnel would be subject to the reduction in 
force, the district went strictly by seniority, the credential held, skipping criteria, 
bumping criteria, and applicable law.
12. The services identified in the resolution are particular kinds of services 
that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955. The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue those services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious. It was a proper exercise of the board’s discretion. The 
reduction and discontinuation of services was related to the welfare of the district and 
its pupils, and it became necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
as determined by the board. No particular kinds of services were lowered to levels less 
than those levels mandated by state or federal law.
13. Positively assured attrition was considered in the layoff decisions and will 
be used in making future rehire decisions. 
14. With the exception of the employees being exempted (skipped) by 
Exhibit A of the resolution, no less senior teachers are being retained while more 
senior teachers credentialed to perform the same service are being laid off. 
Evidence Presented by Respondents 
15. Several respondents elected to testify at the hearing. Their testimony is 
summarized below.
16. Ana Ceja Avila is an elementary school teacher who teaches a fifth and 
sixth grade combination class. She is also able to teach English learners. She explained 
that she was a student in the CVUSD for her entire elementary school education, and 8her experience is what inspired her to become a teacher. She cares about her job and 
wants to be there for her students. She understands why the reduction in force is 
necessary but emphasized that not knowing what the future holds, and the lack of job 
security is a difficult situation to experience. 
17. Samantha Valdez is a kindergarten teacher but has also taught second 
grade. Ms. Valdez believes she has been a valued educator throughout her tenure and 
the principal even described her as an asset to the CVUSD. Ms. Valdez went to school 
in the CVUSD, and she is honored to be teaching where she attended elementary 
school many years ago. Ms. Valdez understands why the reduction in force is 
happening but has great concerns regarding how the reduction in force will affect the 
students and the community as a whole. 
18. Maria Dungao is on special assignment at the district and involved with 
coaching English Language Development teachers. She goes to different school sites 
to coach the various teachers and spends most of her time at secondary schools and 
high schools. She is confused why she is included in the reduction in force because her 
position is not being eliminated. Prior to being placed in her position, the position was 
vacant, and her belief is nobody is able to bump into her position. Her position is very 
important because it helps students become classified as English-proficient, which has 
a big impact on their ability to choose electives when they get to high school. There 
are no other teachers in the district that do what she does. 
19. Edward Simoneau works in the district office and is on a team of six 
teachers in the district office on special assignment that provide various types of 
support to teachers across the district. Other people on his team received the same 
layoff notice, but at least one was able to bump into a classroom position. He 
understands why he is getting laid off, but he shares Ms. Dungao’s perplexion 9regarding why she is being laid off because the resolution identifies only six positions 
in the district office as subject to the reduction in force, and Ms. Dungao is not part of 
the team he is on.
Arguments
20. The district argued that due to declining enrollment, changes in funding 
from the state, and the expiration of COVID funding, a reduction in force was 
necessary and the district’s decision was proper. The district would like to remain 
fiscally solvent and does not take the decision to reduce FTEs lightly. However, the 
district followed applicable law with respect to a reduction in force, procedural 
requirements, notice requirements, and the respondents identified for layoff should be 
upheld. Further, with respect to Ms. Dungao’s argument that she should not be subject 
to the layoff since her position is not identified in the resolution, the district noted that 
the subcategories in the resolution beneath the number of 69 multiple subject 
credential FTEs to be reduced are “mere descriptors,” and Ms. Dungao therefore is 
subject to the layoff. In other words, the layoff is based on her credential, not her 
assignment.  
21. Respondents noted that the way the district conducted this reduction in 
force was transparent, and there are no challenges to the manner in which the district 
selected individuals for layoffs with respect to skipping, bumping, or tie-breaking
procedures. However, with respect to Ms. Dungao, the resolution identifies six special 
assignment positions to be eliminated, and Ms. Dungao’s position is not one of them. 
As such, there is no reason why she should be subject to the layoff. 10 LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
1. Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections 
were provided as required. 
2. A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall 
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)
3. A preponderance of the evidence sustained the statements set forth in 
the district’s statements of reduction in force served on respondents concerning the 
services that will not be required. 
4. The district identified the certificated employees who are providing the 
particular kinds of services that the board directed be reduced or discontinued. 
Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not 
be required for the 2024-2025 school year. The cause relates solely to the welfare of 
the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 
44949.
5. No employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to 
perform a service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render.11 6. Although Ms. Dungao’s special assignment position may not be one that 
is listed in the six “TOSA” positions being eliminated in the resolution, the lead 
category for the 69 FTEs under which that category falls is teachers with a multiple 
subject credential. Ms. Dungao has a multiple subject credential. Therefore, she is 
subject to the reduction in force despite her special assignment in the district office. 
RECOMMENDATION 
It is recommended that before May 15, 2024, the Board of Education for the 
Coachella Valley Unified School District give notice to the respondents whose names 
are set forth below, in Appendix 1, that their employment will be terminated at the 
close of the current school year and that their services will not be needed for the 
2024-2025 school year. 
 
DATE: May 1, 2024
KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings12 Appendix 17
1. Aguirre, Claudia H.
2. Allen, Mark Douglas 
3. Badena, Pearla Janette
4. Barragan, Bianca
5. Bartlett Delariva, Brianna Bernadette
6. Bauman, Patricia Andrea  
7. Beltran-Zazueta, Rafael 
8. Blume, Shelley Margorita
9. Burke, Charlene Cota 
10. Calderon Regalado, Sandra 
11. Cambron, Andres Antonio 
12. Carlson, Teresa 
13. Ceja Avila, Ana Cristina 
14. Chang, Jeff Yen Jong 
 
7 The numbers used in this Appendix reflect nothing more than the number of 
respondents being laid off, these numbers have no bearing on rehire or recall rights. 13 15. Dungao, Maria Carina
16. Espinoza, Julissa Ortiz 
17. Fernandez, Selene Hernandez 
18. Garcia, Lilia Ivette F. 
19. Garcia Mejorado, Brenda 
20. Garcia Toral, Maria Del Carmen 
21. Gentry, Alexia Marie 
22. Gonzales, Cristal Yvette 
23. Grijalva, Lynda Alexis 
24. Gutierrez, Jennifer Breanna 
25. Guzman, Amanda 
26. Hernandez, Peter R. 
27. Huerta, Veronica 
28. Leon, Vanessa 
29. Lopez, Alyssa Mylin 
30. Mendez, Saul 
31. Meza, Jessica 
32. Meza-Bojorquez, Paola 14 33. Naranjo, Laura
34. Okimura, Megan 
35. Ortega, Concepcion 
36. Ortega Aguirre, Maria J. 
37. Osorio, Karen Giselle 
38. Pimentel-Ramos, Michelle 
39. Ramirez, Ashley Marie 
40. Ramirez-Rodriguez, Ana Gissell 
41. Ramos, Vianey 
42. Regalado Gonzalez, Maribel 
43. Rubio, Ashley Marie 
44. Ruiz Jimenez, Cecilio Bladimir 
45. Saenz, Analilia R. 
46. Saenz, Jasmine Soleil 
47. Sanchez, Abby Lynn 
48. Serrato, Jessica Rodriguez 
49. Sical, Josaphat Esteban 
50. Siddiqui, Sabaina Khurram 15 51. Steele, Ericka Lynn
52. Talos, Damian Constantin 
53. Tinajero-Orozco, Martha 
54. Tittnich, Maricela 
55. Toledo, Danya 
56. Torres, Maria Angelina 
57. Valdez, Samantha L. (aka Samantha Granillo) 
58. Vasquez, Everlyn 
59. Zamora-Cervantes, Mayra 