BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
WILLIAM S. HART UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE WILLIAM S. HART UNION 
HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Respondents. 
OAH No. 2024030532 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Julie Cabos Owen, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on April 17 and 24, 
2024, and continued the matter for submission of closing briefs on April 29, 2024. 
William S. Hart Union High School District (District) was represented by Vanessa Lee, 
Attorney at Law with Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP. Tamra M. Smith, Attorney at Law 
with Egality Law, represented all Respondents (Represented Respondents) except for 
Natalie Marquez (Respondent Marquez), who was self-represented.
Testimony and documents were received in evidence. After presentation of the 
evidence on April 17 and 24, 2024, the record was left open, and the matter was 
continued for submission of closing briefs on April 29, 2024. The District and 2 Represented Respondents timely filed and served their closing briefs. Respondent 
Marquez did not submit any closing brief. 
The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 29, 2024. 
The hearing of this matter was originally set for April 9, 2024. The hearing was 
continued from April 9, 2024, until April 17, 2024; from April 17, 2024, until April 24, 
2024; and from April 24, 2024, until April 29, 2024, as described in more detail on the 
record and in any written orders granting and confirming the continuances. Pursuant 
to Education Code sections 44949, subdivision (c), and 44955, subdivision (c), the 
continuances extended the deadline for submission of the proposed decision until 
May 28, 2024. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Parties and Jurisdiction 
1. All Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 
2. Collyn Nielsen is the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources for 
the District. 
3. On February 21, 2024, Mr. Nielsen recommended to the Governing Board 
of the District (Board), pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, that the 
District reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services no later than the beginning of 
the 2024-25 school year. 
4. On February 21, 2024, the Board adopted Resolution Number 23/24-22 
(Resolution) to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services in the District no later 3 than the beginning of the 2024-2025 school year and to lay off a corresponding 
number of certificated employees to implement the Resolution. The Board authorized 
the Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee to send notices to the affected 
employees in accordance with the Education Code. 
5. On February 27, 2024, the District sent notices (layoff notices) to 53 
certificated employees, including Respondents, that their services would be reduced or 
eliminated at the close of the 2023-2024 school year. 
6. Thirty-four Respondents timely submitted requests for hearing. 
Respondent Daniel Soto did not timely submit a request for hearing, but the District 
agreed to allow him to participate in the reduction in force hearing. (The 35 
Respondents are identified in Exhibit 1, which is incorporated by reference.) 
7. The District timely served all Respondents with a Statement to 
Respondent, Statement of Reduction in Force, a blank Notice of Participation in 
Reduction in Force Hearing form, and relevant sections of the Education and 
Government Codes. 
8. The District received signed Notices of Participation in Reduction in Force 
Hearing from all Respondents. 
9. The District served all Respondents with the Amended Notice of 
Reduction in Force Hearing.
Reduction or Elimination of Particular Kinds of Services 
10. For the sake of continuity in reading this decision, some Factual Findings 
contain legal analysis and legal conclusions. 4 11. The Board’s Resolution provides for the reduction or elimination of the 
following particular kinds of services (PKS) and number of Full-time Equivalent (FTE) 
positions by the beginning of the 2024-2025 school year: Sequoia Therapeutic Special 
Education Program 3.0 FTE; General Special Education Teaching Services 5.0 FTE; 
Science 7/8 4.0 FTE; Physical Education 9.0 FTE; Math 5.0 FTE; English 12.0 FTE; Social 
Studies 12.0 FTE; Student Support Program Specialist 6.0 FTE; and Counselors 7.0 FTE. 
12. The services identified in the Board’s Resolution are PKS which may be 
reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 44955. 
Respondents contend some PKS categories are defective, but their contentions are 
unpersuasive. 
13. First, Respondents argue there is no such thing as “General Special 
Education Teaching Services” and the category is overly broad. Respondents assert 
that special education services include a wide range of services for students with 
autism, emotional disturbances, and severe disabilities as well as providing the services 
in different formats (e.g., special day classroom, pulling students out of general 
education classes to work one-on-one with a special education teacher, etc.). However, 
as clarified by the Mr. Nielsen, whose responsibilities include making 
recommendations to the Board about which PKS to reduce and implementing the 
Resolution, the categorization of General Special Education Teaching Services means 
Special Education Teaching Services in the Mild to Moderate classification, but not 
additional classifications such as Moderate to Severe, Deaf and Hard of Hearing, etc. 
14. Consequently, the least senior employees providing General Special 
Education Teaching Services (i.e., Mild to Moderate) would be subject to layoff in this 
category. 5 15. Second, Respondents contend that Sequoia Therapeutic Special 
Education Program is the same as General Special Education Teaching Services and 
should be combined with that PKS category. However, Mr. Nielson testified credibly 
that Sequoia Therapeutic Special Education Program is a program on its own site 
where staff work with emotionally disturbed students, and the credentialed special 
education teachers assigned there must also be adept at working with that student 
population.
16. Consequently, the least senior employees providing services at the 
Sequoia Therapeutic Special Education Program would be subject to layoff in this 
category. 
17. Respondents also question the number of FTE positions authorized to be 
reduced or eliminated, and Respondents argue that the Board must include prior 
attrition, including vacated positions and retirements, in the number of FTEs it 
authorizes for elimination or reduction. This assertion is not persuasive. Mr. Nielsen 
testified that, on his recommendation to the Board prior to adoption of the Resolution, 
the Board considered prior attrition in computing the number of FTEs to reduce or 
eliminate, and therefore lowered the number. The District continued to consider 
additional attrition when determining the number of layoff notices to be served on its 
employees and in rescinding layoff notices even after the hearing concluded. The 
District is not planning to fill any vacated positions. However, if the District keeps the 
positions open, it must consider whether senior employees subject to layoff are 
certificated and competent to fill those positions. 
18. There was no evidence that the reduction or elimination of the FTE 
positions will reduce services below mandated levels. 6 19. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified PKS was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and constituted a proper exercise of discretion. 
20. The reduction or elimination of the identified PKS relates solely to the 
welfare of the schools in the District and its students. 
Seniority Lists
21. The District maintains a Seniority List that contains employees’ seniority 
dates, current assignments, and credential and certificate information. 
22. With some exceptions noted below (Factual Findings 23; 57 and 58), the 
information on the Seniority List is accurate. 
23. By stipulation of the parties: “There is an error in the District's Seniority 
List, which is in evidence as District Exhibit 10. On page A1311 of Exhibit 10, the 
District's Seniority List states that employee Michael R. Miller (#846) has a seniority 
date of "07/01/21." In reality, Mr. Miller's seniority date with the District is July 31, 
2023.” (Exhibit 174.) 
24. The District used the Seniority List to develop a proposed layoff list of the 
least senior employees currently assigned in the various PKS being reduced or 
eliminated. The District also used the Seniority List to determine which employees are 
eligible to “bump” less senior employees assigned to provide services that the senior 
employees are certificated and competent to render. 
25. The District determined that nobody less senior than Respondents was 
being retained to render services that Respondents are certificated and competent to 
render. 7 Tie-Breaking Criteria 
26. On February 21, 2024, the Board adopted Resolution Number 23/24-23,
(Tie Breaker Resolution) establishing tie-breaking criteria for determining the order of 
layoff for certificated employees who first rendered paid service on the same date. 
27. The tie-breaking criteria were to be applied in the following order: (1) 
possession of a currently valid credential in descending order of priority with 
subcategories (a) Clear, (b) Preliminary, (c) Intern, and (d) Short-term Staff permit 
(STSP), Provisional Intern Permit (PIP), Pre-Intern Certificate, or other provisional 
credential or waiver; (2) Possession of an authorization/certification to provide 
instruction to English Learners in descending order of priority with subcategories (a) 
BCLAD, (b) CLAD/LDS certification, and (c) Emergency CLAD certificate; (3) Possession 
of more than one valid credential; (4) Current Head Varsity Coach; (5) Possession of a 
currently valid supplementary authorization; (6) Possession of CTE/Designated Subjects 
Credential; (7) Possession of a doctorate degree; (8) Possession of a master's degree; 
and (9) Current Assistant Varsity Coach. In any case where a tie still results after 
applying the criteria above, the tie(s) shall be broken by lottery. 
28. Respondents did not challenge the tie-breaking criteria. However, they 
challenge the application of tie-breaking criteria as set forth below.
Competency Criteria 
29. If a senior teacher is “certificated and competent” to render a service 
provided by a more junior employee, the senior teacher is statutorily entitled to 
“bump” into the junior employee’s position, thus avoiding layoff. (Ed. Code, § 44955, 
subd. (b).) A school district has the authority and the discretion to establish 
competency criteria that relate to the skills and qualifications of a teacher for purposes 8 of determining bumping rights. ( (1987) 196 
Cal.App.3d 555, 563-567.) This discretion is limited only by a reasonableness standard 
(i.e., the district’s criteria must be reasonable, and not fraudulent, arbitrary, or 
capricious). ( (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 
796, 808.) 
30. Paragraph B of the Resolution established a definition of competency to 
determine which employees are “certificated and competent” to render a service such 
that a senior employee currently assigned in a position subject to layoff can “bump” 
into the position of a less senior employee not subject to layoff. 
31. The Board defined “competency” to provide a particular kind of service as 
follows:
(1) Possession of a current valid credential to teach the 
assigned subject matter; 
(2) An employee must have all appropriate certifications, as 
determined by the District and state law, to hold the 
position (e.g., EL Certification, CLAD, registered nursing 
license). 
(Exhibit 2, p. A3-A4.)
32. The District’s competency criteria are reasonable. Therefore, the District’s 
definition of competency in determining bumping rights is upheld. 
33. The District analyzed potential bumping rights of teachers subject to 
layoff, and the District determined that nobody less senior than Respondents was 9 being retained to render services which Respondents are certificated and competent 
to render. 
Rescinded Layoff Notices 
34. After the first hearing day, the District rescinded the layoff notices of the 
following Respondents due to additional attrition that occurred after March 15, 2024: 
Janet Alexander, Anthony Pena Avila, Michael Carr, Lara Forgrave, Adam Garcia, Heila 
Owston, James Park, and Jacqueline Resler. The District also rescinded the layoff notice 
of Cristopher Boiles because it realized it had mistakenly retained a more junior 
employee in the Sequoia Therapeutic Special Education Program. This left 26 
Respondents: Slade Barbosa, Kelly Brown, Douglas Butler, Elizabeth Carson, Kelli-Ann 
Cassio, Matthew Davis, Apostolos Gatzas, Daniel Hays, Carolyn Holmgren, Lauren Imai, 
Allison Khan, Bradley Knutsen, Steven Kwak, Leticia Ledesma, Susan Lundin, Natalie 
Marquez, Bridgette Martinez, Karyn McHorney, John Okenka, Katie Reagan, Megan 
Reck, Kaitlyn Salazar, Lindsey Schultz, Lilliawna Shaffer, Holly Marie Smith, and Daniel 
Soto. 
35. In its closing brief, the District noted that, after April 24, 2024, it had 
rescinded the layoff notices of another five Respondents due to additional attrition 
occurring after March 15, 2024: Apostolos Gatzas, Carolyn Holmgren, Bradley Knutsen, 
Natalie Marquez, and Kaitlyn Salazar. The District’s representation is accepted, and the 
layoff notices of those Respondents are deemed rescinded.
Skipping Criteria 
36. A District may deviate from laying off employees in order of seniority if 
the District “demonstrates a specific need for personnel to . . . provide services 
authorized by a services credential [and] the certificated employee has special training 10and experience necessary to . . . provide those services, which others with more 
seniority do not possess." (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).) 
37. In the Resolution’s definition of competency (Paragraph B), the Board 
included a subparagraph that dealt with skipping Theater teachers: 
(3) The District has a specific need for certificated staff to 
teach Theater with either a Theater or English credential, 
related course work, special training, and experience; 
therefore the District will skip and retain Theater teachers 
for the 2024-25 school year. 
(Exhibit 2, p. A4.) 
38. Respondents did not challenge the skipping criteria in Paragraph B 
dealing with Theater teachers. 
LANGUAGE OF PARAGRAPH CRE: COUNSELORS
39. Paragraph C of the Resolution provides:
For the purposes of certificated employee assignments and 
reassignments effectuated as a result of this reduction or 
elimination of services, it is necessary to retain certificated 
counselors that provide bilingual services to students. Thus, 
in order for a more senior certificated counselor to displace 
a less senior certificated employee currently providing 
counseling services, the more senior certificated counselor 
must possess and be currently using bilingual skills with 
students. 11(Exhibit 2, p. A4.) 
40. Paragraph C of the Resolution uses language similar to competency 
criteria, referring to “a more senior certificated counselor” displacing “a less senior 
certificated employee currently providing counseling services” if the senior counselor 
possesses and uses bilingual skills. However, the first part of Paragraph C indicates a 
need “to retain certificated counselors that provide bilingual services to students,” 
which suggests possible skipping criteria. At hearing and in its closing brief, the 
District asserts that Paragraph C is skipping criteria, citing Education Code section 
44955, subdivision (d)(1). As such, the District must comply with the requirements of 
that Education Code section in order to “skip” junior counselors from layoff. 
41. Although Paragraph C articulates a need for counselors to provide 
“bilingual services,” the purported need and the stated criteria are vague and subject 
to arbitrary application. First, there are different standards applied for senior and junior 
employees. The criteria require a senior employee to possess “bilingual skills and be 
currently using bilingual skills with students,” in order to displace a junior employee. 
However, the criteria do not require that junior employees have “bilingual skills,” only 
that the junior employees are “currently providing counseling services.” Neither the 
term “bilingual skills” nor the term “bilingual services” is defined. The criteria do not 
articulate in which language a senior counselor should have “bilingual skills” (Spanish, 
Korean, and Russian are some of the languages students speak) or in what manner 
they must be “currently using bilingual skills with students” (completely fluent in all 
foreign languages spoken, fluent in some of the languages, conversational/functional 
in one or more language, etc.). The criteria similarly fail to articulate what “bilingual 
services” the skipped counselors are providing, including in what language(s) and in 
what manner. Most significantly, the criteria fail to indicate what “special training and 12experience” the skipped counselors have, thus providing no objective standards with 
which to measure whether senior counselors possess the requisite special training and 
experience. 
42. Given the foregoing, Paragraph C is vague and does not meet the 
requirements of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). 
APPLICATION OF PARAGRAPH C TO COUNSELOR LAYOFF 
43. The vagueness of Paragraph C is also demonstrated by the improper and 
arbitrary application of the criteria to the District’s counselor layoffs, as discussed 
below.
44. The District “skipped” seven counselors ( Eva Alonzo-Ayon, Karla Ivone 
Gonzales, Guillermo Gonzalez, Brianna Ortiz, Maria Reyes, William Vega, and Alicia 
Viera) with same seniority date (8/1/22) as Respondents Elizabeth Carson , Lauren Imai, 
Susan Lundin, Bridgette Martinez, and Holly Marie Smith (Respondent Counselors). The 
District admits it did not apply the tie-breaking criteria to determine these counselors’ 
relative seniority. Instead, the District apparently used Paragraph C as a tiebreak 
among the counselors with the same seniority date. Although the Board may have 
included bilingual fluency (measured by objective data) as a tie-breaking criterion, the 
Tie Break Resolution does not contain such a criterion. Consequently, Paragraph C was 
improperly applied as a tie-breaking criterion and not as a means to “skip” junior 
employees.
45. In determining that Respondents were subject to layoff, the District 
looked at the counselors’ 2022 job applications to determine their current bilingual 
skills. On their job applications, in the section “About You,” Respondents Elizabeth 
Carson, Lauren Imai, Susan Lundin, and Holly Marie Smith did not check the box 13indicating “Languages (other than English).” Respondent Bridgette Martinez  did check 
the box, and her response indicated, “Spanish . . . [ ] Fluent [x] Some.” (Exhibit 15, p. 
A1369.) However, Mr. Nielsen testified, since Respondent Bridgette Martinez’s 
application only indicated “some” Spanish, this indicated she was “not that fluent.” 
46. The skipped counselors’ job applications were not presented in evidence. 
Mr. Nielsen testified that he “spoke to principals” who observed if a counselor “needed 
to use an interpreter to translate.” There was no uniform measure of level of fluency 
and in what language. 
47. The District did not demonstrate the skipped counselors had special 
training and experience necessary to provide specialized services. Rather, the District 
determined who had “bilingual skills” or were providing “bilingual services” based on a 
subjective self-assessment, the checking of a box on an employment application two 
years ago, and the undocumented conversations with unidentified principals regarding 
who “needed to use an interpreter.” This amorphous determination of bilingual skills 
does not meet the requirement of special training and experience as required by 
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). 
48. Given the foregoing, the skipping criteria set forth in Paragraph C of the 
Resolution and the District’s application of those criteria are arbitrary and capricious 
and cannot be upheld. 
49. With the skipping criteria for counselor layoffs invalidated, in order to 
comply with the provisions of Education Code section 44955, the District must layoff 
counselors in inverse order of seniority. However, the “skipped” counselors and 
Respondent Counselors have the same seniority date (8/1/22), and the appropriate14procedure for layoff would have been to apply tie-breaking criteria to determine their 
relative seniority. Part of the tie-breaking analysis can be addressed in this decision. 
50. As set forth more fully below, Respondent Bridgette Martinez should 
have an earlier seniority date than August 1, 2022. Consequently, she is not included in 
the tie-breaking analysis below. 
51. Had the District correctly applied its tie-breaking criteria to the 
counselors, Respondent Elizabeth Carson would have won a tie with six of the 
counselors who did not receive layoff notices (Eva Alonzo-Ayon, Karla Ivone Gonzales, 
Guillermo Gonzalez, Brianna Ortiz, Maria Reyes, William Vega) because Respondent 
Carson holds an Administrative Services Certificate in addition to her Pupil Personnel 
Services Credential. (Exhibit 14, p. A1352.) Only one other counselor with an August 1, 
2022 seniority date wins the tie break over Respondent Carson; Alicia Viera holds more 
than one credential. ( .) Consequently, Respondent Carson’s layoff notice should be 
rescinded. 
52. Regarding the remaining counselors with the same August 1, 2022
seniority date, the District presented no evidence that the retained counselors won ties 
with Respondents Lauren Imai, Susan Lundin, and Holly Marie Smith under the Board’s 
tie-breaking criteria. Therefore, the District should apply the tie-breaking criteria 
reflected in the Tiebreak Resolution to Eva Alonzo-Ayon, Karla Ivone Gonzales, 
Guillermo Gonzalez, Brianna Ortiz, Maria Reyes, William Vega  and Respondents Imai, 
Lundin, and Smith, as required by Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b). If 
Respondents Imai, Lundin, and Smith are not among the three least senior, their layoff 
notice(s) should be rescinded. 15Respondents Seeking to Change Their Seniority Dates 
COUNSELORS CHALLENGING SENIORITY DATES
53. Under the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) between the District 
and the Hart District Teachers Association (HDTA), counselors have a longer work year 
than teachers and therefore receive additional compensation. (Testimony of HDTA 
President John Minkus.) Per the CBA, a counselor’s school year consists of 196 
workdays, compared to 185 workdays for teachers. The extra workdays are scheduled 
at the direction of the counselors’ supervisors and in accordance with the needs of the 
respective school sites. (Test. of Minkus.) 
54. Pursuant to Education Code section 44845, a certificated employee “shall 
be deemed to have been employed on the date upon which [they] first rendered paid 
service in a probationary position.” However, this does not necessarily include non-
mandatory attendance at training or workshops prior to an employee’s contract start 
date. 
55. Respondents Imai, Martinez, and Smith are currently assigned seniority 
dates August 1, 2022. They claim their assigned seniority date is incorrect because the 
District paid them to render services as counselors prior to August 1, 2022. They noted 
they reported to work during the last week of July 2022 to begin performing counselor 
duties, but they were unable to access the District’s payroll system to enter time until 
August 1, 2022, their official contract start dates. 
Respondent Holly Marie Smith 
56. Respondent Holly Marie Smith works at Saugus High School. She 
contends her seniority date is July 26, 2022, rather than August 1, 2022, as stated on 16the seniority list. Respondent Smith received an email invitation from a District 
administrator regarding a “counselor meeting about master schedule” from 8:00 a.m. 
to 9:00 a.m., on July 26, 2022. (Exhibit 169, p. B524.) Of the eight invited “guests,” five 
had responded “yes,” one had responded “no,” and two were awaiting responses. 
(.) The Respondent Smith attended the meeting on July 26, 2022. The evidence did 
not establish it was mandatory. Respondent Smith’s time records from January-March 
2023 contain the notation, “started July 26, but I was not able to be placed in [time 
records] [un]til Aug. 1st.” (Exhibit 171, p. B527.) This appears to be a notation based on 
Respondent Smith’s assertion, not a District confirmation that July 26, 2022, was her 
first date of paid service as a counselor. Therefore, Respondent Smith failed to 
establish a basis to adjust her August 1, 2022 seniority date. 
Respondent Bridgette Martinez 
57. Respondent Bridgette Martinez works at Valencia High School. She 
contends her seniority date is July 26, 2022, rather than August 1, 2022, as stated on 
the seniority list. She received an email from Justin Thomas, Chair of the Counseling 
Department, stating: 
I don't know what has been told to you yet regard when we 
are returning or when you will start. Most of us will be 
returning on Tuesday, July 26th. I understand that it is 
somewhat early, but it is to process through new students 
and get prepared for registration. There are a few new 
students that will be in your alpha that are coming in on 
Tuesday. I have tried to block my calendar to be with you 
for those appointments to help. Are you able to start on the 
26th? 17(Exhibit 163, p. B510.)
58. Respondent Martinez reported to work on July 26, 2022, and rendered 
service as a counselor for which she was paid. Although the email did not specify she 
was required to start work on July 26, 2022, it was sent by the Counseling Department 
Chair indicating most of the counselors would be returning on July 26, 2022, and that 
she had appointments scheduled on that date to process new students. She 
reasonably construed this was mandatory work. Therefore, Respondent Martinez 
established that she began providing paid services as a counselor on July 26, 2022. 
Consequently, her seniority date should be adjusted to July 26, 2022. (This would have 
placed her higher in seniority than the skipped counselors, establishing grounds to 
rescind her layoff notice.) 
Respondent Lauren Imai 
59. Respondent Lauren Imai is a counselor in the Wellness Center at Golden 
Valley High School. She contends her seniority date is July 27, 2022, rather than 
August 1, 2022, as stated on the seniority list. She testified she started working on July 
27, 2022, preparing for when students would later come in to get their class schedules. 
The evidence did not establish this was mandatory. Therefore, Respondent Imai failed 
to establish a basis to adjust her August 1, 2022 seniority date.
CAPTURING HEARTS – RESPONDENTS BARBOSA,LUNDIN, CARSON, SMITH 
60. Several Respondents, including Slade Barbosa, Susan Lundin, Elizabeth 
Carson, and Holly Marie Smith testified that their seniority dates should be adjusted 
because they attended the Capturing Kids’ Hearts program in July. Capturing Kids’ 
Hearts is a program to help teachers connect with children on a personal level in order 
to better instruct those students The District encourages its certificated employees’ 18participation and pays them for their attendance. However, participation in this 
training program is not mandatory. Therefore, Respondents failed to establish a basis 
to adjust their seniority dates based on their attendance at the Capturing Kids’ Hearts 
program. 
RESPONDENT BRIDGETTE MARTINEZ PRIOR LAYOFF
61. Respondent Bridgette Martinez was previously employed by the District 
and laid off May 2011. The District did not rehire her the following school year, and 
she sought employment elsewhere. Respondent Martinez asserts she is entitled to 
restoration of her prior seniority date with the District.
62. Permanent certificated employees who are laid off have a preferred right 
to reemployment in a position for which they are certificated and competent if they 
are reemployed within 39 months. (Educ. Code, § 44956, subd. (a).) If the employee is 
reemployed within 39 months, their absence is treated as a leave of absence with no 
break in service, and they retain their original seniority date. (Educ. Code, § 44956, 
subd. (d).) As such, to be eligible to retain her original seniority date with the District, 
Respondent Martinez must have been reemployed as a certificated employee by 
September 30, 2014. Respondent Martinez was not reemployed with the District until 
July 2022. Consequently, Respondent Martinez failed to establish a basis to retain her 
seniority date from her prior employment with the District. 
RESPONDENT KELLY-ANN CASSIO –PRIOR SUBSTITUTE SERVICE
63. Respondent Kelly-Ann Cassio has a preliminary Social Science credential, 
and her District seniority date is July 31, 2023. She asserts her correct seniority date is 
an unspecified day in December 2022.  1964. During the Fall of the 2022-2023 school year Respondent Cassio began 
working for the District as a day-to-day substitute teacher. Effective October 19, 2022, 
her employment status changed, and she started employment as a long-term 
substitute for Richard Ortiz’s class while he was on leave. Mr. Ortiz passed away some 
time in December 2022. Respondent Cassio continued to teach his class as a long-term 
substitute, and the District contemplated replacing Mr. Ortiz with a teacher who had a 
clear credential. 
65. The evidence indicated that Respondent Cassio was properly classified as 
a long-term substitute effective October 19, 2022. However, she asserts that, once Mr. 
Ortiz passed away, she was entitled to his vacant position and should have been 
immediately classified as a probationary employee on his death. Respondent Cassio 
provided no persuasive authority that would have required re-classification of a long-
term substitute to a probationary employee immediately upon the absent employee’s 
death. 
66. Additionally, the evidence did not establish that Respondent Cassio 
served at least 75 percent of 2022-2023 school year to allow her long-term substitute 
services to count as probationary and thus change her seniority date. 
67. Given the foregoing, Respondent Cassio failed to establish a basis to 
adjust her seniority date. 
Assertions of “Over-Noticing” Respondents 
68. Respondents assert the District “over-noticed” teachers in several areas, 
including English (no specific Respondents identified), Science (Respondent Lindsey 
Schultz), and Special Education (Respondents Daniel Hays and Matthew Davis). This 
assertion was not established by the evidence and is based on the argument that the 20Board should have counted vacant positions as part of the number of FTEs it 
authorized for reduction. As noted above (Factual Finding 17), that argument was not 
persuasive. Consequently, Respondents (and specifically Respondents Schultz, Hays, 
and Davis) failed to establish “over-noticing” as a basis to rescind their layoff notices. 
Respondents’ Assertions of “Irregularities” in Layoffs
MISCLASSIFICATION OF LONG-TERM SUBSTITUTES  
69. Respondents assert the entire layoff should be set aside, contending the 
District misclassified as long-term substitutes (i.e., temporary) several employees 
replacing regular employees who left the District mid-year. Only a few specific 
employees were identified, but Respondents assert there may be many more. The 
long-term substitutes’ contracts were not offered in evidence. Respondents believe 
some Respondents may have greater relative seniority compared to the purportedly 
misclassified employees, thus changing their layoff status. However, Respondents’ 
speculative argument is not persuasive.
70. Respondents cite 
(2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260 ( ) to support 
their assertion that the District misclassified its employees and the layoff should be set 
aside. However, does not support Respondents’ assertion that the District’s 
long-term substitutes were misclassified.  involved the layoff of 
probationary employees while employees classified as temporary were terminated 
without the same statutory right to participate in the hearing. The Bakersfield 
Elementary Teachers Association (BETA) sought an order directing the district to 
reclassify the temporary employees as probationary and to set aside the layoff, 
asserting some of the temporary employees, if correctly classified as probationary, 21could have affected the relative seniority of other probationary teachers subject to 
layoff. 
71. The court found the temporary employees had been 
misclassified because their temporary classification was based on their certification / 
credential level (they did not hold a preliminary or clear credential), not whether they 
were serving in a temporary or substitute capacity. The court held “a person who has 
been determined to be qualified to teach is not a temporary employee simply because 
he or she is not yet fully accredited, but rather because he or she occupies a position 
the law defines as temporary. It is necessary, therefore, to differentiate a teacher's 
classification from his or her certification. ( , , 145 Cal. App. 4th at p. 
496–497.) The  court agreed that the district's policy of classifying 
employees solely on the basis of their certification was invalid. The  court 
also affirmed the trial court order directing the district to reinstate the misclassified 
employees for the following school year to positions and status consistent with their 
correct classification.
72. In this case, there is no evidence that the long-term substitutes were 
classified as temporary because of their credential. Instead, they were classified as 
temporary to fill the short-range needs of the District. Consequently, Respondents 
failed to establish that any of the identified long-term substitutes should be classified 
as probationary for purposes of this layoff or that the entire layoff should be set aside. 
ALLOWING ENGLISH TEACHER TO REVOKE RETIREMENT ELECTION 
73. On December 8, 2023, the District sent a written notice to all certificated 
staff noting that the District and the HDTA had negotiated an incentive for early 
notification of the intent to retire or resign from the District at the end of the 2023-222024 school year. The notice stated, “Any HDTA unit member who informs the 
[District] by Friday, Jan. 5, 2024, of their intent to retire or resign at the end of the 
2023-24 school year shall receive a one-time payment of $1,000. Once the unit 
member provides such notification to the District, it becomes irrevocable.” (Exhibit 
172.) 
74. An English teacher with a seniority date of August 24, 1999, Victor Limon, 
elected to retire, but he was later allowed to revoke his retirement election. 
Respondents assert this caused a greater number of English teachers to be laid off. 
This assertion is not persuasive. Mr. Nielsen testified that he factored in each of the 
early retirements and resignations when determining the number of FTEs to 
recommend to the Board for layoff, and the Board therefore recommended a smaller 
number of FTEs be reduced. The layoff notices have already been issued, and thus, Mr. 
Limon’s revocation of his retirement election will not adversely affect the number of 
layoff notices issued to Respondents. Consequently, Respondents failed to establish 
that any Respondent’s layoff notice should be rescinded based on Mr. Limon’s 
revocation of his retirement election. 
LAYOFF OUT OF ORDER DUE TO EXPIRATION OF EMERGENCY CLAD 
(RESPONDENT STEVEN KWAK) 
75. Respondent Steven Kwak has a seniority date of September 1, 2022. He 
teaches English, and he was issued a layoff notice. Less senior English teachers Jennifer 
Martinez (seniority date 1/9/23) and Janelle Burkholder (seniority date 7/31/23), both 
holding EL authorizations, were retained. Additionally, on April 29, 2024, the District 
rescinded the layoff notices of two more English teachers with less seniority than 
Respondent Kwak: Madalyn Theodore-Tuttle (7/31/23) and Respondent Carolyn 
Holmgren (7/31/23), both of whom hold EL authorizations. 2376. Respondent Kwak began working with the District as a day-to-day 
substitute in October 2021, transitioned to a long-term English substitute in 2022, and 
began teaching English full-time for the 2023-2024 school year. In Fall 2022, he was 
advised by District administrator, Lisa Holt, he would need to obtain his EL 
authorization, starting with an Emergency CLAD permit. In December 2022, 
Respondent Kwak applied for and subsequently obtained an Emergency CLAD permit. 
Attached to his application was a document he signed stating: 
I understand that my Emergency CLAD Permit will only be 
valid for a one-year authorization During that time, I intend 
to complete renewal requirements for reissuance. I will 
either complete at least six semester units of coursework 
with a grade of "C" of better in a Commission-approved 
CTEL program, or I will pass two of the following: Test 1, 
Test 2, or Test 3 of the CTEL exam. 
(Exhibit 149, p. B418.) 
77. Respondent Kwak failed to pass CTEL examinations in August and 
November 2023. His Emergency CLAD Permit expired. In February 2024, he decided to 
enroll in the CTEL courses rather than attempt to re-take the tests. Respondent Kwak 
needs to complete three courses to obtain his CLAD certification, and he needs to 
complete two courses to re-apply for an Emergency CLAD permit. He is finishing up 
the first CTEL online course. He is hoping to complete the third course by August 2024. 
78. Respondent Kwak does not currently possess any EL authorization. 
79. Respondent Kwak asserts he must be retained because the District failed 
to issue layoff notices in inverse order of seniority as required by the Education Code. 24He contends that using this layoff process to resolve his delay obtaining his EL 
Authorization is a misuse of the layoff process. He points out that, if the District 
believed he was not fulfilling the terms of his employment contract, it could have 
pursued other courses, including non-reelection or termination for cause. His assertion 
is persuasive. 
80. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), prohibits a district from 
retaining a less senior employee to render a service that a senior employee is 
“certificated and competent to render.” However, “Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a 
school district may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of 
seniority [if]: The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific 
course or course of study, . . . and that the certificated employee has special training 
and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study or to provide those 
services, which others with more seniority do not possess.” (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. 
(d)(1).)
81. The District has no authority in this layoff proceeding to deviate from 
seniority order except as set forth in Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d). 
The Resolution provides no criteria for skipping less senior English teachers. 
Additionally, in skipping less senior English teachers, the District failed to establish that 
any of the less senior teachers teaches a “specific course of study” that requires 
“special training and experience.” 
82. The District’s stated basis for terminating Respondent Kwak out of order 
is that he does not meet all of the Resolution’s competency criteria; that is, he does 
not “have all appropriate certifications, as determined by the District and state law, to 
hold the position (e.g., EL Certification, CLAD . . . ),” because his Emergency CLAD 
Permit has expired. This analysis is incorrect. 2583. Competency criteria is considered when analyzing whether a senior 
employee subject to layoff is certificated and competent to bump into a junior 
employee’s position that the senior employee does not currently hold. The case cited 
by the District, . (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, notes 
that districts have the discretion to determine competency criteria and upholds the 
district’s competency criteria as reasonable. In this case, the reasonableness of the 
competency criteria is not at issue; as set forth in Factual Finding 32 above, the 
District’s competency criteria are deemed reasonable. However, the District seeks to 
inappropriately apply the competency criteria in determining whether to lay off an 
employee from his current position, rather than determining if he is certificated and 
competent to bump into another position. This manner of applying the competency 
criteria incorrect, and the District cites no authority that would allow it to do so. 
84. Respondent Kwak established that his layoff notice should be rescinded 
based on the District’s incorrect manner of applying its competency criteria. 
SPECIAL EDUCATION – FAILURE TO LAYOFF JUNIOR EMPLOYEE 
85. Kelsey Saba, a special education teacher, shares a seniority date of July 
31, 2023, with several other special education teachers including Respondents Daniel 
Hays and Matthew Davis. At hearing, the District admitted it improperly skipped Kelly 
Saba. To remedy the failure to layoff Ms. Saba, the District subsequently rescinded the 
layoff notice of Respondent Jean Baird Smith who was at the top of relative seniority 
list after application of tie-breaking criteria. 
86. Respondents Hays and Davis assert they also won tiebreaks with Ms. 
Saba. Respondents argue that all special education layoff notices are invalid because 
they were tainted by nepotism in that Ms. Saba is the daughter of the District’s 26Director of Special Education. This alleged basis to rescind all special education layoff 
notices is not persuasive. Respondents cite no authority to establish that the alleged 
(or even actual) impetus for the improper skipping constitutes a valid basis to rescind 
all layoff notices in a PKS category. In this case, the error was remedied by rescinding 
the layoff notice of the most relatively senior employee, Respondent Jean Baird-Smith. 
Vacated Positions 
87. Several Respondents assert they are qualified to fill positions that have 
been or are being vacated. Specifically: Respondent Lindsey Schultz asserts she should 
be reassigned to the Biology position vacated by David Stradling; and Respondent 
Megan Reck asserts she should be reassigned to the .6 FTE Health position vacated by 
Donna Lee. They are not asserting bumping rights, because they are not seeking to 
bump into a junior employee’s current position. The District is not planning to fill any 
vacated positions but instead plans to close them. Respondents cite no authority 
requiring the District to keep positions open. However, if the District does keep the 
positions open, it must consider whether senior employees subject to layoff are 
certificated and competent to fill those positions. 
Respondent Slade Barbosa (PE / Health - partial PKS)
88. Respondent Slade Barbosa has a seniority date of August 1, 2022, when 
he was hired by the District as a Health Teacher. He currently teaches .2 FTE PE and .8 
FTE Health. 
89. Mr. Nielsen’s credible testimony established the following: Typically, a 
single subject credential in Health is required to teach Health. However, PE teachers 
can teach Health if they go through the Committee on Assignments process (Ed. Code, 27§ 44258.7). Respondent Barbosa participated in that process and could teach Health 
again next year if he goes through the Committee on Assignments process again. 
90. Health was not a PKS that was reduced or eliminated, and there is no 
basis to reduce Respondent Barbosa’s .8 FTE of Health. Consequently, Respondent 
Barbosa established that .8 of his layoff notice should be rescinded.
Respondent Lindsey Schultz - Corrected Seniority List 
91. The parties entered into the following oral stipulation at hearing: 
Respondent Lindsey Schultz holds a Master’s degree that is not reflected on the 
District’s tie-breaking and seniority lists. At Exhibit 14, page A1344, there should be an 
X in the Master’s degree column for Respondent Schultz. 
92. Respondent Schultz and another science teacher, Shania Schull, have the 
same seniority date of July 31, 2023. Respondent Schultz holds a preliminary credential 
and a Master’s degree, and Ms. Schull holds an STSP with no advanced degrees. 
Consequently, pursuant to the tie-breaking criteria Respondent Lindsey Schultz has 
greater relative seniority than Ms. Schull. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 
2. The services identified in the Board’s Resolution are particular kinds of 
services that can be reduced or discontinued pursuant to Education Code section 
44955. 283. The Board’s decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious, and it was a proper exercise of the Board’s discretion. 
4. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the 
welfare of the District’s schools and students within the meaning of Education Code 
sections 44955. 
5. Services will not be reduced below mandated levels. 
6. Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees in the 
District due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 
7. Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (b) and (d), provide, in 
pertinent part: 
(b) [T]he services of no permanent employee may be 
terminated . . . while any probationary employee, or any 
other employee with less seniority, is retained to render a 
service which said permanent employee is certificated and 
competent to render. [¶] . . . [¶] 
(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), a school district may 
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of 
seniority for either of the following reasons: 
(1) The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel 
to teach a specific course or course of study, or to provide 
services authorized by a services credential with a 
specialization in either pupil personnel services or health for 
a school nurse, and that the certificated employee has 29special training and experience necessary to teach that 
course or course of study or to provide those services, 
which others with more seniority do not possess. 
8. In this case, the District’s competency criteria are reasonable. (Factual 
Findings 29-33.)
9. In this case, the skipping criteria in the Resolution, Paragraph C, on its 
face, violates the requirements of Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). 
Additionally, the District did not demonstrate the skipped counselors had special 
training and experience necessary to provide specialized services as required by 
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1). Consequently, the skipping criteria 
for counselors will not be upheld. (Factual Findings 39-48.) 
10. During and following the hearing, the District rescinded the layoff notices 
issued to the following Respondents: Janet Alexander, Anthony Pena Avila, Michael 
Carr, Lara Forgrave, Adam Garcia, Heila Owston, James Park, Jacqueline Resler, 
Cristopher Boiles, Apostolos Gatzas, Carolyn Holmgren, Bradley Knutsen, Natalie 
Marquez, and Kaitlyn Salazar. The Statements of Reduction in Force against these 
Respondents should be dismissed. 
11. Cause was established to adjust the seniority date of Respondent
Bridgette Martinez from August 1, 2022, to July 26, 2022. This would place her higher 
in seniority than the retained counselors, establishing grounds to rescind her layoff 
notice. The Statement of Reduction of Force against her should be dismissed and her 
layoff notice rescinded. 
12. Cause was established to retain Respondent Elizabeth Carson because, 
had the District correctly applied its tie-breaking criteria to the counselors, 30Respondent Elizabeth Carson would have won a tie with six of the counselors who did 
not receive layoff notices. The Statement of Reduction of Force against her should be 
dismissed and her layoff notice rescinded. 
13. Cause exists to require the District to appropriately apply tie-breaking 
criteria from the Tiebreak Resolution to counselors with an August 1, 2022 seniority 
date (Eva Alonzo-Ayon, Karla Ivone Gonzales, Guillermo Gonzalez, Brianna Ortiz, Maria 
Reyes, William Vega and Respondents Lauren Imai, Susan Lundin, and Holly Marie 
Smith) to determine their relative seniority. If Respondent Lauren Imai, Respondent 
Susan Lundin, or Respondent Holly Marie Smith are not among the three lowest 
ranked after the tie-break, her/their layoff notice(s) should be rescinded. 
14. Cause exists to adjust the relative seniority of Respondent Lindsey 
Schultz, pursuant to the re-applied tie-breaking criteria. The District should determine 
if the adjusted relative seniority of Respondent Lindsey will no longer subject her to 
layoff, and if so, the Statement of Reduction of Force against her should be dismissed 
and her layoff notice rescinded. 
15. Cause does not exist to terminate Respondent Steven Kwak in that the 
District incorrectly applied its competency criteria to him. The Statement of Reduction 
in Force against Respondent Steven Kwak should be dismissed, and his layoff notice 
should be rescinded. 
16. Cause exists to terminate Respondent Slade Barbosa’s .2 FTE assignment 
in PE, but cause does not exist to terminate .8 FTE of Respondent Barbosa’s Health 
assignment because Health services were not reduced or discontinued. 3117. Except as set forth in the Legal Conclusions above and the resulting 
orders below, no junior certificated employee will be retained to perform services that 
a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.
18. Cause exists within the meaning of Education Code section 44955 for 
terminating or reducing the remaining Respondents’ employment for the 2023-2024
school year, as set forth in Factual Findings 1 through 92, and Legal Conclusions 1 
through 17.
ORDER 
1. The Statements of Reduction in Force are dismissed against the following 
Respondents, whose layoff notices have been rescinded: Janet Alexander, Anthony 
Pena Avila, Michael Carr, Lara Forgrave, Adam Garcia, Heila Owston, James Park, 
Jacqueline Resler, Cristopher Boiles, Apostolos Gatzas, Carolyn Holmgren, Bradley 
Knutsen, Natalie Marquez, Kaitlyn Salazar. 
2. The District’s seniority date for Respondent Bridgette Martinez shall be 
adjusted from August 1, 2022, to July 26, 2022. 
3. The Statements of Reduction in Force are dismissed against the following 
Respondents, and their layoff notices shall be rescinded: Elizabeth Carson, Bridgette 
Martinez, and Steven Kwak.
4. The District shall adjust the relative seniority of Respondent Lindsey 
Schultz, pursuant to the re-applied tie-breaking criteria, and the District shall 
determine if the adjusted relative seniority of this Respondent will no longer subject 32her to layoff. If so, the Statement of Reduction of Force against her shall be dismissed 
and her layoff notice rescinded.
5. The District shall apply the tie-breaking criteria reflected in the Tiebreak 
Resolution to the following counselors with an August 1, 2022 seniority date to 
determine their relative seniority: Eva Alonzo-Ayon, Karla Ivone Gonzales, Guillermo 
Gonzalez, Brianna Ortiz, Maria Reyes, William Vega and Respondents Lauren Imai, 
Susan Lundin, and Holly Marie Smith. If Respondent Lauren Imai, Respondent Susan 
Lundin, or Respondent Holly Marie Smith are not among the three lowest ranked after 
the tie-break, the Statement(s) of Reduction in Force against her/them shall be 
dismissed, and her/their layoff notice(s) shall be rescinded.
6. The Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained in part with respect to 
Respondent Slade Barbosa, and the District may notify him that .2 FTE of his services
will not be needed during the 2023-2024 school year due to the reduction of particular 
kinds of services.
7. The Statements of Reduction in Force are sustained against the 
remaining Respondents who have not yet had their layoff notices rescinded. Notice 
shall be given to those Respondents that their services will not be required for the 
2024-2025 school year, and such notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority.
DATE:
JULIE CABOS OWEN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
