BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
CULVER CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction in Force 
Involving: 
JORDAN YASSINE, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024040082 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Irina Tentser, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on April 24, 2024, at Culver Park High 
School in Culver City, California. 
Aaron V. O’Donnell, Attorney, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 
represented the Culver City Unified School District (District).
Jordan Yassine (Respondent) represented himself and was present during the 
hearing. 
At the start of the hearing, the District’s counsel, Mr. O’Donnell, informed the 
ALJ that Dr. Kimberly Indelicato, Coordinator School and Family Support Services, had 
not been issued a layoff notice because she agreed to be reassigned to another 
position and would be retained in that new position. Dr. Indelicato’s reassignment to a 2 new position accounts for the reduction in Coordinator School and Family Support 
Services under the Governing Board’s Resolution, discussed below. The hearing 
proceeded only as to Respondent’s layoff by the District. 
Testimonial and documentary evidence was received, and argument was heard. 
The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 24, 2024. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Board Resolution 
1. Jose Alarcon, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, made and 
filed the Statement of Reduction in Force in his official capacity. 
2. On March 12, 2024, the Governing Board of the District (Board) adopted 
Resolution No. 36-2023/2024(HR) (Resolution), which proposed a layoff of certificated 
employees corresponding to 2.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. (Exh. 1.) The 
Board determined that such action is in the best interest of the District and the welfare 
of the District’s schools and students. The Resolution provided for the reduction or 
discontinuance of the following particular kinds of services:
PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICE FTE Reduction 
Board Certified Behavior Analyst (BCBA) 1.0 
Coordinator School and Family Support Services 1.0 
Total FTE Reduction       2.0 33. The Resolution established criteria for an employee serving in a position 
identified for reduction or discontinuance to bump into a position held by an 
employee with less seniority. (Exh. 1, p. A1.) Specifically, the senior employee must be 
both credentialed and competent to render the service currently being performed by 
the junior employee pursuant to Education Code Sections 44955, 44956, and 44957. 
The Resolution defines “competency” for purposes of bumping as follows: 
Competent for reassignment into a position currently held 
by a junior employee, if the senior employee: (a) currently 
possesses a clear or preliminary credential which authorizes 
assignment in the position currently held by the junior 
employee; and (b) has previously served in the District in 
the position currently held by the junior employee for one 
complete school year. In no event may a senior employee 
displace a junior employee unless the senior employee is 
both competent and credentialed for the entire assignment 
of the junior employee. 
(Exh. 1, pp. A1-A2.) 
4. The Resolution was implemented at the discretion of the District 
pursuant to its authority under Education Code section 44955. The Board is authorized 
under the relevant law to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service not later 
than the beginning of the following school year, and exercise its discretion that a 
decrease in the number of employees by the close of the school year is necessary. 4Layoff Notice to Respondent
5. On March 13, 2024, the District served Respondent with written notice
(March 13 notice) that it had been recommended notice be given to him pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that his services would not be required for 
the ensuing 2024-2025 school year. (Exh. 9.) The March 13 notice explained the 
reasons for the recommendation and notified Respondent of his right to request a 
hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying him for the 2024-2025 
school year. 
6. Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. He is 
identified by his Seniority Date, April 1, 2022, on the District’s seniority list. (Exh. 12, p. 
A95.) Respondent has been employed with the District as a BCBA since April 1, 2022, 
and is the only employee in the District currently serving as a BCBA, which is a service 
identified for discontinuance in the Resolution. 
7. On March 14, 2024, Respondent timely submitted a written request for a 
hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying him for the 2024-2025 
school year. (Exh. 10.) On April 10, 2024, the District timely served a Statement of 
Reduction in Force with required accompanying documents on Respondent. On April 
10, 2024, the District received a timely Notice of Participation form from Respondent. 
(Exh. 4.) The District served a Notice of Hearing and a Notice of Continued Hearing on 
Respondent. (Exhs. 5 and 6.) 
Seniority List 
8. The District maintains a seniority list which includes all the District’s 
certificated probationary and permanent employees, and excludes temporary 
employees. The seniority list includes the employee’s seniority date (i.e., the first day of 5paid service in a probationary position), the credentials held by each employee, and 
their current assignment. (Exh. 12.) The District’s Board adopted the seniority list for 
applying the bumping criteria as part of the Resolution. (Factual Finding 3.)
9. Respondent had the opportunity to review his information on the 
seniority list and request corrections. Respondent did not report any errors with his 
information on the seniority list. 
10. The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff list of the 
least senior employees currently assigned in each of the particular kinds of services 
being reduced. Respondent was identified as the only employee currently assigned to 
the service, BCBA, being reduced. 
11. The position of school psychologist with the District requires a school 
psychologist credential, which Respondent possesses. However, the District found that 
Respondent did not satisfy the criteria for reassignment to a school psychologist 
position currently held by an employee with less seniority than Respondent. 
Respondent was hired by the District as a BCBA and was only employed in that 
capacity. Respondent did not meet the Board’s competency standard, as defined in the 
Resolution, because he has not served as a school psychologist within the District for 
at least one complete school year. (Factual Finding 3.) The District established at 
hearing Respondent’s employment as a BCBA with the District does not satisfy the 
required competency criteria established by the Resolution, specifically that Respondent 
“has not “previously served in the District in the position [school psychologist] currently 
held by the junior employee for one complete school year.” (Exh. 1, pp. 1-2.) 
 612. At hearing, the District acknowledged there was some overlap in the 
functions and duties of Respondent as a BCBA and the District’s school psychologists.
(Testimony of Jose A. Alarcon and Dr. Diana Fannon, Director of Special Education.) 
According to Mr. Alarcon, the BCBA duties currently performed by Respondent were 
being incorporated into the duties of other retained District employees, such as the 
junior school psychologists. 
Respondent’s Testimony 
13. At hearing, Respondent asserted that because Mr. Alarcon’s hearing 
testimony demonstrated he could not accurately and fully describe Respondent’s 
duties in his BCBA position with the District, Mr. Alarcon did not properly evaluate 
whether Respondent satisfied the competency criteria to bump a junior school 
psychologist. Respondent assertion that his duties as a BCBA should be considered as 
equivalent of those of a District school psychologist is not relevant to this proceeding. 
14. Respondent argued that because the District was advertising for open 
positions one day prior to the hearing, the District’s basis for his layoff was improper. 
(Exh. A.) Respondent’s argument of future employment positions available at the 
District does not establish the Board acted unfairly or improperly in making a decision 
to reduce or discontinue his BCBA position. (
 (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) 
15. Respondent’s testimony reflected his belief that he was competent to fill 
the role of a District school psychologist. Respondent’s skills and performance as a 
District BCBA and as a holder of a school psychologist credential are not at issue. 
Rather, the issue is whether Respondent has previously served in the District in a 
school psychologist position held by a junior employee for one complete school year. 7Because Respondent did not hold such a position for the requisite time, he does not 
have the requisite “competency” (as defined in the Resolution) for reassignment into a 
school psychologist position currently held by a junior employee, and cannot therefore 
displace or bump a junior employee. Accordingly, Respondent was properly identified 
as an employee subject to layoff to account for the 1.0 FTE reduction in BCBA.
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. (Factual Findings 1-7.)
2. The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services 
which may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The 
Board's decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was not arbitrary or 
capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the District's schools and 
students within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
3. A Board of Education has significant discretion to determine the need to 
reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services and the services to be affected and is 
not open to second-guessing in this proceeding. (
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) The Board’s policy-making decisions are not 
subject to arguments as to the wisdom of their enactment, their necessity, or the 
motivations for the decisions. ( (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 
1513, 1529.) The Board’s decisions and action must be reasonable under the 
circumstances, with the understanding that "such a standard may permit a difference 8of opinion." ( (1981) 116 
Cal.App.3d 831.) 
4. Cause exists, pursuant to Education Code section 44949 and 44955, to 
reduce Respondent, a certificated employee of the District, due to the reduction or 
discontinuation of particular kinds of services as a BCBA. The District properly 
identified the certificated employee, Respondent, providing the particular kinds of 
services, that of a BCBA, the Board directed be reduced or discontinued. 
5. Respondent is the District’s only employee currently in the position of a 
BCBA, which is the service identified for discontinuance in the Resolution. Pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955, in order to bump or displace a junior employee, a 
senior employee is required to not only be certificated for the assignment of the junior 
employee, but also be “competent” within the reasonable criteria defined by the 
governing board of the employing school district. The Board has established such 
criteria in the Resolution. (Factual Finding 3.) It is within the Board’s discretion to 
establish such criteria, which must be upheld and applied so long as they are 
reasonable. ( (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.) 
Such determinations involve discretionary decisions which are within the special 
competence of the school districts. ( , (1983) 35 
Cal.3d 294, 299.) A board’s definition of competency is reasonable when it considers 
the skills and qualifications of the employee threatened with layoff. ( ) The Board 
adopted such criteria in this instance and judged the qualifications of prior experience 
in a school psychologist assignment was necessary and in the interests of the students 
of the District. The competency criteria was exercised at the discretion of the District’s 
Board and is reasonable as a matter of law. Respondent did not establish during the 
proceedings he satisfied the Resolution’s definition of “competency” such that he 9satisfied the criteria to bump or displace a junior employee in the position of a District 
school psychologist.
6. No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 
services that Respondent is certificated and competent to render.
ORDER
Notice shall be given to Respondent Jordan Yassine, who is occupying the 1.0
full-time equivalent certificated position of a Board Certified Behavior Analyst, that his
services will not be required for the 2024-2025 school year because of the reduction 
and discontinuance of the particular kinds of service.
DATE:
IRINA TENTSER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
