BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
BAKERSFIELD CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES of the BAKERSFIELD 
CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Respondents. 
OAH No. 2024030576 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Joseph D. Montoya, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on April 10, 2024, in Bakersfield, 
California.
Candace M. Bandoian, Dannis Woliver Kelly, represented the Bakersfield City 
School District (District). Jean Shin, Staff Attorney, California Teachers Association 
(CTA) represented Respondents Gordon Porter, Ed.D., and Theresa Blair, who attended 
the hearing.
Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was held open until 
April 15, 2024, so that the parties could submit briefs. District was granted the ability 
to renew its objections to statements offered by Respondents during the hearing, the 
statements attributed to a former District Assistant Superintendent of Human 2Resources. District’s brief was timely received and is identified as Exhibit 11. 
Respondents’ brief was timely received and is identified as Exhibit B.
The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 15, 2024. 
Thereafter, on April 25, 2024, the ALJ issued an order reopening the record and 
directing Respondents to lodge a copy of Exhibit A, by April 30, 2024. On April 29, 
2024, Respondents uploaded a copy of Exhibit A to the Case Center evidence platform, 
and the record again closed and the matter was submitted for decision.
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
The Parties and Jurisdiction 
1. Complainant Christine Cornejo filed and maintained the Statement of 
Reduction in Force while acting in her official capacity as Assistant Superintendent, 
Human Resources, of the District. 
2. Respondents Gordon Porter, Ph.D. and Theresa Blair are certificated 
employees of the District. Both are employed as Office Teachers.
3. On February 27, 2024, the Governing Board of the District (Board) 
adopted Resolution No. 2024-03, titled “Resolution to Reduce the Number of 
Certificated Employees Due to a Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of 
Services.” (Ex. 1, p. A1; hereafter “Reduction Resolution.”)
4. The Reduction Resolution requires the of elimination of two full-time 
positions, the kinds of services to be eliminated being those services provided by 
Office Teachers.35. The services which the District seeks to discontinue or reduce are 
particular kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education 
Code section 44955. (All further statutory citations are to the Education Code.)
6. The decision by the Board to reduce or discontinue services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious, but rather was a proper exercise of the District’s discretion. 
7. The reduction and discontinuation of services is related to the welfare of 
the District and its pupils, and it has become necessary to decrease the number of 
certificated employees as determined by the Board.
8. On February 28, 2024, Respondents were served with a written notice 
that it had been recommended that their services would not be required during the 
upcoming 2024-2025 school year. The notice advised each Respondent of their right 
to request a hearing to determine whether there was cause to not reemploy them in 
the 2024-2025 school year, and the notice provided the deadline for requesting a 
hearing, which was March 8, 2024.
9. Each Respondent submitted a written request for hearing in a timely 
manner. Thereafter, on March 21, 2024, Complainant caused a Reduction in Force 
packet to be served on each Respondent. The Reduction in Force packet contained a 
written statement, copies of provisions of the Government Code and the Education 
Code, a District Statement of Reduction of Force—the operative pleading in this 
matter—and a Notice of Participation form. 
10. On March 22, 2024, each Respondent submitted a completed Notice of 
Participation, requesting a hearing. On March 25, 2024, Complainant served each 
Respondent with a Notice of Hearing. This proceeding ensued. 411. All jurisdictional requirements have been met.
Seniority List 
12. District staff created a seniority list, which sets forth such information as 
each certificated employee’s first date of paid service, credential(s), and current 
assignment. The Board adopted the seniority list by its Resolution No. 2024-04 on 
February 27, 2024. Respondents did not contest the accuracy of the seniority list.
13. No tie-breaking criteria was established, as only two positions, of the 
same type, are being eliminated. However, the resolution adopting the seniority list 
provides that the Board determined that between employees who first rendered 
service in a probationary position on the same date, the order of employment would 
be based solely on the needs of the District and the students thereof. (Ex. 2.) 
Respondents’ Case 
14. Each Respondent testified on their own behalf. Each has been employed 
by the District for over 30 years, and both respondents hold advanced degrees. For 
example, Blair has a master’s degree in school counseling, and Dr. Porter holds a Ph.D. 
in education services. Each Respondent has more than one credential. Respondents
were school counselors for many years, and then became Office Teachers. Their 
testimony indicated the District laid off school counselors in approximately 2011, 
eliminating school counselor services in the District, and Respondents were able to 
attain the Office Teacher positions they now hold.
15. Currently, Respondents concentrate on keeping attendance up among 
the student population, which can involve reviewing attendance data, working with 
students, parents, and sometimes social workers or the police. Blair spoke to their role 5of paying some oft-needed attention on a young student who simply needs some 
attention. Respondents are proud of the work they do and believe their work is 
valuable to the District, the students, and their families. Each Respondent has had 
other work experience during their tenure with the District. Dr. Porter had a four-year 
stint as a vice-principal, and Blair has also acted as a vice-principal, and has 
participated in the delivery of special education services, running Individual Education 
Plan meetings. 
16. Each Respondent testified that the former Assistant Superintendent for 
Human Resources, Dr. Diane Cox, told them that they would be able to work as Office 
Teachers until they retired. Each Respondent testified that the conversation occurred 
around the time that they were transitioning from school counselors to Office 
Teachers. Blair believed the conversation occurred in 2011, while Dr. Porter recalled the 
conversation took place in approximately 2013 or 2014. To be clear, the conversations 
were one-on-one with Dr. Cox. 
17. Each Respondent testified they believed Dr. Cox’s statements. Dr. Porter 
explained the context of the conversation; he had conversations with Dr. Cox about 
how the Office Teacher position was being redefined, and he testified he had concerns 
about his future having been through a reduction in force process before becoming an 
Office Teacher. He testified he relied on Dr. Cox’s statement and based the rest of his 
career on it. Blair testified the conversation occurred in Dr. Cox’s office and the two 
were discussing the transition from counselor to Office Teacher; she attested that she 
relied on Dr. Cox’s statement believing Dr. Cox to be a person of her word. 
18. Steve Comstock, Jr., testified. He has been employed by the District for 
16 years, and has been on a leave of absence during the last eight years so that he can 
serve as President of the Bakersfield Elementary Teachers Association, the bargaining 6unit for the District’s teachers. While Comstock was not present during either of the 
conversations Respondents had with Dr. Cox on the subject of finishing their careers as 
Office Teachers, he had communications with Dr. Cox that led him to believe the 
District was committed to maintaining the Office Teacher positions. 
19. District objected to Respondent’s testimony regarding Dr. Cox’s 
statements on the grounds of inadmissible hearsay. Those objections were overruled, 
but renewed in District’s closing brief, and are discussed hereafter. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
1. Jurisdiction was established to proceed in this matter, pursuant to 
sections 44929.5, 44949, and 44955, based on Factual Findings 1 through 11. 
2. Under section 44955, subdivision (b), there are four situations where a 
school district may decrease the number of probationary or permanent teachers it 
employs. One such situation arises “whenever a particular type of service is to be 
reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year, . . . 
“As noted by the Court of Appeal, section 44955, subdivision (b), allows a district to 
reduce particular kinds of services “either by determining that a certain type of service 
to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce 
services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because 
fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (
s (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) Here the District has determined 
that a particular type of service shall not, hereafter, be performed by anyone.
3. The services to be discontinued by the District are particular kinds of 
services within the meaning of section 44955. The Board’s decision to discontinue the 7identified services was neither arbitrary nor capricious and was a proper exercise of its 
discretion. Cause for the reduction or discontinuation of services relates solely to the 
welfare of the District's schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949.
4. Boards of education hold significant discretion in determining the need 
to reduce or discontinue particular kinds of services, which is not open to second-
guessing in this proceeding. ( 64 Cal.App.3d at 
p. 167.) Such policy-making decisions are not subject to arguments as to the wisdom 
of their enactment, their necessity, or the motivations for the decisions. (
(1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529.) Such decisions and action 
must be reasonable under the circumstances, with the understanding that "such a 
standard may permit a difference of opinion." (
(1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831.) Thus, the ALJ may not substitute his 
judgement for the Board’s.
5. The District’s Motion to Strike, set out in its closing brief, must be denied. 
District asserts that Dr. Cox’s statements are hearsay, and District’s closing brief details 
its arguments that no hearsay exceptions apply. Respondents argue that Dr. Cox’s 
statements are not hearsay, relying on an appellate case holding that an oral 
assurance of job security is not hearsay, that case being 
, () (2012), 211 Cal.App.4th 726, 749. Respondents’ reliance on is well 
placed, in part because its holding comports with the general rule that the terms of a 
contract, actual or alleged, are not hearsay. (See . () 
(1994) 24 Cal.App.4th 1550, 1555, fn. 1 [disapproved on other grounds in 
 (1996) 14 Cal.4th 434, 465, fn. 8]; (2009) 174 
Cal.App.4th 301, 316; 1 Witkin, Cal. Evidence. (6th Ed. 2023), Hearsay, §36.)86.The parties disagree on the issue of whether Dr. Cox had the authority to 
bind the District to maintain Respondents’ positions as Office Teachers until they 
retired. Respondents cite section 35035, noting the statute provides a superintendent 
has the authority to enter into contracts for a school district. However, Respondents 
did not accurately quote the statutory provision. The pertinent language is found at 
section 35035, subdivision (h), and states a superintendent may: “Enter into contracts 
for and on behalf of the school district .” (Emphasis added.)
7. Section 17604 states:
Wherever in this code the power to contract is invested in 
the governing board of the school district or any member 
thereof, the power may by a majority vote of the board be 
delegated to its district superintendent, or to any persons 
that he or she may designate, or if there be no district 
superintendent then to any other officer or employee of the 
district that the board may designate. The delegation of 
power may be limited as to time, money or subject matter 
or may be a blanket authorization in advance of its exercise, 
all as the governing board may direct. 
In the event of malfeasance in office, 
the school district official invested by the governing board 9with the power of contract shall be personally liable to the 
school district employing him or her for any and all moneys 
of the district paid out as a result of the malfeasance .
(Emphasis added.) 
8. Aside from the issue of whether an assistant superintendent has the 
same contracting power as the superintendent of the district, and aside from the issue 
of whether the Board’s power and right to determine what sort of courses may be 
provided in the district could be delegated to a superintendent of any stripe, there is 
no evidence that such authority was ever delegated to Dr. Cox, and there is no 
evidence that the Board approved or ratified her statements to Respondents, as 
required by section 17604. Thus, section 35035, subdivision (h), is not availing.
9. District’s assertions that teacher tenure is statutory, not contractual, and 
in any event is subject to the statutory reduction in force process, are persuasive. 
. (1996), 13 Cal.4th 269, held that a 
collective bargaining agreement could not vary statutory procedures for the process of 
not reelecting probationary teachers. The court also noted that the relevant statute 
vested exclusive discretion in the school district to decide whether to reelect 
probationary teachers, and such discretion could not be limited or modified by 
contract. Here the relevant statute, section 44955, subdivision (b), vests the discretion 
to discontinue certain types of services exclusively with the Board, and it cannot be 
delimited by contract.
10. Respondents argue that the District is estopped to deny their alleged 
contract. Respondents cite , (1989) 49 Cal.3d 393, which set out the 
elements of equitable estoppel, i.e., that the party to be estopped was apprised of the 10 facts; the party intended his or her conduct be relied upon or acted so that the other 
party had a right to believe it was intended; the other party was ignorant of the true 
state of the facts; and the party relied on the conduct to his or her injury. 
11. Respondents have not proven a basis for an estoppel. Just what Dr. Cox 
intended is not established, given she did not testify. What facts she was apprised of is 
not shown from the record, i.e., was she apprised of some Board policy to never 
eliminate the services of Office Teachers? And, Respondents have not established the 
sort of detrimental reliance that is needed. At bottom, they kept doing their jobs, 
receiving remuneration. For example, there is no evidence they turned down other 
opportunities based on Dr. Cox’s statements. Finally, District’s reliance on 
 (1915) 171 Cal. 150 and  (1970) 5 
Cal.App.3d 954, for the proposition that estoppel will not lie against a public entity 
where the mode of contracting is established by law is justified. As stated by the Court 
of Appeal in . (1969) 274 
Cal.App.2d 154, 160,
Estoppel may be invoked against a governmental agency 
only when the agency has the power to do that which it 
promised to do or which it led the opposing party 
reasonably and justifiably to believe it would do. Where, 
however, the procedure specified in a statute is the measure 
of the agency's power to act, estoppel cannot be applied to 
enlarge that power.
Here the proffered estoppel would require the District to cede its rights, powers, 
and even duties to determine what sort of services to provide, and its rights, powers, 
and duties to lay off teachers whose services are no longer necessary.1112. Cause exists, pursuant to sections 44949 and 44955, to reduce the 
number of certificated employees of the District due to the discontinuation of 
particular kinds of services. The District identified the certificated employees providing 
the particular kinds of services that the Board directed be reduced or discontinued.
13. No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform 
services that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render.
ORDER
The District may serve final lay off notices to Respondents Dr. Gordon Porter 
and Theresa Blair.
DATE:
JOSEPH D. MONTOYA
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
