BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
ROSELAND SCHOOL DISTRICT 
SONOMA COUNTY 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction in Force 
Involving: 
Certain Certificated Employees, Respondents. 
OAH No. 2025040108 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Administrative Law Judge Michelle Dylan, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 23 and 24, 2025, 
by videoconference. 
Erin M. Hamor and Sinead M. McDonough, Attorneys at Law, represented the 
Roseland School District (District). 
Holly A. Latz, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Carrie Atherley, 
Brendan Boylan, Carolina Duran, Gwen Neu, Ana Talavera, and Sarah Tendall 
(collectively  . 
Jonathan Bobadilla Juarez, Alaina Mitchell, and Patrick Reinking were served by 
the District with layoff notices but failed to timely return notices of participation and 
failed to appear at hearing, therefore they are no longer parties to this action. 2 Respondents Atherley, Duran, Neu, Talavera, and Tendall settled with the District 
during the course of the hearing and withdrew their hearing requests, therefore they 
are no longer parties to this action. Respondent Melissa Bastianon requested a hearing 
and filed a notice of participation but did not appear at the hearing. Therefore, her 
default was entered pursuant to Government Code section 11520, and the matter 
proceeded in her absence. The hearing proceeded as to respondent Boylan only. 
The matter was continued pursuant to Government Code section 11524 from 
April 23, 2025, to April 24, 2025, for completion of the hearing, and until April 30, 
2025, for submission of closing briefs, which were timely submitted and marked for 
identification as Exhibits 101, S, and T. The record was closed, and the matter was 
submitted for decision on April 30, 2025. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. On March 4, 2025, the Board of Education (Board) adopted 
Resolution No. 25-19 entitled solution of Intention to Terminate Certificated 
Employees Due to a Reduction  No. 25-19), 
reducing or discontinuing particular kinds of certificated employee services for the 
2025-2026 year ,and directing 
Superintendent or designee to send appropriate notices to all employees whose 
positions would be affected by the reduction or discontinuation of services. Resolution 
No. 25-19 mandated a reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services in 
the amount of 12.4 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions for the 2025-2026 school year. 3 2. Resolution No. 25-19 identified the certificated services to be reduced for 
the 2025-2026 school year, and their corresponding FTEs, as follows: 
Single Subject Physical Education Teacher (2.0 FTE) 
Teacher on Special Assignment (0.40 FTE) 
Secondary Counselor (3.0 FTE) 
Director of College and Career (2.0 FTE) 
School Psychologist (0.50 FTE) 
Intervention Teacher (3.0 FTE) 
Special Day Class Teacher (1.0 FTE) 
Director of Whole Child (0.50 FTE) 
Director of Human Resources (one position reduced by 10 contract days) 
Director of Secondary Education (one position reduced by 10 contract days) 
High School Principal (two positions reduced by 5 contract days each) 
3. On March 12, 2025, the Board passed Resolution No. 25-23, authorizing 
the elimination of an additional 1.0 FTE certificated services (Single Subject 
Foundational Level Math Teacher) for the 2025-2026 school year, and directing the 
employees. 
4. The services set forth in Resolutions Nos. 25-19 and 25-23 are particular 
kinds of services that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of 4 Education Code section 44955. Director of Human Resources Jenny 
Young, Chief Business Officer (CBO) AJ Giersch, and Director of Secondary Education 
Haley Piazza testified that the reduction of services is necessary due to budgetary 
concerns. Roseland Charter School is experiencing deficit spending and the Budget 
Advisory Committee recommended that $1.5 million be cut from Roseland Charter 
 budget for the 2025-2026 school year. The recommended layoffs are related 
to the reduction in the budget. The parties stipulated that they do not contest that the 
District has a financial basis for the reduction of particular kinds of services at issue in 
this hearing. 
5. Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), when a 
governing board reduces particular kinds of services resulting in a decrease in the 
number of certificated, permanent employees, the services of a permanent employee 
may not be terminated if another employee with less seniority is retained to render a 
 
6. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), provides that the 
governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such a manner that 
employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority and 
qualifications entitle them to render. 
7. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), provides that a school 
district may deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority 
(skipping) where the district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a 
specific course or course of study, and the certificated employee proposed to be 
skipped has special training and experience necessary to teach that course of study, 
which others with more seniority do not possess. 5 8. On March 12, 2025, the Board adopted Resolution No. 25-24, Resolution 
to Adopt Competency Criteria for Certificated Reductions  (Competency Resolution). 
The Competency Resolution provides that, 
for the 2025-2026 school year only, to meet the 
requirements of Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
previously adopted by the Board, shall be: 
A. To teach Math in grades 9-12, a teacher must possess a 
Single Subject: Mathematics teaching credential, and be 
credentialed to teach all levels of mathematics courses 
offered in grades 9-12, up to and including Calculus. 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, for the 2025-2026 school year 
only, to meet the requirements of Education Code section 
44955, the Board of Trustees determines the needs of the 
District and the students by establishing the following 
skipping criteria: 
A. To teach Math in grades 9-12, a teacher must possess a 
Single Subject: Mathematics teaching credential, and be 
credentialed to teach all levels of mathematics courses 
offered in grades 9-12, up to and including Calculus. 
9. The seniority date of certificated employees is determined in accordance 
employee employed after June 30, 1947, shall be deemed to have been employed on 
the date upon which he 6 District compiled a seniority list and sent it to all certificated employees and the union, 
Roseland Educators Association (REA), to confirm its accuracy as discussed in Factual 
Finding 34. 
10. Prior to March 15, 2025, Young served 18 certificated employees with a 
written Terminated Due to a 
Reduction in Force  advising them that it had been recommended to the 
Board that their services would not be required for the 2025-2026 school year, 
pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. A copy of Resolution Nos. 
25-19 or 25-23 (each applicable resolution) was served with each Notice. 
11. On March 14, 2025, Young notified the Board as to which members of 
certificated staff were given layoff notices. 
12. Ten of these employees timely filed Requests for Hearing. 
13. On April 2, 2025, Young signed the District Statement of Reduction in 
Force in her official capacity as the Director of Human Resources of the District. 
14. On April 2, 2025, all employees who requested hearings, including 
respondent Boylan, were sent a Reduction in Force (RIF) Packet, which included: a 
Statement to Respondent, the District Statement of Reduction in Force, copies of 
relevant Education and Government Code sections, and a Notice of Participation in 
Reduction of Force Hearing form. All employees who requested a hearing were served 
with a Notice of Hearing informing them that their hearing would take place on April 
23, 2025, even if the employee had not submitted a Notice of Participation form. 7 15. Of the employees who were sent the RIF packet, all employees other than 
respondent Boylan either failed to return a notice of participation, failed to appear at 
hearing, or settled with the District during the course of the hearing. 
16. Respondent Boylan is a permanent certificated employee of the District. 
The parties stipulated that respondent Boylan was timely and properly served with the 
notice of layoff and RIF packet, and timely submitted a request for hearing and a 
notice of participation to the District. 
17. Jurisdiction for the subject proceedings exists pursuant to Education 
Code sections 44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those 
sections were provided as required. 
Cause for Reduction or Discontinuation of Services and Actions Taken 
by the District 
18. The District has a charter school (Roseland Charter School (charter 
school)) which maintains three campuses, Roseland Accelerated Middle School 
(RAMS), Roseland University Preparatory (RUP) serving grades 9 through 12, and 
Roseland College Preparatory (RCP) serving grades 7 through 12. RUP has been 
operating for approximately 20 years and serves 465 students during this school year. 
RCP is newer and serves 410 students during this school year. RUP and RCP were 
created to serve students by helping them both graduate high school and have the 
opportunity to attend a University of California (UC) or California State University 
(CSU) college or university. Many of  graduating students are first 
generation college students. 
19. Young, Giersch, and Piazza testified credibly at hearing about the reason 
 credibly about the actions taken by 8 the District to carry out the Reduction Resolutions and the need for the competency 
and skipping criteria. Young has worked for the District for nearly 25 years and is in 
her third year as the director of human resources. Young holds an administrative 
services credential and a multiple subject teaching credential. Piazza has been with the 
District for nearly 20 years and is in her second year as the director of secondary 
education. Piazza currently oversees site programming and curriculum at RUP and 
RCP. Giersch manages the finances and prepares the budget for the District and 
Roseland Charter School. 
20. The District acts as the authorizer for the charter school, employs the 
charter school employees, and prepares the budget for the charter school. Services at 
the charter school were identified for reduction in this matter. 
21. The District adopted Resolutions Nos. 25-19 and 25-23 in order to 
reduce particular kinds of services for the 2025-2026 school year. Giersch reviewed the 
charter school interim financial reports and credibly testified that the 
reduction in certificated services is necessary due to 
budgetary concerns. The charter school is experiencing deficit spending of 
approximately $5.1 million for the current school year. Without major reductions, it is 
projected that the charter school will have a negative net position in the 2028-2029 
school year, and will not be able to offer educational services beyond that point. 
Staffing is a significant cost to the District and the level of staffing is no longer fiscally 
viable. As a result, the District determined it necessary to reduce or eliminate a number 
of services, including certificated services currently provided at both RUP and RCP. A 
Budget Advisory Committee was formed in October 2024. The committee 
recommended that $1.5 million be cut from the charter school budget for next year. 9 The committee also recommended that the RCP site be closed and that RCP be 
consolidated into RAMS and RUP in the 2026-2027 school year. 
22. The reduction or elimination of the identified particular kinds of services 
relates solely to the welfare of the schools in the District and its students. 
23. Prior to serving layoff notices on its employees, the Board considered 
anticipated certificated attrition (resignation, retirements, non-reelections) known as of 
March 15, 2025. In a layoff proceeding like this, a governing board need only consider 
positively assured attrition which occurs prior to the March 15 layoff notice deadline, 
not thereafter. (  (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635.) 
COMPETENCY AND SKIPPING CRITERIA 
24. The District established skipping and competency criteria that takes into 
account seniority and credentialing. Those who meet the criteria and can teach the full 
range of mathematics needed by the District, including Mathematics 1, 2, and 3, up to 
purposes of layoff. 
employees and adopting the skipping and competency criteria set forth in Resolution 
No. 25-24 is District need. The District applied a bumping analysis and the competency 
and skipping criteria when determining the order of layoff. 
25. Young and Piazza testified credibly at hearing regarding the mission and 
graduation requirements at RCP and RUP 
the competency and skipping criteria. The mission of RCP and RUP is to prepare 
students to successfully graduate high school with the credits to enter the UC and CSU 
systems and be prepared to be successful in postsecondary work. This mission impacts 
the range of courses that RCP and RUP offer and the graduation requirements at both 10 schools. The District looks to the UC and CSU admissions requirements to determine 
necessary course offerings for any given school year, to ensure that the students who 
wish to apply to a UC or CSU school after graduation meet the minimum requirements 
for doing so. 
26. To graduate from RCP and RUP, each 
student is required to take Integrated Mathematics 1, 2, and 3 (Math 1, 2, and 3), 
which reflects the typical sequence of courses and aligns with the UC and CSU 
admissions requirements. It is also recommended by the District (and aligned with UC 
and CSU recommendations) that each student take Math 4 (Precalculus, Calculus, or an 
Advanced Placement (AP) math class) to be prepared to take college courses. The 
District adopted the Competency Resolution to best meet the needs of the District and 
the 
classes consistent with the college preparatory focus of the schools and UC and CSU 
admission standards. 
27. Of the students who graduated from RUP or RCP in 2023, approximately 
123 students attended either a UC or CSU school. Of those who graduated in 2024, 
approximately 130 students matriculated into a UC or CSU school. 
28. Currently, students can fulfill their Integrated Math 3 requirement by 
taking Financial Algebra. However, UC recently circulated a high school articulation 
bulletin that was received by the District notifying high schools that beginning in the 
2025-2026 school year, certain high school level math courses will no longer meet 
eligibility for admissions into the UC system. Financial Algebra (a course that can be 
taught with a Single Subject: Foundational Level Mathematics Credential (Foundational 
Math Credential)) will no longer qualify as an Integrated Math 3 substitute for 
purposes of UC and CSU admissions requirements, and students must instead take 11 Integrated Math 3, or some higher level course to be eligible for CSU or UC 
admissions. This change will potentially impact the courses the District offers, 
particularly the number of Math 3 or higher level math classes needed, how the classes 
are staffed, and the number of staff needed who possess the credential required to 
teach these higher-level math classes. 
29. In order to teach the full range of K-12 mathematics courses, including 
Integrated Math 1, 2, and 3, up to and including Calculus, a Single Subject: 
Mathematics Credential (Single Subject Math Credential, (math) 
as referred to at hearing), is required. On the other hand, a 
Foundational Math Credential authorizes its holders to teach only certain math 
subjects including K-12, Integrated Mathematics 1 and Integrated Mathematics 2, 
typically taken by 9th and 10th graders, and Financial Algebra. Foundational math 
credential holders cannot teach Integrated Mathematics 3 (typically taken by 11th 
graders), Precalculus, Calculus, or Advanced Placement (AP) Calculus. 
30. Young reported that it is critical for the District to retain fully 
credentialed math teachers to provide flexibility in offering the full range of math 
courses that are consistent with their college preparatory focus to meet the needs of 
students and for scheduling purposes. To sustain the academic standards 
expected from these college preparatory high schools, and in light of its limited 
budget, the District adopted the competency criteria to ensure that its math teachers 
can teach the full range of math courses. 
31. Young drafted the resolution regarding the competency and skipping 
criteria and it was reviewed by the District cabinet team, which included Piazza, the 
superintendent, assistant superintendent, director of special education and the CBO, 
prior to being adopted by the Board. The resolution establishes the definition of 12 competency for the purposes of layoffs, and establishes order of layoff criteria which 
provides for skipping over certificated employees possessing that criteria. Piazza 
believes the resolution meets the needs of the students because it allows the District 
to prioritize teachers who hold single subject math credentials which provides the 
District with more flexibility in providing the full range of college preparatory courses 
to the students. 
32. Piazza has knowledge and experience regarding master scheduling and is 
involved in creating the master schedule for RUP and RCP. The master schedule is 
created by site administrators, the director of college and career, and a teacher at the 
site who is a member of the union, and reviewed by a consultant who has worked with 
the District and is experienced in master scheduling. 
records as part of the process. Piazza explained that many factors go into master 
scheduling and that it can be extremely challenging due to the small size of the 
charter school, the small number of teachers properly credentialed to teach the 
classes, the preparation (prep) time the District needs to afford to teachers, enrollment 
data for the upcoming year, the electives that are offered based on student need and 
teacher credentialling and experience, and the number of students who fail a class 
during the first semester and need to retake it. Student need is the top priority in the 
process. Piazza believes that it is extremely important to have teachers with a single 
subject math credential who can teach the full range of high school math courses 
because it allows program flexibility when master scheduling to offer courses aligned 
with the college preparatory vision and mission of the school. 
33. The District is still in the process of master scheduling for the 2025-2026 
school year. The District intends to assign an upper-level math course to Carrie 13 Atherley, Carolina Duran, and Erica Olvera, three math teachers less senior than 
respondent Boylan, for the 2025-2026 school year  
DISTRICT S BUMPING ANALYSIS RELATING TO SEAN KERR AND RESPONDENT 
BOYLAN  
34. The District compiled a seniority list taking into account each certificated 
credential, English Learner (EL) authorization, hire date and date of seniority (first date 
of paid service.) The seniority list was sent to certificated employees and to their union 
representatives in October 2024 to confirm its accuracy and/or request that their 
information be updated or corrected. The feedback provided was incorporated into 
the seniority list, and an updated copy was sent out to the employees and the union. 
The accuracy of the seniority list was stipulated to by the District and respondent 
Boylan at hearing with the following change. Anna Solano has a multiple subject 
credential and a math supplemental authorization allowing her to teach up to 9th 
grade math. Solano does not have a foundational math credential. 
35. Young explained the process for determining which employees would 
receive layoff notices and in particular the analysis the District did in determining that 
a layoff notice would be issued to respondent Boylan. The District consulted the 
seniority list when determining which employees would receive layoff notices. 
Resolution No. 25-19 identified 2.0 FTE of an administrative position, Director of 
College and Career services, to be eliminated. Sean Kerr, currently a site administrator 
with an FTE of 1.0, is one of two District employees assigned to the Director of College 
and Career roles. Kerr works at RUP. Kerr held a teaching position with the District 
from August 12, 2009, to June 30, 2014, and transitioned into an administrative role on 
July 1, 2014. Kerr holds an Administrative Services credential and a Foundational Math 14 Credential. He does not hold a Single Subject Math Credential and cannot teach the 
full range of high school math classes. 
36. Respondent Boylan has worked for the District since August 8, 2018. He 
is a certificated teacher at RUP and holds a Foundational Math Credential. He, like Kerr, 
does not hold a Single Subject Math Credential and cannot teach the full range of high 
school math classes. Respondent Boylan currently teaches Math 1 and Math 2 classes 
and the corresponding Support Math classes to students. Respondent Boylan is the 
least senior District employee who holds a Foundational Math Credential. Respondent 
Boylan does not hold any other credentials. Respondent Boylan has a degree in 
economics and a minor in environmental studies. 
37. Kerr is more senior than respondent Boylan. In conducting its order of 
layoff analysis, the District determined that Kerr has bumping rights and would bump 
respondent Boylan from his position, based on Kerr  and respondent 
seniority rights and credentials. The District also considered the competency and 
skipping criteria. 
occurs when a teacher whose assignment is slated for reduction or discontinuation 
instead moves into a different assignment (for which they are certificated and 
senior teacher. In this case, there is no employee less senior to respondent Boylan 
holding a position that can be taught only with a Foundational Math Credential, as 
opposed to a Single Subject Math Credential. Marcus Hartley (seniority date: 
September 28, 2017) teaches at RUP and holds a Foundational Math Credential but he 
is more senior than respondent Boylan. Anna Solano (seniority date: August 29, 1996) 
teaches at RUP and holds a math authorization allowing her to teach 9th grade math 
and below, but she is more senior than respondent Boylan. Jason Castro (seniority 15 date: August 7, 2017) teaches at RUP and holds a Foundational Math Credential but he 
is more senior than respondent Boylan. 
38. Other math teachers less senior than respondent Boylan hold Single 
Subject Math Credentials allowing them to teach the full range of high school math 
classes. Specifically, the District is retaining several math teachers less senior than 
respondent Boylan. Carrie Atherley has a seniority date of August 4, 2022, and is the 
least senior math teacher. Carolina Duran is a probationary employee, has a seniority 
date of August 23, 2021, and is the next least senior math teacher. Erica Olvera has a 
seniority date of August 10, 2020, and is also less senior than respondent Boylan. 
Atherley, Duran and Olvera each hold a Single Subject Math Credential authorizing 
them to teach the full range of high school math classes up to and including AP 
Calculus at RCP and RUP. Atherton and Duran are currently assigned as math teachers 
at RCP. Olvera is assigned as a math teacher at RUP. All three employees have college 
math degrees. 
39. The District determined that neither Kerr nor Boylan can bump Atherley, 
Duran, or Olvera, because Kerr and respondent Boylan each have a Foundational Math 
Credential and cannot teach all the same courses that Atherley, Duran and Olvera can 
teach. Furthermore, there is no employee less senior to respondent Boylan holding a 
position that can be taught with only a Foundational Math Credential that Kerr or 
respondent Boylan could bump into for next year. As a result, the District determined 
that neither Kerr nor respondent Boylan was able to bump any less senior employee 
and served respondent Boylan with the layoff notice arising out of the 1.0 FTE layoff to 
Director of College and Career services for RUP, the service that Kerr currently 
provides. 16 40. Neither Atherley, Duran nor Olvera have stated that they will not be 
returning to teach for the District next year. The District intends on assigning all three 
of these teachers to teach courses within the full scope of their math credentials. 
Young reported that these positions require a full math credential because they are 
responsible for teaching courses such as Math 3, Precalculus, Calculus, and/or AP 
Calculus, which are integral to the college preparatory mission of the charter school. 
41. Only two of the five math teachers currently teaching at RUP, Olvera and 
Margarito Loza Alcala (Loza), hold a Single Subject Math Credential. Young explained 
that the fact that Solano has a Math Supplemental Authorization allowing her to teach 
only up to and including 9th grade math significantly impacts the staffing schedule for 
the high school math classes because Solano can only teach Math 1 and Math 1 
Support at the high school level. 
42. Only two of the four math teachers currently teaching at RCP, Atherley 
and Duran, hold Single Subject Math Credentials. Castro holds a Foundational Math 
Credential. Emil Guzman holds an Intern Single Subject Math Credential, but Guzman 
resigned and will not be returning for the 2025-2026 year. 
43. The order of seniority from most senior to least senior math teacher at 
RUP and RCP is Solano, Castro, Hartley, Loza, respondent Boylan, Olvera, Duran, 
Ackerley, and Guzman. Young explained that laying off one of the least senior teachers 
with a single subject math credential would reduce the number of teachers that can 
teach math course offerings for 11th and 12th grade students, which significantly 
impacts the District  
necessary to graduate and be UC and CSU ready. Young reported that teachers with 
single subject math credentials are highly qualified teachers that are very difficult to 
find and recruit. 17 44. Young advised respondent Boylan on March 7, 2025, that he was going 
to be laid off by the District. 
45. The layoff for a Foundational Level Math teacher in Resolution No. 25-23 
was specific to RCP because of the lack of need for the position based on enrollment. 
This was determined by the individuals that oversee the master schedule, including 
Piazza, the director of college and career Emily White, and the consultant. The 
resignation)  
Young reported that the District issued precautionary layoff notices to Atherley and 
Duran because the District will be required to lay off another math teacher at the 
charter school due to the budget constraints in the event that respondent Boylan 
retains his position. 
46. Each teacher in the math program has an eight-period day. Each teacher 
teaches six classes, and two of the eight periods are for prep. The single subject math 
teachers are assigned to teach certain classes for the 2024-2025 school year. For this 
school year, Loza is assigned to teach four Math 3 classes, Calculus and Statistics. 
Atherley is assigned to teach two Math 3 classes, two Math 1 classes, and two Math 
Support classes. Duran is assigned to teach Precalculus, three Math Support classes, 
Study Hall, and Avid 10. Olvera is assigned to teach two Math 2 classes, two Math 
Support classes, and two Financial Algebra classes. 
47. Respondent Boylan proposes that the District keep him on as an 
employee, and instead lay off Atherley and have Duran teach her two advanced math 
classes because Atherley is the least senior math teacher, or lay off Duran and have 
Atherley teach  advanced class, because Duran is a probationary employee and 
the next least senior math teacher. Respondent Boylan is credentialed and qualified to 18 teach six of the six courses that Olvera is teaching this year, four of the six courses that 
Duran is teaching this year, and four of the six courses that Atherley is teaching this 
year. Young reported that RCP needs both Duran and Atherley because they have full 
single subject credentials upper-level math classes 
and based on 
teach the upper-level math classes. She also noted that the District intends on 
assigning all three of these teachers to teach courses within the full scope of their 
math credentials. 
48. Piazza believes the maximum class size for a math class is 32 students. As 
of April 18, 2025, for the 2024-2025 school year, there were some open spots in the 
upper-level math classes. The District anticipates an increase 
junior class of between one to 29 students based on the current number of 
sophomores. The District also anticipates an increased need for advanced math classes 
because Financial Algebra will no longer be accepted as a substitute for Math 3 for UC 
and CSU admissions purposes in the 2025-2026 school year. 
49. Piazza confirmed that the District intends on assigning Atherley, Duran, 
and Olvera each to an upper division math class that cannot be taught by a 
foundational level math teacher, for the 2025-2026 school year. 
 
TESTIMONY OF MATT JONES 
50. Matt Jones, the chapter president of REA, testified credibly at hearing. 
This is his fourth year in this role. Jones teaches 7th grade math and science at RAMS. 
In his role as president of the union he speaks with District administrators and attends 
school board meetings often. Jones was present at the Board meeting on March 12, 19 2025, when the Board adopted the competency and skipping criteria. Jones learned 
about the criteria for the first time by attending the school board meeting and reading 
the agenda. Jones was surprised that the District had not given notice to the union 
that it would be considering adopting the criteria. 
51. Jones feels that communication with Roseland leadership has been more 
challenging this year than in any other year of his union presidency. The competency 
and skipping criteria is an example of something that the union would expect to have 
advance notice of so that it could prepare its members for upcoming changes that 
could affect their employment. Young informed Jones of the certificated employees 
that would potentially be laid off for the 2025-2026 school year, including respondent 
Boylan, on February 15, 2025. Jones is aware that RCP is going to merge with RUP in 
the 2026-2027 school year. 
RESPONDENT BOYLAN S TESTIMONY AND CONTENTIONS  
52. Respondent Boylan has worked for the District for seven years. He is a 
permanent certificated employee. He currently teaches courses including Integrated 
Math 1 and Math 2, and Math Support for Math 1 and Math 2. Respondent Boylan 
taught Financial Algebra during the 2018-2019 and 2019-2020 school years. 
Respondent Boylan is also able to teach Statistics and Consumer Math. Respondent 
Boylan has served as the Teacher-In-Charge of the Roseland Summer School Program 
for the last three years. He has also served as the Teacher-In-Charge at RUP. 
Respondent Boylan is passionate about and loves teaching math. Respondent Boylan 
was very surprised that he received a layoff notice from the District. 
53. Respondent Boylan believes that it is important for high school students 
to take all required math level classes, particularly Math 1, to prepare for college. 20 Some students at RUP struggle to pass Math 1, and respondent Boylan has taught 
students Math 1 who have previously failed the class. RUP provides additional support 
for students taking Math 1 and Math 2 by providing Math Support classes. 
Respondent Boylan teaches the same students in each respective Math Support class 
that he teaches in Math 1 and Math 2. 
54. RUP does not currently offer any AP math classes. Respondent Boylan 
reported that the administration does not think that enough students at RUP would 
want to take AP math classes to justify offering them. He reported that most students 
take Math 1, Math 2, and Math 3, and a fourth-year class such as Calculus, Statistics or 
Financial Algebra. Some students have taken Financial Algebra as a substitute for Math 
3. 
55. According to data for the 2024-2025 school year, as of April 18, 2025, 
class enrollment in foundational math classes at RUP is 570, and class enrollment in 
advanced math classes is 154, therefore Respondent Boylan argues that there is a 
greater need for teachers who teach foundational math classes than for teachers who 
teach advanced math. Respondent Boylan also argues that out of the classes that the 
math teachers less senior to him are teaching this year there are only three math 
classes he cannot teach. 
56. Respondent Boylan is confused as to why he was not retained over 
Solano, who only has a Supplemental Math Authorization. He feels that the District did 
not act consistently in this regard because he can teach more high school math classes 
than Solano. 21 57. Respondent Boylan believes that there are a small number of students 
who will graduate this year from RUP who have not passed Math 3 based on 
conversations he has had with colleagues. 
58. Respondent Boylan has not taken an Avid 10 summer class that would 
enable him to teach Avid 10. 
59. Respondent Boylan has taken steps to obtain his Single Subject Math 
Credential. At the time of the hearing, he had passed two tests required for the 
credential, and had taken a third test that if passed will render him credentialed and 
competent to teach the full range of math courses once he applies for and obtains a 
full Single Subject Math Credential from the Commission on Teacher Credentialing. 
Respondent learned that he passed the subject matter CSET for Level III Advanced 
Math on April 25, 2025. However, respondent Boylan does not currently have a single 
subject math credential, nor did he have such a credential at the time the District 
conducted its bumping and skipping analysis. Any credential that he obtains in the 
time they received the layoff notice is determinative. (
 (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 689, 699.) 
60. Respondent Boylan argues that his layoff violated Education Code 
section 44955 which requires that seniority is followed in layoff proceedings, and that 
his layoff notice should be rescinded. He argues that he (or Kerr) should have been 
able to bump Atherley, Duran or Olvera based on their seniority dates. A teacher with 
more seniority typically has greater rights to retain employment than a junior teacher. 
Specifically, a senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to a position 
held by a junior teacher (bumping) if the senior teacher is properly credentialed and 
competent. Pursuant to Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), the District has 22 an obligation to reassign senior teachers who are losing their positions into positions 
held by junior teachers if the senior teacher has both the credentials and competence 
to occupy such positions. (  (1975) 13 Cal.3d 
469, see also  (1987) 196 Cal.App. 3d. 555, 
563-564.) The seniority rule is not absolute if the senior teacher does not have the 
credentials and competency to occupy such a position, and a junior teacher with a 
needed credential or skills may be retained even if a more senior teacher is terminated. 
 . . . by reduction or discontinuation of a 
service, where competency is not demonstrated by a senior employee, a junior 
employee having the ability to serve the needs of a program may be retained by a 
ult in the termination of a 
 (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 834.) 
61. Respondent Boylan Respondent Boylan does not 
hold the credential necessary to bump into any of the positions of the math teachers 
less senior than him, because they each hold a Single Subject Math Credential, and will 
be teaching in positions requiring that credential in the 2025-2026 school year. 
Furthermore, as previously noted, Education Code section 44955, subdivision (c), 
provides that the governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in such 
a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which their seniority 
 entitle them to render. Furthermore, the District intends to assign 
the math teachers less senior to respondent Boylan to advanced math classes in the 
2025-2026 school year. 
62. Respondent Boylan also argues that based on the number of 
non-advanced math classes offered by the District during this school year the 23 competency and skipping criteria adopted by the District are not justified by a specific 
need, and are therefore arbitrary and capricious. He further argues that his layoff is 
improper where employees less senior than him, and in one case a probationary 
employee, were skipped over without the District proving a specific need to do so. 
Respondent submitted math enrollment information for RUP and RCP for the 
2024-2025 school year. According to the data, as of April 18, 2025, class enrollment in 
foundational math classes is 889 (570 at RUP), and class enrollment in advanced math 
classes is 207 (154 at RUP). This takes into account that students taking both Math 1 
and Foundational Support, and both Math 2 and Foundational Support, are each 
counted twice. Respondent Boylan argues that based on this data there is a greater 
need for foundational math classes than for advanced math classes. He also argues 
that out of the math classes that the math teachers less senior to him are teaching this 
year there are only three math courses that he cannot teach because they require an 
advanced math credential. 
63. Districts have broad discretion to establish competency standards for 
purposes of a certificated layoff. (  (1987) 196 
Cal.App. 3d. 555, 563-565,  (1983) 35 Cal.3d 294, 
299.) Such determinations involve discretionary decisions which are within the special 
competence of the school districts. ( ., , 196 
Cal.App.3d at pp. 556-557.) Adoption of competency criteria is used by school districts 
to ensure that they can retain employees who have the necessary training and 
experience to best meet student and district needs, regardless of seniority. (
, , 35 cal.3d 294 at p. 299.) Whether the board has acted 
people, bearing in mind that such a standard may permit a difference of opinion on 24 ( (1978) 76 
Cal.App.3d 796, 808.) 
64. A school district has discretion in determining whether an employee is 
certified and competent, as provided by Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
(b), to be reassigned and, as a result, displace a junior employee, as provided by 
subdivision (c). ( , , 196 Cal.App.3d 555 at 
p. . 
at p. 566.) Competency criteria that consider the skills and qualifications required of 
the teacher are reasonable.  at pp. 565-566.) 
65. Respondent not persuasive. 
competency and skipping criteria were reasonable and based on a specific need of the 
District and the students, not arbitrary and capricious, and were applied consistently. 
RCP and RUP are geared toward preparing students for college entry. Math 3 is a 
graduation requirement for all RCP and RUP students and an admission requirement 
for UC and CSU colleges and universities; and upper-level math courses above Math 3 
are recommended for admission into these colleges and universities. Beginning in the 
2025-2026 school year, students will no longer be able to take Financial Algebra as a 
substitute for Math 3 to be eligible for CSU or UC admission, thus increasing the need 
for Math 3 and upper-level math classes. Furthermore, the teachers with less seniority 
than respondent possess advanced math credentials in subjects that respondent 
Boylan is not qualified to teach, and the District plans to assign all the employees with 
lower seniority than respondent Boylan to teach an upper division, non-foundational 
math course for the 2025-2026 school year. adopt the 
competency and skipping criteria and to retain the less senior employees with the 25 appropriate credentials over respondent Boylan in order to serve the needs of the 
students and the District was proper. 
66. Respondent Boylan argues that the competency and skipping criteria do 
not make sense and have been inconsistently applied because other math teachers, 
such as Solano, remain on the District payroll without the advanced math credential. 
This argument is rejected. The math teachers who have been retained by the District 
that do not possess a Single Subject Math Credential are senior to respondent Boylan. 
67. Respondent Boylan suggests that math assignments should be 
restructured so that one of the teachers less senior to him can be laid off. This 
argument is not persuasive. The District has no obligation to reassign a senior teacher 
losing their position into a position held by a junior teacher if the senior teacher does 
not have the credentials and competency to occupy such a position. In addition, there 
is no obligation to reassign senior teachers who are not losing their positions in an 
effort to save junior teachers. ( , , 196 
Cal.App.3d 555, at p. 568.) Furthermore, -time 
position to accommodate [a -
extent Respondent Boylan is making such a suggestion here. (See 
 (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 346, quoting 
 (1989) 208 Cal.App.3d 456, 460.) Also, the District 
intends to assign each of the math teachers less senior than him to teach advanced 
math classes. For these reasons, r ssertion that the District is required to 
rework the class assignments of other math teachers to avoid his layoff is rejected. 
68. Based on the above, the District appropriately applied bumping rules and 
the competency and skipping criteria such that no employee with less seniority than 26 respondent Boylan is being retained to perform a service that he is certificated and 
competent to render. Respondent  
69. This decision addresses all challenges respondent Boylan made to 
complainant . Any other contentions not specifically addressed in this decision 
are found to be without merit and are rejected. 
Summary of Findings 
70. T to reduce particular 
services was fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious. 
71.
based on a specific need of the District and the students, not arbitrary and capricious, 
and were properly applied . 
72. The District appropriately issued a layoff notice to respondent Boylan. 
73. No employee with less seniority than respondent Boylan is being 
retained to perform a service that respondent Boylan is certificated and competent to 
render. Additionally, there was no evidence that the District proposes to discontinue 
any services that are mandated by state or federal laws or regulations. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 27 2. Under Government Code section 11520, if a respondent fails to appear 
after timely filing a notice of participation, the agency involved may proceed with a 
default and take action. 
3.A school district may consider its financial circumstances in deciding 
whether to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service  (
 (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 631.) A board's decision as to reduction or 
discontinuation of a particular kind of service is not tied in with any statistical 
computation, such as reduction in the number of students. The number of 
terminations made necessary by particular kinds of services reductions depends totally 
upon the district's decision as to how many services to reduce (. at p. 635.) A school 
district's decision to reduce particular kinds of services must not be fraudulent, 
arbitrary, or capricious. ( . at p. 637.) The services identified in the Resolution are 
particular kinds of services that can be reduced or discontinued under Education Code 
fraudulent, 
arbitrary, or capricious. (Factual Finding 70.) Cause for the reduction or discontinuance 
meaning of section 44949. 
4. The District is authorized to reduce services within the meaning of 
type of service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it 
(  (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) 
5. Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 establish a seniority-based 
layoff procedure that mandates that employees shall be terminated in the inverse 28 order in which they were employed. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), 
provides that when a governing board reduces particular kinds of services resulting in 
a decrease in the number of certificated, permanent employees, the services of a 
permanent employee may not be terminated if another employee with less seniority is 
retained to render 
 he governing board shall make 
assignments and reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be retained to 
render any service which their seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.
Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), provides that a school district may 
deviate from terminating a certificated employee in order of seniority (skipping) where 
the district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or 
course of study, and the certificated employee proposed to be skipped has special 
training and experience necessary to teach that course of study, which others with 
more seniority do not possess. 
6. The District appropriately accounted for positively-assured attrition when 
it determined which teachers to lay off. The District also appropriately applied 
bumping rules and the competency and skipping criteria such that no employee with 
less seniority than respondent Boylan is being retained to perform a service that he is 
certificated and competent to render. (Factual Findings 70-73.) 
7. Respondent s arguments have been considered and rejected. As a result, 
cause exists to give respondent Boylan notice that his services will not be required for 
the 2025-2026 school year. 
8. In this case, a continuance of seven days was granted. Therefore, the 
deadlines for submitting a proposed decision and serving a notice of termination were 
extended by seven days. (Ed. Code, §§ 44949, subd. (c)(3), 44955, subd. (c).) 29RECOMMENDATION
The 
The District may give final notice to respondent Boylan that his services will not be 
needed for the 2025-2026 school year.
DATE:
MICHELLE DYLAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
