BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE  
MOUNTAIN VIEW SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the District Statement of Certificated 
Reduction in Force against: 
CERTIFICATED TEACHERS OF THE MOUNTAIN VIEW SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
Respondents. 
OAH No. 2025030712 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Cindy F. Forman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter in El Monte, California, on April 8, 2025. 
Margaret A. Chidester and Alexandra T. Reynoso, Attorneys at Law, represented 
the Mountain View School District (District). 
Carlos R. Perez, Esq., represented respondents Pedro Flores, Nancy Iniguez, 
Naomi Nagera, Jessica Nunez, Anthony Ramirez, and Miriam Varela (collectively, 
respondents). All respondents were present at the hearing. 
The Administrative Law Judge received testimony and documentary evidence. 
The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 8, 2025. SUMMARY OF PROPOSED DECISION 
The District Governing Board (Board) determined to reduce or discontinue 
particular kinds of services provided by teachers and other certificated employees for 
budgetary reasons. The decision was not related to the competency and dedication of 
the individuals whose services the District proposed to reduce or eliminate. 
The 
, and breaking ties between 
employees with the same first dates of paid service. The selection process was in 
accordance with the requirements of the Education Code. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. Roberto López-Mena filed the District Statement of Certificated 
Reduction in Force (Accusation) in his official capacity as District Assistant 
Superintendent, Human Resources. 
2. Respondents are probationary or permanent certificated employees of 
the District. 
3. On March 6, 2025, the Board adopted Resolution 25-031 titled 
Resolution of the Governing Board of the Mountain View School District Regarding 
Reduction or Discontinuance of Particular Kinds of Certificated , 
which provides for the reduction or discontinuation of certain services at the close of 
the 2024-2025 school year. The Resolution also established exemption and tie-breaker criteria for determining the relative seniority of certificated employees who first 
rendered paid service on the same date. 
4. On or before March 15, 2025, the District provided 25 certificated 
employees with notice pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 that 
their services would not be required for the 2025-2026 school year. Each notice stated 
the reasons for the discontinuation of services. Thereafter, 24 certificated employees 
timely requested a hearing to determine whether cause existed for not reemploying 
them for the 2025-2026 school year. 
5. On March 21, 2025, the District served the Accusation, a Notice of 
Hearing, and other required documents on the 24 certificated employees who 
requested a hearing. Per the Resolution, those requesting a hearing were not required 
to file a Notice of Participation as provided by Government Code section 11506 and 
Education Code section 44949, subdivision (c)(1). 
6. All jurisdiction requirements were met. 
District Layoffs 
7. The Resolution provided the District would reduce or discontinue the 
following particular kinds of services affecting the employment of 28 full-time 
positions: (1) one Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) Principal- Alternative Education position; 
(2) one F.T.E. Director II  Pupil Personnel Services position; (3) one F.T.E. Director II  
Family Engagement, Extended Learning, and Migrant Education position; (4) seven 
F.T.E. Learning Recovery Intervention 2-6 positions; (5) seven F.T.E. Intervention 
Teacher 3-6 positions; (6) four F.T.E. Elementary Physical Education Teacher positions; 
(7) two F.T.E. School Counselor positions; (8) three F.T.E. TOSA  Curriculum and Instruction positions; (9) one F.T.E. TOSA  Family Engagement position; and (10) one 
F.T.E.  TOSA  English Language Development position. 
8. The Board took action to reduce or discontinue the services set forth in 
Factual Finding No. 7 because of the  loss of emergency COVID funding. 
Assistant Superintendent López-Mena testified 
reduce particular kinds of services. The District consists of eight schools and 4,400 
students. Assistant Superintendent López-Mena explained the recent of 
COVID funding will cause the District to incur significant deficits over the next three 
years
will not be able to meaningfully reduce its expenditures unless certain services are 
either discontinued or reduced. 
9. The Board adopted criteria to retain certain employees for the 
2025-2026 school year regardless of seniority. Specifically, the Resolution provides 
certain certificated employees are exempt 
that others do not 
possess. the categories of certificated employees 
the Board seeks to retain in the 2025-2026 school year, regardless of seniority. These 
categories are: 
1. Certificated personnel who possess administrative 
credentials, who are currently assigned to administrative 
positions, and who will be assigned to administrative 
positions for the 2025-2026 school year. 
2. Certificated personnel who possess a credential 
authorizing service in the following special education job descriptions: Resource Specialist Teacher, Special 
Education Teacher - RIS, Special Education Teacher - Self 
Contained Class, Speech/Language Specialist, School 
Psychologist, Program Specialist, and Adaptive Physical 
Education Teacher who are presently assigned within the 
scope of that credential, and who will be assigned within 
the scope of that credential for the 2025-2026 school 
year. 
3. Certificated personnel who possess a single subject 
credential authorizing service in mathematics or science, 
who are presently assigned within the scope of that 
credential, and who will be assigned within the scope of 
that credential for the 2025-2026 school year. 
4. Certificated personnel with specific and recent training 
in community site leadership responsibilities who have 
at least 6 months of service in [District] community 
school leadership, who are presently assigned to such a 
position, and who will be assigned as community site 
lead for school year 2025-2026. 
Except as discussed in Factual Findings 16 through 18 below, respondents did not 
c criteria, and none of the respondents indicated they 
possessed the qualifications described in Attachment A. 
/// 
/// 10. The Board also adopted tiebreaker criteria for determining the relative 
seniority of 
Resolution provides the order of termination of employees with the same first date of 
paid service shall be determined by reference to certain tiebreaker criteria and to 
points assigned to each category of tiebreaker criteria. The Resolution further 
established a lottery process to be implemented if the tiebreaking criteria did not 
break all the ties between employees with the same first date of paid service. The 
tiebreaking criteria are reasonable as they relate to the skills and qualifications of 
certificated and probationary employees. Respondents did not challenge the tie-
breaking criteria, and the District properly applied the criteria. 
11. The District maintains a seniority list containing 
dates (first date of paid service with the District), current assignments and locations, 
probationary, temporary, etc., and credentials. Assistant Superintendent López-Mena 
updated multiple times, with its most 
recent update on April 4, 2025. Respondents did not challenge the accuracy of the 
seniority list. 
12. The District used the seniority list to develop a proposed layoff and 
assigned to the services sought to be 
reduced or discontinued according to the Resolution. Based on the information from 
the seniority lists, the District determined whether senior employees designated for 
employees holding positions that were not included in the particular kinds of services 
designated for reduction in the layoff. The District also used the seniority list to apply 
 13. The District identified vacancies in the 2025-2026 school year due to 
Positively Assured Attrition, including retirements, deaths, and resignations. In 
consideration of such attrition, the District concluded the number of certificated 
employees required to be terminated for the 2025-2025 school year would be reduced 
by three F.T.E. positions: specifically, two F.T.E. positions for Elementary Physical 
Education Teachers and one F.T.E. positions for a School Counselor. 
14. On or before April 8, 2025, the District rescinded its notices of non-
reemployment issued to 19 of its certificated employees. As a result of the rescinded 
layoff notices, six District certificated employees remained subject to the Resolution 
and were represented at the layoff hearing. They are respondents Pedro Flores, Nancy 
Iniguez, Naomi Najera, Jessica Nunez, Anthony Ramirez, and Miriam Varela. 
to Retention of Temporary Employee 
15. In closing argument, he challenged the retention 
of Alexander Rectra (Employee No. 309) for the 2025-2026 school year, who, according 
2024, and a temporary employee who is 
to the Resolution. Mr. Rectra is the only temporary employee not displaced or 
, and he neither received a layoff notice nor was 
present at the hearing. Respondents  contended the District should release Mr. 
Rectra from service because his temporary status and his position do not justify 
exemption from the layoff criteria. Respondents  further contended that by 
failing to release Mr. Rectra, the District deprived respondents of the opportunity to fill 
his position. 
/// 16. contentions are unpersuasive. Counsel failed to 
cite any legal authority requiring the release of Mr. Rectra solely because of his status 
as a temporary employee and in the absence of any evidence that he can be displaced 
by a senior employee. None of the respondents established they possessed the 
requisite 
(1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655 [requiring competency to be 
demonstrated by the senior employee].) The exemption criteria state that a 
Community Site Coordinator must have specific and recent training in community site 
leadership responsibilities and have at least six months of service in District leadership. 
Assistant Superintendent López-Mena testified that a Community Site Coordinator 
also has 
experience in working with a team and team building, and a background in 
communication and organizational skills. None of the respondents asserted or 
demonstrated they possess the necessary community site leadership experience or 
skills required of a Community Site Coordinator. 
17.  offered no legitimate basis to challenge 
the exemption category for Community Site Leads created by the District. Assistant 
Superintendent López-Mena credibly explained Community Site Leads are uniquely 
trained and have a distinct role in a new District initiative involving community 
work in a classroom or have regular teaching responsibilities. Nor do they work regular 
classroom hours. 
18. The District demonstrated a specific need for personnel to provide 
community liaison services. The District also demonstrated Mr. Rectra has the special 
training and experience necessary to provide those services, which others with more seniority do not possess. no adverse impact 
on respondents  employment or reemployment rights. to 
exempt Mr. Rectra from layoff despite his temporary status was not arbitrary, 
capricious, or an improper exercise of discretion. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists under Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955. All notices and other requirements of those sections have been 
provided as required. 
2. The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services 
that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The 
Governing Board
arbitrary nor capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion. The reduction or 
discontinuation of the particular kinds of services stated in the Resolution is related to 
the welfare of the  schools and pupils within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44949. 
3. A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
 (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178 179.) 
4. Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), junior teachers 
may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess superior skills or capabilities that their more senior counterparts lack. (
 (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 
842843.) Respondents did not dispute three of t four skipping criteria. The 
District  fourth exemption category pertaining to Community Site Leads is reasonable 
and consistent with  needs. 
5. A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer 
to a continuing position that he or she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, 
position. ( . (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.) A school district 
has discretion to determine whether an employee is certified and competent to be 
reassigned and, as a result, to displace a junior employee, in accordance with 
Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (c) and (d). (
(1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.) The criteria used to determine a 
 at p. 566.) Competency criteria that 
consider the skills and qualifications required of the certificated employee are 
reasonable. ( . at p. 565-566.) The competency criteria adopted in the Resolution are 
 
6. Except as provided by statute, the District retained no certificated 
employees with less seniority to provide a service that any of the respondents are 
certificated and competent to render. As between employees who first rendered paid 
service to the District on the same date,  order of termination was based 
solely on the needs of the District and its students. 
7. Cause therefore exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of 
the District due to the reduction and discontinuation of particular kinds of services. ORDER
1. The District Statement of Certificated Reduction in Force is sustained.
2. Notice may be given to employees occupying up to 25 full-time 
equivalent certificated positions that their services will not be required for the 2025-
2026 school year because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of 
services. Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. Such notice may be given 
to respondents Pedro Flores, Nancy Iniguez, Naomi Najera, Jessica Nunez, Anthony 
Ramirez, and Miriam Varela.
DATE:
CINDY F. FORMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
