 BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
MONROVIA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the 
Force Against: 
CERTIFICATED TEACHERS OF THE MONROVIA UNIFIED 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Respondents. 
OAH No. 2025031047 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Harden Sooper, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on April 16, 2025. 
Sharon J. Ormond, Attorney at Law, represented the Monrovia Unified School 
District (District). 
Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Nancy Bravo, Jasmin 
Y. Castro, Daniel Chacon, David P. Clark, Jolisa Grimmer, Higinio Lujan, Jessica Meza, 
Natalie Ridley, and Stephanie Wang. All respondents were present at the hearing. 2 notice. Therefore, this Proposed Decision does not 
proposed layoff of Mr. Clark. 
The ALJ received testimony and documentary evidence. The record closed and 
the matter was submitted for decision on April 16, 2025. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. Respondents are certificated employees of the District. 
2. On February 26, 2025, the Governing Board (Board) of the District 
adopted Resolution Number 2425-24 (Resolution) to reduce or discontinue particular 
kinds of services provided by the District at the end of the 2024-2025 school year as 
follows: (1) 14 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) elementary teaching services positions, (2) 2.4 
FTE Career Technology Education (CTE) art media credential teaching services 
positions, (3) four FTE secondary English language arts teaching services positions, (4) 
five FTE secondary math teaching services positions, (5) one FTE secondary biology life 
science teaching services position, (6) one FTE secondary foundational science 
teaching services position, (7) two FTE secondary Spanish teaching services positions, 
(8) two FTE secondary physical education teaching services positions, (9) four FTE 
special education services positions servicing students with mild/moderate disabilities 
and requiring an added authorization for Autism Spectrum Disorder (AAAS), (10) two 
FTE social worker services positions, (11) one FTE high school counseling services 
position, (12) 0.625 FTE middle school counseling services position, and (13) two FTE 
middle school assistant principal services positions. 3 3. The Board directed the District Superintendent or their designee to 
initiate layoff procedures and give appropriate notice pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44955 and 44949 to a corresponding number of certificated employees. 
4. On February 27, 2025, the District served each respondent with a 
Preliminary Notice of Recommendation Not to Reemploy for the 2025-2026 School 
Year, informing them that their services would not be required for the 2025-2026 
school year. 
5. On the same date, Vanessa Landesfeind, Ed.D.
Superintendent of Human Resources, filed the Statement of Reduction in Force while 
acting in her official capacity. The District served each respondent with the Statement 
of Reduction in Force, Statement to Respondent, blank Request for Hearing and 
Notice of Participation form, and copies of pertinent provisions of the Government 
and Education Codes. 
6. Each respondent timely submitted a signed Request for Hearing and 
Notice of Participation. 
Reduction of Particular Kinds of Services 
7. At the hearing, 
to reduce particular kinds of services. The District consists of nine school sites and 
serves approximately 4,900 students. Dr. Landesfeind explained the District is currently 
in a state of deficit spending, also known as structural deficit. The District is spending 
funds held in reserve such that the District may become fiscally insolvent. The County 
of Los Angeles required the District to file a fiscal stabilization plan setting forth the 
s and eliminate its structural deficit. Dr. 
Landesfeind testified after the District filed its initial plan, the County of Los Angeles 4 required the District to file an amended fiscal stabilization plan further reducing 
expenditures. As part of its plan to reduce expenditures, the District will reconfigure its 
campuses such that all elementary schools will include students in kindergarten 
through sixth grade and all middle schools will include students in seventh and eighth 
grade. -located with another school 
within the District. The fiscal stabilization plan requires a reduction in the need for 
certificated teachers. 
8. Before adopting the Resolution, the District considered all known 
attrition in determining the number of layoff notices to be served on its employees. In 
a layoff proceeding, a governing board need only consider positively assured attrition 
which occurs before the March 15 layoff notice deadline, not thereafter. (
 (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635.) However, Dr. Landesfeind 
testified the District will take into consideration any additional resignation and 
retirement notices before issuing final layoff notices. 
Bumping Criteria and Skipping Criteria 
9. The Resolution defined competency  for purposes of allowing an 
employee holding another position not subject to layoff. The Resolution provides that 
(1) current possession of a valid clear or preliminary 
credential in the subject or grade level; (2) possession of a full English Learner 
certificate, if required by the position; (3) possession of a single subject credential if 
teaching in a departmentalized setting; and (4) any training and experience necessary 
to meet the requirements of specialized positions. The Resolution further stated 
bumping shall only be allowed in cases where the senior employee is both competent 
and credentialed to assume the whole assignment of the more junior employee. 5 respondent Grimmer challenged her right to bump a junior employee, as discussed 
below. 
10. The Resolution also established certain 
employees for the following school year regardless of seniority. Specifically, the 
Resolution provides that certificated employees who possess special training and 
experience to teach classes in the Mandarin Dual Immersion Program are subject to 
the respondents indicated they possessed such qualifications. 
Seniority List and Tiebreaking Criteria 
11. The District maintains a seniority list containing each employee  
seniority date, in most cases their hire date; credential information; and current 
assignments, including the FTEs associated with their position. Dr. Landesfeind testified 
to the accuracy of the seniority list and how it was compiled. The list was updated 
based on information in employee personnel files and, for credential information, 
confirmed by accessing the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) 
website. Employees were allowed to confirm or challenge the accuracy of that 
information and in some cases, the District updated the list based upon new 
information provided by employees. 
12. The District used the seniority list to implement and determine the 
proposed layoffs. The District identified the least senior certificated employees 
currently assigned to the particular kinds of services to be reduced. The District then 
determined how many certificated employees assigned to the particular kinds of 
services are retiring or resigning; whether the least senior certificated employees in 6 these particular kinds of services hold other credentials, can perform in other service 
areas, and are entitled to bump other more junior certificated employees; whether 
certain certificated employees should be skipped and retained; and how many 
certificated employees in each service area must be reassigned or laid off. 
13. To determine the relative seniority of certificated employees who first 
rendered paid service on the same date, the Board, on January 15, 2025, adopted 
Resolution Number 2425-15 establishing tie-breaker criteria. The tie-breaking criteria 
provide for a point system awarding priority based on credential status and type, 
number of years of experience, and educational background. Employees with current 
special education or bilingual teaching credentials earn additional points. In the event 
of a tie after applying the tie-breaking criteria, the District would hold a random 
lottery. Respondents did not challenge the tiebreaker criteria or their application. 
 
14. Respondent Jolisa Grimmer has been employed as a part-time, or 0.625 
FTE, school counselor at the District for eight years. She is currently assigned to a 
school site encompassing both an independent study program and a continuation 
high school. When she initially began working for the District, respondent Grimmer 
was a counselor only for the independent study program. In 2021 or 2022, she 
assumed responsibility as a counselor for both the independent study program and 
the continuation high school. However, respondent  job remained a 0.625 
FTE position. Respondent Grimmer did not dispute her seniority date is May 17, 2018. 
15. According to the District, respondent Grimmer is subject to layoff 
because she was bumped from her position by a more senior part-time counselor, 
Adlina Dugan, with a seniority date of 7 0.625 FTE middle school counselor was eliminated pursuant to the Resolution. Ms. 
Dugan and respondent Grimmer hold the same Pupil Personnel Services (PPS) school 
counseling credential. That PPS school counseling credential allows respondent 
Grimmer to work as a school counselor for grades kindergarten through 12. 
Respondent Grimmer did not dispute she was subject to bumping by Ms. Dugan. 
16. In her testimony, respondent Grimmer asserted she is a permanent 
employee who is certified and competent to perform jobs currently held by less senior 
full-time counselors and therefore should be entitled to bump a less senior full-time 
counselor. Respondent Grimmer testified she was unaware her status as a part-time 
employee subjected her to layoff before a less senior full-time employee who held the 
same credential. She further capricious, unethical, 
discriminatory, and violates the Education Code and District policy. 
17. On behalf of the District, Dr. Landesfeind testified respondent Grimmer 
was not entitled as a part-time employee to bump a full-time employee. According to 
Dr. Landesfeind, an employee subject to layoff may only bump a less senior employee 
holding a position with the same number of hours or FTE. The District therefore cannot 
split a full-time position into two part-time positions to accommodate a more senior 
part-time employee. Dr. Landesfeind cited 
paragraph E of the bumping shall only be allowed in cases 
where the senior employee is both competent and credentialed to assume the whole 
 Dr. Landesfeind testified 
paragraph E means only a full-time employee can bump another full-time employee. 
18. The District also cited 
(2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334 ( ), in which the court held two part-time 
psychologists were not entitled to bump a less senior full-time psychologist. In 8 response, respondent Grimmer asserted she is not requesting the District split a full-
time position. Rather, she is willing to assume a full-time position, allowing the District 
to maintain its desired staffing levels. 
19. The  court explicitly did not opine on the situation presented 
by respondent Grimmer Neither appellant here asserts that by virtue of her seniority 
she is entitled to the full-time psychologist position. . . . We have no occasion to 
consider what the appellants' rights would have been had such a demand been made.
( , , at p. 345.) However, the  court noted a district may 
-time 
employees performing the same responsibilities do not necessarily perform the same 
-time employee. The court, though, did not require a school district 
to define a service in that manner and recognized that some districts may determine 
that an assignment can equally effectively be shared by two or more part-time 
employees. The court found that if the determination is reasonable and made in good 
faith, neither section 49455 nor any other provision of the Education Code precludes a 
-time. ( . at p. 344, citing 
 (1989) 208 Cal.App.3d 456.) 
20. is that the service eliminated by the Resolution was 
a part-time school counselor, which is not the same service as a full-time school 
counselor, as respondent Grimmer argued. was 
reasonable and made in good faith. Respondent Grimmer did not contend that the 
District retained any part-time school counselor junior to her. 
21. The  court also in a footnote cited 
 (1979) 96 Cal.App.3d 503 ( ), in which the court 
reversed an order granting priority to a previously laid off part-time employee to be 9 employed as a full-time teacher to the next vacancy, pursuant to the reinstatement
procedures stated in Education Code section 44956. The court reasoned
hold otherwise would give to a teacher who was laid off a priority that she would not 
have had if there had been no layoff. We cannot read the statute as conferring that 
( , , 96 Cal.App.3d at p. 505.) Although involved a 
reinstatement under section 44956, the court found sections 44955 and 
44956 should be read together and applied consistently if reasonably possible to do 
so. ( , , at p. 343.) Here, respondent Grimmer bumping a less senior 
full-time counselor would likewise confer to her a bonus she would not have otherwise 
had if not for  layoffs. This is particularly true with respect to Ms. 
Dugan, who is more senior than respondent Grimmer and will continue to occupy a 
part-time counselor position. 
22. Based on the foregoing, respondent Grimmer was not entitled to bump a 
less senior full-time counselor. 
 
23. Respondent Daniel Chacon has worked as a teacher for the District for 10 
years. He holds a CTE Arts, Media, and Entertainment credential and teaches theater, 
drama, video production, and drawing 
includes an independent study program and continuation high school. Respondent 
Chacon testified at hearing 
CTE art media credential services positions. Respondent Chacon expressed his concern 
about the future of services provided to students in alternative education programs, 
who are often underserved and do not thrive in a traditional school setting. Although 
the evidence did 
the identified art media credential 10 teaching services positions was arbitrary, capricious, or an improper exercise of its 
discretion. Respondent Chacon did not dispute his seniority date nor did he assert he 
was entitled to bump a less senior employee. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 
2. The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services 
that could be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955. The 
nor capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or 
pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
3. A school district may reduce services within the meaning of section 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.) 
4. Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), junior teachers 
may be given retention priority over senior teachers if the junior teachers possess 
superior skills or capabilities that their more senior counterparts lack. (
 (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 831, 842-
 11 5. A senior teacher whose position is discontinued has the right to transfer 
to a continuing position that he or she is certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, 
position. (  (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469.) A school district 
has discretion to determine whether an employee is certified and competent to be 
reassigned and, as a result, to displace a junior employee, in accordance with 
Education Code section 44955, subdivisions (c) and (d). (
 (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 555, 565.) The criteria used to determine a 
 at p. 566.) Competency criteria that 
consider the skills and qualifications required of the teacher are reasonable. (  at pp. 
565-566.) The competency criteria adopted in the Resolution are reasonable. 
6. No junior certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform a 
service that a more senior employee is certificated and competent to render. (Ed. 
Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) 
7. Based on the above, there is sufficient cause for not reemploying 
respondents for the ensuing school year. (Ed. Code, § 44949, subd. (b).) 
// 
// 
// 
// 
// 
// 12ORDER
1. The 
2. Notice may be given to employees occupying 43.625 full-time equivalent 
certificated positions that their services will not be required for the 2025-2026 school 
year because of the reduction and discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
Notice shall be given in inverse order of seniority. Such notice may be given to 
respondents Nancy Bravo, Jasmin Y. Castro, Daniel Chacon, Jolisa Grimmer, Higinio 
Lujan, Jessica Meza, Natalie Ridley, and Stephanie Wang.
DATE:
HARDEN SOOPER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
