BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE  
SANTA ANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction In Force of: 
CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE SANTA ANA UNIFIED 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Respondents. 
OAH No. 2025020454 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Eric Sawyer, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, heard this matter on April 14 through 18, 2025, in Santa Ana, 
California. 
Anthony P. De Marco and Lauren Ruvalcaba, Attorneys, represented Santa Ana 
Unified School District (District). 
Marianne Reinhold and Ilissa B. Gold, Attorneys, represented a majority of the 
respondents, who are identified in Exhibit D. 
A number of other respondents, identified in Exhibit OAH 1, appeared at the 
hearing and represented themselves. 2 The hearing concluded on April 18, 2025. However, the record was held open, 
and the hearing was continued, for the parties to submit closing briefs. The closing 
briefs submitted by the District and represented respondents were timely lodged. The 
closing briefs of several self-represented respondents (noted below) also were timely 
lodged and marked collectively as Exhibit 102. 
The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision upon receipt of 
the closing briefs on April 25, 2025. 
By operation of Education Code section 44949, subdivision (e), the continuance 
of the hearing, due to leaving the record open for closing briefs, extends by one week 
the dates specified in sections 44949, subdivision (c)(3), and 44955, subdivision (c). 
SUMMARY 
The District proposes to lay off 386 full-time equivalent positions due to 
overstaffing. A number of respondents challenge various aspects of 
seniority tie-breaking method, proposed skipping, and proposed bumping decisions. 
The glancing challenge to the seniority tie-breaking method is not successful. 
unsuccessfully argue they should have been skipped as well. However
bumping decisions for its Counselor 192 and Counselor 202 service areas are in error, 
and a number of other respondents successfully demonstrate either that they were 
improperly bumped by unqualified certificated employees, or they should be allowed 
to bump less senior colleagues. In all other respects, the District met its burden of 
establishing by a preponderance of the evidence that its proposed layoff may proceed 
as it intends. 3 FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Parties and Jurisdiction 
1. Jennifer Flores is the Associate Superintendent, Human 
Resources. (Ex. 2.) 
2. Respondents, who are identified in Exhibits D and OAH 1, are employed 
by the District as certificated employees. (Ex. 2.) 
3. On or before January 31, 2025, pursuant to Education Code sections 
44949 and 44955, the Board of Education (Board) was given written notice of 
the recommendation by Superintendent that notice should be given to a 
requisite number of certificated employees that their services will not be required for 
the ensuing 2025-2026 school year. (Ex. 1.) 
4. On March 14, 2025, and no later than March 15, 2025, certificated 
employees, including respondents, who were employed and identified as permanent 
or probationary employees of the District, were given written notice of the 
recommendation that, pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, their 
services will not be required for the ensuing 2025-2026 school year (layoff notice). The 
certificated employees who were given this layoff notice are identified in attachment 5 
of the layoff notice. (Ex. 2, pp. A25-37.) 
5. Ms. Flores brought the Statement of Reduction in Force in her official 
capacity, which was served on the certificated employees in question. (Ex. 2.) 
6. Of those who received the above-described layoff notice and Statement 
of Reduction in Force, respondents timely requested, or have been deemed to have 4 timely requested, a hearing to determine if there is cause for not reemploying them 
for the 2025-2026 school year. (Exs. 2, D, OAH 1.) 
7. The District compiled a list of 24 certificated employees it concluded had 
not requested a hearing, and therefore are not respondents allowed to participant in 
this matter. (Ex. 11.) However, two individuals on that list were represented by counsel 
at the hearing, Kristi Almanzar and Rodolfo Calderon (Ex. D), and one individual 
appeared and represented herself, Bianka Silva (Ex. OAH 1). The District did not object 
to these appearances at the hearing, and therefore the three in question were allowed 
by the ALJ to participate in the hearing as respondents. 
8. On the final day of the hearing, District Executive Director of Human 
Resources, Olga McCullough, testified that the District will not issue final layoff notices 
to the following respondents: Rodolfo Calderon, Morgan Riley Waite, and Cheryl 
Whittington. 
The Board  Layoff Resolution 
9. On January 31, 2025, the Board adopted Resolution 24/25-3649 
(Resolution) to reduce or eliminate particular kinds of services performed by 
certificated employees no later than the end of the 2024-2025 school year, and stating 
the reasons therefor. (Testimony [Test.] of McCullough; Ex. 1.) 
10. The Board further determined that it shall be necessary by reason of said 
reductions or discontinuances to decrease the number of certificated employees at the 
close of the current school year by a corresponding number of full-time equivalent 
(FTE) positions, and directed the Superintendent, or his designees, to proceed 
accordingly by notifying the appropriate employees to 
determination. (Test. of McCullough; Ex. 1.) 5 REDUCTION OR ELIMINATION OF PARTICULAR KINDS OF SERVICES 
11. According to the Resolution, the following particular kinds of services 
were to be reduced or eliminated at the end of the 2024-2025 school year: 
Service Areas        FTEs 
Elementary Instruction 
Teacher - Elementary (General/Multiple Subjects)   186 
Teacher - Transitional Kindergarten       12 
Secondary/Departmentalized Instruction 
Teacher - Math         34 
Teacher - English         63 
Teacher - Social Science        35 
Teacher Secondary - Business         6 
Teacher Secondary - French         2 
Teacher Secondary - Home Economics        1 
Teacher Secondary- Health         1 
Non-Rostered Services 
Curriculum Specialist        16 
Itinerant Support Teacher        21 6 Home and Hospital 5
Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA)      17 
Counselor - 192 days        63 
Counselor - 202 days        27 
Counselor Coach           4 
Instructional Coach - Future Ready      39 
Social Worker         10 
Lead Social Worker           4 
Total         546 
12. The decision to reduce or discontinue these FTE positions is due to the 
 Beginning in Spring 2023, the District determined during 
staff allocation that it was overstaffed. The District established a stabilization plan, in 
which it began reducing staff in all categories, including teachers. Under this plan, the 
District decided to not renew temporary teaching contracts, offer early retirement 
incentives to certificated staff, and not fill certain key positions left vacant, including 
nine administrative positions overseeing certificated staff and several management 
positions overseeing classified staff. Nonetheless, the District determined the 
reduction and elimination of certificated staff still was necessary to implement the 
stabilization plan. (Test. of McCullough.) 
13. During the hearing, however, Ms. McCullough testified that subsequent 
to the Resolution, the District has received information indicating fewer FTEs need to 7 be reduced to fulfill the stabilization plan, lowering the number of FTEs subject to 
reduction or elimination as follows: 
Service Areas        FTEs 
Elementary Instruction 
Teacher - Elementary (General/Multiple Subjects)  140 
Teacher - Transitional Kindergarten      12 
Secondary/Departmentalized Instruction 
Teacher - Math         26 
Teacher - English         44 
Teacher - Social Science        16 
Teacher Secondary - Business         0 
Teacher Secondary - French         0 
Teacher Secondary - Home Economics        0 
Teacher Secondary- Health         0 
Non-Rostered Services 
Curriculum Specialist        16 
Itinerant Support Teacher        20 
Home and Hospital           5 8 Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA) 17
Counselor - 192 days        27 
Counselor - 202 days        20 
Counselor Coach           4 
Instructional Coach - Future Ready      39 
Social Worker           0 
Lead Social Worker           0 
Total         386 
14.
below, and they will not be given final layoff notices, depending on the outcome of 
the hearing. Thus, the District intends only to issue final layoff notices to 276 
respondents. (Test. of McCullough.) 
TIE-BREAKING 
15. Exhibit B to the Resolution sets forth tie-breaking criteria to determine 
the relative seniority of certificated employees who first rendered paid probationary 
service on the same date. (Ex. 1.) 
16. The tie-breaking criteria is comprised of nine areas, each of which is 
assigned varying points, based on the needs of the District at this time. The criteria are 
weighted in favor of more senior and experienced teachers, as well as those with 
bilingual skills and special education experience, which are particularly important to 
 9 17. The criteria was applied to certificated employees with the same seniority 
date; the greater the number of points, the more senior the involved employee is 
considered. (Test. of McCullough; Ex. 1.) 
18. According to the Resolution, cases where multiple employees remain 
tied after applying the above criteria, the final determination may be made by a lot or 
other equitable method as determined by the District. 6.) In such cases, the 
District used a digital on-line randomizer, which staff had seen used before by the 
determine which school 
districts to audit. The higher the number assigned by the randomizer, the greater the 
seniority. (Test. of McCullough.) 
19. Ms. McCullough believes this was a fair and unbiased way to handle ties 
after all of the tie-breaking criteria had been applied. Screen shots showing the 
number assigned by the randomizer were 
personnel files and made available for inspection upon request. No evidence 
presented indicates any respondent made an inspection request and/or reported an 
error or irregularity with the randomizer results. (Test. of McCullough; Ex. 1.) 
20. As a result of seeking additional information from certificated staff 
concerning their seniority dates with the District, and other relevant information, the 
District several times updated its seniority list. Those updates caused changes in 
-breaking 
criteria. Sometimes those changes moved a respondent out of one group and into 
another. When there 
date, the randomizer was used to assign numbers to all of those now in that band. The 
District advised its certificated employees that the seniority list would be subject to 
change over time as new information was received. Ms. McCullough does not 10 remember how many times the randomizer was used to break ties. After the formal 
seniority list was published to all respondents, it was updated four times. The seniority 
a few days before the hearing when it was uploaded into Case Center, 
the digital repository for exhibits used in this case. (Test. of McCullough.) 
SPLIT ASSIGNMENTS  
21. The Resolution prohibits fractional bumping of split assignments. (Ex. 1, 
p. A3, para. 12.) 
22. A split assignment is where a teacher is credentialed and competent to 
teach more than one course of instruction, where two or more courses require 
school assignments which include at least one section of coaching a sports team. (Test. 
of McCullough; Ex. 1.) 
23. Fractional bumping is where a more senior employee credentialed and 
for a more senior employee to bump a less senior employee teaching a split 
assignment, the senior employee must be competent and credentialled to teach all of 
 
24.
these type of blended assignments. Case law generally allows school districts to 
protect a whole assignment by preventing employees from demanding fractional 
bumping. For example, in (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 11 1016, 1021, the court concluded a laid off counselor could not compel her former 
employing school district to re-employ her as a part-time employee in half of a newly 
created position that was 50 percent counselor and 50 percent teacher. In 
(2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343, the court similarly 
ruled a school district cannot be compelled to split one full assignment into fractional 
assignments when considering bumping in a layoff. 
SKIPPING 
25. Pursuant to the Resolution, the Board determined it was necessary to 
retain certificated employees for the following school year regardless of seniority 
(skipping) to teach specific courses or courses of study who possess the types of 
special training and experience that others with more seniority do not possess. 
26. The Resolution provides that the courses or courses of study subject to 
skipping are those taught by certificated employees in the following categories: (a) in 
the area of Elementary Instruction - Teacher Elementary, special education services, 
and Visual and Performing Arts (VAPA); (b) in the area of Elementary Instruction  
Transitional Kindergarten, special education services and VAPA; and (c) in the area of 
Secondary  Departmentalized Instruction, International Baccalaureate (IB) in grades 7 
through 12, VAPA, and special education services. (Ex. 1.) 
27. At the outset of the hearing, the District announced that, by operation of 
the above-described whole assignment rule, it had decided also to skip high school 
teachers who have a blended assignment teaching one area of content, as well as 
coaching a sport. If the coach in question did not have a PE credential, he or she may 
still be assigned a section as a sports coach if they complete 20 hours of mandated 12 health and safety training and receive certification. The certified training is in basic first 
aid and CPR, heat stroke, and concussion protocols. (Test. of McCullough.) 
28. Thus, the District has decided to skip all high school sports coaches in 
such a blended assignment who had received initial layoff notices, and determined 
that these teachers only could be bumped by someone who could assume their whole 
assignment of both teaching and coaching. (Test. of McCullough.) 
The Seniority List 
29. The 
dates (first date of paid probationary service), contract status, job title and course(s) 
taught, credential information, additional licensure, and current location of their 
assignment(s). The seniority list used at hearing is 355 pages, detailing the above 
information for 2,720 certificated employees. (Exs. 12, 45.) 
30. Since 
Department have been reviewing the seniority list and relevant personnel files, 
 of its certificated employees. Staff 
also confirmed current assignments through ERIES course 
listing, as well as confirmed their credentials with the Orange County Department of 
Education (OCDE). A consultant was hired to review the accuracy of the seniority list 
and recommend appropriate changes. In the last few school years, the Human 
Resources Department several times requested certificated employees to review their 
seniority information, and provide information and documentation if they believed 
there was an error, or the District was missing material facts. The District recently has 13 disputes. This activity resulted in many updates to the seniority list. (Test. of 
McCullough.) 
31. As discussed above, the seniority list was formally updated four times in 
the weeks leading up to the hearing of this matter to address errors identified by 
respondents and confirmed by District staff. As indicated below, the seniority list was 
updated throughout the hearing after various respondents testified and offered 
documentation demonstrating correction of the seniority list was warranted. 
32. Based on the above, it was established by a preponderance of the 
evidence that is accurate, with the few exceptions noted 
below. 
33. The District used the seniority list to implement and determine the 
proposed layoffs, identifying the corresponding least senior certificated employees in 
each affected service area. The District then determined how many certificated 
employees assigned in the involved particular kinds of services are retiring or 
resigning; whether the least senior certificated employees in these particular kinds of 
services hold other credentials, can perform in other service areas, and are entitled to 
bump other more junior certificated employees; whether certain certificated 
employees should be skipped and retained; and how many certificated employees in 
each service area must be reassigned or laid off. For the hearing, the District created a 
displacement chart, which shows how and why each affected respondent is being laid 
off. In her testimony, Ms. McCullough also explained in detail how each certificated 
employee who received the layoff notice is affected by the layoff. The displacement 
chart was updated after the hearing to account for revisions suggested by some 
respondents which the District confirmed were correct. (Test. of McCullough; Exs. 12, 
13, 45.) 14 34. The District considered all known attrition, resignations, and retirements 
in determining the actual number of necessary final layoff notices to give. Ms. 
McCullough testified the District has taken into account attrition subsequent to the 
Resolution, and will continue to do so after the hearing. 
Challenges to the Application of the Tie-Breaking Criteria 
35. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), provides, in part: 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to 
the district on the same date, the governing board shall 
determine the order of termination solely on the basis of 
needs of the district and the students thereof. . . . 
36. School districts have wide latitude in implementing tie breaks to seniority 
dates. For example, school districts are not required to apply tie-breaking criteria prior 
to issuing layoff notices. (  (2002) 98 
Cal.App.4th 838, 855.) In fact, the failure of a school district to apply tie-breaking 
criteria until after a hearing began was found not to be prejudicial to laid off teachers 
where there no evidence the criteria were applied inappropriately or in bad faith
(  (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 144.) 
37. While not binding, decisions from prior OAH layoff cases can provide 
guidance. In the past, OAH decisions have generally approved of a school district 
using a lottery as a final tie breaker if ties in seniority remain after applying other 
objective criteria contained in a layoff resolution based on the needs of the school 
district and its students. (See, e.g.,  (2011 ALJ J. 
Lew).) 15 38. A number of respondents who were in bands of others with the same 
seniority date received an initial number from the randomizer high enough to not be 
subject to lay off. However, the final application of the randomizer used when the 
resulted in those respondents getting 
lower numbers, making them subject to lay off. 
39. The respondents who testified about the above scenario were Alexander 
Cheng (# 543), Kyle Lofdahl (# 557), Lillian Moreno (# 523), and Linda Solval (# 537). 
40. This situation does not warrant an order directing the District to change 
these respondents  seniority vis-a-vis other respondents sharing the same seniority 
date. The Resolution clearly specifies that if ties remain after application of all the 
criteria, the District shall use a lot or other equitable method as determined by the 
District  As discussed above, use of a lottery after application of tie-breaking criteria is 
an approved method of resolving this kind of situation. The randomizer is essentially a 
digital lottery. 
41. The preponderance of the evidence established the randomizer was used 
in a fair and unbiased way. No evidence presented indicates the randomizer was used 
in a way to defeat the statutory principles requiring the District to honor seniority. The 
District endeavored to continually update the seniority list as new information was 
received and confirmed, and to keep the involved certificated employees apprised of 
the situation as it progressed. While the cited case law would have supported the 
District if it decided to use the randomizer only once before locking the seniority list 
just before the hearing, no statute or case required the District to do that. In sum, the 
District should not be penalized for giving respondents advance notice of their 
situations, or for making changes to the seniority list when warranted. 16 Challenges to Some Skipping Decisions 
42. Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), permits a school 
demonstrates a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of 
study . . . and that the employee [who is retained] has special training and experience 
necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which others with more seniority 
 
43. Respondents do not challenge the skip categories specifically provided 
for in the Resolution pertaining to VAPA, special education, and IB. However, some 
respondents , as 
detailed below. 
SPEECH AND DEBATE COACHES 
44. Four respondents are English teachers each also with one section of 
Speech. These four respondents coach their schools  Speech and Debate teams, and 
contend they should have been skipped under the whole assignment rule for the same 
reason as sports coaches. The four respondents in question are Adam Duarte (# 562), 
Jefte Diaz (# 178), Timothy Ahn (# 185), and Katrina Shimasaki (# 563). 
45. Based on the testimony of two of these respondents (Duarte & Diaz), a 
stipulation concerning the other two (Ahn & Shimasaki), and documentation provided 
by all four, these respondents established their ability to successfully teach Speech and 
to coach Speech and Debate teams, which came from years of experience teaching 
and coaching Speech and Debate teams. These four respondents believe their ability 
to teach Speech comes from their specialized training and experience, not from simply 17 having an English credential. (Test. of Duarte, Diaz, stipulation regarding Ahn & 
Shimasaki; Exs. O-R.) 
46. However, Ms. McCullough persuasively testified these four respondents 
are not eligible for the whole assignment rule skip that the qualified sports coaches 
received for two reasons. 
47. First, anyone with an English credential can teach Speech; no other 
credential is necessary to teach English and Speech in the same assignment. In fact, 
respondents Duarte and Shimasaki are being bumped by more senior teachers with an 
English credential or authorization. By contrast, sports coaches teaching a blended 
assignment must have a credential for the subject matter sections (such as English, 
Math, or Social Studies), and either a PE credential or the mandated 20 hours of health 
and safety training to perform the section of sports coaching. (Test. of McCullough.) 
48. Second, English teachers who also have a section of Speech are not 
required to coach the Speech and Debate team because students who take Speech are 
not required to compete in Speech and Debate competitions. If students in a Speech 
class want to compete in Speech competitions, they would be coached in that 
additional activity by any of 14 District employees who specialize in coaching students 
for Speech and Debate competitions. By contrast, every student-athlete on a sports 
team must compete in athletic competition, and are coached by the certificated 
employee performing the blended assignment. (Test. of McCullough.) 
49. Respondents point to the fact their collective bargaining agreement 
(CBA) with the District provides additional compensation for coaching the Speech and 
Debate teams, as do sports coaches. The same provision of the CBA offers additional 
compensation to all other faculty members who volunteer their time outside of the 18 classroom to work with students, such as drama, band, student government, etc. This 
comparison is not decisive, as it does nothing to change the fact that teaching Speech 
is not the sort of blended assignment covered by the whole assignment rule skip. 
50. Although these four respondents have unique experience and 
qualifications to coach in Speech and Debate competitions, the District cannot retain 
them in favor of more senior English teachers who can provide the same service in the 
Speech classes. 
JOURNALISM OR YEARBOOK 
51. Respondent Daniel Van Hoosier (# 282) is an English teacher with a 
section or more of Journalism and Yearbook. Similar to the Speech and Debate 
coaches discussed above, respondent Van Hoosier is not eligible for the whole 
assignment rule skip because anyone with an English credential has the training and 
experience to teach Journalism and Yearbook; no other credential or authorization is 
required to perform the Journalism and Yearbook section. (Test. of McCullough.) 
SPORTS COACHES 
52.  Alexander Cheng (# 543). Respondent Cheng testified he should be 
skipped because of his past track-and-field coaching experience. However, he did not 
establish that he has the required health and safety certification discussed above to be 
skipped. 
53. Kyle Lofdahl (# 557). Respondent Lofdahl testified he should be skipped 
because of his past middle school baseball and pickleball coaching experience. While 
respondent Lofdahl testified he has the required health and safety certification, he did 19 not submit any documentation verifying the same. Based on these circumstances, 
respondent Lofdahl failed to establish a basis for the District to skip him. 
Challenges to Some of the Bumping Decisions 
GLOBAL CHALLENGE TO DISTRICT S COUNSELOR LAYOFF DECISIONS 
54. The Resolution specifies two separate classes of counselors being 
reduced, Counselor  192 (192 Counselor) and Counselor  202 (202 Counselor). (Ex. 
1.) The distinction drawn by the District for these two service areas is the number of 
school days per school year worked by the involved counselor. Depending on whether 
the counselor is assigned to an elementary school, a middle school, or a high school, 
some counselors work 192 days in a school year, and some work 202 school days. 
(Test. of McCullough.) 
55. The District is allowing 202 Counselors to bump into positions held by 
less senior 192 Counselors, but will not allow 192 Counselors to bump into positions 
held by less senior 202 Counselors. The reason stated for this approach is that allowing 
a 192 Counselor to bump into a 202 Counselor position would give the 192 Counselor 
a benefit of 10 additional working days in the following school year, and that the layoff 
laws prohibit an employee receiving a benefit from a layoff. (Test. of McCullough.) 
56. One problem with this unequal treatment of counselors is that both 
service categories have the same credential and competency requirements, i.e., a 192 
Counselor is credentialed and competent to perform a position held by a 202 
Counselor and vice versa. Specifically, both positions require the same credential and 
have the same job descriptions. (Test. of McCullough.) 
// 20 57. Another problem is that it was not established by a preponderance of the 
evidence that being a 202 Counselor is more beneficial than being a 192 Counselor. 
For example, both positions comprise 1.0 FTE and are considered full-time 
assignments. The daily pay rate for both positions is the same. More to the point, 
being required to work additional 10 days in a school year is not necessarily a benefit; 
many would leap at the opportunity to work 10 less days in a school year at the price 
of receiving slightly less pay. No evidence indicates the involved 192 Counselors object 
to being required to work 10 additional days next school year in order to bump, and 
more importantly, no evidence suggests any 202 Counselor has refused to be 
reassigned into a position that requires working 10 less days. 
58. Finally, the District cites no provision from the Education Code requiring 
a bumping decision to ignore seniority in order to avoid giving a senior teacher a 
benefit. 
59. The only legal authority cited by the District is 
 (1989) 208 Cal.App.3d 456, 460, in which a school nurse employed 
in a permanent .16 FTE position discontinued for budgetary reasons was unable to 
compel her former employer to rehire her in a newly created full-time nursing position. 
The court held: 
[T]he purpose of [layoff rehire rights] is to give a 
permanent [employee] . . . the same employment rights that 
she would have had if no layoff had intervened, but to not 
greater rights. [Citation omitted.]  Thus, when a part-time 
employee is laid off he or she is not entitled to a  
position which subsequently opens up. Section 44956 only 
requires that the employee be returned to his or her 21 prelayoff status. [Citation omitted.] Moreover, in our view 
appellant did not have the right to force the Office of 
Education to divide the full-time position to accommodate 
her desire for a part-time position. (See 
 (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1020 1021.) 
( ; emphasis in original.) 
60.  does not hold that bumping decisions are controlled by whether 
an employee is benefitted by exercising his or her seniority rights.  involved a 
completely different issue, i.e., a part-time position versus a full-time position. In fact, 
the   court did not even 
on It is hard to describe one full-time employee having greater rights 
than another full-time employee, simply because one works more days in the school 
year. 
61. Based on the above, any more senior 192 Counselor is entitled to bump a 
less senior 202 Counselor, and conversely, a less senior 202 Counselor is not entitled 
to bump a more senior 192 Counselor. 
62. The record in this case is not developed enough to allow the ALJ to make 
bumping decisions based on the above. Therefore, the District is ordered to 
redetermine its layoff of the 192 and 202 Counselors jointly, based solely on seniority, 
without regard to the number of school days worked in the position, and provide final 
layoff notices only to the number of counselors necessary to effectuate the total 
number of layoffs for the two combined service areas articulated in the Resolution and 
as modified during the hearing. 
// 22 SCHOOL-BASED MENTAL HEALTH SPECIALISTS  
63. School-Based Mental Health Specialists (SBMHS) implement a variety of 
school-based mental health services for students on campus. (Ex. 29.) They also work a 
greater number of school days in a school year than a 192 Counselor. (Test. of 
McCullough; Ex. 29.) 
64. The preponderance of the evidence established that a certificated 
employee currently fulfilling the 192 Counselor position who also has an Associate 
Professional Clinical Counselor (APCC) license or a Licensed Professional Clinical 
Counselor (LPCC) license from the State of California is credentialed and competent to 
perform the service of an SBMHS. (Test. of Yariza Amaton, Alejandra Salazar, Danissa 
Colombana.) 
65. The District and a majority of respondents concurrently filed with their 
closing briefs a joint stipulation regarding the following respondents who presently 
are 192 Counselors and hold either an APCC or LPCC license: Sandra Guillen (# 406); 
Lexy Rens (# 384); Danissa Colombana (#346); Alejandra Salazar (# 344); and Pablo 
Flores (# 341). The joint stipulation is marked for identification and admitted as Exhibit 
49. 
66. The District has not allowed a 192 Counselor to bump into an SBMHS 
position because the 192 Counselors work fewer school days than an SBMHS. The 
District has not articulated any other reason for disallowing such bumping. According 
to the joint stipulation, the District is not laying off 21 certificated employees who 
currently are assigned an SBMHS position and less senior than the five respondents 
identified above. 
// 23 67. For the reasons explained above concerning the 202 Counselor situation, 
respondents Guillen (# 406), Rens (# 384), Colombana (#346), Salazar (# 344), and 
Flores (# 341) shall not be laid off, as they are credentialed and competent to perform 
a service that less senior certificated employees are being retained to perform. 
PROGRAM SPECIALIST  
68. Under direction of a designated site administrator, a Program Specialist 
implements, coordinates, and facilitates programs that are more than one school in 
scope. Any valid teaching or service credential can be used. (Ex. T.) Any 192 Counselor 
meets that description. A Program Specialist works more than 192 school days in a 
school year. 
69. Respondent Angelica Sandoval (# 420) is a 192 Counselor who works at a 
dual immersion elementary school site and works with students in an English Learner 
(EL) Program. (Ex. 12.) She is designated for layoff because she is being bumped by a 
more senior 202 Counselor (# 521). However, respondent Sandoval seeks to bump a 
less senior employee, respondent Karla Aranda (# 94). Respondent Aranda is a 
Program Specialist who works in an EL and Migrant Education Program. (Test. of 
McCullough; Exs. 12, 45.) Ms. McCullough testified someone able to bump respondent 
Aranda would need her experience working with migrant populations and knowledge 
in how to comply with federal law regarding migrant education. Respondent Sandoval 
did not testify, and her existing experience was not established. While respondent 
Sandoval is credentialed 
established that she is competent to do so. 
70. Based on the above, respondent Sandoval failed to establish by a 
preponderance of the evidence that she is credentialed and competent to perform an 24 assignment being rendered by a less senior certificated employee, and therefore she is 
subject to lay off. 
71. Respondent Yariza Amaton (# 430) also is a 192 Counselor. Initially she 
sought to bump into an SBMHS position, but it was revealed that her APCC license is 
in delinquent status. (Test. of Amaton; Ex. 46.) Thus, respondent Amaton testified she 
can bump respondent Cecilia Chavez (# 388), who currently is a Program Specialist 
responsible for being the District liaison with the McKinney-Vento program that 
provides assistance to homeless children. Respondent Amaton described in her 
testimony her past experience also serving as a McKinney-Vento program liaison for 
1.5 years, as well as her overall experience working with homeless and exploited youth. 
In her rebuttal testimony, Ms. McCullough commented that a more senior counselor 
could bump respondent Chavez, so long as the more senior employee would not gain 
a benefit from doing so. As held above, the fact respondent Amaton works 192 school 
days is not an impediment to her bumping. Therefore, it was established by a 
preponderance of the evidence that respondent Amaton is credentialed and 
competent to bump the less senior employee, respondent Chavez. 
DUAL IMMERSION CLASSROOM ASSIGNMENTS  
72. The following six respondents teach elementary dual immersion classes 
and are being bumped by more senior teachers: Patricia Reyes (# 1187); Jazmina 
Amado (# 1191); Cristina Zavala-Venegas (# 1201); Ana Harvey (# 1288); Elizabeth 
Alvarez (# 1289); and Marcela Santillan (# 1293). (Test. of McCullough; Exs. 13, 45.) 
73. All six of these respondents possess either a Bilingual Cross-Cultural 
Language and Academic Development (BCLAD) credential, or Bilingual Authorization 
(BASP) embedded in their credentials, both of which authorize them to provide 25 bilingual instruction. All six respondents are assigned to classes where they provide 
bilingual instruction in English and Spanish, and at sites where many, if not all, of the 
classes are dual immersion in those two languages. (Test. of Reyes, Amado, Zavala-
Venegas, Harvey, Alvarez, and Santillan.) The District agrees the dual immersion classes 
require the teacher to have either a BCLAD or BASP. (Test. of McCullough.) 
74. The District proposes bumping, or displacing, these six respondents with 
more senior teachers as follows: Reyes, by a curriculum specialist (# 2312); Amado, by 
an instructional coach (# 2276); Zavala-Venegas, by an instructional coach (# 2169); 
Harvey, by an instructional coach (# 1611); Alvarez, by a curriculum specialist (# 1418); 
and Santillan, by a teacher on special assignment (# 1335). However, it was established 
by a preponderance of the evidence that none of these more senior teachers holds a 
BCLAD or BASP certification. (Test. of Reyes, Amado, Zavala-Venegas, Harvey, Alvarez, 
and Santillan; Ex. 12.) Thus, none of the six more senior teachers are credentialed and 
competent to provide bilingual instruction in a dual immersion assignment. 
75. In response, Ms. McCullough testified in rebuttal that the District will re-
work the bumping chart to ensure these six respondents are bumped by teachers who 
hold a bilingual credential or authorization. Ms. McCullough is confident that, with 
over 200 teachers with BCLADS being retained for next school year, the District can fill 
this need. 
76.
since the six identified more senior teachers cannot lawfully bump these six 
respondents, the basis asserted by the District for laying off the six respondents was 
not established. Second, although Ms. McCullough is confident the District can find 
more senior teachers with bilingual authorization to meet the needs of the students at 26 the dual immersion schools, the District provided no evidence establishing this 
proposition. 
77. Because the District is attempting to bump these six respondents who 
provide bilingual, dual immersion instruction, with instructors who do not possess 
BCLAD or BASP authorization, and therefore lack the credentials and competency to 
teach these assignments, respondents Reyes, Amado, Zavala-Venegas, Harvey, Alvarez, 
and Santillan are not subject to being laid off. 
PEP SQUAD 
78. Respondent Justin Davidson (# 579) testified he is competent and 
credentialed to bump respondent Vi Pham (# 415). Both are Math teachers using a 
Math credential. The District skipped respondent Pham because she also is assigned a 
section of Pep Squad, and thus has a blended assignment subject to the whole 
assignment rule. In her Pep Squad section, respondent Pham is the faculty advisor and 
teacher of record; she gives grades and coordinates with an outside or walk-on coach 
who works with the cheerleaders. (Test. of Davidson, Pham.) 
79. Respondent Davidson testified and submitted documentation regarding 
his prior experience as a cheer coach (Ex. U). Respondent Davidson previously served 
for other school districts as a cheer coach in 2014, an after-school cheer coach in 2015, 
and an assistant cheer coach in 2016. He also has training certificates in concussion 
protocols, CPR, and basic first aid, but the certificates are ten or more years old and 
were issued by another state. (Test. of Davidson; Ex. U.) 
80. The District announced the sports coach skip at the beginning of the 
hearing. Respondent Davidson therefore did not know earlier what documentation the 
District would find relevant regarding his competency to teach other assignments 27 when it solicited information from teachers as it finalized its seniority list. Therefore, 
respondent Davidson submitted his documentation toward the end of the hearing. Ms. 
McCullough testified she did not have sufficient time to check whether respondent 
health and safety certifications qualify under California law and District 
requirements. On the other hand, respondent Davidson did not establish by a 
preponderance of the evidence that his certifications so qualified either. In its closing 
brief, the  and 
concludes he has not demonstrated competency to bump respondent Pham. 
81. Respondent Pham testified to defend her position. She has been the Pep 
Squad advisor for the last two years. In that position, she has the requisite training and 
certifications, which neither party disputes. (Test. of Pham, McCullough.) 
82. On balance, respondent Davidson failed to establish that he has the 
requisite training and certification rendering him competent to bump into respondent 
, due to the vagaries of the certification he presented. Because of the 
lateness of the sports coach skipping announced by the District, respondent Davidson 
was given little notice that his current health and safety certification status was 
important. Therefore, the Order below discusses how to resolve this situation. 
SPORTS COACH 
83. Isabelle Arriaga (# 433). Respondent Arriaga represented herself at 
hearing. She testified she is able to bump into the position held by less senior 
respondent Jessica Marquez (# 137). Both are social studies teachers, but the District 
skipped respondent Marquez because she currently is a cross-country and track coach 
at a high school, and thus has a blended assignment subject to the whole assignment 
rule skip. Respondent Arriaga works at a high school now, but in the 2022/2023 school 28 year, she worked at a middle school and was the head coach of
track program. In that capacity, she ensured students got physicals, gave grades to 
those participating in meets, and determined the events in which to place meet 
participants. Respondent Arriaga submitted documentation showing she has all the 
required health and safety certification to be a sports coach. (Test. of Arriaga; Ex. 101.) 
84. Respondent Marquez testified to defend her position. Her testimony 
established she has the health and safety certification required by the District, and is 
imminently qualified to be a cross-county and track coach, having superior prior and 
current experience as a runner and running coach. (Test. of Marquez.) 
85. Both respondents are credentialed 
current blended assignment. Both have the requisite health and safety certifications. 
Both have experience coaching runners and track-and-field athletes. The only thing 
that separates the two teachers is their level of experience, as respondent Marquez is 
more qualified than respondent Arriaga. However, the Education Code is clear that 
seniority must be honored in all situations, unless the District has articulated a 
particular skipping category. 
86. Sports coaching, as it intertwines with the whole assignment rule, has 
been skipped by the District, when the teacher in question is performing an entire 
blended assignment. Where a senior teacher is not performing such a blended 
assignment that can be skipped, the District still will allow a more senior employee to 
bump into an entire blended assignment if credentialed and competent to perform the 
entire assignment. (Test. of McCullough.) The District does not dispute respondent 
Arriaga has the proper credential and required health and safety certification to 
blended assignment. Boiled to its essence, the District 29 instead argues respondent Marquez has greater and better experience and 
competency to perform her position, which is true. 
87. R
experience and competency is an invitation to ignore the rules of seniority, and to 
submerge layoff cases into the quagmire of judging peers by subjective standards. Put 
another way, the issue to be resolved is whether one teacher is credentialed and 
and  competent. In this case, all of the objective standards, i.e., credentials and 
health and safety cert  Thus, while 
respondent Marquez is more competent to coach cross-country and track-and-field, 
respondent Arriaga is competent to do so as well, and that is all that is required for her 
to bump into the assignment. 
88. Respondent Arriaga should be allowed to bump into respondent 
, and therefore respondent Arriaga is not subject 
to lay off. 
LITERACY COACHES 
89. Carla Villa (# 1235) and Jessica Rodriguez (# 1290). Respondent Villa is an 
Instructional Coach, and respondent Rodriguez is an elementary school teacher. Both 
seek to bump into Literacy Coach positions being held by less senior employees, Jill 
Hubbart (# 450) and Marisol Nemetz (# 1194). The District is not reducing its Literacy 
Coach service. (Test. of Villa, Rodriguez, McCullough; Ex. 1.) 
90. Respondents Hubbart and Nemetz testified, and their testimony was 
corroborated by Ms. McCullough in her cross-examination testimony. Diana Torres, 
District Executive Director of Teaching and Learning, also testified about the Literacy 30 Coach position, and the training required to hold the position. Both respondents 
Hubbart and Nemetz currently serve as Literacy Coaches under a specific three-year 
grant providing funds to the District from an outside source. Under that grant, both 
respondents have received almost 100 hours of training this school year specific to 
their positions. That specific training is needed to perform this assignment. (Test. of 
Hubbart, Nemetz, McCullough, Torres; Ex. 1.) 
91. Ms. McCullough agrees respondent Villa has the necessary credential to 
perform the Literacy Coach assignment. The record is not clear whether respondent 
Rodriguez has the necessary credential to fulfill this position. However, Ms. 
McCullough was clear that neither respondent has the specific Literacy Coach training 
provided under the grant. 
92. Under these circumstance, respondents Villa and Rodriguez are not 
credentialed and competent to perform the Literacy Coach service, and therefore they 
may not bump less senior employees currently performing that position. (Test. of Villa, 
Rodriguez, Hubbart, Nemetz, McCullough; Ex. 1.) 
USING MUSIC VACANCIES  
93. Maya Avila (# 1148). Respondent Avila is a kindergarten teacher with a 
multiple subject credential. The District proposes bumping her with David Lofink        
(# 2629), who holds a music credential as well as a multiple subject credential. (Ex. 12, 
p. A435.) The District decided not to bump Mr. Lofink into a vacant music position 
because staff felt he is better suited for an elementary position due to his experience 
teaching reading, and he did not have recent experience teaching music. Ms. 
McCullough also suggested there were no music vacancies for Mr. Lofink. However, 31 the for several 
reasons. (Test. of McCullough.) 
94. First, the District failed to establish by a preponderance that there is no 
vacant music position for Mr. Lofink. Music is part of the VAPA skip, meaning the 
District has maximum flexibility in this area. Also, Ms. McCullough initially testified 
there are some music positions available for Mr. Lofink. When Ms. McCullough 
researched the issue and reported back in her rebuttal testimony, she equivocated, but 
still testified there were limited vacancies in music. 
95. Second, the articulated reason for channeling Mr. Lofink into respondent 
is better suited as an elementary teacher, is not a valid basis for 
making a bumping decision. As noted above, bumping is based on credentialing and 
another. While Mr. Lofink does not have recent experience teaching music, the District 
failed to establish that anything other than a music credential was required to be 
credentialed and competent to teach it. 
96. Third, several other teachers with much lower seniority than respondent 
Avila, and thus in jeopardy of being laid off, are being bumped into vacant music 
positions, including Fatimah Khan (# 860), Nicole Galardo (# 720), and Brandon Stuhl 
(# 4). Mr. Stuhl currently teaches high school English; there are only three teachers in 
the District with less seniority than Mr. Stuhl. No logical reason was presented by the 
District explaining why Mr. Stuhl was bumped into a music vacancy, but not Mr. Lofink. 
Further accentuating the point is that three probationary teachers currently teaching 
music, who are very junior to Mr. Lofink, are not being laid off. Those teachers are 
Gabrielle Poveda (#46), Jessica Ulloa (# 56), and Alejandra Morales (# 57). (Test. of 
McCullough.) 32 97. As the legal authority above indicates, school districts have great 
flexibility in their skipping and bumping analysis. On the other hand, Education Code 
section 44955, subdivision (c), requires school districts 
reassignments in such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service 
While the ALJ is 
hesitant , such discretion is 
not properly exercised where assignments and reassignments are not being made to 
honor seniority, resulting in very junior employees being retained over more senior 
employees without a valid reason established by fact. In this case, the District failed to 
establish by a preponderance of the evidence that it is appropriate for Mr. Lofink to 
bump respondent Avila, and therefore, respondent Avila should not be laid off. 
Seniority Date Challenges 
98. Seniority is measured from the first date on which an employee renders 
paid service in a probationary position. (Ed. Code, §§ 44845, 87414.) Several 
respondents contend their seniority dates are earlier than those assigned by the 
District. 
AGREED UPON CHANGE IN SENIORITY DATE 
99. Maria Cielo-Medina (was # 510, now 665A). The District agrees 
respondent Cielo-  seniority date should be changed from August 10, 2021, to 
the new date of August 9, 2021. Her new seniority number is 665A. However, this 
change in seniority will not prevent her from being subject to lay off. (Test. of Cielo-
Medina, McCullough; Ex. L.) 
// 33 EARLY REPORT DATE FOR TRAINING 
100. Kayla Bruner (# 600) and Denise Torres (# 583). Their assigned seniority 
date is August 9, 2021. Both respondents attended two days of District-wide 
professional development on August 9 and 10, 2021, which established their seniority 
date. However, both respondents testified their site-principal required them to attend 
site-specific training on August 5 and 6, 2021, and that therefore their seniority date 
should be advanced to August 5, 2021. (Test. of Bruner, Torres.) 
101. Respondent Torres presented an e-mail from her principal, Dr. Kim 
Garcia, advising that teachers would r for Professional Development 
 for the 2021/2022 school year. (Ex. V, p. B369.) The e-mail is 
not clear whether this training was District-wide or site-specific. Both respondents 
testified they attended professional development on August 5 and 6, 2021. Both 
respondents presented paystubs from this time period showing they were 
 that 
month, although none of the paystubs show specific dates for such activity. (Test. of 
Bruner, Torres; Exs. N, V.) 
102.
who denied there had been any training on August 5 or 6, 2021, and that only 
program verification took place then. 
103. On balance, 
preponderance that they attended training on August 5 and 6, 2021. It is clear District 
had two days of professional development on August 9 and 10, 2021, and both 
compensation for two days of such training. If 
respondents had attended four days of compensated training as they contend, the 34 paystubs should have shown that. The e-mail from Dr. Garcia only advises that 
teachers would report  so the e-mail just as easily could have 
August 9 and 10, 2021. As these events occurred almost four years ago, it is not likely 
now are better than the contemporaneous documentation 
they presented. , 
constructed after many rounds of review described above, and as bolstered by the 
information from Dr. Garcia. 
LONG-TERM SUBSTITUTE OR TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENTS  
104. Several respondents performed long-term substitute or temporary 
teaching assignments prior to their recognized seniority dates, and therefore 
requested an earlier seniority date than as determined by the District. 
105. Education Code section 44918, subdivision (a), provides that a teacher 
may receive credit toward probationary or permanent status if he or she serves as a 
long-term substitute or temporary teacher for 75 percent of the school days in a 
school year
year. On-call or day-to-day substitute assignments do 
not count for this purpose. ( .) 
106. A teacher who starts a school year as a long-term substitute or 
temporary teacher, but is offered a probationary position prior to serving 75 percent 
of the school days in the same school year, is not entitled to tack on the substitute 
service. In such a case, the probationary employment did not begin the following 
school year. Similarly, an employee who serves less than 75 percent of the school year 35 as a substitute or temporary teacher, but is reemployed the following school year as a 
probationary employee, is not entitled to tack on the prior year  
107. Misty Omar (was # 173, now 235A). The District agrees respondent 
tute teaching experience warrants changing her seniority date from 
August 9, 2023, to the new date of October 11, 2022. This change also results in 
seniority number being changed to 235A, and her status being 
changed from probationary to permanent. However, respondent Omar is still subject 
to being laid off. (Test. of Omar, McCullough; Ex. G.) 
108. Selena Qafaiti (was # 841, now 857A). The District agrees respondent 
Qafaiti ity date 
from November 5, 2018, to the new date of August 13, 2018. This change also results 
in respondent seniority number being changed to 857A. However, respondent 
Qafaiti is still subject to being laid off. (Test. of McCullough, Qafaiti; Ex. K.) 
109. The preponderance of the evidence established that respondents Sara 
Renderos (# 1287), Saray Magdaleno (# 1223), and Humbelina Lopez (# 1142), all 
worked less than 75 percent of the school days in the school year prior to when they 
obtained probationary status, and therefore none of them are entitled to tacking on 
earlier service for purposes of changing their seniority dates. (Test. of McCullough, 
Renderos, Magdaleno, Lopez; Exs. 12, E, F, H.) 
110. Kelly Ramirez (# 1217). February 
During the 
2013/2014 school year, respondent Ramirez had substitute assignments for nine 
different teachers, some lasting 20 days or less. Because respondent Ramirez was 
offered probationary employment the same school year as when she performed her 36 substitute service, not the following year, she is not entitled to tack on the earlier 
service from the same school year. (Test. of McCullough, Ramirez; Ex. I.) 
111. Marilena McTigue (# 964). Respondent McTigue is not scheduled to 
receive a final layoff notice because she is able to bump a junior certificated employee 
(# 470) using her social science authorization. However, respondent McTigue disputes 
her seniority date of January 17, 2017, arguing her prior hourly substitute service work 
during the 2015/2016 school year allows her to tack on the earlier service. According 
to respondent McTigue, she worked every school day that prior school year and over 
1,000 hours in total. However, the documents she presented (Ex. J) do not support her 
contentions. In any event, Ms. McCullough testified respondent 
McTigue rsonnel file shows she served as an hourly employee the prior school 
year; there were gaps in some months of her service that school year; and she did not 
work 75 percent of that school year. Based on the above, the preponderance of the 
evidence establishes respondent McTigue is not entitled to tack on her service during 
McCullough, McTigue; Ex. J.) 
Other Represented Respondents 
112. Lizbeth Pulido (# 76). Respondent Pulido is an Outreach Consultant, a 
position in which she works with high school students struggling with their attendance 
and grades. No special credential is needed for this assignment; respondent Pulido has 
a multiple subject credential. She testified as to her extensive experience in her 
assignment. The District does not expect to give her a final layoff notice. (Test. of 
McCullough, Pulido.) It is not clear why respondent Pulido testified. No argument was 
advanced for her in a closing brief. 37 113. Julie Rodriguez (#561). Respondent Rodriguez also serves as an Outreach 
Consultant. She testified as to her extensive experience in this assignment. The District 
does not expect to give her a final layoff notice either, as there are two vacancies not 
filled for the position of Outreach Consultant next school year. It is not clear why 
respondent Rodriguez testified. No argument was advanced for her in a closing brief. 
114. Aimee Gallagher (#65). Respondent Gallagher has a theatre credential, 
and teaches theatre, drama, ethnic studies, and activism. She testified as to her 
extensive experience in these areas. Her position receives grant funding from 
Proposition 28, and she has received training from that grant. Respondent Gallagher 
believes she cannot be replaced by another teacher within the District, due to her 
unique training from the grant funding. For that reason, she believes it is possible 
replacing her with another teacher may result in the District having to return the grant 
funding relative to her position. (Test. of Gallagher; Ex. S.) The District initially did not 
expect to give respondent Gallagher a final layoff notice. However, the District 
determined a teacher with either an English or theatre credential can perform 
Therefore, the District has decided to bump 
respondent Morgan Riley Waite (# 235 , 
notwithstanding her unique training and the grant funding. (Test. of McCullough.) On 
balance, respondent Gallagher failed to establish a factual or legal reason to prohibit 
her from being laid off. 
Self-Represented Respondents 
115. Of the 14 self-represented respondents, only four testified and/or 
submitted documentary evidence. The issue contested by respondent Arriaga is 
discussed above. 38 LORENNA NUNES 
116. Respondent Nunes (# 41) has an English credential and is one of the 
most junior teachers in that service area being reduced. She has no credential or 
authorization that would allow her to bump a less senior employee not being laid off. 
While she served the District in a unique and important position at Chavez 
Continuation High School, the District established by a preponderance of the evidence 
there are more senior certificated employees who are credentialed and competent to 
perform her assignment and that she is properly subject to lay off. 
IVY DO 
117. Respondent Do (# 188) provided in her testimony additional information 
the District did not know in making its layoff determinations. However, she is among 
the most junior in the group of certificated employees providing her particular kind of 
service, and she is not credentialed and competent to bump a less senior teacher. 
Therefore, the District established by a preponderance of the evidence that she is 
properly subject to lay off. 
CINDY BUI 
118. Respondent Bui (# 287) has a social science credential, and is assigned to 
teach sections of middle school social studies and two sections of PAL Peer 
Leadership. She is subject to lay off as part of the social studies service reduction. She 
is being bumped by a more senior certificated employee (# 1867), an instructional 
coach with a social sciences credential who was not given a layoff notice. Respondent 
Bui contends she is performing a blended assignment because in order to perform the 
PAL Peer Leadership sections, a teacher needs to complete a two-day certified PAL 
advisor training program offered by the OCDE, which respondent Bui has completed. 39 Therefore, respondent Bui 
assignment rule skip. Respondent Bui does not believe the senior employee bumping 
her has such training and therefore cannot bump her. (Test. of Bui; Ex. 100.) 
Respondent Bui also filed a closing brief reiterating these points. (Ex. 102.) 
119. Respondent Bui is not eligible for the whole assignment rule skip 
because she is a middle school teacher, not a high school teacher. (Test. of 
McCullough; Ex. 12.) 
120. On the other hand, the District has presented no evidence establishing 
that the more senior employee (# 1867) has completed the two-day certified training 
offered by OCDE.  Ms. McCullough simply 
testified on rebuttal that the PAL Peer section is an elective, and if it is offered next 
school year the District will look to assignments or reassignments to cover it with a 
credentialed and competent teacher; if not, the District will rehire someone with 
seniority rights. 
establish that the person scheduled to bump respondent Bui is competent to teach the 
PAL Peer sections, because she does not have the required two-day certified training 
from OCDE. Put another way, in bumping respondent Bui, the District has violated the 
fractional bumping of split assignments, which is not 
limited to high school teachers. Respondent Bui performs a split assignment: some 
sections require a social science credential, and some sections require the two-day 
certified training from OCDE. The teacher scheduled to bump respondent Bui can only 
perform social studies sections, but not the PAL Peer sections. 
121. Based on these unique circumstances, the District failed to establish 
respondent Bui is being lawfully bumped, and therefore respondent Bui may not be 
laid off. 40 CLOSING ARGUMENTS  
122. Respondent De La Torre gave a closing argument at the end of the 
hearing. Respondents Nunes, Howard, Fierle, Do, and Soto filed closing briefs. In their 
various closing remarks, these 
decision to lay off personnel, the decisions made and articulated in the Resolution, 
and/or the impact layoffs will have on the students served by the District. However, the 
Education Code does not provide jurisdiction to entertain these arguments in this 
layoff proceeding. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. (Factual Findings 1-7.) 
2. In administrative hearings involving personnel matters, the burden of 
proof is on the agency bringing the action. (See, e.g.,  
(1981) 127 Cal.App.3d 99, 113;  
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) Thus, a school district seeking to skip junior teachers 
bears the burden of proving the skip is valid. (  
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 138.) In this case involving the employment rights of 
respondents, the District bears the burden of proof. 
3. As no other law or statute requires otherwise, the standard of proof in 
this case is the preponderance of the evidence. (Evid. Code, § 115.) A preponderance 
means evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it. (
 (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 41 4. A school district may reduce or discontinue services within the meaning 
type of service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it 
services shall be reduced in extent 
(  (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178 179.) 
5. The services identified in the Resolution are particular kinds of services 
that can 
decision to reduce or discontinue the identified services was neither arbitrary nor 
capricious and was a proper exercise of its discretion. Cause for the reduction or 
discontinuation of services relates solely to the welfare of the 
pupils within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. (Factual Findings 9-14.) 
6. A school district has discretion in determining whether an employee is 
certified and competent, as provided by Education Code section 44955, subdivision 
(b), to be reassigned and, as a result, to bump or displace a junior employee, as 
provided by subdivision (c). (See also  (1987) 196 
reasonable. ( , p. 566.) 
7. During the hearing, the District advised it would not issue final layoff 
notices to respondents Calderon, Riley Waite, and Whittington. (Factual Finding 8.) 
Therefore, the Statement of Reduction in Force as against these three respondents 
shall be dismissed. 
8. Based on the above legal principles, it is concluded the District engaged 
in a proper and lawful layoff of certificated staff, with a few necessary modifications 42 noted below. For example, t final version of the seniority list in evidence, 
after modifications made during the hearing (Ex. 12), is accurate. (Factual Findings 29-
34.) The only exceptions are a few respondents seniority dates that have been 
adjusted . (Factual Findings 99, 
107, 108.) certificated employees with the 
same seniority date is valid and withstood a glancing challenge. (Factual Findings 15-
20, 35-41.) espondents did 
not challenge them. (Factual Findings 25-28, 42-43.) A few respondents who were not 
skipped argued they should have been, but those arguments are rejected. (Factual 
Findings 21-24, 44-53, 119.) A number of respondents argued they either are being 
improperly bumped by unqualified certificated employees, or they should have been 
allowed to bump less senior certificated employees. (Factual Findings 54-97.) Some of 
those challenges are successful, and the involved respondents may not be laid off 
because otherwise the District would be employing next school year less senior 
certificated employees whose positions the affected respondents are credentialed and 
competent to perform. (Factual Findings 54-62, 63-67, 71, 72-77, 83-88, 93-97, 120.) 
9. Because there is insufficient evidence for the ALJ to redetermine the 
seniority of the 192 and 202 Counselors when combined, the District is ordered below 
to re-rank all affected respondents in both service areas based solely on their seniority 
dates, without regard to the number of school days worked. (Factual Findings 54-62.) 
10. With respect to respondent Davidson, his notice and an opportunity to 
respond to this lay off as it affected him was impaired to the extent the District was 
unable to review his final evidence submitted at hearing. The District therefore is 
ordered below to engage in that analysis before issuing the final Decision in this 
matter. (Factual Findings 78-82.) 43 11. Aside from the successful bumping challenges noted above, no junior 
certificated employee is scheduled to be retained to perform services which a more 
senior employee is certificated and competent to render. Cause therefore exists for the 
District to reduce the number of certificated employees of the District due to the 
reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services identified in the Resolution, 
and as revised during the hearing and herein. (Factual Findings 1-122; Legal 
Conclusions 1-10.) 
ORDER 
The District  Statement of Reduction in Force is dismissed as against the 
following respondents: Rodolfo Calderon, Morgan Riley Waite, Cheryl Whittington, 
Sandra Guillen, Lexy Rens, Danissa Colombana, Alejandra Salazar, Pablo Flores, Yariza 
Amaton, Patricia Reyes, Jazmina Amado, Cristina Zavala-Venegas, Ana Harvey, 
Elizabeth Alvarez, Marcela Santillan, Isabelle Arriaga, Maya Avila, and Cindy Bui. 
The District shall not give the respondents identified above a final layoff notice 
for the 2025-2026 school year. 
As for respondent Justin Davidson, the District shall review the health and safety 
certification he submitted at hearing (Ex. U) and determine if it is valid and complies 
 used for sports coaches. If so, the District shall not give 
respondent Davidson a final layoff notice, and shall determine whether a final layoff 
notice for respondent Vi Pham is necessary. If 
not comply with District requirements used for sports coaches, the District may give 
respondent Davidson a final layoff notice. 
// 44 The District shall re-determine its layoff of the 192 and 202 Counselors based 
solely on seniority, without consideration of the number of school days worked in the 
position, and shall provide final layoff notices only to the number of counselors 
necessary to effectuate the total number of layoffs for the two combined service areas 
articulated in the Resolution and as modified during the hearing, i.e., 47. 
The District  Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained against the 
remaining respondents. The District may give a final notice of layoff to those 
respondents. Notice shall be given to those respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2025-2026 school year, and such notice shall be given in inverse order 
of seniority. 
DATE:  
ERIC SAWYER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 