BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
COACHELLA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF COACHELLA VALLEY 
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Respondents. 
OAH No. 2025020921 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Kimberly J. Belvedere, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on April 8, 2025, in Thermal, California. 
Christine K. Shu and Katie J. Oh, Olivarez Madruga Law Organization, L.L.P., 
represented the Coachella Valley Unified School District (CVUSD or district). 
Jon Y. Vanderpool, Vanderpool Griffith L.L.P., represented 89 respondents, 
including those who filed a request for hearing but who may not have filed a notice of 
participation. The district did not oppose the representation of those who did not file a 
request for hearing or notice of participation. 
Respondents Yuri Covarrubias, Ana Tafoya-Barboza, and Jessica Flores were not 
present at the hearing and were not represented by counsel. 
Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed, and the 
matter was submitted for decision on April 8, 2025. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Background and Jurisdiction 
1. Daniela Tabarez, the district’s Interim Chief Business Officer, and Summer 
Martinez, the district’s Director of Certificated Personnel, testified on behalf of the 
district. The following factual findings are derived from their testimony and 
documentary evidence admitted at hearing. 
2. The district’s fiscal health has been in decline for a few years for various 
reasons. There are more expenditures being generated than revenue being received. 
This structural deficit has been an ongoing problem that the district has been working 
to address. The Riverside County Office of Education (RCOE) has fiscal oversight of the 
district, and the district has been working with the RCOE over the past year to address 
the structural deficit concerns. Based on budget documents presented, the district will 
have a structural deficit for the next three school years. A review of the exhibits 
pertaining to the budget, which included multi-year budget projections for the next 
three school years, correspondence between the district and the RCOE, and the 
district’s Fiscal Stabilization Plan, all supported the district’s position that a reduction 
in force (and restructuring of the visual and performing arts program) is warranted due 
to the district’s financial situation. 
3. On February 20, 2025, the Board of Education for the district adopted 
Resolution Number 2025-34, reducing or eliminating particular kinds of certificated 
services for the 2025-2026 school year, and directing the Superintendent or his 
designee to give appropriate notices to certificated employees whose positions would 
be affected by the reduction. The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of 
service is a matter reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-3 guessing in this proceeding. (
 (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) A school district’s decision to reduce a 
particular kind of service must not be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (
(1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 637.) The resolution called 
for the reduction or discontinuation of the following full-time equivalent (FTE) 
positions: 
Total Non-Management Certificated FTE  48 FTE 
Multiple Subject Credential Teachers   29 FTE
 Itinerant Pathways to Success 21 FTE
 Dual Language       4 FTE
 BTSA and PAR Consultant     1 FTE
 Migrant Education Program TOSA11 FTE
 Independent Studies (Adult Education)  1 FTE
EL TK-12 TOSA 1 FTE
School Nurse Services Credential    4 FTE
Singe Subject English     5 FTE 
Single Subject Math      3 FTE 
 
1 “TOSA” designates a teacher on special assignment. 4 Single Subject Social Science 3 FTE
Single Subject Physical Education    2 FTE 
Single Subject Biology     1 FTE 
Single Subject Spanish     1 FTE 
Total Management Certificated FTE 12 FTE
Coordinator Attendance-Certificated   1 FTE
Coordinator LCAP 1 FTE
Coordinator of MTSS Data Coach 1 FTE
Coordinator School Climate    1 FTE
Director of CTE      1 FTE
Director of Emergency Operations   1 FTE
Director of Title IX and Compliance 1 FTE
Elementary Assistant Principals 3 FTE
Secondary Assistant Principals 1 FTE
Special Education program Certificated 1 FTE
4. The resolution referenced Exhibit “A,” which explained the board would 
deviate from the normal order of layoffs for personnel who had special training and 
experience that others with more seniority did not possess (also known as skipping), in 
accordance with Education Code section 44955. The seminal case for the retention of 5 less senior employees, (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 
127, requires a district to not only establish a specific need for personnel to teach a 
specific course of study, but to also establish that the certificated employee it 
proposes to retain has special training and experience necessary to teach that course 
or course of study or to provide those services. ( . at p.138.) The skipping criteria 
detailed in the resolution are: 
1) Certificated personnel who possess a credential authorizing service in 
Special Education and who will be assigned within the scope of that 
credential in the 2025-2026 school year. 
2) Certificated personnel who possess a single subject English credential, 
and an ELAI, ELD, or CLAD authorization, and who will be assigned to 
teach English Language Development (ELD) in the secondary setting 
(grades 7 through 12) during the 2025-2026 school year. 
3) Certificated personnel who possess a valid bilingual cross-cultural 
language and academic development authorization (BCLAD), bilingual 
certificate of competence (BCC), bilingual authorization in Spanish 
(BASP), or a bilingual certificate of competence (BCES), and who will be in 
a dual language assignment requiring one of the above authorizations 
for the 2025-2026 school year. 
4) Certificated personnel who will be assigned to teach in transitional 
kindergarten for the 2025-2026 school year and who meet other criteria 
specified in the resolution.
5. The resolution also referenced Exhibit “B,” which established the tie-
breaking criteria for employees, who first rendered paid probationary service to the 6 district on the same date. In other words, the tie-breaking criteria determines who is 
more “senior” for purposes of this reduction in force if two or more employees had the 
same seniority date, and then incorporates the results of the tie-breaking into the final 
seniority list used to make decisions. If the tie-breaking criteria set forth in the 
resolution exhibit does not resolve all ties, then a lottery process is used to break any 
ties. The district provided documentary evidence and testimony concerning how it 
applied the tie-breaking criteria and the lottery process. No evidence showed the 
district improperly used the tie-breaking criteria or lottery process, and no 
respondents raised any objections concerning tie-breaking criteria.
6. Thereafter, the district timely provided notice to 110 certificated 
personnel advising them that their services would not be required for the 2025-2026 
school year. The reasons for the recommendation were set forth in the notice. 108 
respondents requested a hearing and/or filed a notice of participation, and two did 
not request a hearing or file a notice of participation. The district did not object to 
allowing any respondents who did not file a request for hearing or notice of 
participation to participate in the hearing. The district rescinded 17 layoff notices.2 In 
total, there are 92 respondents remaining that were the subject of this hearing. 
7. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.
 
2 The following individuals had their layoff notices rescinded: Maria Aguilar; 
Gabriel Baca; Jennifer Casals; Esmeralda Castaneda; Bruce Coffey; Amy Dailey; Mario 
Figueroa; Alysha Infante; Kathleen Mason; Stephanie Milton; Josefine Ortiz; David 
Osborn; Genesis Sanchez De-Leon; Melissa Shavinski; Guillermo Lira; Erich Stein-Steele; 
and Bernadette Unden. 7 Skipping, Bumping, and Tie Breaking
8. No evidence established that the district’s skipping criteria was arbitrary 
or capricious or that the district made any errors with respect to the application of the 
skipping criteria, noted above. No teachers were skipped under the first skipping 
criteria. One teacher, Harry Trantham, was skipped under the second skipping criteria. 
Under the third skipping criteria, 31 teachers were skipped.3Nine teachers were 
skipped under the fourth criteria.4
9. The district also employed a process to determine whether employees 
identified for layoff held any other credentials that would entitle them to “bump” into 
a position being held by a junior employee. A senior employee whose position is 
discontinued has the right to transfer to a continuing position which he or she is 
 
3 Those skipped under the third criteria were: Jose Rodriguez Mendoza; Imelda 
Diz Rodriguez; Giselle Paez; Romina Arredondo; Mirka Lino; Laura Razo Huerta; Crystel 
Alondra Beltran-Lara; Angela Maria Ayala; Diana Anaya Gonzalez; Kelvin Tejeda 
Bereguete; Marlene Marin Alcantar; Ruth Robledo Infante; Marco Antonio Machuca 
Gonzales; Talitha Zavala; Maribel Hernandez Rodriguez; Deisy Carrasco; Stephanie 
Cardenas; Yuri Covarrubias; Cindy Estrada Bribiesca; Martin Loya Castro Jr.; Alma Rocio 
Padilla; Patricia Lopez; Elizabeth Cervantes; Inez Eyecenia Ryes Aispuro; Melissa Salazar 
Silvestre; Eduardo Luis Carrasco-Lua; Alicia Serrano; Lucia Rodriguez; Marisa Gaytan; 
Esteban Lua Zamora; and Rosa Nunez.
4 Those skipped under the fourth criteria were: Jessica Meza; Elisa Coronel; 
Evelyn Castro; Deyci Hernandez Flores; Justin Brown; Alexia Gentry; Alicia Vieyra; 
Viridiana Morales; and Emily Stein.8 certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior employee is entitled to 
displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position. (
 (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.) In total, seven certificated 
personnel had the right to bump a junior teacher; two chose to exercise their bumping 
rights, three chose layoff, and two did not return any form indicating whether they 
chose layoff or bumping.5 No evidence was introduced that the district improperly 
“bumped” any employees. With respect to the employees who did not return their 
forms, they were given a deadline of April 30, 2025, to make their selection. If they did
not return the forms by that date, Elizabeth Quigley will be assigned to a mathematics 
teaching position, and Rebecca Kay will be assigned to an English or Social Science 
teaching position, consistent with their credentials.
10. The services identified in the resolution are particular kinds of services 
that may be reduced or discontinued within the meaning of Education Code section 
44955. The board’s decision to reduce or discontinue those services was neither 
arbitrary nor capricious. It was a proper exercise of the board’s discretion. The 
reduction and discontinuation of services was related to the welfare of the district and 
its pupils, and it became necessary to decrease the number of certificated employees 
 
5 The certificated personnel who elected to bump junior teachers were: Carly 
Mahoney and Christina Martinez, both of whom will be assigned to a position 
consistent with their credentials. Patricia Bauman, Adalila Garcia, and Gregory 
Nishimoto chose to be subject to the reduction in force. Elizabeth Quigley and 
Rebecca Kay did not return their form indicating whether they wanted to bump into a 
position or be subject to the reduction in force.9 as determined by the board. No particular kinds of services were lowered to levels less 
than those levels mandated by state or federal law.
11. Positively assured attrition was considered in the layoff decisions and will 
be used in making future rehire decisions. 
12. With the exception of the employees being exempted (skipped) as 
discussed above, no less senior teachers are being retained while more senior teachers 
credentialed to perform the same service are being laid off.
13. The district noted that making the decision to lay off teachers is never 
easy, but the district has a duty to remain fiscally solvent. If the reduction in force is 
not permitted, the district will become insolvent. The district followed all applicable 
procedures and minimized the number of layoffs necessary to remain solvent. 
Respondents’ Position 
14. The following certificated personnel subject to the reduction in force 
provided testimony: Adalila Garcia, Justin Weiner, Erica Axelrod, Rebecca Mussetter, 
Amy Gonzalez, Marisa Gaytan, Rachel Kuiland, and Patricia Bauman. Their testimony 
was sincere and heartfelt, and generally described a frustration with the district’s fiscal 
situation. All witnesses evidenced an extreme dedication to their positions, and a 
heartfelt dedication to the students in the district. They love teaching and believe the 
students will suffer with the reduction in force.
15. In their closing argument, respondents argued that, although the district 
made a detailed and transparent presentation concerning the reasons and process 
concerning the reduction in force, the turnover in this district is disheartening. The 
district does not have its fiscal house in order, and this failure creates a problem every 10 year that brings the threat of job loss. The manner in which the district is being 
managed is not in the best interests of the students, or the teachers, who face the 
threat of job loss year after year. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
1. Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections 
were provided as required.
2. A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall 
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)
3. A preponderance of the evidence sustained the statements set forth in 
the district’s statements of reduction in force served on respondents concerning the 
services that will not be required.
4. The district identified the certificated employees who are providing the 
particular kinds of services that the board directed be reduced or discontinued. 
Because of the reduction of particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant to 
Education Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not 
be required for the 2025-2026 school year. The cause relates solely to the welfare of 
the schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 
44949. 11 5. No employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to 
perform a service that any respondent is certificated and competent to render. 
6. Elizabeth Quigley and Rebecca Kay had not returned their selection as of 
the date of this hearing regarding whether they chose layoff or to bump a junior 
employee. The district assumes they would elect to bump into a position, and both will 
be reassigned to appropriate positions. If, however, Ms. Quigley or Ms. Kay returned a 
selection indicating they chose layoff rather than bumping into another position, that 
will alter the outcome of this case and result in two respondents subject to layoff 
having their notice rescinded. The district shall ensure that, if Ms. Quigley or Ms. Kay 
choose to be subject to the reduction in force, that two respondents currently subject 
to the reduction in force be re-employed consistent with all criteria set forth in the 
resolution. 
RECOMMENDATION 
1. It is recommended that before May 15, 2025, the Board of Education for 
the Coachella Valley Unified School District give notice to the respondents whose 
names are set forth below, in Appendix 1, that their employment will be terminated at 
the close of the current school year, and that their services will not be needed for the 
2025-2026 school year.
//
//
//
//12 2. In the event that the two teachers who had not elected layoff or to 
exercise bumping rights by April 30, 2025, in fact did return a selection by that date 
selecting layoff, the district shall make appropriate adjustments to the layoff list 
consistent with those selections (i.e., two layoffs shall be rescinded). 
 
DATE: May 1, 2025  
KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings
 
Appendix 16 
1. Mark Allen
2. Crystal Alvarado 
3. Roxanne Cota Avalos 
4. Erica Axelrad 
5. Brianna De La Riva
6. Patricia Bauman
7. Shelley Blume
8. Guillermo Cabrera
9. Sergio Ceja
10. Ana Ceja Avila
11. Diana Champion
12. Jasmine Chapa
 
6 The numbers used in this Appendix reflect nothing more than the respondents
that were properly noticed and may be laid off after all skipping and bumping criteria 
are employed; this list does not take into consideration rehire or recall rights. 13 13. Claudia Chavez
14. Santiago Delgado
15. Kenny Draper
16. Eric Fernandez
17. Rachel Flores Kuiland
18. Jennifer Floryan
19. Adalila Garcia
20. Cheryl Garner 
21. Amy Gonzalez 
22. Peter Hernandez 
23. Raul Hernandez 
24. Damon Juarez 
25. Raquel Larios-Duarte 
26. Reyna Lemus-Perez 
27. Alejandra Martinez 
28. Brenda Martinez 
29. Maribel Martinez 
30. Elyse Moser 
31. Roberto Murillo 
32. Rebecca Mussetter 
33. Gregory Nishimoto 
34. Sixta Payan 
35. Heidi Plonski 
36. Lisa Presley 
37. Judith Rodenbeck 
38. Paul Rodriguez 
39. Analila Saenz 
40. Melissa Sanchez 
41. Daisy Rodriguez Serrato 
42. Jonathan Becerra Serrato 
43. Ericka Steele 
44. Justin Weiner 
45. Qimin Wang 
46. Ana Tafoya-Barboza 
47. Jessica Flores 