BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
GROSSMONT UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
CERTIFICATED TEACHERS OF THE GROSSMONT UNION HIGH 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Respondents. 
OAH No. 2025040008 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter in El Cajon, California, on April 21, 2025.
Jonathan Pearl, Attorney at Law, Dannis Woliver Kelley, represented the 
Grossmont Union High School District (district). 
Fern Steiner, Attorney at Law, Fern Steiner Law, APC, represented 17 
respondents.
Nora Weisz, respondent, represented herself. 
There was no appearance by Jennifer Rodriguez-Ramirez and Shelby Schlaht. 
Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed and the 
matter was submitted for decision on April 23, 2025, after the parties uploaded 
additional documents introduced at hearing. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. On February 27, 2025, the Governing Board (board) of the district
adopted Resolution Number 2025-28, reducing particular kinds of certificated services 
and directing the Superintendent or designee to give appropriate notice to the 
certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the reduction.1The 
resolution called for the reduction or discontinuation of 49.2 full-time equivalent (FTE) 
positions. The resolution identified the particular kinds of service and FTE(s) that were
being discontinued and reduced.
2. The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a matter
reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this 
proceeding. (
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) School districts have the discretion to determine particular 
kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a service continues to be 
performed or provided in a different manner by the district. (
. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) A school district’s decision to 
reduce a particular kind of service must not be fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious. (
 (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 637.) 
 
1 An earlier version of this resolution, that did not have Home Economics as a 
position subject to reduction, was introduced. There was no evidence that it was ever 
presented to the board, nor did the board vote on it. As such, it is not controlling and 
its contents are irrelevant. 3 3. On February 27, 2025, the board also adopted Resolution Number 2025-
30 establishing tie-breaking criteria for resolving ties in seniority between employees 
who first rendered paid service to the district on the same date. This resolution 
contained six criteria to use to break any ties.
4. On March 12, 2025, Bobbi Burkett, Ed.D., sent notices to certificated staff 
advising their services would not be required for the 2025-2026 school year. The 
reasons for that decision were set forth in Resolution Number 2025-28 which she 
attached. The certificated staff were given until March 19, 2025, to request a hearing. 
Dr. Burkett advised that the failure to do so waived the right to a hearing. Thereafter, 
Dr. Burkett served a Statement of Reduction in Force and other documents on the 
certificated staff who requested a hearing by submitting Notices of Participation. 
5. Two represented respondents, Ashley Jeffries and Melissa Korn-Heller, 
did not file Notices of Participation. Ms. Jeffries was served with the March 12, 2025, 
documents and “refused to sign” acknowledging receipt of those documents. Ms. 
Korn-Heller signed the March 12, 2025, acknowledgement and requested a hearing, 
but did not file a Notice of Participation. Education Code section 44949, subdivision 
(b), states in part: “If an employee fails to request a hearing on or before the date 
specified, his or her failure to do so shall constitute his or her waiver of his or her right 
to a hearing.” These two respondents did not appear, no argument about them 
participating was made, and the district objected to their participation. That objection 
was sustained. 
6. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements were met.4 Evidence Received at Hearing
7. Dr. Burkett, the district’s Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources; 
Milena Aubrey, Ed.D., Director of Human Resources; and respondents Caryn Ipapo-
Glass, Angela Ramsey, and Nora Weisz, testified in this proceeding. Several documents 
were received in evidence. The findings reached herein are based on that evidence.
8. The district serves 16,000 students, grades 9 through 12, and ages 18 to 
22, through 17 school sites. It has approximately 1,185 certificated employees (as 
noted on the district’s seniority list). 
9. The Positions/FTEs identified in Resolution Number 2025-28 were 
Assistant Principal/Vice Principal (10.0), English Teacher (8.0), French Teacher (1.0), 
Home Economics Teacher (1.0), Library Media Specialist (9.0), Math Teacher (2.0), 
Physical Education (PE) Teacher (2.0), Principal-Special Ed Academy (1.0), Program 
Specialist (2.0), Psychologist (4.0), Social Science Teacher (2.0), Spanish Teacher (2.2), 
Special Education Teacher – Mild/Moderate (4.0), and Theatre Teacher (1.0). 
10. Dr. Burkett explained that the district’s “vision for its future” as it “moves 
forward serving the needs of its students” and its $2.4 million budget shortfall were 
primary considerations behind the district’s layoff decision. Neither Dr. Burkett nor Dr. 
Aubrey explained or defined the district’s “vision.” No evidence of what that vision 
entailed was introduced nor was there any evidence the “vision” was improper. 
11. Respondents asserted that, assuming an average salary for certificated 
employees, the proposed reduction of 49.2 FTEs was more than twice the projected 
$2.4 million deficit. Dr. Burkett testified the reduction was also based on the district’s 
“vision.” 5 12. Dr. Burkett testified that the decision to dismiss certificated employees 
was based solely on the welfare of the district and its students as that term is defined 
in the Education Code. She explained that positively assured attrition was taken into 
account, and the district will still be able to meet the state’s minimum staffing 
requirements after the layoff. 
13. After the executive leadership team identified the certificated employees 
subject to layoff, Dr. Aubrey reviewed the seniority list to determine if any of those 
individuals were credentialed and competent to “bump” a less senior employee and 
she applied the tie-breaking criteria when required. 
14. A senior employee whose position is discontinued has the right to 
transfer to a continuing position in which he or she is certificated and competent to 
fill. In doing so, the senior employee is entitled to displace or “bump” a junior 
employee who is filling that position. (Ed. Code, § 44955; 
 (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.) Several bumps occurred as was detailed 
in the documents.
15. The district had to use the tie-breaking criteria to make decisions 
regarding home economics, biology, principal/vice principal, English, and PE positions. 
16. Dr. Aubrey explained the letters of reassignment given to administrators 
and how she then determined if any of them could bump into other positions.
17. There was no evidence that the bumping performed was inaccurate or 
the tie-breaking criteria had been applied incorrectly. 
18. Dr. Aubrey described the credentialing changes that occurred effective 
January 1, 2022. Individuals with a PE credential issued before January 1, 2022, have 6 the ability to teach dance as part of the PE curriculum. Individuals with PE credentials 
issued after that date do not have that dance specialization included in the credential 
and need a specialized credential to teach dance. Similarly, individuals with an English 
credential issued before January 1, 2022, can teach theatre and drama. Individuals with 
English credentials issued after that date do not have that specialization and a specific 
credential is required to teach theatre. 
19. Dr. Aubrey testified about the “pool” of unassigned teachers who were 
issued their credentials before January 1, 2022, who have more seniority than 
respondents, giving them the ability to bump less senior respondents. Among those 
unassigned teachers are PE teachers who can bump respondents. 
20. Dr. Aubrey explained that the principals at each school create the master 
schedule for that site. They are the ones making the decision whether a certain course, 
such as theatre, will be offered at their school. 
21. Dr. Aubrey also described the psychology internship programs in place at 
the district allowing individuals to obtain required hours for credentialing and satisfy 
other field work requirements. 7 Dance / PE Issue
22. Caryn Ipapo-Glass teaches dance at Grossmont High School. She has a 
preliminary single subject credential in dance, ELAS,2 and a GELAP3 in PE. 
23. Ms. Ipapo-Glass’s “overarching question/concern” is that she was not 
hired as a PE teacher. She has decades of training as a dance teacher. The job for 
which she applied listed the position as a dance teacher. It was a highly sought after 
position. It was never made known to her during her interview or hiring process that 
she was being categorized as a PE teacher.
24. Nothing on any of her contractual documents identify her as a PE 
teacher. All her documents only identify her position as a “dance” position. 
25. Ms. Ipapo-Glass has never taught PE, has no desire to do so, has no 
access to the available PE funds, does not uphold PE standards for grading her 
students and, but for this process, had no idea she was considered a PE employee. She 
 
2 As stated on the Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) website, 
individuals with an English Learner Authorization and a preliminary single subject 
credential will receive an ELAS authorization.
3 As stated on the CTC website, the General Education Limited Assignment 
Teaching Permit (GELAP) may be issued at the request of an employing school 
district, county office of education, charter school or state agency to fill a staffing 
vacancy or need. A GELAP is issued for a one-year period and can be reissued in any 
one subject twice if the holder completes the renewal requirements and the employing 
agency requests the permit. 8 was not hired as a PE teacher, she accepted a dance position, and is now being laid off 
as a PE teacher. 
26. Ms. Ipapo-Glass also disputes it is in the best interest of the students’ 
welfare to terminate the dance program at Grossmont High School, specifically for the 
at-risk and English as a second language students. Her program has the highest 
enrollment in the district with 250 students. Her position requires a vast knowledge of 
production, stage dance competition, and choreography. It is much more than the 
program offered in PE as part of the dance portion of that course. Given all that her 
dance program entails, a PE teacher with a credential issued before June 1, 2022, could 
not perform Ms. Ipapo-Glass’s job.
27. Ms. Ipapo-Glass asserted that the layoff feels arbitrary. It “effectively 
eradicates a robust program at the school that is a cornerstone.”
28. On cross-examination, Ms. Ipapo-Glass acknowledged there is no PE or 
dance teacher being retained who has less seniority than her. However, she did not 
understand why the “nuanced specificity” she has to teach dance versus it being part 
of a pre-2022 PE credential is not being considered when determining seniority. She 
does not understand why the district would want to replace her position with someone 
less qualified to teach dance. 
29. Ms. Ipapo-Glass would prefer the district be “more upfront” in its 
decision-making. If it no longer wants dance at Grossmont High School in the way it 
currently operates, she would prefer that it say so. If the district does not want the 
quality of the program that currently exists, it should say so and “stand up behind it.” 
30. Ms. Ipapo-Glass testified that laying her off effectively ends a highly 
successful program. 9 Newcomer Students’ Issue
31. Angela Ramsey began her testimony by thanking the district 
representatives for being present, acknowledging this difficult process, noting that she 
understands the quantitative data used to make these decisions, but urging that if the 
district were “ever in the situation again, to look at the qualitative data.”  
32. Ms. Ramsey has a preliminary single subject teaching credential in 
English, and an Emergency Cross-Cultural, Language and Academic Development 
permit (EM CLAD). She has her EM CLAD, not because she did not take the required 
classes, but because her classes were obtained out of state and did not transfer. She 
has a master’s degree in English as a Secondary Language (ESL) from Louisiana State 
University. She has “three times the amount of credentials as anyone to teach ESL.”
33. Ms. Ramsey explained that in order to get her CLAD in California, she was 
required to take coursework and have the CLAD added to her Arizona teaching 
credential. Arizona required she serve two full years as a teacher of record, which she 
will accomplish in June 2025. Once that happens, she can pay a fee and request her 
Arizona CLAD be transferred to California.  
34. Ms. Ramsey’s husband has served in the Marine Corps for 19 years, which 
led to them moving around a lot, and is why she has credentials in other states. She 
explained how difficult it has been with all these “moving parts” to obtain her 
credentials in the different states where she has lived. 
35. Ms. Ramsey grew up in an immigrant community, so she went to school 
specifically to teach the immigrant population. She knows “first-hand the challenges” 
immigrant children face. Her primary goal is to support this newcomer population, 
which is a growing population in the district. 10 36. Ms. Ramsey teaches at Santana High School. In the first semester this 
school year, 45 more newcomers enrolled at the school than the district projected. As 
a result, she gave up her prep period to teach these unexpected students. 
37. Ms. Ramsey is piloting a class for newcomers for the district that she is 
co-teaching. She came up with this program three years ago when she was a 
substitute teacher for the district. She is not paid for creating this program nor gets 
credit for it. The program has been so successful that the district approved her and her 
co-teacher to continue co-piloting this program in the newcomer classes. 
38. Given recent funding cuts, the district “lost so much money” for these 
newcomer programs that she and her colleagues now refer to the programs as 
“newcomer light,” but they have still found ways to make the program work. 
39. Ms. Ramsey ensures that her students’ social and emotional needs are 
met “in real time” every day in her classroom, in addition to the academic teaching she 
provides students. 
40. Ms. Ramsey understood that her testimony cannot change the 
quantitative documents on which the district is relying, but asked “in the future, 
please, please think of the intangibles, think of the experience you are letting go 
away.” She explained that by laying off qualified teachers who specialize in teaching 
newcomer/immigrant students, the district is losing valuable resources. While people 
with similar credentials can be assigned to the classroom, the district is losing 
someone, like herself, who went to school to specifically teach this demographic. 11 Theatre Issue
41. Nora Weisz has a preliminary single subject credential in theatre, activity 
supervisor, and a “Cir” CLAD. She teaches theatre, and “two years ago took over a 
program that had been decimated by COVID.” 
42. To the extent the district asserts there is no interest or need for the 
theatre program, Ms. Weisz disagrees. Her school site is a Title I school and her theatre
classes are the only access students have to theatre and the arts. It is not that the 
students are uninterested, they have just never had any experience with theatre. 
43. By laying her off and cutting her program, the students will never get 
exposure to the theatre or the arts. Many parents tell her that her program is the only 
thing that keeps the students enrolled at school. Her program motivates them. 
44. Ms. Weisz has many students in her classes who are on IEPs or have 
other issues. The theatre classes keep them coming to school, which in turn keeps 
them attending their other classes, and gives them something to look forward to each 
day at school. 
Evaluation 
45. Ms. Ipapo-Glass is being bumped by a more senior PE teacher with a 
credential issued before 2022. That credential authorizes the senior employee to teach 
dance. Although no evidence refuted Ms. Ipapo-Glass testimony that her program is 
highly successful and robust, and that her knowledge and experience far outweigh 
what will most likely be offered by the senior PE teacher who bumps her, the 
Education Code is seniority-based and requires districts not to lay off employees who 
have more seniority and are competent and credentialed to teach the course.12 46. Similarly, no evidence refuted Ms. Ramsey’s testimony that her training 
and experience teaching newcomer students is far superior to any senior employee 
who will bump her. While this may be true, the Education Code is seniority-based. 
47. Alternatively, Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d), allows a 
district to deviate from seniority if (1) the district demonstrates a specific need or (2) to 
comply with constitutional requirements related to equal protection of the laws. The 
process of deviating from seniority is called “skipping” and a district’s proposed skip is 
generally set forth in the resolution, although not required to be. (
 (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 135) Junior employees may be 
given retention priority if they possess special training and experience that their more 
senior counterparts lack. (  (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 
571;  (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655.) 
48. No evidence was presented that the district chose to skip dance or the 
newcomer program. The district’s decision to lay off Ms. Ipapo-Glass and Ms. Ramsey 
was permissible under the Education Code. 
49. While Ms. Weisz’s testimony was sincere, and making theatre and the arts 
accessible to students is praiseworthy, the district has discretion to reduce or 
discontinue a particular kind of service or decide the service shall be offered in a different 
way, as it did here. The district’s decision to lay off Ms. Weisz was permissible under the 
Education Code. 
50. No employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to 
perform services respondents are certificated and competent to render. 13 LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
Jurisdiction 
1. Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections 
were provided as required. The district has the burden of proof by a preponderance of 
the evidence in this matter to show that its decision to reduce or discontinue services 
complied with the Education Code. 
Applicable Case Law 
2. A district may reduce services within the meaning of section 44955, 
subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to students shall 
not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce services’ by 
determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because fewer 
employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)
3. A senior employee whose position is discontinued has the right to 
transfer to a continuing position in which he or she is certificated and competent to 
fill. In doing so, the senior employee is entitled to displace or “bump” a junior 
employee who is filling that position. (Ed. Code, § 44955; 
 (1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.) No evidence was introduced that the 
district improperly applied it bumping criteria. 
4. Administrators serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. 
( (1973) 34 Cal.App.3d 19, 22-23.) But, if they can meet certification 
and competence standards, their seniority may allow them to bump into teaching 14 positions of junior employees. Administrators first hired as teachers in their districts 
maintain their original seniority dates. (Ed. Code, § 44893.) For employees hired initially 
as administrators on or after July 1, 1983, however, their administrative time does not 
count toward seniority, except for site administrators who can earn up to three years’ 
seniority. (Ed. Code, § 44956.5.) 
Disposition 
5. A preponderance of the evidence sustained the district’s statement of 
reduction in force served on respondents. 
6. The district identified the certificated employees providing the particular 
kinds of services that the board directed be reduced or discontinued. Because of the 
reduction of those particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant to Education Code 
section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be required for 
the 2025-2026 school year. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the schools and 
the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 
7. The services being reduced are particular kinds of services the Education 
Code allows the board to reduce or eliminate. 
8. Cause exists to affirm the layoff notices issued to the respondents 
identified below whose services are proposed for reduction or discontinuance per 
Resolution Number 2025-28. 
RECOMMENDATION 
It is recommended that before May 15, 2025, the Governing Board give notice 
to the respondents listed below that their employment will be terminated at the close 15 of the current school year and their services in those positions will not be needed for 
the 2025-2026 school year: 
Mary Kathleen Chestnut 
Darryl Cooke 
Kimberly De La Mora 
Tomi Margarita Felix Chavez 
Elaine Flores-Smith 
Tatiana Harvey 
Lance Heinemann 
Melissa Korn-Heller 
Caryn Ipapo-Glass 
Ashley Jeffries 
Nicholas Kurutz 
Molly Lindsay 
Monica Magdaleno 
Diana Maldonado 
Savannah Martin 
Angela Ramsey 16 Emilia Rivera
Jennifer Rodriguez-Ramirez 
Shelby Schlaht 
Eesha Sharma 
Nora Weisz 
 
DATE: April 28, 2025  
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 