BEFORE THE 
SANTA CLARA COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 
COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force Involving 71 
Certificated Employees, Respondents. 
OAH No. 2025030967 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Administrative Law Judge Holly M. Baldwin, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on April 23 and 24, 2025, by 
videoconference. 
Attorney Joshua A. Stevens represented the Santa Clara County Superintendent 
of Schools. 
Attorney Eric J. Lindstrom represented 56 respondents listed in Attachment B to 
this decision, who are members of the Association of County Educators (ACE). 
Respondent Conchita Yu appeared at hearing on April 24, 2025, representing 
herself.
Six respondents were self-represented and did not appear at hearing: Tracy 
Cadena, Jordan Goldstein, Althea Guzman, Courtney Henry, An Ho, and Ngoc Pham. 
The hearing proceeded in their absence pursuant to Government Code section 11520.
The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 24, 2025. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Procedural History 
1. On March 7, 2025, the Interim Superintendent of the Santa Clara County 
Office of Education (SCCOE), Dr. Charles Hinman, adopted a resolution entitled “In the 
Matter of the Reduction or Discontinuance of Certain Certificated Particular Kinds of 
Services for the 2025-2026 School Year” (PKS Resolution), reducing or discontinuing 
particular kinds of services for the 2025-2026 school year and directing that 
proceedings be initiated not to employ the affected employees for the coming year. 
The PKS Resolution identified the services to be reduced or discontinued, a total of 
96.17 FTE (full time equivalent) certificated positions, as listed in Attachment A to this 
decision. The PKS Resolution stated that the services of no permanent employee will 
be terminated while any probationary employee, or any other employee with less 
seniority, is retained to render a service that the permanent employee is certificated 
and competent to render. 
The PKS Resolution did not designate any particular kinds of services to be 
retained (“skipping” criteria) under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d). 
2. Interim Superintendent Hinman also adopted, on March 5, 2025, a 
resolution entitled, “In the Matter of Determination of Seniority Among Certificated 
Employees with the Same Seniority Date” (Tie-Breaker Resolution), setting forth criteria 
to be used in determining the order of termination as between certificated employees 
who first rendered paid service to the SCCOE on the same date. 
3. Prior to March 15, 2025, SCCOE timely issued initial layoff notices to 
88 certificated employees pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 44955, and 3 served the notices by certified mail. Each of these employees was served with an initial 
layoff notice, a copy of the PKS Resolution, forms for acknowledgment of receipt and 
request for hearing, and copies of the applicable Education Code sections.
4. Interim Superintendent Hinman made and filed the Statement of 
Reduction in Force in his official capacity on March 26, 2025.
5. A total of 71 certificated employees 0F1 timely requested a hearing, were 
served with a Statement of Reduction in Force packet (RIF Packet), and became 
respondents in this proceeding by filing notices of participation. Each of these 
respondents was served by certified mail with a RIF Packet including a statement to 
respondent, a Statement of Reduction in Force (with attached PKS Resolution), a blank 
form for notice of participation in the hearing, and copies of relevant Education Code 
and Government Code sections. 
6. Prior to hearing, SCCOE rescinded the layoff notices issued to the 
following eight employees, who are no longer respondents in this matter: Miguel 
Aldapa, Maria Castro, Kristen Everett, Wendy Franco, Maria Navarro, Michelle Oliver, 
Angela Pak, and Juana Rojas Zavala.
7. Thus, 63 employees remained as respondents at the time of hearing: the 
56 employees represented by attorney Lindstrom who are listed in Attachment B to 
this decision, and the 7 self-represented respondents who are listed in Attachment C. 
 
1 At hearing, SCCOE provided a list of 70 respondents who had been served 
with RIF Packets; but the evidence established that one respondent, Angela Pak, was 
inadvertently left off the list of respondents despite having been served a RIF Packet. 4 8. SCCOE’s counsel timely served a notice of hearing on respondent’s 
counsel by email, who accepted service on behalf of the represented respondents, and 
timely served a notice of hearing on each unrepresented respondent by certified mail. 
PKS Resolution and Identification of Employees for Layoff Notices
9. Kushwinder Gill, Ed.D., Assistant Superintendent of Personnel Services, 
testified about SCCOE’s decision to initiate a layoff proceeding, the methodology used 
to identify certificated employees to receive layoff notices, and the steps taken to 
comply with the Education Code’s requirements for the layoff process. 
10. SCCOE administrators, directors, and division leaders conducted a series 
of cabinet meetings and conversations, and consulted with the Interim Superintendent 
over the last several months about the need to reduce the number of certificated 
employees for the 2025-2026 school year. Dr. Gill explained that the proposed 
reductions in the PKS Resolution occurred after a review of SCCOE’s needs and its 
ability to comply with federal and state mandated programs. In making the reduction 
in force recommendations, SCCOE staff also accounted for positively assured attrition. 
11. Dr. Gill identified two reasons for the proposed reductions: the expiration 
of grant funding, and a decline in student enrollment in special education programs. 
(a) The Early Learning Services department includes Head Start and 
preschool programs that depend on grant funding. SCCOE is in the fifth year of a five-
year federal Head Start grant, and has applied for renewal of the grant funding, but no 
approval has yet been received. State preschool grant funding has also not yet been 
approved. All certificated employees in the Early Learning Services department 
received layoff notices. Dr. Gill explained that if SCCOE learns that Head Start or 
preschool grant funding has been approved, as many of these positions as possible 5 will be reinstated. The reductions to the Migrant Education and Youth Health and 
Wellness departments are also due to grant funding not yet being approved. 
(b) The reductions in the Special Education department are due to an 
expected decline in enrollment of special education students for the upcoming school 
year, as described by the Executive Director of the Special Education department (see 
Factual Findings 19-20). 
12. In the opinion of Dr. Gill, the layoffs and reduction in particular kinds of 
services relate solely to the welfare of the schools and students served by SCCOE. 
13. Interim Superintendent Hinman adopted the PKS Resolution on March 7, 
2025, and directed staff to prepare the initial layoff notices to affected employees.
14. Dr. Gill and her staff prepared the seniority list of SCCOE certificated 
employees (Seniority List). For each certificated employee, the Seniority List states the 
hire date, employee’s name, position, FTE, bargaining unit, calendar days worked per 
school year, work site, and the employee’s credentials with expiration dates. Dr. Gill 
explained the steps taken to ensure accuracy of the Seniority List. The list is updated as 
new information is obtained about employee credentials, authorizations, and 
certifications. The Seniority List was shared with the union president and posted on the 
SCCOE intranet, and employees were emailed a link to review the Seniority List and 
verify the accuracy of their own seniority date and credentials. Responses were sent to 
Human Resources staff who updated the Seniority List. Staff also verified employee 
credentials on the website of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing.
15. Dr. Gill described the method by which SCCOE identified certificated 
employees to receive layoff notices. The positions listed in the PKS Resolution were 
checked against the Seniority List to identify which employees currently are in the6 affected positions, which employee was the least senior in each affected position, and 
whether the employee had credentials that would allow them to “bump” a less senior 
employee. If a less senior employee was bumped, the list was reviewed to determine 
whether the employee had credentials allowing them to bump yet another employee. 
This process was repeated until no more bumps were possible, and the least senior 
employee in the bumping chain was identified for layoff. The criteria set forth in the 
Tie-Breaker Resolution were applied to break any ties in seniority dates. 
16. No employee has disputed their seniority date or application of the 
tie-breaking criteria. 
17. Dr. Gill confirmed that no permanent or probationary certificated 
employee with less seniority than a respondent is being retained to provide a service 
for which a respondent is credentialed and competent to render. 
18. Dr. Gill confirmed that she maintained records of the service of the initial 
layoff notices, the RIF Packets, and the notice of hearing. No disputes were raised at 
hearing regarding the service of any of these documents. 
Mandated Services to Special Education Students 
19. Jennifer Ann, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Special Education 
Department, testified at hearing about the reductions to positions in her department, 
and SCCOE’s ability to provide at least the minimum level of mandated special 
education services. Dr. Ann explained that for each student receiving special education 
services, the student’s IEP (Individualized Education Program) lists the specific types 
and amounts of services (typically stated in minutes or hours) that SCCOE must
provide. Dr. Ann participated in the discussion of proposed PKS reductions in positions
serving special education students, including Speech-Language Pathologists (SLP’s), 7 Mental Health School Wellness Specialists, and Adaptive Physical Education (APE) 
Specialist. 
20. In Dr. Ann’s opinion, SCCOE will be able to meet the minimum mandated 
level of special education services for special education students for the 2025-2026 
school year, despite the layoffs. Dr. Ann testified that there are fewer special education 
students enrolled for the 2025-2026 school year than the 2024-2025 school year, 
because some students will be served directly by school districts rather than SCCOE. 
21. Dr. Ann reviewed the service levels for each special education student 
projected to be served next year and compared that information to staffing levels for 
those services. 
22. The PKS Resolution includes a 3.0 FTE reduction in the SLP position. For 
SLP services, Dr. Ann reviewed the number of speech-language minutes in the IEP’s for 
next year’s special education students, and compared it to the number of SLP staff and 
the hours that staff are able to provide services. Dr. Ann created a spreadsheet for her 
review of SLP services, 1F2 reflecting the number of weekly minutes of required services 
for next year by type (individual, group, consultative), and the number of classes in 
special education clusters. She converted the total number of required weekly speech-
language minutes to hours, to compare that information to staff capacity. 
 
2 For other types of special education services, Dr. Ann performed a similar 
review of mandated student service levels and available staffing, but did not create a 
spreadsheet to document it in the same detail. “Rebenching” packets provided an FTE 
average per class, which is used to determine staffing for special education services. 8 Each SLP works a seven-hour workday. Dr. Ann used six hours per day (30 hours 
per week) of student time for each SLP in making her calculations, to account for lunch 
and other tasks. She also used a conservative number in calculating group minutes, 
assuming that groups would be limited to two students (although some services are 
offered in groups of three or four students). After comparing the required minutes of 
services to the SLP time available, Dr. Ann found that there would still be two hours of 
non-student time available for SLP’s each week. 
23. A committee is discussing implementation of a tool for quantifying SLP 
workload, as described in Factual Finding 37. Dr. Ann was formerly a member of that 
committee. The workload tool is being used by SLP’s but it has not yet been officially 
adopted and implemented. Thus, Dr. Ann used the method described in Factual 
Finding 22 to determine SLP capacity.
24. James Howarth, Assistant Director of Human Resources, also provided 
testimony on behalf of SCCOE about the SLP workload tool. Howarth is part of the 
committee working on this tool. He confirmed that the tool is still being discussed and 
developed in the committee, even though it is currently being used by members of the 
SLP team. There has not yet been an agreement between the parties about use of the 
tool, and its formal implementation. 
25. Dr. Ann was questioned about compensatory SLP services owed to 
students. In some circumstances, staff absences result in a student not receiving the 
required minutes of speech-language services, and SLP staff tracks the compensatory 
time that must be made up for each student. In the fall of 2024, Dr. Ann became aware 
that there was a backlog of compensatory time for SLP services rolled over from prior 
school years, which should not happen, and she has taken steps to address it. Most of 
the compensatory time has been made up. 9 Dr. Ann considered how mandated services would continue to be provided at 
reduced staffing levels next year if staff were absent. She believes SCCOE will have
sufficient staff to cover SLP absences. There are no designated substitutes for SLP’s. 
However, if an SLP took an extended leave of absence, SCCOE could bring in a retired 
SLP or a short-term contractor to provide coverage.
26. If SCCOE becomes unable to provide the mandated services to special 
education students, it would rehire staff into positions that had been laid off.
27. Dr. Ann was questioned about Behavioral Analyst services, and explained 
that staff in those positions at SCCOE provide very limited direct student services, 
primarily supporting the entire special education program. Next year there will be 16 
fewer classes, which is equal to one Behavioral Analyst position. The PKS Resolution 
includes a 1.0 FTE reduction to the Behavioral Analyst position. 
28. Dr. Ann was also questioned about adaptive physical education services. 
The PKS Resolution includes a 1.0 FTE reduction in the APE Specialist position. 
Adaptive PE teachers provide services to school districts, and some districts will not be 
in the SCCOE program for next year. Dr. Ann determined that there will be sufficient 
adaptive PE teachers next year to provide these services despite the layoff. 
Respondents’ Contentions 
29. Respondents raised two global challenges to the layoff process, 
contending that the decision to reduce particular kinds of services is arbitrary or 
capricious, and that the proposed reductions will render SCCOE unable to provide the 
minimum required level of mandated services to special education students in the 
2025-2026 school year. Respondents also challenged the “partial layoff notices” issued 10 to five Mental Health School Wellness Specialists. Lastly, respondents Boiko and Yu
provided individual testimony about their proposed layoffs. 
PKSREDUCTION ALLEGEDLY ARBITRARY OR CAPRICIOUS
30. Adia Hoag testified at hearing about her analysis of SCCOE finances. 
Hoag is a staff member at the California Teachers Association and is the primary staff 
contact for the ACE members. As part of her job duties, Hoag follows the county 
budget process closely and regularly reviews information received from SCCOE. Hoag 
analyzed SCCOE financial information from the 2023-2024 school year (unaudited 
actual figures), and 2024-2025 school year (adopted budget, first interim budget 
revision, second interim budget revision). She also looked at trends in SCCOE income 
and spending from the 2019-2020 school year through the 2024-2025 year. 
Hoag made several points. SCCOE carried over almost $15 million more in 
reserves than last year. Local Control Funding Formula (LCFF) income from the state 
increased, as did income from federal, other state, and other local sources. She stated 
that overall, SCCOE began the 2024-2025 school year with $57 million more than last 
year. When looking at expenditures, Hoag noted that SCCOE increased spending in 
categories such as books and supplies, and services and consultants. Hoag also noted 
that the Santa Clara County Board of Education recently hired a new superintendent 
starting May 1, 2025, at a salary that would make him the highest paid county 
superintendent in the state. 
In Hoag’s opinion, SCCOE has sufficient funds to run its programs and an 
employee layoff is unnecessary. 
31. Riju Krishna testified about several topics at hearing. Krishna is a teacher 
for SCCOE’s Opportunity Youth Academy, and is the ACE union president. She is part 11 of the ACE bargaining team and regularly requests and receives information from 
SCCOE, including through Public Records Act requests. 
32. Krishna questioned special education declining enrollment as a 
justification for the layoffs. She stated that on March 4, 2025, Interim Superintendent 
Hinman sent an email message explaining the reductions being made, and stating that 
there were currently 916 students enrolled, with a projected 796 enrolled for next year 
(a difference of 120 students). These figures did not match other information Krishna 
received. A PRA response on April 2 showed that districts were taking back 36 students 
from SCCOE. Information about special education block enrollment showed 1,050 
students in February and 1,055 in March. Rebenching packets from February and 
March showed projections of 796 and 809 students for next year. Krishna stated the 
FTE reductions reflect an 11 to 13 percent reduction to employee positions, while the 
decrease of student enrollment stated by Interim Superintendent Hinman is only four 
percent. 
Krishna has worked for SCCOE since 2002. In her experience, districts state they 
will take back students from SCCOE, but that it does not always happen as projected, 
or the students may later return to being served by SCCOE. The special education 
students served by SCCOE include those with the highest level of need. 
33. Krishna also questioned lack of grant funding as a justification for layoffs. 
For the Mental Health School Wellness Specialist positions being reduced by 
12.47 FTE in the PKS Resolution, Krishna noted that 11 layoff notices were issued, two 
vacant positions were eliminated, and five employees had their calendar days reduced 
as described in Factual Finding 42. According to Krishna, after the layoff notices, there 
will be 15 management positions remaining to oversee five clinicians, where grant 12 funding is typically focused on the number of clinicians. She conceded that she does 
not know the overall job responsibilities of the 15 management positions. 
Krishna questioned SCCOE’s approach in issuing initial layoff notices to the 
entire Early Learning Services department because grant funding has not yet been 
approved, when she believes there is sufficient money in the general fund. She also 
noted that discovery responses received from SCCOE included documents labeled as 
“tentative assignments” for the upcoming school year showing most of the Early 
Learning Services positions reinstated. Parents have not yet been informed of cuts. 
MANDATED SERVICES
34. Stephanie Pedone testified about SLP services and workload. Pedone is 
the current SLP team lead. She did not receive a layoff notice. 
35. Pedone confirmed that students accrue compensatory time when a 
service provider is not available to provide their required minutes of service. SLP’s had 
previously tracked this compensatory time in a multi-provider spreadsheet; this year 
the team changed to track compensatory time in separate spreadsheets for each SLP.
At the beginning of the 2024-2025 school year, Pedone had 10,923 minutes of accrued 
compensatory time to provide, which she inherited with her current caseload. SCCOE 
offered speech camps during February break and spring break for students who were 
owed five or more hours of compensatory time, which decreased the backlog of 
compensatory time. Pedone still has 2,460 minutes left from the backlog, in addition 
to any compensatory time accrued during absences this school year.
36. Pedone has not been informed of a clear plan for covering SLP absences 
and compensatory time. Pedone stated that SCCOE does not provide short-term 
substitutes for SLP’s who are absent, instead asking SLP’s to make up their minutes. 13 Four years ago, Pedone was out for four months on medical leave, and returned to 
find her students had not been served. She described adverse impacts on students. 
Pedone also discussed difficulties finding SLP’s to cover summer services for 
students in extended school year programs. She noted that finding contractors can be 
difficult because many contractors provide services virtually, but many of the students 
served by SCCOE have moderate to severe needs that benefit more from in-person 
services. Pedone reported that there is a shortage of SLP’s in California. 
37. Pedone discussed the development of a tool to track SLP workload, 
called the SLP Weighted Workload Acuity Tool (SWWAT). The SWWAT is a comparative 
tool that measures SLP workload in units, and an SLP working a seven-hour day can 
perform 60 to 65 units. Pedone’s workload this year is 65.7 units. She is familiar with 
her colleagues’ workload, and several of them are over 65 units this year. If SLP’s are 
over their workload numbers, they are directed to contact their manager and schedule 
a meeting to make adjustments. 
The SWWAT was developed in the 2023-2024 school year. In March 2024, a 
memorandum of understanding was signed between SCCOE and ACE for a one-year 
pilot program from July 2024 through June 2025 to test and evaluate a new 
mechanism for assigning cases to SLP’s. The parties agreed to develop and implement 
a workload acuity tool, with the SWWAT being deployed as a pilot project for the 
2024-2025 school year, and a committee meeting monthly to review its effectiveness. 
If the parties do not reach tentative agreement on a successor agreement by June 30, 
2025, the pilot program will continue through June 2026. 
38. Pedone is concerned that if SLP positions are reduced for next year, more 
students will be unserved. In her opinion, the expected drop in student enrollment for 14 next year does not justify a 3.0 FTE reduction in SLP’s. Pedone questioned whether 
Dr. Ann’s analysis of SLP service levels and staffing sufficiently accounts for time spent 
on the assessments needed for IEP’s. 
39. Krishna also questioned Dr. Ann’s analysis of minimum staffing levels 
needed to meet mandated services for special education students. In her opinion, Dr. 
Ann’s analysis of SLP service minutes failed to take into account sufficient time for 
travel, assessments, programming student devices, billing Medi-Cal, and prep time. 
She also questioned why a similar spreadsheet was not created for positions other 
than SLP’s. In Krishna’s opinion, the proposed reductions are arbitrary, and will result 
in SCCOE’s inability to provide mandated services to special education students. 
MENTAL HEALTH SCHOOL WELLNESS SPECIALIST “PARTIAL LAYOFFS” 
40. Dr. Gill discussed the “calendar days” shown for certificated employees 
on the Seniority List. Each employee is required to work a certain number of calendar 
days in a school year, which varies depending on the employee’s particular program. 
An employee working 185 calendar days and an employee working 220 calendar days 
may both be considered full-time employees depending on the number of calendar 
days required for their respective positions.
41. The PKS Resolution identified a 12.47 FTE reduction in the position of 
Mental Health School Wellness Specialist. Some employees in this position received 
layoff notices stating they would not be employed at all for the 2025-2026 school year; 
those layoff notices are not in dispute (apart from respondents’ global challenges).
42. Five respondents in Mental Health School Wellness Specialist positions 
each received what SCCOE categorized as a “partial layoff notice”: Avelina Charles, 
Alejandra Fernandez-Zamora, Kathryn Hendricks, Estefania Ramirez-Romo, and Jeremy 15 Strametz. These five respondents received notices that they would be working in the 
same job positions next year, in full-time 1.0 FTE status, but for a reduced number of 
calendar days in the 2025-2026 school year (187 calendar days) than in the 2024-2025 
school year (210 calendar days for Strametz and 205 calendar days for Charles, 
Fernandez-Zamora, Hendricks, and Ramirez-Romo). 
43. Hendricks testified at hearing. She is the second most senior employee in 
the Mental Health School Wellness Specialist position. Hendricks and her colleagues 
were called into a meeting on March 6, 2025, told that there would be a change in 
their calendar days worked for the 2025-2026 school year, and given “partial layoff” 
notices. Hendricks was not told that her FTE was slated to be reduced through this 
layoff proceeding, or that she would become a part-time employee. Hendricks was 
informed that her calendar days worked would be reduced from 205 to 187, but that 
no other changes would occur to her job duties, title, or job description. 
44. Hendricks was hired as a Behavioral Analyst in September 2021, and was 
contracted to work 185 calendar days at that time, as classified staff in the SEIU union. 
In December 2022, the Behavioral Analyst positions were changed to certificated 
positions in the ACE union, through a memorandum of understanding requiring that 
they work 205 calendar days. 2F3When Hendricks worked on a 185 calendar day 
schedule, she was considered a 1.0 FTE employee. When she worked on a 205 calendar 
day schedule, she was also considered a 1.0 FTE employee. Hendricks was told during 
 
3 Strametz previously worked 224 calendar days and was reduced to 210 
calendar days at that time. He works more days than the other employees in this 
position because his school site is year-round.16 the 2022 bargaining process that the change to the number of calendar days was 
related to a grant requirement, but she saw no such requirement in the grants. 
INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEES
Eleesa Boiko 
45. The PKS Resolution identified a 1.0 FTE Behavioral Analyst position in the 
Special Education department for layoff. The job description for the Behavioral Analyst 
position requires certification as a BCBA (Board Certified Behavior Analyst) or proof of 
enrollment. 
Eleesa Boiko holds this position and testified at hearing to her contention that 
she should not be laid off. Boiko is the least senior employee in a team of eight 
Behavioral Analysts and has BCBA certification. Boiko and another colleague, who is 
more senior but does not have BCBA certification, both received initial layoff notices. 
The notice to Boiko’s colleague was subsequently rescinded, while Boiko’s was not. 
Boiko discussed the importance of the services she provides to vulnerable 
students. She also questioned the fairness and transparency of the process by which 
employees were identified for layoffs. 
Conchita Yu 
46. Conchita Yu testified at hearing. Yu is a Head Start teacher in the Early 
Learning Services department and received an initial layoff notice. Yu discussed the
importance of the essential services she provides to vulnerable students, the impact of 
layoffs on students and families, and the emotional and financial impact of layoffs on 
SCCOE employees. Yu did not raise any specific challenge to the layoff procedures as 
applied to her position. 17 LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
1. SCCOE complied with all notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth 
in Education Code sections 44949 and 44955. 
2. The services identified in the PKS Resolution are particular kinds of 
services that may be reduced or discontinued under Education Code section 44955 in 
the discretion of SCCOE.
3. A district may consider its financial circumstances in deciding whether to 
reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service. However, the district’s decision to 
reduce a particular kind of service must not be fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious. (
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 637.) The courts have held this 
legal standard permits “a difference of opinion on the same subject.” (
(1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 796, 808.)
Respondents raised questions about SCCOE’s financial need for PKS reductions 
and the method by which the services were identified for reductions. (Factual Findings 
30-33, 39.) However, the evidence did not establish that SCCOE’s decision to reduce 
the services stated in the PKS Resolution, as described in Factual Findings 1, 9-12, 
19-22, and 27-28, was fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious, or an abuse of discretion.
4. A district may properly reduce services in a statutorily mandated 
program as long as the mandated services do not fall below the statutory minimum. 
( 76 Cal.App.3d at p. 811.) 
Respondents raised questions about SCCOE’s ability to provide mandated 
services to special education students if the proposed reductions are implemented. 18 (Factual Findings 34-39.) However, the evidence did not establish that SCCOE will be 
unable to provide the minimum level of mandated services. (Factual Findings 19-28.) 
5. Cause exists to reduce the number of certificated employees of SCCOE 
due to the reduction or discontinuance of particular kinds of services. 
6. The matters set forth in Factual Findings 40 through 44 establish that the 
“partial layoff notices” issued to five respondents (Avelina Charles, Alejandra 
Fernandez-Zamora, Kathryn Hendricks, Estefania Ramirez-Romo, and Jeremy Strametz) 
are not properly considered layoff notices within the meaning of Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955. Changing the work schedules of these five respondents 
from a 205 or 210 calendar day school year to a 187 calendar day school year, while 
keeping them in the same 1.0 FTE position with the same job description, is not a 
reduction that requires a layoff notice. SCCOE may make such a work schedule change 
without issuing a layoff notice, and “partial layoff notices” issued to these five 
respondent must be rescinded. 
7. Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 establish a seniority-based 
layoff procedure that mandates that employees shall be terminated in the inverse 
order in which they were employed. These statutes do not permit employees to 
establish that they should be skipped because their certifications and experience 
render them more valuable to SCCOE than other employees. (See 
(1983) 35 Cal. 3d 294, 299.) It is SCCOE’s right and burden, not the employees’, to 
demonstrate a specific need for personnel or services such that those qualifications 
may be skipped in the layoff process. (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d); 
 (2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 136-137.) 19 Respondent Boiko does not raise a valid challenge to her layoff. The PKS 
Resolution reduced the service that Boiko provides, Behavioral Analyst, and did not 
provide for skipping of any employee based on certification status. (Factual Findings 1 
and 45.) There is no permanent or probationary employee junior to Boiko who is being 
retained to render a service that she is credentialed and competent to teach. 
(Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) Boiko may properly be given a final layoff notice. 
8. The evidence did not establish any valid challenge to the layoff notice 
received by respondent Yu. (Factual Finding 46.) Yu may properly be given a final 
layoff notice. 
9. The evidence established that no certificated employee with less seniority 
than respondents is being retained to render services which respondents are 
certificated and competent to perform. 
10. Because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services set 
forth in Factual Finding 1 and Attachment A to this decision, cause exists pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44949 and 44955 to give notice to the respondents (except 
the respondents listed in Legal Conclusion 6) up to the number of the FTE reductions 
set forth in the PKS Resolution, that their services will not be required or will be 
reduced for the 2025-2026 school year. This cause solely relates to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
11. All other arguments and contentions of the parties not specifically 
addressed herein were considered and are rejected. 20ORDER
1. The Statement of Reduction in Force against respondents Avelina 
Charles, Alejandra Fernandez-Zamora, Kathryn Hendricks, Estefania Ramirez-Romo, 
and Jeremy Strametz is dismissed and the preliminary layoff notices issued to these 
respondents are rescinded. Final notices of layoff may not be provided to these five 
certificated employees.
2. The Statement of Reduction in Force is sustained as to all respondents 
other than Avelina Charles, Alejandra Fernandez-Zamora, Kathryn Hendricks, Estefania 
Ramirez-Romo, and Jeremy Strametz. Aside from these respondents, final notice may 
be given to the certificated employees listed in Attachment B and Attachment C that 
their services will not be required or will be reduced for the 2025-2026 school year 
because of the reduction or elimination of particular kinds of services. In issuing its 
final notices of layoff, SCCOE shall follow the seniority requirements of Education Code 
section 44955, subdivision (b), to effectuate all reductions in services.
DATE:
HOLLY M. BALDWIN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
21 Attachment A: Reduction or Elimination of Particular Kinds of Services
Position Department FTE
Teacher – Specialized Academic Instruction Special Education 11.0 
Teacher – Early Childhood Special Education Special Education 2.0
Mental Health & Wellness Specialists Youth Health & Wellness 12.47 
Behavior Analyst Special Education 1.0 
Teacher- Therapeutic Special Education 2.0 
Teacher- Deaf and Hard of Hearing Special Education 1.0 
Teacher – Migrant Education Migrant Education 1.0 
School Nurse Special Education 2.0 
Speech and Language Pathologist Special Education 3.0 
Adaptive Physical Education Specialist Special Education 1.0 
Teacher- Visual Impairment Special Education 2.0 
Teacher on Special Assignment - Curriculum & 
InstructionSpecial Education 1.0 
Preschool Teacher/Coach – Migrant Education Migrant Education 1.0 
Teacher – Head Start Early Learning Services 23.022 Preschool Teacher/Coach – Head Start Early Learning Services 3.0 
Teacher – Head Start P/D Early Learning Services 3.0
Teacher – State Preschool Early Learning Services 9.0 
Teacher – Educare State Preschool – Head Start Early Learning Services 1.0 
Teacher – Educare – Head Start Early Learning Services 5.0
Teacher – Infant/Toddler - Educare Early Learning Services 2.0 
Preschool Teacher/Coach – Educare Early Learning Services 2.0 
Psychologist Special Education 2.2 
School Therapist- Deaf and Hard of Hearing Special Education 0.5 
School Therapist Special Education 2.0 
Teacher – Early Learning Center Early Learning Services 2.0 
Teacher – Early Learning Center – Infant/Toddler Early Learning Services 1.0 
Total = 96.17 FTE  
  23 Attachment B: List of 56 ACE Respondents
Wenda Abbas
Mayra Alvarez
Kruthika Anand
Monica Berry 
Eleesa Boiko 
Terrie Cascio 
Ana Castillo 
Avelina Charles 
Daisy Blesilda Collado 
Angeles Cordova Escamilla 
Mireya Coronado 
Le Ha Dang 
Thu-Huong Dang
Alejandra Fernandez-Zamora 
Ricardo Flores Hernandez 
Angelica Galvan 
Eric Garcia Marina Garcia 
Yolanda Garcia 
Haru Gojo 
Angelica Guzman 
Kathryn Hendricks 
Anna Heredia 
Ana Herrera 
Any Jenkins 
Rocio Jimenez de Reyes 
Yihsien Lee 
Aliaa Malik 
Yareny Mandujano 
Marcela Martinez 
Ana Martinez Davis 
Sara Moran 
Rowena Nacion 
Felicidad Ng 24 Preeti Nighojkar
Adriana Oviedo 
Hir Patel 
Jill Phiri 
Joyce Ponce 
Maria Portillo 
Viridiana Ramirez 
Estefania Ramirez-Romo 
Alicia Rios-Marquez 
Amalia Saldana 
Awanti Singh Tahani Smith 
Jeremy Strametz 
Vicki Tafoya
Bao Chau Tran 
Christopher Tsang 
Ana Ureno 
Juana Valdivia 
Irene Vargas
Silvia Vidal Hernandez (Espinoza)
Frances Vuong 
Palak Vyas 
 25 Attachment C: List of 7 Self-Represented Respondents
Tracy Cadena
Jordan Goldstein
Althea Guzman
Courtney Henry 
An Ho 
Ngoc Pham 
Conchita Yu 