BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
PLUMAS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Teacher Reduction in Force of: 
CERTAIN CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES, Respondents 
OAH No. 2025040492 
PROPOSED DECISION
Sean Gavin, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 
State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on April 24, 2025, from 
Sacramento, California. 
Michelle L. Cannon, Attorney at Law, represented the Plumas Unified School 
District (District).
Respondents Sarah Cardin and Lauren McIntyre (collectively, “respondents”) 
appeared at the hearing. All other named respondents resolved their cases prior to 
hearing. Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Cardin. Respondent 
McIntyre appeared without an attorney. 
Evidence was received, the record closed, and the parties submitted the matter 
for decision on April 24, 2025. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. James Frost is the District’s Interim Superintendent. Mr. Frost’s actions, 
and those of the District’s staff and Governing Board (Board), were taken solely in their 
official capacities.
2. On or before March 12, 2025, Mr. Frost recommended to the Board a 
reduction of particular kinds of services (PKS) and the termination of services of a 
corresponding number of certificated employees. The same day, the Board adopted 
Resolution No. 1671 – Revised, “Resolution to Decrease the Number of Certificated 
Employees Due to a Reduction in Particular Kinds of Services” (Resolution). The 
Resolution provided, in relevant part: 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, by the Governing Board 
of the Plumas Unified School District for the 2025-2026 
school year, the particular kinds of services to be provided 
by said District shall be and hereby are reduced to the 
extent set forth below: 
Position FTE
Certificated Student Nurse  .17 
Certificated Student Nurse .17 
CRC Enrichment 1.0 
Teacher    1.0 3 Teacher 1.0
Teacher    1.0 
Counselor    .5 
3. The Resolution also included, as Exhibit A, criteria for determining the 
order of seniority for employees with the same first date of probationary service 
(Resolution Tie-Breaking Criteria) and, as Exhibit B, criteria for determining whether a 
certificated employee subject to layoff was competent to perform a service 
(Competence Criteria). 
4. Additionally, the Resolution provided for a process commonly known as 
“skipping,” in which a District deviates from the normal order of layoffs for personnel 
who have special training, experience, or credentials that others with more seniority do 
not have. In that regard, the Resolution provided:
[T]his Board is authorized by Education Code section 44955 
to deviate from terminating certificated employees in order 
of seniority where the District demonstrates a specific need 
for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study 
or to provide services authorized by a services credential 
with a specialization in either pupil personnel services or 
health for a school nurse, and that the certificated 
employee has special training and experience necessary to 
teach that course or course of study or to provide those 
services, which others with more seniority do not possess.4 5. The Resolution directed Mr. Frost or his designee to notify all employees 
whose services would be terminated as a result of the Resolution. On March 13, 2025, 
District personnel, as designated by Mr. Frost, served several certificated employees, 
including respondents, with written layoff notices. The District submitted into evidence 
notices to nine employees. The notices to six employees, including both respondents, 
were titled “Notice of Layoff.” Two employees received a “Notice of Layoff/Reduction 
in Hours.” One employee received a “Notice of Layoff & Bumping Rights.” A copy of 
the Resolution was served with each notice. 
6. Respondents timely requested a hearing. This hearing followed, as 
provided for in Education Code section 44949. 
Reasons for Reduction of PKS 
7. Mr. Frost testified at hearing about the reason for the District’s layoffs. 
He has been the District’s Interim Superintendent since November 2024. He explained
he recommended reducing PKS and associated layoffs because of the District’s 
financial situation. Specifically, the District received a financial report in December 
2024 that showed significant deficit spending and a risk of insolvency. Among other 
factors, declining enrollment contributed to the poor financial outlook. In response, 
the District has applied to the State for help. The State has assigned a fiscal advisor 
and has agreed to advance some payments to help bridge any financial shortfalls 
between this fiscal year and the next.5 District’s Seniority List
DISTRICT’S CREATION OF SENIORITY LIST AND TIE-BREAKING ANALYSIS
8. Betsy Webster has been a Human Resources (HR) Specialist for the 
District for almost four years. The District is the only school district in Plumas County, 
and the District and County Office of Education share a close relationship. Some 
individuals, like Ms. Webster, perform work for the District although they are employed 
by the County. 
9. At hearing, Ms. Webster explained one of her duties as an HR Specialist is 
to maintain the District’s seniority list. She maintains it as a chart that shows 
information from the District’s personnel files about its certificated employees, 
including first date of paid service, status as either permanent or probationary, school 
site assignment, FTE, the class or grade taught, and information about employees’ 
credentials. An individual’s first date of paid service is known as their “seniority date.” 
10. Ms. Webster prepared the District’s seniority list in October 2024 as part 
of her regular job duties. She testified that as part of that process, she verified the 
accuracy of the information in the District’s personnel records. According to the 
District’s records, 18 teachers, including respondents, had the seniority date August 21, 
2024 (collectively, the “August 21 Teachers”). To break this “tie,” Ms. Webster applied 
two of the three criteria specified in the District’s Collective Bargaining Agreement 
(CBA) with the Plumas County Teachers’ Association (the “CBA Tie-Breaking Criteria”). 
Specifically, section 18.02B of the CBA provides: 
In the event that a number of individuals have the same 
first date of paid service, the following criteria will be used 6 in determining the order of layoff. Equal weight shall be 
given each of the following: 
1. Teaching experience in subject areas of credentials 
2. Authorization of credentials 
3. Number of years of classroom teaching experience 
11. Ms. Webster applied the last two CBA Tie-Breaking Criteria. First, she 
assigned points based on the August 21 Teachers’ “authorization of credentials.” Those 
with full credentials received three points, supplemental authorizations received two 
points, English Language Learner (ELL) authorizations received two points, and 
provisional credentials received one point. Ten of the teachers, including respondents, 
received the maximum of five points for maintaining a full credential and an ELL 
authorization. 
12. Next, Ms. Webster ranked the August 21 Teachers based on their number 
of years of classroom teaching experience. Respondent McIntyre had seven years of 
classroom teaching experience, which was fourth most among the 10 teachers who 
earned five points based on their credential authorizations. Therefore, her final rank 
was fourth among the August 21 Teachers. Her corresponding rank on the full 
seniority list was 121. 
13. Respondent Cardin had zero years of classroom teaching experience, so 
Ms. Webster ranked her tenth among the 10 teachers who earned five points based on 
their credential authorizations. Her corresponding rank on the full seniority list was 
127. Another August 21 Teacher, Cristian Araiza, also received five points for his 
credential authorizations and had zero years of classroom teaching experience. Ms. 7 Webster ranked Mr. Araiza ninth, one spot ahead of respondent Cardin. Mr. Ariaza’s 
corresponding rank on the full seniority list was 126. Ms. Webster did not explain, 
either in the documents she prepared or at hearing, why she ranked Mr. Araiza ahead 
of respondent Cardin despite their identical credential authorizations and years of 
classroom teaching experience. 
14. After Ms. Webster applied the second and third CBA Tie-Breaking 
Criteria, she stopped her analysis and adjusted the full seniority list accordingly. She 
explained she never applied the first CBA Tie-Breaking Criterion—teaching experience 
in subject areas of credentials—because doing so would have been difficult. 
Specifically, the District would have had to contact each teachers’ previous employers 
to determine whether their prior teaching experience had been in the subject area of 
their credentials. Ms. Webster testified she would have made such efforts if necessary, 
but after applying the second and third CBA Tie-Breaking Criteria, she believed no ties 
remained. 
15. Ms. Webster finished updating the seniority list in October 2024. Between 
November 2024 and January 2025, she added three more certificated employees hired 
after October 2024, but she did not otherwise update the seniority list based on the 
Resolution or resulting layoff notices. The Resolution Tie-Breaking Criteria includes 
nearly the same language as the CBA Tie-Breaking Criteria. The only difference is that 
the Resolution Tie-Breaking Criteria also includes an additional sentence: “In the event 
the above criteria are not successful in determining seniority, a lottery will be used to 
determine the order of layoff.” 
16. That same sentence appears in Section 18.02C of the CBA, followed by 
another: “The lottery shall take place prior to the issuance of layoff notices and shall be 8 conducted in the presence of representatives of the Board and the Association.” In 
contrast, the Resolution Tie-Breaking Criteria does not include this final sentence. 
17. Ms. Webster finalized the seniority list before the Board adopted the 
Resolution. As a result, she applied the CBA Tie-Breaking Criteria, not the Resolution 
Tie-Breaking Criteria. Consequently, the District did not employ a lottery to determine 
the order of layoff for those who remained tied, such as respondent Cardin and Mr. 
Araiza.
RESPONDENTS ’EVIDENCE OF INACCURATE SENIORITY DATE
18. As noted above, the District’s seniority list identified August 21, 2024, as 
respondents’ seniority date. At hearing, respondent Cardin testified her seniority date 
should be August 15, 2024, because on that day she attended a New Hire Orientation 
at the District office. She submitted an email from the District’s HR Supervisor, dated 
August 1, 2024, which stated, in relevant part: “To ensure a smooth transition and to 
provide you with the necessary information and resources, we have organized a New 
Hire Orientation. We kindly request that you save the following date . . .” Respondent 
Cardin also submitted a timesheet showing the District paid her for 5.25 hours on 
August 15, 2024, for “New Employee District Day.”
19. Respondent Cardin believes other August 21 Teachers also attended the 
New Hire Orientation on August 15, 2024, but she does not recall specifically who did. 
Respondent McIntyre testified she also received a similar email invitation, attended the 
New Hire Orientation, and was paid for attending.9 District’s Selection of Teachers for Layoff
20. Ms. Webster testified the District’s “cabinet,” meaning the superintendent 
and directors, decided which teachers to lay off. She did not participate in the decision.
21. Mr. Frost participated in the process of deciding which teachers to lay off 
pursuant to the Resolution. He testified that when the Board used the word “Teacher” 
in the Resolution, it meant “self-contained classroom teacher.” He explained at 
hearing, “that was our intent” because the District believed its single classroom 
teachers were overstaffed. He clarified that the District intended to retain high school 
teachers, who typically teach the same subject to multiple sets of students throughout 
the day, rather than elementary school teachers, who teach multiple subjects to the 
same set of students within the same classroom each day. Mr. Frost confirmed the 
District preferred to retain high school teachers over elementary school teachers even 
when the high school teachers were less senior than the elementary school teachers.
22. Mr. Frost further testified that the District opted to retain less senior 
teachers who had experience teaching math. Specifically, the teacher who ranked 125 
on the seniority list, Jefferson Dolan, was less senior than respondent McIntyre, who 
ranked 121. Nevertheless, the District did not serve Mr. Dolan a layoff notice in part 
because of his background teaching math. 
23. Ultimately, the District opted not to serve layoff notices to five teachers 
who were less senior than both respondents. Four of those teachers, ranked 129, 131, 
133, and 137 on the seniority list, taught science, math, or social science at the high 
school level. The fifth teacher, ranked 135, taught English at the high school level 
under a single subject credential. 10 24. Despite passing over these less senior teachers for layoff notices, the 
District insisted it did not engage in skipping as provided for in the Resolution. 
Respondents submitted into evidence the District’s response to certain requests for 
production of documents. In response to a request for “[d]ocuments reflecting the 
special experience and training of any less senior employee that the District proposes 
to skip and retain out of seniority order,” the District replied: “Not applicable. Junior 
employees were only retained if more senior employees in positions to be eliminated 
do not have the credentials to teach the subject matter.” 
25. At hearing, Ms. Webster testified that sometime in April 2025, she 
reviewed a document that explained the District skipped teachers with credentials in 
science or mathematics and high school teachers. The District did not offer the 
document into evidence. 
Analysis 
ADEQUACY OF THE RESOLUTION
26. School districts may lay off teachers “whenever a particular kind of 
service is to be reduced or discontinued not later than the beginning of the following 
school year.” (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (b).) Here, the Board stated through the 
Resolution its intention to decrease certain District programs and services for the 
2025-2026 school year. It therefore resolved to reduce specified “particular kinds of 
services.” 
27. However, as relevant here, the Resolution identified 3.0 FTE “Teacher” 
positions to reduce. In doing so, the Board conflated a PKS with an individual 
performing that PKS. “Teacher” is not a PKS. 11 28. Rather, “[a]t the elementary school level, reduction of classroom teaching 
can be a reduction of a particular kind of service.” (  
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 631.) Similarly, “[s]ince high school offerings, such as 
mathematics, science, history and art, are particular kinds of service, logically 
elementary grade classes which teach the same offerings, although with a single 
teacher, are particular kinds of service.” (  (1982) 
132 Cal.App.3d 32, 36.) 
29. Mr. Frost and Ms. Webster explained that before adopting the 
Resolution, the Board discussed the need to lay off elementary school teachers due to 
overstaffing. No evidence refutes that. However, whatever the Board’s motivations, the 
Resolution is clear on its face and identifies merely “Teacher” as the PKS to reduce. The 
Board did not identify, for example, “elementary classroom teaching” as a PKS to 
reduce. Consequently, assuming the Resolution authorized any layoffs, the District 
would have been required under Education Code section 44955 to lay off its three 
least senior teachers, subject to adjustments for bumping or skipping.
BUMPING AND SKIPPING
30. The District argued it did not engage in skipping when it chose not to lay 
off teachers less senior than respondents. Rather, the District argued respondents did 
not have the credentials or competency to “bump” those less senior teachers. In taking 
this position, the District confused bumping and skipping. The District engaged in 
skipping. 
31. School districts must generally lay off teachers in inverse seniority order. 
(Ed. Code, § 44955, subds. (b), (c).) However, 12 Senior employees are given “bumping” rights in that they 
will not be terminated if there are junior employees 
retained who are rendering services which the senior 
employee is certificated and competent to render. 
Conversely, as in this case, a district may move upward from 
the bottom of the seniority list, “skipping” over and 
retaining junior employees who are certificated and 
competent to render services which more senior employees 
are not.
(  (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 567, 571-572 [citing 
(1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 648, 655; 
. (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1023.]) 
32. Here, the District incorrectly claimed respondents were laid off because 
they were not certificated or competent to bump any less senior teachers. But before 
considering a teacher’s bumping rights, that teacher must be a candidate for layoff. 
Here, respondents’ bumping rights are irrelevant because the District only reached 
them on the seniority list by inappropriately skipping less senior teachers. 
33. Respondent McIntyre ranked 121 on the seniority list. Respondent Cardin 
ranked 127. They both received layoff notices. The teachers ranked 129, 131, 133, 135, 
and 137 on the seniority list did not. Thus, the District skipped five teachers who were 
less senior than both respondents. 
34. As relevant here, the law permits skipping if a school district 
demonstrates two things: (1) “a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course 
or course of study”; and (2) “that the [less senior] certificated employee has special 13 training and experience necessary to teach that course or course of study . . . which 
others with more seniority do not possess.” (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (d)(1).) 
35. Mr. Frost and Ms. Webster explained the District chose not to lay off the 
teachers less senior than respondents because those teachers taught science, math, or 
at the high school level. The District’s witnesses testified to the difficulty retaining 
math and science teachers and to overstaffing at the elementary level. Nevertheless, 
the District did not demonstrate it was authorized to skip the teachers less senior to 
respondents. 
36. Notably, the District denied it engaged in skipping. That denial informed
the District’s discovery responses, in which it asserted it did not maintain any 
documents reflecting the special experience and training of the less senior employees 
it proposed to skip. Although nothing in the statute requires a district to demonstrate 
its special needs that justify skipping via formal written policies, course or job 
descriptions, or program requirements (see 
(2008) 170 Cal.App.4th 127, 138), the District’s failure to maintain or produce any such 
documents undermines any finding that skipping was appropriate. 
37. Furthermore, to the extent the District’s witnesses testified that its less 
senior teachers possessed special training and experience, such testimony is not 
credible in this case in the absence of supporting documents. “If weaker and less 
satisfactory evidence is offered when it was within the power of the party to produce 
stronger and more satisfactory evidence, the evidence offered should be viewed with 
distrust.” (Evid. Code, § 412.) 
38. Therefore, contrary to the District’s position that it correctly applied 
respondent’s bumping rights, the District actually skipped less senior teachers than 14 respondents. Because the District did not make the showing required under Education
Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), such skipping was improper. 
ADDITIONAL FINDINGS REGARDING THE DISTRICT’S SENIORITY LIST
39. As explained above, the District improperly skipped five teachers less 
senior to respondents. That finding is based on the seniority list. However, the
evidence strongly suggests the seniority list is inaccurate.
40. First, respondent Cardin credibly testified she first rendered paid service 
to the District on August 15, 2024, when she attended a New Hire Orientation. She 
supported her testimony with an email inviting her to attend to receive “necessary 
information and resources” and a timesheet showing the District paid her to attend. 
Although respondent McIntyre did not produce supporting documents, she credibly 
testified she received a similar email invitation, attended the orientation, and was paid 
to attend. Consequently, respondents’ seniority date should be August 15, 2024, not 
August 21, 2024. 
41. The District argued the other August 21 Teachers also attended the 
orientation. Therefore, in the District’s view, adjusting respondents’ seniority date 
would not affect any part of this case, as the other August 21 Teachers’ seniority dates 
would also be adjusted. The evidence did not support that conclusion. 
42. To the contrary, although respondent Cardin testified she believed other 
August 21 Teachers attended the Orientation, she did not know who specifically. Ms. 
Webster, on the other hand, confirmed she verified the dates on the seniority list are 
accurate. Therefore, the preponderance of the evidence is that respondents’ seniority 
date is August 15, 2024, but the other August 21 Teachers’ seniority date is August 21, 
2025. 15 43. Despite this error, respondents were still more senior than at least five 
August 21 Teachers as reflected in the District’s seniority list. Changing their seniority 
date to August 15, 2024, would only make them even more senior relative to those 
below them on the list. No teachers have a seniority date between August 15 and 
August 21, 2024. As a result, the evidence did not establish respondents received their 
layoff notices as a result of this error. 
44. Secondly, Ms. Webster did not apply the Resolution Tie-Breaking Criteria 
when she prepared the seniority list. Rather, she used the CBA Tie-Breaking Criteria, 
which are substantially similar but not identical. Furthermore, in addition to applying 
the wrong criteria, she misapplied the criteria she did use. 
45. Specifically, under both the Resolution and the CBA, “equal weight shall 
be given” to each of the three criteria. Ms. Webster chose not to apply one of those 
three criteria because doing so would have been, in her view, unnecessary and difficult. 
Nevertheless, contrary to her testimony, ties remained after she applied two of the 
three criteria. For example, respondent Cardin and Mr. Araiza were tied. The evidence 
did not establish how Ms. Webster broke that tie, but it was not by any method 
provided for in either Tie-Breaking Criteria. 
46. Ms. Webster’s errors, as described above, render the entire seniority list 
dubious. Nevertheless, in its current form, the seniority list shows respondents were 
still more senior than at least five August 21 Teachers. As a result, the evidence did not 
establish respondents received their layoff notices as a result of Ms. Webster’s errors.16 Summary of Findings
47. The Board’s Resolution did not properly identify a PKS to be reduced 
related to teaching. On that basis, the Resolution does not authorize respondent’s 
layoffs. 
48. Moreover, even interpreting “Teacher” to mean generalized teaching 
services, the Resolution would have required the District to lay off its three least senior 
teachers, subject to appropriate bumping and/or skipping. The District did not do so. 
Instead, it skipped five teachers less senior to respondents, but it did not demonstrate 
the skipped teachers possessed special training and experience that respondents did 
not possess. On that basis, assuming the Resolution properly identified PKS to be 
reduced, respondents’ layoff notices would still be invalid. 
49. The District created its seniority list contrary to the terms of the 
Resolution Tie-Breaking Criteria. The District also included incorrect seniority dates for 
respondents. However, the evidence did not show respondents received their layoff 
notices as a result of these errors. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Jurisdiction and Burden and Standard of Proof 
1. All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955 were met. As no law requires otherwise, the standard of 
proof in this matter is a preponderance of the evidence. (Evid. Code, § 115.) “Except as 
otherwise provided by law, a party has the burden of proof as to each fact the 17 existence or nonexistence of which is essential to the claim for relief or defense that he 
is asserting.” (Evid. Code, § 500.) 
District’s Authority to Lay Off Respondents Pursuant to the 
Resolution 
2. Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b): 
Whenever . . . a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 
discontinued not later than the beginning of the following 
school year . . . and when in the opinion of the governing 
board of the district it shall have become necessary by 
reason of any of these conditions to decrease the number 
of permanent employees in the district, the governing 
board may terminate the services of not more than a 
corresponding percentage of the certificated employees of 
the district, permanent as well as probationary, at the close 
of the school year. Except as otherwise provided by statute, 
the services of no permanent employee may be terminated 
under the provisions of this section while any probationary 
employee, or any other employee with less seniority, is 
retained to render a service which said permanent 
employee is certificated and competent to render. 
3. “At the elementary school level, reduction of classroom teaching can be a 
reduction of a particular kind of service.” ( ,, 144 
Cal.App.3d at p. 631.) “Since high school offerings, such as mathematics, science, 
history and art, are particular kinds of service, logically elementary grade classes which 18 teach the same offerings, although with a single teacher, are particular kinds of 
service.” ( ,, 132 Cal.App.3d at p. 36.) 
4. As explained in Factual Findings 26 through 29 and 47, above, the 
preponderance of the evidence is that the District’s Resolution did not properly 
identify a particular kind of service to be reduced related to teaching. Therefore, the 
preponderance of the evidence did not show it was necessary, by reason of the 
reduction of a particular kind of service related to teaching, to decrease the number of 
permanent employees in the District for the 2025-2026 school year. As a result, the 
Resolution does not provide a lawful basis for the District to decrease its number of 
teachers in the District for the 2025-2026 school year, and the Board may not 
terminate the services of respondents, pursuant to Education Code section 44955, 
subdivision (b). 
District’s Authority to Skip Teachers Less Senior than Respondents 
5. Certificated employees subject to layoff “shall be terminated in the 
inverse of the order in which they were employed.” (Ed. Code, § 44955, subd. (c).) To 
accomplish this, “[t]he governing board shall make assignments and reassignments in 
such a manner that employees shall be retained to render any service which their 
seniority and qualifications entitle them to render.” ( .) 
6. Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (d)(1), notwithstanding 
subdivision (b) of that section, a school district may deviate from terminating a 
certificated employee in order of seniority if, as relevant to this matter: 
The district demonstrates a specific need for personnel to 
teach a specific course or course of study . . . and that the 
certificated employee has special training and experience 19 necessary to teach that course or course of study or to 
provide those services, which others with more seniority do 
not possess. 
7. As explained in Factual Findings 30 through 38 and 48, above, the 
preponderance of the evidence is that the District skipped the teachers ranked 129, 
131, 133, 135, and 137 on the seniority list, all of whom were less senior to 
respondents, who were ranked 121 and 127 on the same list. The District did not 
demonstrate a specific need for personnel to teach a specific course or course of study 
or that those less senior teachers have special training and experience necessary to 
teach such a course or course of study, or to provide services, which respondents do 
not possess. The District therefore may not lay off respondents because it did not 
demonstrate a lawful basis to deviate from the requirement that it lay off teachers in 
the inverse order in which they were employed, pursuant to Education Code section 
44955, subdivisions (c) and (d)(1). 
The District’s Seniority List and Respondents’ Seniority Dates 
8. Under Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b): 
As between employees who first rendered paid service to 
the district on the same date, the governing board shall 
determine the order of termination solely on the basis of 
needs of the district and the students thereof. Upon the 
request of any employee whose order of termination is so 
determined, the governing board shall furnish in writing no 
later than five days prior to the commencement of the 
hearing held in accordance with Section 44949, a statement 20 of the specific criteria used in determining the order of 
termination and the application of the criteria in ranking 
each employee relative to the other employees in the 
group. This requirement that the governing board provide, 
on request, a written statement of reasons for determining 
the order of termination shall not be interpreted to give 
affected employees any legal right or interest that would 
not exist without such a requirement. 
9. As explained in Factual Findings 40 through 42 and 49, above, the 
preponderance of the evidence is that respondent Cardin’s and respondent McIntyre’s 
seniority date with the District is August 15, 2024. The District’s seniority list, which 
shows their seniority date as August 21, 2025, is inaccurate. The error did not cause 
either respondent to receive a layoff notice they should not have received. 
10. As explained in Factual Findings 44 through 46 and 49, above, the 
preponderance of the evidence is that the District did not apply the Resolution Tie-
Breaking criteria adopted by the Board, but rather applied the CBA Tie-Breaking 
Criteria. The preponderance of the evidence also showed that the District misapplied 
the CBA Tie-Breaking Criteria because it did not give equal weight to all three criteria
and did not break any remaining ties in an authorized manner. The errors did not 
cause either respondent to receive a layoff notice they should not have received. 
// 21RECOMMENDATION
The Statement of Reduction in Force is overruled. The District shall reemploy 
respondents Sarah Cardin and Lauren McIntyre for the 2025-2026 school year. 
DATE: May 6, 2025
SEAN GAVIN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
