BEFORE THE 
GOVERNING BOARD OF THE 
SAN MARCOS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Reduction in Force of: 
EIGHT CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES OF THE SAN MARCOS 
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Respondents 
OAH No. 2025040477 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Abraham M. Levy, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on April 22, 2025. 
Dean T. Adams, Attorney at Law, Adams Silva & McNally L.L.P., represented the 
San Marcos Unified School District (district). 
Dyland Griffith, Attorney at Law, Vanderpool Griffith L.L.P., represented 
respondents Sarah Ackley, Thomas Briones, Alexandra Filippo, Ryan Griffitts, Devin 
Lecakes-Jones, Erick Marquez, Hector Miramontes, and Ryan Otten.  
Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed, and the 
matter was submitted for decision on April 22, 2025. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. On February 13, 2025, the Governing Board (board) of the district 
adopted Resolution Number 32-24/25, reducing particular kinds of certificated 
services and directing the Superintendent or designee to give appropriate notice to 
the certificated employees whose positions would be affected by the reduction. The 
resolution called for the reduction or discontinuation of 18.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) 
positions. The resolution identifies the particular kinds of service and FTE(s) positions 
that are being discontinued and reduced. 
2. The decision to reduce or discontinue a particular kind of service is a matter 
reserved to the district’s discretion and is not subject to second-guessing in this 
proceeding. (
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167.) School districts have the discretion to determine particular 
kinds of services that will be eliminated, even though a service continues to be 
performed or provided in a different manner by the district. (
. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 334, 343.) A school district’s decision to 
reduce a particular kind of service must not be fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious. (
 (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 627, 637.) 
3. In its resolution, the board also established tie-breaking criteria for 
resolving ties in seniority between employees who first rendered paid service to the 
district on the same date. The resolution contained four criteria to use to break any 
ties. 3 4. On March 7, 2025, Joel Garcia, Ed.D., sent notices to certificated staff 
advising them that their services would not be required for the 2025-2026 school year. 
The reasons for that decision, as noted, are in Resolution Number 32-24/25, which he 
attached. The certificated staff were given until March 21, 2025, to request a hearing. 
Dr. Garcia advised that the failure to do so waived the right to a hearing. Thereafter, 
Dr. Garcia served a Statement of Reduction in Force and other documents on the 
certificated staff who requested a hearing by submitting Notices of Participation. 
5. All prehearing jurisdictional requirements have been met. 
Evidence Received at Hearing 
6. Dr. Garcia testified in this proceeding and several documents were 
received in evidence. Each of the eight respondents elected to not testify. The findings 
in this decision are based on the evidence of record. The evidence includes a Seniority 
List, which highlights each respondent by his or her seniority date, position, subject 
matter authorization, credentials, and assignment. 
7. The district serves 19,000 students at a total of 18 schools, including ten 
elementary schools, two kindergarten to eighth grade schools, and two comprehensive 
high schools. The district employs 1,100 certificated staff.
8. In early January 2025, the district discovered it needed to reduce the 
number of certificated employees due to concerns about the budget for the upcoming 
school year and multi-year budget projections. Dr. Garcia stated the district identified 
a very large structural deficit of $7,500,000, which he described as a huge concern for 
the district.4 9. To identify particular kinds of services to eliminate or reduce, Dr. Garcia 
worked closely with the district’s superintendent of business services and the business 
services team, and he had discussions with site administrators. In identifying the 
particular kinds of services to reduce, the district considered attrition and retirement. 
He and his team identified the following specific kinds of services for reduction: 
7th to 12th Grade English/Language Arts Teacher (4.0 FTE), 
7th to 12th Grade Math Teacher (4.0 FTE), School Based 
Mental Health Specialists (3.0 FTE), 7th to 12th Grade Social 
Science Teacher (2.0 FTE), 7th to 12th Grade Physical 
Education Teacher (1.0 FTE), 7th to 12th Grade Technology 
Teacher (1.0 FTE), 7th to 12th Grade Art Teacher (1.0 FTE), 
Social Worker (1.0 FTE), Digital Photography Teacher 
(Career Technical Education [CTE], Designated Subjects 
Credential in Arts, Media, Entertainment) (1.0 FTE) 
10. Dr. Garcia testified that the decision to reduce these services was based 
on the welfare of the district. The district will not employee temporary teachers in 
these areas. With the elimination and reductions in services, Dr. Garcia stated that the 
district will continue to be able to meet its minimum state-mandated staffing 
requirements. 
11. At the February 13, 2025, board meeting, Dr. Garcia presented his 
recommendation to the board, and the board adopted the resolution as noted. 
12. In identifying certificated employees whose services would not be 
needed in the 2025-2026 school year, the district relied upon the Seniority List it 
developed. This Seniority List reflected updated information regarding the seniority 5 and status of each district certificated employee. A senior employee whose position is 
discontinued has the right to transfer to a continuing position in which he or she is 
certificated and competent to fill. In doing so, the senior employee is entitled to 
displace or “bump” a junior employee who is filling that position. (Ed. Code, § 44955; 
(1975) 13 Cal.3d 469, 473-474.) The district 
applied several bumps. The district did not apply the tie-breaking procedure identified 
in the Resolution. 
13. The district sent out 14 notices identifying the 18 FTE positions to be 
eliminated. The eight respondents in this proceeding timely filed notices of 
participation. 
Respondents 
14. With respect to each respondent who participated in this matter, the
district made the following decisions based on the Seniority List and applied bumping 
rights as applicable: 
15. Respondent Lecakes-Jones is tied with respondent Marquez on the 
seniority date with a seniority date of August 25, 2024. They both teach social sciences. 
Two people have more seniority than respondent Lecakes-Jones. The district bumped 
Parisa White into the Social Science position due to her Social Science Authorization, 
and Ms. White also has more seniority than Mr. Lecakes-Jones with a seniority date of 
August 22, 2023. 
16. Respondent Griffitts is the least senior math teacher and has no bumping 
rights with a seniority date of August 17, 2024.6 17. Respondent Miramontes is proposed for being laid off as a mental health 
specialist due to the elimination of the School Based Mental Health Services Grant 
(SBMHS) by the United States Department of Education that funded his position. 
18. Respondent Filippo is also being laid off as a mental health specialist due 
to the elimination of the grant-funded SBMHS position. 
19. Respondent Ackley is the least senior Social Science teacher with a 
seniority date of November 12, 2024. She holds an English Supplemental credential, 
but she has no bumping rights under this credential. 
20. Respondent Marquez has no bumping rights as a Social Science teacher. 
He has a seniority date of August 22, 2024.
21. Respondent Otten has no bumping rights as a physical education teacher 
with a seniority date of August 25, 2024. Respondent Otten holds a Business and 
Finance credential, but he has no bumping rights under this credential. 
22. Respondent Briones teaches Digital Photography and is not credentialed. 
The district has proposed laying him off because effective 2025-2026, the course 
respondent Briones teaches will require a Single Subject Credential in Art as required 
for Visual and Preforming Arts graduation credits. The course at the district is part of 
the Career Technical Education pathway designed to prepare students for post-
secondary options or careers. Without this credential, Dr. Garcia testified that 
respondent Briones cannot teach this course because students would not be able to 
obtain credit for the course. If he were to teach the course, it would be considered a 
“misassignment.” Dr. Garcia testified due to this change in the requirements for credits, 
the district notified respondent Briones that the course required him to obtain a Single 
Subject Credential in Art to teach this class. Respondent has not obtained this 7 credential. Dr. Garcia testified that the decision to lay off respondent Briones was both 
due to a lack of work and a lack of funds. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Jurisdiction 
1. Jurisdiction for this proceeding exists pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44949 and 44955, and all notices and other requirements of those sections 
were provided as required. 
Applicable Case Law 
2. A district may reduce services within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain type of service to 
students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it may ‘reduce 
services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent because 
fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” (
(1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 178-179.)
3. A senior employee whose position is discontinued has the right to 
transfer to a continuing position in which he or she is certificated and competent to 
fill. In doing so, the senior employee is entitled to displace or “bump” a junior 
employee who is filling that position. (Ed. Code, § 44955; 
, , at 473-474.) No evidence was introduced that the district 
improperly applied the bumping criteria. 8 Evaluation and Disposition
4. A preponderance of the evidence sustained the district’s statement of 
reduction in force. 
5. The district identified the certificated employees providing the particular 
kinds of services that the board directed to be reduced or discontinued. Because of 
the reduction of those particular kinds of services, cause exists pursuant to Education 
Code section 44955 to give notice to respondents that their services will not be 
required for the 2025-2026 school year. The cause relates solely to the welfare of the 
schools and the pupils thereof within the meaning of Education Code section 44949. 
The services being reduced are particular kinds of services the Education Code allows 
the board to reduce or eliminate. With respect to the decision to lay off respondent 
Briones, the district can eliminate his position as a budgetary matter because the 
position now requires a certification to teach the course, and respondent Briones is not 
certificated. The district’s decision is due to both a lack of funds and a lack of work. 
6. No employee with less seniority than any respondent is being retained to 
perform services respondents are certificated and competent to render. 
RECOMMENDATION 
It is recommended that before May 15, 2025, the Governing Board give notice 
to the respondents listed below that their employment will be terminated at the close 
of the current school year, and their services in those positions will not be needed for 
the 2025-2026 school year: 9 Sarah Ackley
Thomas Briones 
Alexandra Filippo 
Ryan Griffitts 
Devin Lecakes-Jones 
Erick Marquez 
Hector Miramontes 
Ryan Otten 
 
DATE: May 1, 2025 
ABRAHAM M. LEVY 
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings