BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE 
BERKELEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
ALAMEDA COUNTY 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Statement of the Reduction in Force of: 
NOLUTHANDO LISA WILLIAMS, a Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2025040924 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Administrative Law Judge Michael C. Starkey, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), heard this matter on May 2, 2025, via videoconference. 
Attorney Marci Williams represented complainant Samantha Tobias Espinosa, 
Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, Berkeley Unified School District (District).  
Attorney Stewart Weinberg represented respondent Noluthando Lisa Williams, 
also known as Lisa Williams, who was present. 
Weinberg also represented the other nine respondents who were served with 
layoff notices and requested a hearing. Weinberg reports and the evidence establishes 
that as to each of these nine respondents, either the layoff notice was rescinded, or 
 The hearing proceeded 
as to respondent Williams only. 2 The record closed and the matter was submitted on May 2, 2025.
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
1. On March 6, 2025, the Board of Education of the Berkeley Unified School 
District (Board) adopted Resolution No. 25-025, stating that it considered all positively 
assured attrition and found it necessary to reduce or discontinue additional services 
no later than the conclusion of the 2024-2025 school year, including two full-time 
  
2. On March 11, 2025, the District served a notice of reduction in force, 
including copies of the resolution, relevant sections of the Education Code, and a 
request for hearing form, to respondent Noluthando Lisa Williams, also known as Lisa 
Williams. 
3. Respondent timely requested a hearing and this proceeding followed. 
4. However, respondent did not challenge any aspect of the 
reduction in force notice to her. Respondent stipulated that she received proper notice 
of the layoff; that the District does not plan to offer enough courses for her to teach 
during the next school year; that she is the only (and therefore least senior) teacher in 
her position; and that no other certificated employee with less seniority is being 
retained to teach a subject that she is competent to teach. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. Jurisdiction in this matter exists under Education Code sections 44949 
and 44955. (Factual Findings 1 3.) 32. The District, through its Board, has discretion to reduce or eliminate 
particular kinds of services, in the best interests of the District and its students. The 
No. 25-025 is not arbitrary or 
capricious, and is not an abuse of discretion.
3. Respondent stipulates that she received proper notice; she is the least 
senior teacher in her position; and that the District has not retained any other 
certificated employee with less seniority to teach a subject that she is competent to 
teach. s action. (Factual Finding 4.)
4. The District established cause to give notice to respondent that the 
District will not require her services after the conclusion of the 2024 2025 school year.
ORDER
Noluthando Lisa 
Williams, also known as Lisa Williams. Notice may be given to respondent that her 
services will not be required after the conclusion of the 2024-2025 school year.
DATE: 
MICHAEL C. STARKEY
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
