BEFORE THE 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE 
RAISIN CITY ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 

In the Matter of the Statement of Reduction in Force of: 

SANDRA ORTIZ and MATILDE SANCHEZ, Respondents 

OAH No. 2023030588 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Sean Gavin, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on April 19, 2023, from Caruthers, 

California. 

Chris Lozano, Legal Counsel for the Fresno County Superintendent of Schools, 

represented the Raisin City Elementary School District (District). 

Ernest H. Tuttle III, Attorney at Law, represented respondents Sandra Ortiz and 

Matilde Sanchez. 

At the start of the hearing, counsel notified the ALJ that the parties had resolved 

Ms. Sanchez’s case and that the District would rescind her layoff notice. Consequently, 

the hearing proceeded only as to Ms. Ortiz (respondent). 

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter was submitted for 

decision on April 19, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

Since July 1, 2021, Orin Hirschkorn has been the District’s acting 

Superintendent pursuant to the District’s administrative services contract with the 

Caruthers Unified School District. Superintendent Hirschkorn’s actions, and those of 

the District’s staff and Board of Trustees (Board), were taken solely in their official 

capacities. 

2. 

On February 14, 2023, Superintendent Hirschkorn recommended to the 

Board a reduction and/or discontinuation of particular kinds of services (PKS) and the 

termination of services of a corresponding number of certificated employees. The 

same day, the Board adopted Resolution No. 2023-138 (Resolution), stating, in 

relevant part: 

[I]t is in the District's best interests that, as of the end of the 

2022-2023 school year, certain particular kinds of services 

now being provided be discontinued or reduced as follows: 

1. Eliminate One (1) Full-Time Equivalent Reading 

Intervention Specialist Position 

2. Eliminate One (1) Full-Time Equivalent Single Subject ELA 

Teaching Position 

3. 

The Resolution provided the method to determine which teachers to lay 

off and authorized Superintendent Hirschkorn to initiate layoff procedures. The 

Resolution directed Superintendent Hirschkorn, in determining the order of layoff, “to 

2 

avoid any reassignments or bumping that will result in ‘out-of-field’ or ‘ineffective’ 

teaching assignments as defined by the California Every Student Succeeds Act.” 

4. 

Respondent is a certificated employee of the District. On February 23, 

2023, Superintendent Hirschkorn served respondent with a written “Notice of 

Reduction in Force (Layoff)” (layoff notice), which included his recommendation to the 

Board that her services would not be required for the 2023-2024 school year. 

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Participation in Reduction in Force Hearing. On 

March 23, 2023, Superintendent Hirschkorn served respondent with a Statement of 

Reduction in Force and a Notice of Hearing for April 19, 2023, at 9:00 a.m. Jurisdiction 

for the subject proceedings exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 and 

44955. 

Cause for Reduction or Discontinuation of Services 

5. 

Superintendent Hirschkorn testified at hearing about the reason for the 

District’s layoffs. The District maintains classes from kindergarten through eighth 

grade. The kindergarten through fifth-grade classes follow the multiple subject model, 

in which the students stay in one classroom and one teacher instructs them in multiple 

subjects. The sixth- through eighth-grade classes follow the single subject model, in 

which students move between different classrooms and teachers instruct one subject 

in each class. 

6. 

The single subject model relies on teachers with single subject 

credentials. The District is rural. Recruiting and retaining enough qualified single 

subject credentialed teachers is difficult. As a result, Superintendent Hirschkorn 

recommended to the Board that for the 2023-2024 school year, the District transition 

to the multiple subject classroom model for grades six through eight. This transition 

3 

requires every teacher to maintain a multiple subject credential. Respondent received 

a layoff notice because she maintains a single subject credential for English. 

Respondent’s Testimony 

7. 

Respondent is a Reading Intervention Specialist for the District. She is 

passionate about helping students improve their reading and writing skills and has 

devoted her career to that purpose. She serves 70 to 80 students in the District, many 

of whom read at two or three grade levels below expectations. A majority of her 

students are English language learners and come from non-English monolingual 

households. Respondent comes from a similar background and feels uniquely suited 

to help her students. 

8. 

Given the students’ need for ongoing help in reading and writing, 

respondent does not understand or agree with the District’s choice to eliminate her 

position. She does not believe ending the reading program will benefit students. The 

District intends to replace the reading program partially with volunteers from 

AmeriCorps, but respondent believes those volunteers will be underqualified to help 

the students adequately. 

Analysis 

9. 

School districts are authorized to lay off certificated employees at the 

close of the school year “whenever a particular kind of service is to be reduced or 

discontinued not later than the beginning of the following school year . . . and when in 

the opinion of the governing board of the district it shall have become necessary by 

reason of [this] condition[] to decrease the number of permanent employees in the 

district.” (Ed. Code § 44955, subd. (b).) At hearing, respondent argued her layoff will 

negatively affect the students. However, the wisdom of the District’s decision to 

4 

transition to a multiple subject model for sixth through eighth grade is not a proper 

basis upon which to challenge respondent’s layoff. Furthermore, respondent argued 

that the District’s plan to replace her services is inadequate. This argument is rejected. 

“Even though a service must continue to be performed in a school district, the 

particular kind of service of the employee may be eliminated.” (Rutherford v. Bd. of 

Trustees (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 167, 177 (citing Davis v. Berkeley School Dist. (1934) 2 

Cal.2d 770).) 

10. 

The District’s decision to adopt a multiple subject model for the 2023-

2024 school year provides cause for it to reduce or discontinue PKS. The layoff notice 

issued to respondent was necessary based on the District’s determination to reduce or 

discontinue PKS and employ only teachers with multiple subject credentials. Both the 

reduction and discontinuation of PKS as well as the resulting layoff notice to 

respondent are related to the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils. On that basis, 

the District appropriately issued the layoff notice to respondent. Any other assertions 

put forth by respondent at hearing and not addressed above are found to be without 

merit and rejected. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All notice and jurisdictional requirements set forth in Education Code 

sections 44949 and 44955 were met. 

2. 

“A board's decision as to reduction or discontinuation of a particular kind 

of service is not tied in with any statistical computation, such as reduction in the 

number of students. The number of terminations made necessary by PKS reductions 

depends totally upon the district's decision as to how many services to reduce.” (San 

5 

Jose Teachers Assn. v. Allen (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 627, 635.) A school district's 

decision to reduce a PKS must not be fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious. (Id. at p. 637.) 

The services identified in the Resolution are PKS that can be reduced or discontinued 

under Education Code section 44955, and there was no evidence that the District’s 

decision was fraudulent, arbitrary, or capricious. 

3. 

The District is authorized to reduce services within the meaning of 

Education Code section 44955, subdivision (b), “either by determining that a certain 

type of service to students shall not, thereafter, be performed at all by anyone, or it 

may ‘reduce services’ by determining that proffered services shall be reduced in extent 

because fewer employees are made available to deal with the pupils involved.” 

(Rutherford v. Bd. of Trustees, supra, 64 Cal.App.3d at pp. 178-179.) 

4. 

Cause exists for the reduction and/or discontinuation of the PKS and for 

the reduction and/or discontinuation of respondent’s Reading Intervention Specialist 

position for the 2023-2024 school year pursuant to Education Code sections 44949 

and 44955. Cause for the reduction and/or discontinuation of services relates solely to 

the welfare of the District’s schools and pupils within the meaning of section 44949. 

Respondent’s arguments have been considered and rejected. As a result, cause exists 

to give respondent notice that her services will not be required for the 2023-2024 

school year. 

// 

// 

// 

// 

6 

RECOMMENDATION 

The Statement of Reduction in Force is affirmed. The District may notify 

respondent that her services will not be needed during the 2023-2024 school year due 

to reduction or discontinuation of particular kinds of services. 

DATE: May 3, 2023

SEAN GAVIN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

7 

Sean Gavin (May 3, 2023 13:11 PDT) 
 
 
