BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 

OAH No.  2018120333 
 
 
ORDER DENYING MOTION 
FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL 
OF SUSPENSION  
 
  (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4))  
 

 
 

In the Matter of the Motion for 
Immediate Reversal of Suspension Filed 
by:  
 
ROBIN PIZZA, 
a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
                                        Moving Party, 
v.  
 
CONTRA COSTA COUNTY OFFICE 
OF EDUCATION, 
 
                                  Responding Party. 
  

 
 

Craig R. Meredith, Attorney at Law, represented Robin Pizza.  Sally J. Dutcher, 

On November 30, 2018, the County’s Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources 

 
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Tiffany L. King, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, California, on 
January 4, 2019. 
 
 
Attorney at Law, represented the Contra Costa County Office of Education (County). 
 
Procedural Background 
 
 
signed the Statement of Charges and Recommendation for Dismissal and Request for 
Immediate Unpaid Suspension against Robin Pizza, a permanent certificated employee, 
based on charges of:  1) unprofessional conduct; 2) unsatisfactory performance; 3) evident 
unfitness for service; 4) persistent violation of, or refusal to obey the County’s policies and 
regulations, and other rules governing her employment; and 5) willful refusal to perform her 
regular assignment without reasonable cause.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subds. (a)(2), (5), (6), 
and (8); 44939, subd. (b).)  On December 4, 2018, Ms. Pizza filed her Demand for Hearing 
and Notice of Defense.  
 
 
Reversal of Suspension pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), 
contending that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for immediate 

On December 7, 2018, Ms. Pizza filed a Notice of Motion and Motion for Immediate 

unpaid suspension because the allegations therein do not rise to the level of willful refusal to 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.  Specifically, Ms. Pizza argues the 
well-pleaded facts in the Statement of Charges amount to alleged unsatisfactory performance 
or unprofessional conduct, but do not include allegations that her conduct was intentional or 
willful in nature.  The County filed its opposition on December 2, 2018.  Oral argument was 
heard on January 4, 2019. 
 
 

DISCUSSION 

 
Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 
immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged with 
“ … with willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 
prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with 
violation of [Education Code] section 51530. . . .” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).)  
 
 
Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), an employee who has been 
placed on such suspension may file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  “Review 
of a motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the 
facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.” (Ibid.)1 
 
 
Although not defined by the statute, “willful refusal” connotes an intentional failure 
to perform a certain act.  Case law has held that declining an employer’s lawful directions, 
without reason, is sufficient to establish “willful refusal.” (See, e.g., Wilbur v. Office of City 
Clerk (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 636, 642 [employee who did not attribute his refusals to illness 
and made no showing of willingness to comply with the reasonable orders of his superiors 
demonstrated “willful refusal to obey the reasonable orders of an employer”]; Flowers v. 
State Personnel Board, 174 Cal.App.3d 753, 760 [employee’s repeated refusal to undergo a 
medical examination or sobriety test, as directed by his employer, supported a charge of 
insubordination].) 
 
The Statement of Charges alleges that Ms. Pizza repeatedly failed to attend 
 
mandatory meetings, to complete reports and service logs, to complete assessments in a 
timely manner, and to secure student files, despite repeated directives and warnings by her 
employer.  The County argues that, if these facts are accepted as true and viewed as a whole, 
they are sufficient to support a finding that Ms. Pizza willfully refused to perform her regular 
assignment.  Ms. Pizza countered that her failure to accomplish these tasks may be related to 

                                                           
1 “…The grant or denial of the motion shall be without prejudice to consideration by 
 
the Commission on Professional Competence, based upon the full evidentiary record before 
it, of the validity of the grounds for dismissal.  The ruling shall not be considered by the 
commission in determining the validity of the grounds for dismissal, and shall not have any 
bearing on the commission's determination regarding the grounds for dismissal.”  (Ed. Code, 
§ 44939, subd. (c)(4).) 

 

2 

 
The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument.  It 

issues with organization, time management, and recordkeeping, rather than an intentional 
refusal to perform.  However, those facts are not alleged in the pleading, and therefore, 
cannot be considered in determining whether the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges 
constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939.   
 
 
is determined that the County alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, 
would constitute a basis for immediate suspension based upon “willful refusal to perform her 
regular assignment without reasonable cause” under Education Code section 44939, 
subdivisions (b) and (c). 
 
 

ORDER 

 
GOOD CAUSE HAVING NOT BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

 
 
Reversal of Suspension is DENIED.  
 
 
 
DATED:  January 18, 2019 
 
 
 
                                                                     TIFFANY L. KING 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

_______________________ 

Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

3 

