BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by:

OAH No. 2018030687

ELOISA ZUNIGA,

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Employee,

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT,

 School District.

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4))

Kimberly J. Belvedere, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically, on April 12, 2018.

Dexter Rappleye, Attorney at Law, represents respondent Eloisa Zuniga.

David Greco, Assistant General Counsel, represented the Los Angeles Unified School 

District.

On or about February 14, 2018, the district served respondent with a written 

Statement of Charges, charging her with immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, persistent 
refusal to obey rules and regulations, and evident unfitness for service.  The Statement of 
Charges alleged a single incident involving a special needs child being “forced or put” down 
to the floor by respondent; respondent pinning the child to the floor; respondent encouraging 
another child to hit her while pinned on the floor; and respondent allowing another child to 
actually hit her while pinned on the floor.  

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.” (Ed. Code,

1

§ 44939, subd. (b).)  Based on the foregoing charges, the district’s governing board 
immediately suspended respondent from her duties and gave notice of its intent to suspend 
her.

On March 16, 2018, respondent filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), alleging that the 
Statement of Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support an allegation that she
engaged in immoral conduct, which is necessary in this case to sustain the suspension.  The 
motion also requested the administrative law judge hearing the motion take official notice of 
two unpublished OAH decisions that do not pertain to this matter, and a police report.  The 
request for official notice did not limit the request to mere existence of the documents; rather, 
the request also argued that facts contained within each document should be considered in 
reaching a determination on the instant motion.

OAH set the matter for oral argument and established a briefing schedule.  The 
district filed an opposition to the instant motion and respondent’s request for official notice.  
Respondent filed a reply to the district’s opposition.  All pleadings were read and considered.  

On April 12, 2018, the parties orally argued their positions.  Respondent argued that 

the pleading is insufficient because it did not put the single event into context; immoral 
conduct is limited to the categories of sexual harassment/public sexual activity, a teacher’s 
drug use or possession of drugs, or a teacher’s theft of property or compensation; and the 
factors set forth in Morrison v. State Bd. of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (Morrison) must be 
considered in determining whether respondent’s conduct constituted “immoral conduct.”  
The district argued that the facts, as pled, establish immoral conduct sufficient to sustain the 
immediate suspension, and that the Morrison factors are irrelevant for purposes of a MIRS 
because the standard to uphold a pre-trial suspension is not the same as the standard to 
terminate a teacher following an administrative hearing.  

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.” (Ed. Code, § 
44939, subd. (b).)

Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a motion filed 

pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as 
alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.” [Emphasis Added].  As such, respondent’s 
request for official notice of the two OAH decisions and police report is denied, as this 
motion only concerns what is contained in the four corners of the Statement of Charges.

2

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in the 

context of teacher disciplinary matters.  (California Teachers Association v. State of 
California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.)  Immoral conduct has been defined by the courts as 
follows:
 

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 
contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, 
or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 
or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order 
and the public welfare.  (Palo Verde etc. School Dist. v. Hensey
(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing Bd. of Education of San 
Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland, 179 Cal. App 2d 
808, 811.)

The Morrison factors are irrelevant for purpose of a MIRS because those factors 
come into play only after immoral conduct has been established at hearing, and must be 
considered at hearing, to determine whether there is a nexus between the immoral conduct 
and fitness to teach in order to support a dismissal.  This motion is not to determine 
respondent’s fitness to teach and whether she should be dismissed; it is merely to establish 
whether the district’s charges contained within the four corners of the Statement of Charges 
meet the definition of immoral conduct.  

Based on a review of the Statement of Charges, pleadings, and applicable law, it is 

determined that the district has alleged facts that, if true, are sufficient to constitute immoral 
conduct, which is a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (b).  

GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED.

DATED: April 16, 2018

___________________________
KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

3

