BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension of:

 
 OAH No.  2018010423

 ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR
 IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF
 SUSPENSION

 [Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1)]

SHAMSHI ESPANA (EN 691561),
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

   

 Moving Party,

 

 

 vs.

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT,

 

 Responding Party.

On February 1, 2018, a telephonic hearing on the motion filed by Shamshi Espana for 
immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) was held before Ji-Lan Zang, Administrative Law 
Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings, in Los Angeles.

Melanie Luthern, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Shamshi Espana
(Employee).  Lynn I. Ibarra, Assistant General Counsel, represented responding party Los 
Angeles Unified School District (District).

District has suspended Employee without pay pending the outcome of its action to 
dismiss Employee.1  The basis for the suspension under Education Code section 44939 is
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district.  In the Motion, Employee 
seeks an order for the immediate reversal of her suspension.  District opposes the Motion.

Having considered the moving, opposing, and reply papers filed by the parties, and 

the oral argument of counsel, the undersigned ALJ hereby finds and orders as follows:

//

//

1 The dismissal action bears OAH No. 2018010605.

 

 

Education Code Section 44939

Education Code section 44939 authorizes the governing board of a school district, if it 

deems the action necessary, to immediately suspend a permanent employee from his or her 
duties, upon the filing of written charges with the governing board charging the employee 
with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, 
incompetency due to mental disability, willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing district, 
or violation of section 515302 (teaching communism).

An employee who is suspended pursuant to section 44939 may serve and file with the 

Office of Administrative Hearings a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  The 
motion shall include “a memorandum of points and authorities setting forth law and 
argument supporting the employee’s contention that the statement of charges does not set
forth a sufficient basis for immediate suspension.” (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  Review of the 
motion “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement 
of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this 
section.”  (Ibid.)  

Statement of Charges

District seeks to dismiss Employee from her assignment as a Special Education 

Science teacher at University High School (University).  The statement of charges alleges 
causes for dismissal, pursuant to section 44932, for unprofessional conduct, unsatisfactory 
performance, evident unfitness for service, and persistent refusal to obey school laws and 
regulations.3  

District’s dismissal action against Employee consists of allegations of her poor or 
unsatisfactory performance as a classroom teacher.  Employee’s performance deficiencies for 
the 2014 to 2015 school year are alleged in paragraphs 1 to 12 of the statement of charges; 
and her performance deficiencies for the 2015 to 2016 school year are alleged in paragraphs 
13 to 48.  In general, Employee’s performance deficiencies relate to areas including, but not 
limited to, timely scheduling and completion of Individual Education Programs (IEP); 
adherence to IEP protocol; timely entry of student grades; lesson planning; establishing 
effective classroom routines and procedures; timely submission of weekly lesson plans to her 
administrator; effective use of instructional time; timely submission of her roll book; and 
teaching lessons that lacked rigor, structure, and demonstrated knowledge of content.

In the statement of charges, the sole basis alleged for Employee’s suspension under 
section 44939 is willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.  

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise 

 

 

indicated.

3 A copy of the statement of charges is attached to the Motion as Exhibit A.

2

(SOC, ¶ 1, 4, 6, 9, 11, 12, 29, 30, 36, 37, 47.)4  Specifically, the Statement of Charges alleged 
the following:

A.

Employee failed to comply with policies and procedures relating to special 

education, in that she failed to submit a Summary of Performance for a student to her Special 
Education Coordinator for review during the period of January 13, 2014 to May 23, 2014; 
failed to timely complete an IEP for a student during the period of April 22, 2014 to June 6, 
2014; failed to timely schedule an IEP on May 20, 2014; and failed to timely and properly 
complete a student’s IEP during the period of March 2, 2015 to April 20, 2015.  (SOC, ¶ 1, 4, 
6, 12.)

B.

Employee failed to timely enter student grades by the end of a 10-week 

grading window on October 10, 2014; and failed to timely submit her Fall term roll book on 
December 19, 2014.  (SOC, ¶ 9, 11.)

C.

Employee failed to comply with directives regarding her instruction methods 

and her weekly lesson plans.  

•

In particular, on January 13, February 8, and April 6, 2016, Employee failed to 
comply with a directive to “plan and deliver cognitively engaging learning 
activities to promote mastery of learning objectives, clearly communicate all 
expectations and directions for learning tasks[,] and [r]efrain from releasing 
students to work independently unit they were capable of articulating 
[Employee’s] directions.”  (SOC, ¶ 29, 36, 47.)  

• On February 8, 2016, Employee failed to comply with a directive to submit 

weekly lesson plans.  (SOC, ¶ 30.)  

• On February 25, March 1, March 9, and April 6, 2016, Employee failed to 
comply with a directive to sumbit lesson plans to the assistant principal at 
University by 7:55 a.m., on the first day of every week beginning February 1, 
2016, and have current lesson plans visible and available in the classroom at 
all times. (SOC, ¶ 37, 39, 47.)  

• On February 8 and April 6, 2016, Employee failed to comply with a directive 
to deliver lessons that “clearly communicate the lesson objective, connect the 
lesson with past lessons or prior knowledge, and conclude with a summation 
of the day’s learning.”  (SOC, ¶ 36, 47.)

Statutory Construction

Section 44939 limits the grounds for immediate suspension of a teacher to instances 

of “willful refusal” to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.  District 
contends that under the statute, “willful refusal” occurs “when a teacher is on notice of an 

 

 

4 References to specific paragraphs of the statement of charges are indicated by 

“SOC” followed by the paragraph number.

3

assignment (including under federal and state and law requirements for special education), is 
directed to perform the assignment, and does not do so”.  (Ex. A, p. 3.)  (Ex. 1, p. 10.)  
District further contends that “refusal to obey” a law or regulation under section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(8), which sets forth causes for dismissal, is equivalent to “willful refusal”
under section 44939.  (Id.)  These arguments are not persuasive, in that District’s position 
disregards the element of willfulness required by section 44939.

The fundamental rule in construing a statute is to determine the Legislature’s intent. 

(Delaney v. Superior Court (1990) 50 Cal.3d 785, 798. ) To determine that intent, “‘The 
court turns first to the words themselves for the answer.’”  (Brown v. Kelly Broadcasting Co.
(1989) 48 Cal.3d 711, 724, quoting People v. Knowles (1950) 35 Cal.2d 175, 182.) 
However, the concept of willfulness, as used in both penal and civil contexts, is nuanced.  
Penal Code section 7 states that “[t]he word ‘willfully’, when applied to the intent with 
which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act,
or to make the omission in question.”  Notwithstanding this definition, willfulness has also 
been interpreted to imply to more than the intentional doing of a negligent act.  (J. C. Penney 
Casualty Ins. Co. v. M. K. (1991) 52 Cal.3d 1009, 1020–1021.)  While willfulness may not 
require a guilty intent on the part of the perpetrator, it nevertheless applies to acts that are 
“conscious, intentional and deliberate.”  (Goodhew v. Industrial Acc. Commission (1958) 157 
Cal.App.2d 252, 257.)  As the court noted in Goodhew, “[t]he word ‘willful’ is used in 
different statutes with various shades of meaning.”  (Id. at p. 256.)  There is no “universal 
formula” that defines the word “willful” and its meaning must be determined “in the context 
of the particular statute being considered.”  (Kwan v. Mercedes-Benz of North America, Inc.
(1994) 23 Cal.App.4th 174, 183.)

Turning then to the statutory framework, it is readily apparent that the Education 

Code establishes two separate schemes for dismissals under section 44932, and for 
immediate suspension under section 44939.   Section 44932 enumerates 11 separate causes 
for teacher dismissals, including immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, and alcoholism, 
among others.  However, under section 44939, a teacher may be immediately suspended 
based only on the five grounds which are described above.  Specifically, many of the causes
for dismissal under section 44932, such as dishonesty, unfitness to teach, and unsatisfactory 
performance, cannot form the grounds for immediate suspension under section 44939.

The Education Code also sets forth different procedural requirements for dismissals 

and immediate suspension.  For example, under section 44938, subdivision (b), an employing 
district may not take action against an employee charged with unsatisfactory performance 
pursuant to section 44932 without first having given at least 90 days’ written notice to the 
employee of the unsatisfactory performance with such specificity and particularity so as to 
“furnish the employee an opportunity to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds 
for the charge.”  (§ 44938, subd. (b).)  There is a similar notice requirement when an 
employee is charged with unprofessional conduct pursuant to section 44932.  (§ 44938, subd. 
(a).)  Under section 44939, the employing district may immediately suspend the employee, 
but the employee may also file a motion for immediate reversal within 30 days of service of 

4

the initial pleading.  (§ 44939, subds. (a), (b), (c).)  This remedy is unique to immediate 
suspension cases.

Thus, the Education Code, in creating the separate grounds and procedures for cases 

involving dismissals generally and those involving immediate suspension, contemplates a 
clear distinction between two types of cases.  Moreover, in narrowing the substantive 
grounds for immediate suspension and in creating additional due process protections for the 
employee under section 44939, the Legislature evidenced intent to set a higher threshold for 
the employing district to justify immediately suspending a teacher without pay.  In this 
context, District’s argument that “refusal to obey” under section 44932 constitutes “willful 
refusal” under section 44939 would render the substantive and procedural distinctions 
between the two statutes meaningless.  Consequently, this interpretation must be avoided. 

Furthermore, although both section 44932, subdivision (a)(8) and section 44939, 
subdivision (b) use the word “refusal”, the language of the statutes are dissimilar.  Under 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), a teacher may be dismissed for “[p]ersistent violation of or 
refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 
government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the school 
district employing him or her.”  Under section 44939, subdivision (b), a teacher may be 
immediately suspended only for “willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school 
district.”  The use of the word “willful” rather than “persistent” indicates that while repeated 
and persistent performance issues may establish grounds for dismissing a teacher under 
section 44932, they are not grounds for immediate suspension under section 44939.  

In light of the foregoing, the most reasonable interpretation of willfulness under 
section 44939 is that it implies more than the repeated doing of negligent acts.  Employee, in 
her Motion, contends that “[w]illful refusal suggests that [Employee] made the affirmative 
decision to engage in insubordination.”  (Motion, p. 10.)  This argument is compelling.  As 
the California Supreme Court stated in Board of Educ. of City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 
41 Cal.2d 546, 552, “[t]he willful refusal of a teacher to obey the reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing board of education is insubordination.”  Willfulness, therefore, 
requires an intentional and affirmative decision on the part of the teacher to refuse 
assignments and to engage in insubordination. 

This interpretation of the statute is consistent with prior case law requiring strict

construction of teacher dismissal statutes.  (Board of Trustees of Placerville Union School 
Dist. v. Porini (1968) 263 Cal.App.2d 784, 789.)  Strict construction is warranted because 
teacher dismissal statutes “ha[ve] as a possible object the termination of employment of a 
permanent teacher.  [A teacher’s] right of continued employment is a valuable right.” (Ibid.)  
Immediate suspension is an even more severe measure, in that the suspension of a teacher
without pay pending the outcome of dismissal hearing involves the immediate deprivation of 
a valuable right.  Under these circumstances, section 44939 must be strictly construed to set a 
higher threshold for establishing a case involving immediate suspension than that involving 
dismissal generally.  Thus, absent compliance with the requirements of section 44939, the 

5

Education Code does not contemplate immediate suspension based on a teacher’s repeated 
failures to comply with directives or procedures.  

Analysis

The Motion tests whether the alleged facts, if true, are “sufficient to constitute a basis 

for immediate suspension.”   (Ed. Code, § 44939.)  In the statement of charges, the word 
“willful refusal” is used in numerous instances.  However, the mere quoting of the statutory 
language is conclusory and insufficient to survive a motion for immediate reversal of 
suspension.  (Curcini v. County of Alameda (2008) 164 Cal.App.4th 629, 649; Bley v. Board 
of Dental Examiners of State of California (1932) 120 Cal.App. 426, 429–431.)  The 
allegations of Employee’s refusal to comply with the directives, as contained in the statement 
of charges, do not show a “willful refusal” to perform her regular assignment as a special 
education teacher.  

For example, with respect to allegation that Employee failed to comply with policies 
and procedures relating to special education, there was no allegation that Employee did not 
perform or refused to perform her duties.  She did offer a reason to District for failing to 
submit a student’s Summary of Performance to her Special Education Coordinator, but 
District found her “excuse for not doing so was without reasonable cause.”  (SOC, ¶1a.) The 
statement of charges does not specify what Employee’s “excuse” or justification was, and 
therefore does not contain sufficient facts demonstrating that Employee’s refusal was willful 
or without reasonable cause.  In other instances, where the statement of charges alleges that 
Employee was not timely in either completing or scheduling IEP’s, there was no showing 
that Employee’s failures were, in fact, intentional or deliberate.  The pleading merely 
assumes that, because Employee has six years of experience as a special education teacher, 
she must have knowingly failed to perform these duties.  

Similarly, allegations of Employee’s unsatisfactory performance and insufficient or 

non-compliance with other directives and policies and procedures do not manifest a “willful 
refusal” to perform her duties; she did perform her duties, but she did so unsatisfactorily as 
detailed by the facts alleged in the statement of charges.  At worst, some of the allegations 
show that Employee was repeatedly negligent in failing to turn in her assignments on time.  
For example, Employee did eventually submit her roll book, albeit late and after several 
directives for her turn it in.  Employee also turned in the weekly lesson plans to the Assistant 
Principal, although the plans were submitted two to three days late. Additionally, the 
statement of charges failed to allege, with sufficient specificity, how Employee failed to 
comply with directives to deliver lessons that contain engaging learning activities and clearly 
communicate lesson objective.  It appears that Employee did deliver the lessons, but her 
delivery was inadequate in District’s view.

Moreover, District alleges that the last incident during which Employee “willfully 

refused” an assignment occurred on April 6, 2016, which is approximately one year and eight 
months before the Employee was placed on unpaid suspension in December 2017.  
Therefore, it can be inferred that between April 6, 2016, to December 2017, Employee had 

6

been compliant with District’s rules, regulations, and directives.  The fact that Employee 
apparently did not have any compliance issues during this period before her immediate 
suspension demonstrates a lack of intent to engage in willful refusal or insubordination. 

Because the statement of charges does not allege sufficient facts demonstrating an

intentional or affirmative decision on Employee’s part to refuse performing her duties as a 
teacher, grounds for her immediate suspension have not been established.  The ALJ finds that 
the facts alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are not sufficient to establish a basis for 
Employee’s immediate suspension under section 44939.  The Motion shall be granted.

Disposition

The Motion is granted.  In accordance with Education Code section 44939, 

subdivision (c)(5), this Order shall become effective within five days of service of the Order, 
and District shall make Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation 
within 14 days after service of this Order.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

DATED:

_____________________________
JI-LAN ZANG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearing

7

February 15, 2018