BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
IGNACIO GIL, 
 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
   
v.  
 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
  
   
 
 
 

    School District. 

Employee, 

 

 

 

 

 

 
OAH No. 2018070607 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)) 

 

 
Administrative Law Judge Debra D. Nye-Perkins, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from San Diego, California, on 
August 3, 2018. 
 
Ira L. Gottlieb, Attorney at Law, Bush Gottlieb, represented Ignacio Gil. 

Kelly Kim, Assistant General Counsel, represented Los Angeles Unified School 

 

District. 
 
 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
In June 2018, the district served Mr. Gil with a written Statement of Charges, 

charging him with unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct including egregious 
misconduct, immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, persistent violation of or refusal 
to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government 
of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school 
district employing him, and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing district, 
based upon respondent’s alleged conduct between October 2015 and February 2018. 

 

Based upon the foregoing charges, the district governing board immediately 

suspended Mr. Gil from his duties and gave notice to him of the suspension. 

 
On July 13, 2018, Mr. Gil filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension with 

OAH, under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), arguing that the Statement of 
Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support an allegation that Mr. Gil’s actions 
constituted immoral conduct, or that he acted willfully to refuse to perform, which is 
necessary in this case to sustain the suspension.  OAH set the matter for oral argument and 
established a briefing schedule.  On August 3, 2018, the parties orally argued their positions.   

 
 

DISCUSSION 

 
Mr. Gil asserts that the allegations regarding his comments and behavior are not 
sufficient to constitute immoral conduct.  Additionally, Mr. Gil asserts that the allegations do 
not establish that he willfully refused to perform regular assignments.  The district asserts 
grounds exist for the immediate suspension.  Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), 
permits a school district to immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 
who has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 
involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of [Education Code] Section 
51530.”  

 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), provides that the employee may 

file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  OAH’s “[r]eview of a motion filed 
pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” 

 
The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument.  
Based on a review of the Statement of Charges, the district has alleged facts which, if true, 
are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b).  

 
GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED. 
 
DATED:  August 8, 2018 
 
 

____________________________ 
DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

2 

