BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
IRIS HURTADO, a Permanent Certificated 
Employee, 
 
   
 
v. 
 
SAN JOSE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
  
   
 
 
 

    Responding Party. 

Moving Party, 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
OAH No. 2018090798 

Related to OAH No. 2018100316 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 
Administrative Law Judge Diane Schneider, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

of California, heard this matter telephonically from Oakland, California, on October 19, 
2018. 

 
Christopher E. Schumb, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Iris Hurtado. 

Ingrid A. Meyers, Attorney at Law, Dannis Woliver Kelly, represented San Jose 

 

 

Unified School District (District). 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
 
A statement of charges, served on respondent Iris Hurtado on August 27, 2018, 
alleges causes for dismissal including, but not limited to, immoral conduct and willful refusal 
to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause under Education Code section 
44939.  The District placed respondent on immediate suspension without pay under 
Education Code section 44939.    
 
 
On September 19, 2018, respondent timely filed a motion with the Office of 
Administrative Hearings for immediate reversal of her suspension without pay pursuant to 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), arguing that the District has not alleged a 
sufficient basis to put her on immediate unpaid status because the allegations in the 
accusation do not rise to the level of immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform 

assignments without reasonable cause.  Respondent also requests that the District reimburse 
her for all accrued and unpaid pay and benefits. 
 
 

DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

 
 
immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.” (Ed. Code,  
§ 44939, subd. (b).) 
 
Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a motion filed 
 
pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” 
 

The written submissions of the parties and oral argument have been fully considered.  

Based upon a review of the statement of charges, the District has failed to allege facts, 
which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), for immoral conduct.  The District has, however,  
alleged facts which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension 
under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), for willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause. 

 

 
ORDER 
 
Respondent’s motion for immediate reversal of suspension and her request for 

 
reinstatement to paid status are DENIED, based upon the sufficiency of the charges 
pertaining to respondent’s alleged “willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the School District, or 
with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.”  The District’s immediate suspension of 
respondent Iris Hurtado is upheld.   
 
 
DATED:  
 
 

October 19, 2018 

____________________________ 
DIANE SCHNEIDER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

2 

 

