BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2018060551 
 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 
 
 

 
 

 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
JEFFREY BUDD, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee,  
 
  
and,  
 
EAST WHITTIER CITY SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
  
 

 

 

 

 

       Responding Party. 

  Moving Party, 

 

Chantal M. Sampogna, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of 

Administrative Hearings (OAH), heard this matter on July 13, 2018, in Los Angeles, 
California. 

Hannah Weinstein, Attorney at Law, represented Jeffrey Budd (Budd), moving party.   
 
Eric Bathen, Attorney at Law, represented the East Whittier City School District 

 

 
  
(District). 

  

District’s Immediate Suspension of Mr. Budd 

 
 
On May 2, 2018, District filed a Statement of Charges (SOC) against Budd, in which 
it alleged facts which it asserted constituted immoral conduct as defined in Education Code 
sections 44939, subdivision (b), and 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and immediately suspended 
Budd from his duties without pay.  
 
  
Budd timely filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (MIRS) with 
 
OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1).  District filed an 
opposition, and Budd filed a reply.  Counsel for both parties presented oral argument at the 
motion hearing, and the matter was submitted. 
 
// 
 

 

STUDENT G.A. 

Budd intentionally falsified documents related to G.A.’s 2017 Individualized 

District’s SOC alleges Budd, in his capacity as a special education case manager, 

On May 16, 2017, after recently convening G.A.’s May 12, 2017, IEP meeting, Budd 

Facts as Alleged in the Statement of Charges 
 
 
falsified documents required for District compliance with the Individuals with Disabilities 
Education Act (IDEA), and made related false statements to parents protected by the IDEA, 
and to district employees required to comply with the IDEA.  District alleges these were 
multiple dishonest statements that rose to the level of immoral conduct.  The following are 
examples of the specific factual content the District alleged in the SOC and attached 
documents:  
 
 
 
 
Education Program (IEP) by creating a document which falsely attested that an April 7, 
2017, IEP meeting was held; providing an opening and closing time for the meeting; stating 
that five identified IEP team members were present; d) and that team members spoke about 
challenges presented with the academic calendar.  On the signature page for the April 7, 
2017, IEP meeting, Budd indicated it was part one of G.A.’s IEP meeting. 
 
 
made the following false statements: he provided the falsified April 7, 2017, part one IEP 
meeting notes to IEP team members and obtained their signatures indicating the meeting had 
occurred and they were present; he documented on the May 12, 2017, IEP that IEP team 
member and school counselor Cecelia Joseph-Palencia was present, though she was not; he 
documented statements allegedly made by Ms. Joseph-Palencia at this meeting, though she 
was not present; and in response to parent’s question if the IEP meeting should have been 
held before May 12, 2017, he stated to parent that part one of the IEP meeting had taken 
place during parent conferences, though it had not.  Budd identified on the signature page for 
this meeting, that it was part two of the IEP meeting. 
 
 
Between the first and second semesters of the 2016-2017 academic year, Budd 
unilaterally moved G.A. to a general education math class, changing G.A.’s placement 
without holding an IEP Amendment meeting and without parent’s approval.   
 
 
On January 18, 2018, Budd admitted the foregoing information.  When Assistant 
Superintendent, Personnel Services, Doug Staine met with Budd on February 9, 2018, to 
review due process challenges brought by G.A., Budd did not demonstrate any appreciation 
for the gravity of the situation or any remorse for falsifying documents, the liability exposure 
he created for the district, or how his conduct affected G.A. or parent.  Justin Mayernik, 
Principal Granada Middle School, explained that after meeting with legal counsel regarding 
G.A.’s Due Process Hearing request, counsel informed Mr. Mayernik the District could not 
defend against G.A.’s due process claim, and had $80,000 in estimated settlement and legal 
fees.  
 
// 

2 

PATTERN AND COURSE OF CONDUCT 

  
 
 
SOC paragraph 14 alleges Budd repeated this pattern and course of conduct of 
documenting a part one of an IEP team meeting at or near the IEP due date, and a part two of 
the IEP team meeting held after the due date, in over nine other student’s IEP files.  
Examples of these allegations are found in paragraphs 14b (student J.G.), and 14d (student 
R.G.).  For these two students, Budd created documents indicating these students’ IEP 
meetings were opened via email or phone through contact with the parent, and documented 
this as part one of the IEP meeting; Budd held the IEP team meetings several weeks later 
with members present and documented this as part two of the IEP team meetings.    
 
Affected Rights of Student and Parent 
 
 
education laws Budd was responsible for upholding.  These requirements add to the gravity 
of Budd’s alleged actions and inform how these actions adversely affected the students, 
parents, and District. 
 

The District attached to the SOC regulations and citations which identified the special 

Under both the IDEA and State law, students with disabilities have the right to a free 

and appropriate public education (FAPE).  (20 U.S.C. §§ 1400 et seq., at 20 U.S.C. § 
1400(d)(1)(A); Ed. Code, § 560001.)   
 

An IEP must be reviewed at least annually to determine whether the student’s annual 

goals are being met (34 C.F.R. § 300.324(b)(1); § 56343, subd. (d)), and an IEP team 
meeting must be held at a time and place mutually agreeable to the parties (34 C.F.R. 
300.322(a)(2); § 56345.1, subd. (c).) (See SOC at 173-175.)   
 

A procedural violation denies a FAPE if it impedes the child’s right to a FAPE, 

Section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district may immediately 

significantly impedes a parent’s opportunity to participate in the FAPE decision-making 
process, or causes a deprivation of educational benefits.  (20 U.S.C. § 1415(f)(3)(E)(ii); § 
56505, subd. (f)(2).); see W.G. v. Board of Trustees of Target Range School Dist. No. 23 
(1992) 960 F.2d 1479, 1484.)   
 
Applicable Law 
 
 
suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged with immoral conduct.  
Section 44932, subdivision (a), provides that the District may dismiss a permanent employee 
for immoral conduct, including egregious misconduct, as described in sections 44010 and 
44011, and Penal Code sections 11165.2 and 11165.6, relating to acts and crimes constituting 
specified sex offenses, abusing controlled substances, and child abuse and neglect.  
 
// 
                                                 

1 Further statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise designated. 

3 

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare 

At a MIRS hearing, the ALJ must decide “whether the facts as alleged in the 
 
statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension 
under this section.”  (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted 
as true for purposes of a MIRS, the ALJ need not accept “contentions, deductions or 
conclusions of fact or law.”  (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)  The SOC is given 
a reasonable interpretation, reading it as a whole and its parts in their context.  (Speegle v. 
Board of Fire Underwriters (1946) 29 Cal.2d 34, 42.)  
 
 
of the general public and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing 
moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.”  (Board of Education v. 
Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811-812, citing Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 
36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 
 
 
California Supreme Court established the following seven factors to be considered when 
determining if a teacher’s conduct is immoral, making the teacher unfit to teach: 1) the 
likelihood and degree that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow 
teachers; 2) the proximity or remoteness in time of conduct; 3) the type of certificate held by 
the teacher; 4) extenuating or aggravating circumstances; 5) the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; 6) the likelihood of the recurrence 
of the questioned conduct; and 7) the nexus between the conduct and the ability to teach.  
(Morrison at 229.) 
 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education, (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, (Morrison) the 

The Court in Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, held 

the Morrison factors apply when assessing whether to discipline a teacher for dishonest acts.  
(Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 221.)  “Not every 
impropriety will constitute immoral or unprofessional conduct, and not every falsehood will 
constitute ‘dishonesty’ as a ground for discipline.”  (Id. at 220 n.12).   

The court must base its decision on all of the evidence, after conducting a thorough 
inquiry and consideration of the Morrison factors, and may not consider a single act alone, 
when considering a teacher’s fitness to teach.  (Board of Education v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 555, 561.)   

Budd argues the following: that District failed to sufficiently describe how most of 

Analysis 
 
 
Budd’s actions constituted “falsifications” of IEP documents, and only pled factual 
conclusions; that District only pled between one and three dishonest acts, an insufficient 
number to rise to the level of immoral conduct; and that because case law finding immoral 
acts can be categorized as acts constituting sexual harassment or public sexual activity, drug 

4 

use or possession, or theft, Budd’s actions cannot be found to immoral.2  (See Respondent’s 
Memorandum of Points and Authorities in Support of Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension, page 8, fns. 1-3.)3  Despite Budd’s assertions, in its SOC, supportive documents, 
and citation references, the District specifically identified the due process rights and 
responsibilities Budd was charged with upholding, pled Budd’s multiple false statements and 
falsification of documents, effectively denying these rights from student and parents, and 
pled Budd’s failure to uphold his responsibilities to the district, which exposed it to liability.  
The allegations were not vague, conclusory and devoid of factual content.    
 
 
The District pled with specificity that Budd performed multiple acts of dishonesty, 
which, if true, would constitute immoral conduct as defined in sections 44939 and 44932, 
subdivision (a).  Applying the Morrison factors the allegations pled demonstrate the 
following: Budd’s conduct carried a high likelihood and a significant degree that the conduct 
would adversely affect students, parents, and the District as the alleged behavior could deny 
a student of a FAPE, deny a parent’s right to meaningfully participate in a student’s 
education, and subject District to liability; Budd repeatedly behaved this way just one year 
ago; Budd is a permanent certificated employee assigned to teach special education and act 
as a special education case manager; though allegations relating to Budd’s motivations were 
not pled in the SOC, it did allege Budd’s lack of remorse and any appreciation for the gravity 
of the situation, the liability exposure he created for the district, or how his conduct affected 
G.A. or G.A.’s parent; there is a nexus between Budd’s conduct and his ability to perform as 
a special education case manager and teacher, as in this capacity he is charged with adhering 
to students and parents rights, and upholding the District’s responsibilities, under the IDEA.  
Budd’s pattern of behavior is indicative of corruption, was willful, flagrant, and shameless 
conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and displayed an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.   
 
// 
 
// 
 
// 
                                                 
 
Reversal of Suspension of David Suavage, a Permanent Certificated Employee, and Elk 
Grove Unified School District (Order), involving allegations of a teacher failing to comply 
with IEP protocols, this Order is not precedential, and the facts are distinguishable as 
provided above.  (See Gov. Code, § 11425.60.) 
 

2 Though Budd cites to the MIRS Order In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 

3 Budd mistakenly concludes that the referenced case law means that only acts 
relating to sexual harassment or public sexual activity, drug use or possession, or theft, can 
constitute immoral conduct.  The fact that these cases can be grouped in to these categories, 
does not warrant such a conclusion.  There is no statute, regulation, or case law so limiting 
the finding of immoral conduct in teacher discipline matters.   

5 

The ALJ considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument made 

Conclusion 
 
 
during the hearing.  Based upon a review of the SOC filed in the instant matter, and the 
record during the motion hearing, Budd’s motion for immediate reversal of suspension is 
denied. 
 
 
 
DATED:  
 
 
 

____________________________ 
CHANTAL M. SAMPOGNA 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

6 

July 20, 2018