BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension of:

LOREN TRATHEN,

and

Employee,

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION

OAH No. 2018030047

YUCAIPA-CALIMESA JOINT UNIFIED
SCHOOL DISTRICT,

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c))

 

 District.

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Eric Sawyer, Office of Administrative Hearings
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, on March 30, 
2018.

Carlos R. Perez, Esq., represented Loren Trathen (Employee).  Mark W. Thompson,

Esq., represented the Yucaipa-Calimesa Joint Unified School District (District).

The District filed a statement of charges against Employee, which seeks his 
termination, and places him on immediate unpaid suspension, as of February 1, 2018.  The
suspension is based on allegations that Employee engaged in immoral conduct and willfully 
refused to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, in violation of Education 
Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, subdivision (b).

Employee timely filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (motion) with 

OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1).  The various papers 
filed by the parties in connection with the motion were described on the record during the 
hearing.  The parties also presented oral argument during the hearing.

The ALJ considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument made 

during the hearing.  Based upon a review of the statement of charges filed in the instant 
matter, and as set forth in detail on the record during the telephonic hearing, the motion is 
denied as follows.

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged with immoral 
conduct and/or willful refusal to perform their regular assignments.  Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion for review of the 
suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the 
facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.”

Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of this motion, the 

ALJ need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.”  (Blank v. 
Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)  A motion such as this is analogous to a demurrer.  A 
demurrer can be sustained when a plaintiff’s “conclusory characterization of defendant’s 
conduct as intentional, willful and fraudulent” was “patently insufficient.”  (Brousseau v. 
Jarrett (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.)

Immoral Conduct

“Immoral conduct,” pursuant to Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), 
and 44939, has been defined to mean conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  It is sometimes used as 
synonymous with dishonesty or a high degree of unfairness.  (Board of Ed. of San Francisco 
Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)  

Immoral conduct also can be construed according to common usage.  “The term 

‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of the general 
public and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 
includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 
depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.”  (Palo Verde etc. Sch. Dist. 
v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.)  

In this case, it is alleged that in 2014 respondent was advised by his adult son that, 

while on campus during a District activity, a 14 or 15-year-old female student kissed him in a 
classroom.  Respondent was present on campus at the time; his son was also employed by the 
District as a walk-on coach of the girls’ softball team.  Respondent allegedly told his son to 
report the incident to the proper authorities, but did not follow up with his son to confirm 
whether the reporting happened.  It is also alleged that respondent failed to make any report 
of the incident, in violation of relevant provisions of the Penal Code requiring teachers, as 
mandated reporters, to report observed or suspected child abuse, including sexual encounters 
with a minor.  When respondent was interviewed by a District investigator in 2017 about the 
incident, he maintained he would do the same thing with another adult in a similar situation.

2

Based on the definitions of immoral conduct provided by case law, the allegations, 
 
when accepted as true, establish Employee engaged in immoral conduct.  He violated the 
Penal Code by failing to report his direct knowledge of a sexual encounter between a minor 
student and his adult son, another District employee.  Employee’s intentional failure to 
follow the law is contrary to justice.  By ignoring his own reporting duty, and trusting his son 
to make his own report, Employee acted contrary to honesty by essentially secreting his 
knowledge of a sexual encounter between a minor student and his adult son.  While the 
allegations indicate Employee’s son described the female student as the aggressor, Employee 
had no way of knowing that was true.  Employee’s reporting pursuant to the law would have 
protected all involved by shedding light on the situation and insuring no more incidents in 
the future, once the involved parties had been contacted by authorities, had they chosen to 
investigate.  Employee’s omission thus can be described as contrary to modesty and good 
morals.  The statutory requirement to report suspected child abuse is a legislative statement 
that the members of this community require mandatory reporters, including teachers, to be 
sensitive to suspected child abuse and quick to report their suspicions in order to protect 
children.  Secreting suspicions of a sexual encounter between an adult and a minor is 
contrary to respectable society and the public welfare.  Employee thereby demonstrated
willful indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.

Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignment

As discussed above, unpaid suspension is also authorized for a willful refusal to 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing school district, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (b).  

In this case, it is also alleged that the District had enacted policies tracking, and to an 

extent expanding, the mandatory reporting requirements contained in the Penal Code and 
discussed above.  So, not only was it the law for Employee to report known or suspected 
sexual contact with a minor student, it was also express District policy.  It is alleged that he 
willfully failed to report a known sexual encounter between a female minor and his adult son. 
Employee allegedly not only violated the law, but he also willfully refused to carry out 
District policy, which can be described as a regular assignment.  Nowhere is it alleged that 
Employee had reasonable cause to fail to perform the duties required of him by law and 
District policy.  Assuming the allegations are true, the District has pled facts supporting 
cause for immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b).

Morrison Factors

///

The parties also address whether facts meeting the factors articulated in the case of 

Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229, have been sufficiently 
pleaded in this case.  They have.

3

First, the ALJ views the Morrison factors as predominantly a test whether the events 

in question have a sufficient nexus with teaching to warrant discipline of a teaching 
credential or adverse employment action.  The statement of charges clearly alleges activity 
occurring on the District campus, between a student and a District employee, involving 
another District employee’s failure to report a suspected sexual contact between the student 
and the District employee.  These facts certainly demonstrate a strong and direct nexus with 
Employee’s use of his credential, employment with the District, and fitness to teach.

Second, the bare allegations in the statement of charges alone satisfy enough of the 

Morrison factors to demonstrate the same.  In summary, the sexual contact between a minor 
student and adult District employee raises the likelihood of adversity to both; the incident 
occurred in 2014, but was apparently discovered in 2017, so the events in question are 
proximate; Employee allegedly secreted knowledge of the incident, leading to the suspicion 
he did so to protect his son, which is an aggravating circumstance; Employee’s statement to 
the investigator that he would handle a similar situation the same way today indicates there is 
a likely recurrence of the questioned conduct; and there will be no chilling impact on 
constitutional rights by requiring mandatory reporters to follow the law and District policy.

Since the District has pleaded facts which, if true, support causes for immediate 
suspension for immoral conduct and willful failure to perform a regular assignment, the 
motion must be denied.

 

IT IS SO ORDERED.

DATED:

____________________________
ERIC SAWYER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

4

April 3, 2018