BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

      
     OAH No.  2018101073 
 
     ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
     IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
     SUSPENSION 
 
     [Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1)]    

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension of: 
 
DIANE GREGORY, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee,  
 
                                              Moving Party, 
 
  and 
 
VISALIA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
                                         Responding Party. 
 
 
 
 
On November 9, 2018, a telephonic hearing on the motion filed by Diane Gregory for 
immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) was held by Erlinda G. Shrenger, Administrative 
Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), from Los Angeles. 
 
 
Gregory (Employee). 
 
 
responding party Visalia Unified School District (District). 
 
 
The District has suspended Employee without pay pending the outcome of its action 
to dismiss Employee.1  The basis for the suspension under Education Code section 44939 is 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district.  In the Motion, Employee 
seeks an order for the immediate reversal of her suspension.  The District opposes the 
Motion.  
 

Gabriela D. Flowers and Janae D. Castellani, Attorneys, Lozano Smith, represented 

Joshua F. Richtel, Esq., Tuttle & McCloskey, represented moving party Diane 

 

                                                
1 The dismissal action bears OAH case number 2018110332.  The grounds for 
 
dismissal alleged by the District against Employee are unprofessional conduct; dishonesty; 
unsatisfactory performance; evident unfitness for service; and persistent violation of rules.  
(Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2), (4), (5), (6), and (8).) 

Having considered the moving, opposing, and reply papers filed by the parties, the 

An employee who is suspended pursuant to section 44939 may serve and file with the 

Education Code section 44939 authorizes the governing board of a school district, if it 

 
Statement of Charges (SOC) attached to the moving papers, the exhibits attached to and 
referenced in the SOC, and the oral argument of counsel, the undersigned ALJ hereby finds 
and orders as follows: 
 
Education Code Section 44939 
 
 
deems the action necessary, to immediately suspend a permanent employee from his or her 
duties, upon the filing of written charges with the governing board charging the employee 
with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, 
incompetency due to mental disability, willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing district, 
or violation of section 51530 (teaching communism).2 
 
 
Office of Administrative Hearings a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  The 
motion shall include "a memorandum of points and authorities setting forth law and 
argument supporting the employee's contention that the statement of charges does not set 
forth a sufficient basis for immediate suspension."   (Educ. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  
Review of the motion "shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section."  (Id.) 
 
 
ALJ need not accept "contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law."  (Blank v. 
Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)  With regard to the alleged misconduct of a public 
employee, the term "willful" carries a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of 
accidental or even negligent conduct."  (Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 
Cal.App.2d 770, 775.) 
 
Discussion 
 
 
administrators had made numerous attempts to communicate with [her] regarding [her] 
unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory behaviors" demonstrates a willful refusal to 
complete her regular assignments without reasonable cause.  (SOC ¶ 44.) The District also 
alleges that Employee's "willful refusal" was "demonstrated" when, "on several occasions, 
[she] was given job-related directives by [her] supervisor, which [she] agreed to implement 
but failed to do so without any reasonable cause."  (Ibid.)   
 

 
In the SOC, the District alleges that Employee's "failure to follow directives after 

Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of the Motion, the 

                                                
 
indicated. 

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise 

 

2 

The District's argument that Employee's failure to follow directives constitutes a 

The specific instances of Employee's misconduct alleged in the SOC involve her 

A review of the SOC in its totality indicates Employee's alleged misconduct is not the 

 
failure to provide and follow adequate lesson plans; her lack of preparation for classroom 
instruction; her poor classroom management and disorganization; her failure to timely submit 
documentation as directed; her failure to properly supervise and ensure students safety; and 
her failure to properly report her absences from work. 
 
 
result of a willful, volitional refusal to perform her regular assignment.  The well-pleaded 
facts indicate that when Employee taught her classes, administrators found fault with her 
performance.  In other words, Employee was performing her assignments as a first and sixth 
grade teacher, but she did so deficiently in the District's opinion. 
 
 
"willful refusal" to support an immediate suspension under section 44939 is contrary to the 
statutory scheme of the Education Code, where causes for dismissal are set forth in section 
44932, but the limited grounds for immediate suspension are set forth separately in section 
44939.  Absent compliance with the requirements of section 44939, the Education Code does 
not contemplate immediate suspension based on a teacher's unsatisfactory performance or 
repeated failures to comply with directives or procedures.  For example, under section 44938, 
subdivision (b), an employing district may not take action against an employee charged with 
unsatisfactory performance without first having given at least 90 days' written notice to the 
employee of the unsatisfactory performance with such specificity and particularity so as to 
"furnish the employee an opportunity to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds 
for the charge."  (Ed. Code, § 44938, subd. (b)(1).)  There is a similar notice requirement 
when an employee is charged with unprofessional conduct.  (Ed. Code, § 44938, subd. (a).) 
 
 
In its opposition to the Motion, the District cites to other OAH decisions that found 
grounds for immediate suspension for willful refusal to perform regular assignments, based 
on the employee's failure to follow directives.  The District acknowledges that those other 
OAH decisions are "not binding here."  (Opposition, p. 15-16.)  Further, all but one of those 
OAH decisions were decided prior to the January 1, 2015 revisions to section 44939 which 
added the provisions for motions for immediate reversal of suspension.    
 
 
The District, in its opposition, also relies on Powers v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1984) 157 Cal.App.3d 560-564-565, to support its contention that Employee's 
continued pattern of failing to follow directives constitutes insubordination and demonstrates 
a willful refusal to perform her assignments.  The District's reliance on Powers is misplaced.  
In Powers, the Commission on Professional Competence found the teacher to be 
insubordinate after a multi-day evidentiary hearing, in which both school district 
representatives and the teacher testified.  In contrast, the analysis on the Motion is "limited to 
a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are 
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension" under section 44939.  While the 
SOC alleges multiple instances of Employee's failure to comply with directives, the 
allegations do not reflect that Employee's failure was intentional or deliberate.  The 
conclusory allegations in the SOC that Employee's conduct is "reasonably viewed as" or 

 

3 

The Motion is granted.  In accordance with Education Code section 44939, 

Based on the foregoing, and the reasons stated on the record, the ALJ finds that the 

"demonstrates" a willful refusal to perform her assignments are not binding on the ALJ and 
need not be accepted. 
 
 
facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are not sufficient to establish a basis for Employee's 
immediate suspension under section 44939.  The Motion shall be granted. 
 
Disposition 
 
 
subdivision (c)(5), this Order shall become effective within five days of service of the Order, 
and the District shall make Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation 
within 14 days after service of this Order. 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED:  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearing 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

4 

November 16, 2018