BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by:

MARIO CORONA,

A Permanent Certificated Employee,

Moving Party,

and,

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT,

 Responding Party.

OAH No. 2018040628

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c))

Administrative Law Judge Debra D. Nye-Perkins, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from San Diego, California, on 
May 11, 2018.

Dexter Rappleye, Attorney at Law, Bush Gottlieb, represented Mario Corona.

Michael Voigt, Office of the General Counsel, represented Los Angeles Unified

School District.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

In March 2018, the district served Mr. Corona with a written Statement of Charges, 
charging him with immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, 
persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 
prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing 
board of the school district employing him, and willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the employing district, within the meaning of Education Code section 44932, subdivisions 
(a)(2), (6), and (8), and section 44939.  The charges are based upon respondent’s alleged 

conduct from August 15, 2016, to January 18, 2017, and during the 2015 – 2016 school year, 
for failure to comply with multiple directives from the school regarding respectful treatment 
of students, the sexual harassment policy, and the code of conduct with students, among 
others, as well as engaging in misconduct with female students by making inappropriate 
comments of a sexual nature to certain female students, inappropriately touching female 
students, and being alone in his classroom with female students despite multiple directives 
not to do so.

Based upon the foregoing charges, the district governing board immediately 

suspended Mr. Corona from his duties and gave notice to him of the suspension.

On April 13, 2018, Mr. Corona filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

with OAH, under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), arguing that the 
Statement of Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support an allegation that Mr. 
Corona engaged in immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular assignments.  Mr. 
Corona argues that the facts alleged, even if true, are not sufficient to establish immoral 
conduct, or willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, which is 
necessary in this case to sustain the suspension.  OAH set the matter for oral argument and 
established a briefing schedule.  On May 11, 2018, the parties orally argued their positions.  

DISCUSSION

Mr. Corona asserts that the allegations, even if true, do not constitute immoral 

conduct within the meaning of Education Code section 44939, and that the Statement of 
Charges does not allege conduct constituting willful refusal to perform regular assignments 
without reasonable cause.  The district asserts grounds exist for the immediate suspension.  
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), permits a school district to immediately 
suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged “with immoral 
conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, with 
incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular assignments 
without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 
school district, or with violation of [Education Code] Section 51530.”   

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), provides that the employee may 

file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  OAH’s “[r]eview of a motion filed 
pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.”

The written submissions of the parties and oral argument have been considered. 

Based on a review of the Statement of Charges, the district has alleged facts which, if true, 
are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b).

2

GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED.

DATED: May 15, 2018

____________________________
DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

3

