BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 

 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
JIM RIZOR, 
 
  
v 
 
SAN JACINTO UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
  
 

               District. 

Employee, 

 

 

 

 
OAH No. 2018120417 
 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Eric Sawyer, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 

 
 
 
State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, on January 11, 2019. 
 
  
represented the San Jacinto Unified School District (District). 

Carlos R. Perez, Esq., represented Jim Rizor (Employee).  Mark W. Thompson, Esq., 

  
The District filed a statement of charges against Employee, and placed him on indefinite 

 
Employee timely filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (motion) with 

  
unpaid suspension.  The suspension is based on allegations that Employee willfully refused to 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, in violation of Education Code section 
44939. 
 
 
OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1).  The various papers filed by 
the parties in connection with the motion were described on the record during the hearing.  The 
ALJ sustained Employee’s objection to the Declaration of Matt Hixson for the reason described 
on the record.  The parties also presented oral argument during the hearing. 
 
 
immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.  Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion for review of the suspension, 
and review of that motion “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension 
under this section.” 
 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district may 

In this case, the ALJ considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument 

  
made during the hearing.  Based upon a review of the statement of charges filed in the instant 
matter (the pleadings), and as set forth in detail on the record during the telephonic hearing, the 
motion is granted as follows. 

 
Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of this motion, the 

A comparison of Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, subdivision 

With regard to the alleged misconduct of a public employee, the term “willful” carries a 

This comparison indicates the cause of discipline for willful refusal to perform a regular 

  
ALJ need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.”  (Blank v. Kirwan 
(1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)  A motion such as this is analogous to a demurrer.  A demurrer can 
be sustained when a plaintiff’s “conclusory characterization of defendant's conduct as 
intentional, willful and fraudulent” was “patently insufficient.”  (Brousseau v. Jarrett (1977) 73 
Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 
 
  
volitional coloration which excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct.”  
(Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775.)  
 
  
(b), is illuminating.  Pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5) and (a)(2), discipline is 
warranted for unsatisfactory performance or unprofessional conduct, respectively, but not unpaid 
suspension.  More importantly, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), while a teacher’s 
persistent violation of a school district’s reasonable regulations is grounds for discipline, it is not 
an authorized basis for unpaid suspension.  Rather, unpaid suspension is authorized only for a 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (b).   
 
  
assignment is more akin to the traditional labor charge of insubordination, i.e., an intentional, 
willful, volitional refusal to perform any part of a particular regular assignment.  Examples 
coming to mind are refusal to have children say the pledge of allegiance, perform yard duty, 
allow children to use the restroom during instructional time, teach certain parts of a school 
district’s curriculum, turn in lesson plans, attend meetings mandated by a supervisor, etc.  
However, a charge of willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must be more than 
unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent or even persistent failure to perform a regular 
assignment. 
 
  
alleged misconduct is not the result of a willful, volitional, refusal to perform his regular 
assignment.  The well-pleaded facts indicate that when Employee taught his classes, 
administrators found fault with his performance.  Stated another way, the pleadings indicate 
Employee was teaching his classes, but did so deficiently in the District’s opinion.  The 
allegations also indicate Employee failed to improve after receiving multiple conferences and, 
perhaps, persistently, but not always, failed to comply with directives given to him. 
 
  
during the times in question was unsatisfactory, unprofessional and persistently violated District 
rules and regulations, among other theories.  But where the pleadings allege a willful refusal to 
perform a regular assignment, the allegations are vague, conclusory and devoid of the kind of 

The pleadings allege with factual precision and abundance that Employee’s teaching 

In this case, a review of the statement of charges in its totality indicates Employee’s 

2 

 
Good cause having been established, the motion is granted.  Pursuant to Education Code 

factual content which, if true, would constitute a willful state of mind or volitional refusal to 
perform as directed.  As discussed above, vague and conclusory allegations are not binding on 
the ALJ and need not be accepted.   
  
  
section 44939, subdivision (c)(5), this order shall become effective within five days of service, 
and the District shall make the Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation 
within 14 days after service of the order. 
 
   
 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

____________________________ 
ERIC SAWYER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

3 

January 14, 2019