BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
BRENDA EVANS, 
 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
   
v.  
 
OXNARD SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
  
   
 
 
 

    School District. 

Employee, 

 

 

 

 

 

 
OAH No. 2018070451 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)) 

 

 
Administrative Law Judge Debra D. Nye-Perkins, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from San Diego, California, on 
August 3, 2018. 
 
Brett B. McMurdo, Attorney at Law, Hathaway, Perrett, Webster, Powers, Chrisman 

& Gutierrez, represented Brenda Evans. 
 

April Navarro, Attorney at Law, represented Oxnard School District. 
 
 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
In May 2018, the district served Ms. Evans with a written Statement of Charges, 

charging her with unprofessional conduct, dishonesty, unsatisfactory performance, evident 
unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state 
or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State 
Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district employing her, and 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing district, based upon respondent’s alleged 
conduct between October 2017 and March 2018. 

 

Based upon the foregoing charges, the district governing board immediately 

suspended Ms. Evans from her duties and gave notice to her of the suspension. 

 
On July 11, 2018, Ms. Evans filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

with OAH, under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), arguing that the Statement 
of Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support an allegation that Ms. Evans acted 
willfully to refuse to perform, which is necessary in this case to sustain the suspension.  OAH 
set the matter for oral argument and established a briefing schedule.  On August 3, 2018, the 
parties orally argued their positions.   

 
 

DISCUSSION 

 
Ms. Evans asserts that the allegations do not establish that she willfully refused to 

perform regular assignments.  The district asserts grounds exist for the immediate 
suspension.  Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), permits a school district to 
immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the employing school district, or with violation of [Education Code] Section 51530.”  

 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), provides that the employee may 

file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  OAH’s “[r]eview of a motion filed 
pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” 

 
The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument.  
Based on a review of the Statement of Charges, the district has alleged facts which, if true, 
are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b).  

 
GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED. 
 
 
DATED: August 8, 2018 
 
 

____________________________ 
DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

2 

