BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

On November 9, 2018, a telephonic hearing on the motion filed by Carlos 

      
     OAH No.  2018100593 
 
     ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
     IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
     SUSPENSION 
 
     [Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1)] 
 
    

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension of: 
 
CARLOS LARGAESPADA, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee,  
 
                                              Moving Party, 
 
  and 
 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
                                         Responding Party. 
 
 
 
 
Largaespada for immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) was held by Erlinda G. 
Shrenger, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), from 
Los Angeles. 
 
 
(Employee). 
 
 
Angeles Unified School District (District). 
 
 
The District has suspended Employee without pay pending the outcome of its action 
to dismiss Employee.1  The basis for the suspension under Education Code section 44939 is 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district.  In the Motion, Employee 
seeks an order for the immediate reversal of his suspension.  The District opposes the 
Motion.  
                                                
1 The dismissal action bears OAH case number 2018100601.  The grounds for 
 
dismissal alleged by the District against Employee are unprofessional conduct; unsatisfactory 
performance; evident unfitness for service; and persistent violation of school laws and 
regulations.  (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2), (5), (6), and (8).) 

Mampre R. Pomakian, Associate General Counsel, represented responding party Los 

Tamara M. Smith, Egality Law LLP, represented moving party Carlos Largaespada 

An employee who is suspended pursuant to section 44939 may serve and file with 

Education Code section 44939 authorizes the governing board of a school district, if it 

 
Having considered the moving, opposing, and reply papers filed by the parties, 
Employee's request for official notice and the District's opposition thereto,2 the Accusation 
filed with OAH, and the oral argument of counsel, the undersigned ALJ hereby finds and 
orders as follows: 
 
Education Code Section 44939 
 
 
deems the action necessary, to immediately suspend a permanent employee from his or her 
duties, upon the filing of written charges with the governing board charging the employee 
with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, 
incompetency due to mental disability, willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing district, 
or violation of section 51530 (teaching communism).3 
 
 
OAH a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  The motion shall include "a 
memorandum of points and authorities setting forth law and argument supporting the 
employee's contention that the statement of charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for 
immediate suspension."  (Educ. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  Review of the motion "shall 
be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section."  (Id.) 
 
 
ALJ need not accept "contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law."  (Blank v. 
Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)  With regard to the alleged misconduct of a public 
employee, the term "willful" carries a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of 
accidental or even negligent conduct."  (Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 
Cal.App.2d 770, 775.) 
 
Discussion 
 
 
section 44939, on the basis of willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, because, despite being provided assistance, guidance, and directives to 
improve his performance as an elementary school teacher, Employee failed to improve his 
performance.  However, the well-pleaded facts in the Accusation do not reflect a "willful 
refusal" to perform but, instead, indicate that Employee performed his assignment as a third 
                                                
 
ALJs in three other cases (OAH Nos. 2017070832, 2017090844, and 2018051146) and 
legislative history materials pertaining to Assembly Bill 449, on relevance grounds.  
 
 
indicated. 

 
The District contends Employee is subject to immediate suspension pursuant to 

2 The ALJ denied Employee's request for taking official notice of orders issued by 

Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of the Motion, the 

3 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise 

 

2 

The District's argument that Employee's failure to follow directives constitutes a 

grade teacher, but did so unsatisfactorily in the District's view.  While the Accusation alleges 
multiple instances of Employee's failure to comply with directives, the allegations do not 
reflect that Employee's failure was intentional or deliberate.  The conclusory allegations in 
the Accusation that Employee's failure to follow directives or improve his performance 
demonstrated a "willful refusal" to perform his assignments are not binding on the ALJ and 
need not be accepted.  When viewed in its totality, the Accusation indicates that Employee's 
alleged misconduct was not the result of a willful, volitional refusal to perform his regular 
assignment. 
 
 
"willful refusal" to support an immediate suspension under section 44939 is contrary to the 
statutory scheme of the Education Code, where causes for dismissal are set forth in section 
44932, but the limited grounds for immediate suspension are set forth separately in section 
44939.  Absent compliance with the requirements of section 44939, the Education Code does 
not contemplate immediate suspension based on a teacher's unsatisfactory performance or 
repeated failures to comply with directives or procedures.  For example, under section 44938, 
subdivision (b), an employing district may not take action against an employee charged with 
unsatisfactory performance without first having given at least 90 days' written notice to the 
employee of the unsatisfactory performance with such specificity and particularity so as to 
"furnish the employee an opportunity to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds 
for the charge."  (Ed. Code, § 44938, subd. (b)(1).)  There is a similar notice requirement 
when an employee is charged with unprofessional conduct.  (Ed. Code, § 44938, subd. (a).) 
 
 
Based on the foregoing, and the reasons stated on the record, the ALJ finds that the 
facts alleged in the Accusation, if true, are not sufficient to establish a basis for Employee's 
immediate suspension under section 44939.  The Motion shall be granted. 
 
Disposition 
 
 
subdivision (c)(5), this Order shall become effective within five days of service of the Order, 
and the District shall make Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation 
within 14 days after service of this Order. 
 
 
 
 
DATED:    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearing 

The Motion is granted.  In accordance with Education Code section 44939, 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

November 17, 2018