BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

      
     OAH No.  2018051146 
 
     ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
     IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
     SUSPENSION 
 
     [Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1)] 
 
    

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension of: 
 
DAVID SAUVAGE, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee,  
 
                                              Moving Party, 
 
and,  
 
ELK GROVE UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
                                         Responding Party. 
 
 
 
 
On June 22, 2018, a telephonic hearing on the motion filed by David Sauvage for 
immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) was held before Cindy F. Forman, Administrative 
Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings, in Los Angeles, California.  
 
 
(Employee).  Erin M. Hamor and Gabriela D. Flowers, Attorneys at Law, represented 
responding party Elk Grove Unified School District (District). 
 
On May 8, 2018, District notified Employee of its intent to dismiss him from his 
 
assignment as a special education teacher at Monterey Trail High School (MTHS) in Elk 
Grove, California, pursuant to Education Code1 section 44932.  District’s Statement of 
Charges (SOC) alleged that Employee acted inappropriately toward District employees, 
failed to comply with the protocols and procedures relating to Individual Education Programs 
(IEPs) and IEP meetings, performed poorly as a classroom teacher, interacted inappropriately 
with students, failed to implement proper procedures and plans as the case manager for 
certain of his students, manipulated school records, made false statements to District 
teachers, and violated express District directives.2  The District alleged that certain of the 
foregoing acts consisted of immoral conduct or reflected the willful refusal to perform 
                                                
 
 
 

Christopher O. Hammer, Attorney at Law, represented moving party David Sauvage 

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise stated. 

2 The dismissal action bears OAH No. 2018060308. 

On June 5, 2018, after receipt of the Motion, District served an Amended Statement 

regular assignments without cause as prescribed by District’s reasonable rules and 
regulations, and District immediately suspended Employee without pay on those bases 
pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (b).3 
 
 
On May 24, 2018, Employee filed the Motion, seeking immediate reversal of 
District’s unpaid suspension order.  Employee contends that the charges in the SOC do not 
constitute either immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular assignments.  
Accordingly, Employee contends that District has not met the statutory requirements of 
section 44939, subdivision (b), and his suspension is not warranted and should be 
immediately reversed. 
 
 
of Charges (ASOC) on Employee.  The ASOC includes the same bases of dismissal and 
factual allegations found in the SOC.  The ASOC also contains new factual allegations 
relating to Employee’s use of inappropriate sexual innuendo with students, his inappropriate 
contact with a District paraeducator in November 2016, his failure in December 2016 to 
supervise a male and a female student who were sitting side-by-side under a blanket, and his 
failure to document properly student misconduct that occurred on January 6, 2017.  The 
ASOC further alleges that District issued a letter of reprimand on February 3, 2017, with 
respect to the foregoing conduct.  (ASOC, p. 15 ¶16 – p. 19, ¶ 22.)  The conduct underlying 
the new allegations in the ASOC occurred prior to service of the SOC on Employee.   
 
 
On June 13, 2018, District filed its opposition to the Motion, citing both the new 
allegations of the ASOC and the original allegations of the SOC (as re-alleged in the ASOC) 
in support of its suspension order.  In his reply, filed on June 20, 2018, Employee requested 
that the ALJ ignore the new factual allegations contained in the ASOC and limit the analysis 
of the propriety of Employee’s suspension to the allegations found in the SOC.  In addition, 
Employee asserted that the new allegations, even if considered, do not describe conduct that 
is immoral or reflects a willful refusal by Employee to perform regular assignments without 
cause, and he re-asserted that the original allegations likewise failed to satisfy the section 
44939, subdivision (b), threshold for immediate suspension.     
 
 

ORDER 

Having considered the moving, opposing, and reply papers filed by the parties, and 

 
 
the oral argument of counsel, the undersigned ALJ hereby finds and orders as follows: 
                                                
3  Section 44939, subdivision (a), provides that the governing board of the school 
 
district may immediately suspend a permanent employee from his duties upon a written 
statement of charges charging the employee with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or 
of any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of Section 
51530 [advocating or teaching communism].”  

 

2 

2. 

1. 

The new allegations contained in the ASOC are not relevant to, and therefore 

The SOC contains no allegations that rise to the level of immoral conduct.  As 

 
will not be considered in, determining whether District’s suspension of Employee met the 
statutory requirements of section 44939, subdivision (b).  The District’s suspension order 
was based on the allegations in the SOC, not the new allegations contained in the ASOC.  
Nothing in the statute permits the retroactive application of new allegations made after the 
initial statement of charges to support the original suspension order.  (Bd. of Trustees of 
Placerville Union School Dist. v. Porini (1968) 263 Cal.App.2d 784, 789 [statutes pertaining 
to teacher discipline should be “strictly construed”].)  It makes no difference that the events 
underlying the new allegations were known to the District and Employee prior to service of 
the SOC if those allegations were not included in the SOC.  
 
 
In addition, the appeal procedures set forth in section 44939, subdivision (c), are 
predicated on service of the “initial pleading” in the matter.  (§ 44939, subd. (c)(2) [The 
motion shall be served upon the governing board of the school district and filed with the 
Office of Administrative Hearings within 30 days after service upon the employee of the 
initial pleading of the matter.”  (emphasis added).])  Any other result would allow a school 
district to continually amend its charges to address any pleading deficiencies pointed out by 
Employee and maintain a teacher’s suspension indefinitely.  Such action would contravene 
the intent of the Legislature to provide an efficient, cost-effective, and quick procedure to 
litigate unpaid suspensions.  (See Assem. Bill No. 215 (2013-14 Reg. Sess.) § 1.))   
 
 
stated in Board of Ed. of San Francisco Unified Sch. Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App. 
2d 808, 811 (Weiland), “The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is 
hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not 
been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 
shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.”  The 
Supreme Court in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 223-224, 
further defined immoral conduct, in quoting from Jarvella v. Willoughby-Eastlake City 
School Dist. (1967) 12 Ohio Misc. 288: “It [immoral conduct] must be considered in the 
context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of 
the general public; more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of 
the school community.  . . .  In providing standards to guide school boards in placing 
restraints on conduct of teachers, the Legislature is concerned with the welfare of the school 
community.  Its objective is the protection of students from corruption.”   
 
 
poor judgment, they are not indicative of “corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness, or 
show moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community.”  
(Weiland, 179 Cal.App. 2d at 811.)  Employee’s alleged comments to students, while 
inappropriate, do not rise to the level of immorality.  In addition, the allegations that 
Employee misled parents and falsified student documents were not criminal in nature, nor 
were they alleged as designed to deliberately defraud the State or District.  Accordingly, 

While the alleged acts in the SOC may demonstrate professional incompetence and 

 

3 

3. 

The SOC contains no allegations that reflect Employee’s willful refusal to 

Under section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), a teacher may be dismissed for “[p]ersistent 

contrary to District’s contention, those allegations are distinguishable from the fraud 
allegation noted as immoral conduct in Weiland.   
 
 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause as prescribed by the District’s 
reasonable rules and regulations.  District contends that under the statute, “willful refusal” is 
present here because Employee repeatedly failed to implement “repeated verbal and written 
directives related to IEP protocol, working professionally with staff, mismanagement 
mistreatment of students, and repeated directives to follow the directives of administrators.”  
(District Opposition, p. 12, lines 20 - 22.)  District’s claim is not persuasive in that District’s 
position disregards the element of willfulness required by section 44939, subdivision (b).   
 
 
violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 
prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing 
board of the school district employing him or her.”  The threshold for immediate suspension 
as set forth in section 44939, subdivision (b), however, is higher than the threshold for 
dismissal set forth in section 44932, subdivision (a)(8).  A teacher cannot be immediately 
suspended for persistent violation of school regulations and laws or for the mere refusal to 
comply with those regulations and laws.  Rather, section 44939, subdivision (b), provides 
that a teacher can be immediately suspended only if the refusal to obey reasonable 
regulations was “willful.”  The use of the word “willful” rather than “persistent” indicates 
that while repeated and continuing performance issues may establish grounds for dismissing 
a teacher under section 44932, they are not grounds for immediate suspension under section 
44939.  Likewise, a refusal needs to be “conscious, intentional and deliberate” to be willful.  
(Goodhew v. Industrial Acc. Commission (1958) 157 Cal.App.2d 252, 257.)  While the SOC 
alleges multiple instances of Employee’s failure to comply with directives and other 
regulations, the allegations do not reflect that Employee’s failure was intentional or 
deliberate. 
 
 
Cal.App.3d 560, 564-65 (Powers), to support its claim that Employee’s alleged failure to 
follow directives constitutes insubordination, is misplaced.  In Powers, the Commission 
found the teacher to be insubordinate after a multi-day disciplinary hearing, in which both 
school district representatives and the teacher facing dismissal testified.  The analysis here is 
“limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.”  (§ 
44939, subd. (c)(1).)  The SOC contains no allegations of the reasons, if any, for Employee’s 
failure to follow District’s directives.  Without allegations reflecting that Employee 
intentionally and affirmatively refused assignments, the SOC does not reflect that Employee 
engaged in insubordination.  (See Board of Educ. of City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 
Cal.2d 546, 552 [“[t]he willful refusal of a teacher to obey the reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing board of education is insubordination.”]) 

District’s reliance on Powers v. Commission on Professional Competence (1984) 157 

 

4 

4. 

 
IT IS SO ORDERED. 

Based on the foregoing, the ALJ finds that the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, 

 
are not sufficient to establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under section 
44939.   
 
The Motion is granted.  In accordance with Education Code section 44939, 

 
subdivision (c)(5), this Order shall become effective within five days of service of the Order, 
and District shall make Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation 
within 14 days after service of this Order. 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED:    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
CINDY F. FORMAN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearing 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

July 2, 2018