BEFORE THE
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by:

OAH No. 2018030450

RODERICK AARON HALL, a Permanent 
Certificated Employee,

v.

MORENO VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT,

     Responding Party.

Moving Party,

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c))

Administrative Law Judge Melissa G. Crowell, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter telephonically from Oakland, California, on April 
5, 2018.

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, Law Offices Carlos R. Perez, represented

respondent Roderick Aaron Hall.

Christopher D. Keeler and Katelyn E. Trottier, Attorneys at Law, Fagen Friedman & 

Fulfrost, LLP, represented Moreno Valley Unified School District.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

A statement of charges was filed and served against respondent Roderick Aaron Hall, 

alleging multiple causes for dismissal, including immoral conduct pursuant to Education 
Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1).  The District placed respondent on immediate 
suspension without pay under Education Code section 44939 based upon the charge of 
immoral conduct.   

On March 8, 2018, respondent timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of his 

suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), 
arguing that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to put him on immediate unpaid 

status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not state sufficient facts to 
constitute immoral conduct. In his motion, respondent requests an order reversing his 
suspension without pay.

DISCUSSION

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b),  provides, in relevant part, that a 

school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who 
has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving 
moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of [Education Code] Section 
51530 . . . .” 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 

employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 
Administrative Hearings.  This section limits the review of a motion to immediately reverse a 
suspension “a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.”

The Administrative Law Judge has considered the written submissions of the parties 
and their oral argument.  Based upon a review of the charges, the District has alleged facts 
which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct.

The motion for immediate reversal of the suspension of Roderick Aaron Hall by 

Moreno Valley Unified School District is denied. 

DATED: April 12, 2018

ORDER

2

____________________________
MELISSA G. CROWELL 
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

