BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2018100454 
Related to OAH No. 2018000876 

 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
LISA SALYER, a Permanent Certificated 
Employee, 
 
   
 
v. 
 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
  
   
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

    Responding Party. 

Moving Party, 

 

 
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Danette C. Brown, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, 
California, on November 2, 2018. 

 
Attorney Deborah Eshaghian, with Eshaghian Law Group, represented Lisa Salyer. 

Attorney Lynn I. Ibara, with the Office of the General Counsel, Los Angeles Unified 

School District (District), represented the District. 

 

  
 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
On or about August 24, 2018, the Governing Board of the District (Governing Board) 

 
approved the Statement of Charges and Recommendation for Dismissal and Immediate 
Unpaid Suspension of Ms. Salyer, based on causes including, but not limited to:  (1) immoral 
conduct; (2) unprofessional conduct; (3) unsatisfactory performance; (4) evident unfitness for 
service; (5) persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 
regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of 
Education or by the governing board of the school district employing her; and (6) willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by the 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing district.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subds. 
(a)(1), (2), (5), (6), & (8); 44939, subd. (b).)  On or after August 24, 2018, the Governing 

Board gave notice to Ms. Salyer of its decision and placed her on immediate suspension 
without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939.  On or about October 2, 2018, the 
Governing Board received Ms. Salyer’s demand for a hearing.  
 
 
 
On October 8, 2018, Ms. Salyer filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
(Motion), pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), contending that the 
Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for immediate suspension because 
the allegations therein do not rise to the level of immoral conduct or willful refusal to 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.  
 

 
DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

 
 
immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.” (Ed. Code, § 
44939, subd. (b).) 
 
Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a motion filed 
 
pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” 
 

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument.  
Based upon a review of the Statement of Charges, the District has alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code 
section 44939, subdivision (b). 

 

 
GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion is DENIED.      

 
ORDER 

 
 
 
DATED:  November 19, 2018 
 
 

____________________________ 
DANETTE C. BROWN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

2 

