BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

      
     OAH No.  2018100526 
 
     ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
     IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
     SUSPENSION 
 
     [Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1)] 
 
    

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension of: 
 
ISABEL YBARRA, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee,  
 
                                              Moving Party, 
 
  and 
 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
                                         Responding Party. 
 
 
 
 
On November 9, 2018, a telephonic hearing on the motion filed by Isabel Ybarra for 
immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) was held by Erlinda G. Shrenger, Administrative 
Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), from Los Angeles. 
 
 
(Employee). 
 
 
Angeles Unified School District (District). 
 
 
The District has suspended Employee without pay pending the outcome of its action 
to dismiss Employee.1  The grounds for the suspension under Education Code section 44939 
are immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable 
cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district.  In 
the Motion, Employee seeks an order for the immediate reversal of her suspension.  The 
District opposes the Motion.  
                                                
 
dismissal alleged by the District against Employee are immoral conduct; unprofessional 
conduct; dishonesty; unsatisfactory performance; evident unfitness for service; and persistent 
violation of school laws and regulations.  (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1), (2), (4), (5), (6), 
and (8).) 

1 The dismissal action bears OAH case number 2018100600.  The grounds for 

Mampre R. Pomakian, Associate General Counsel, represented responding party Los 

Tamara M. Smith, Egality Law LLP, represented moving party Isabel Ybarra 

An employee who is suspended pursuant to section 44939 may serve and file with the 

Education Code section 44939 authorizes the governing board of a school district, if it 

Having considered the moving, opposing, and reply papers filed by the parties, 
 
Employee's request for official notice and the District's opposition thereto,2 the Statement of 
Charges (SOC) previously filed with OAH, and the oral argument of counsel, the 
undersigned ALJ hereby finds and orders as follows: 
 
Education Code Section 44939 
 
 
deems the action necessary, to immediately suspend a permanent employee from his or her 
duties, upon the filing of written charges with the governing board charging the employee 
with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, 
incompetency due to mental disability, willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing district, 
or violation of section 51530 (teaching communism).3 
 
 
Office of Administrative Hearings a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  The 
motion shall include "a memorandum of points and authorities setting forth law and 
argument supporting the employee's contention that the statement of charges does not set 
forth a sufficient basis for immediate suspension."   (Educ. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  
Review of the motion "shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section."  (Id.) 
 
 
ALJ need not accept "contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law."  (Blank v. 
Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 
 
 
a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct."  
(Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775.) 
 
 
the general public and contrary to good morals.  It includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness.  Or, it can be 
conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral indifference to the 
                                                
 
obtained from the District's Personnel Commission website pertaining to the job 
classification of "Communication Support Assistant," on relevance grounds and a lack of 
showing that the matter was one for which official notice may be taken.  (Evid. Code, § 452, 
subds. (b), (h); Gov. Code, § 11515.)  
 
 
indicated. 

With regard to the alleged misconduct of a public employee, the term "willful" carries 

Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of the Motion, the 

2 The ALJ denied Employee's request for taking official notice of a document 

"Immoral conduct" has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the welfare of 

3 All further statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise 

 

2 

In its opposition to the Motion, the District argues that immoral conduct to justify 

opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward 
good order and the public welfare.  (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School 
District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 808, 811.) 
 
Discussion 
 
 
Employee's immediate suspension is established by the allegations in SOC ¶¶ 17, 23-25, 29-
32 (related to billing discrepancies and inaccuracies), SOC ¶ 7 (related to Employee's 
requests to reschedule meetings with Field Director Esperon), and SOC ¶ 8 (related to 
Employee's audio recording of her assessment sessions).  (Opposition, pp. 4-7.)  These 
allegations, however, do not reflect conduct that rises to the level of immoral conduct to 
justify an immediate suspension under section 44939.  The SOC contains no facts which, if 
true, would indicate Employee's conduct described by these allegations are indicative of 
corruption or resulted from willful, flagrant or shameless conduct, or reflect an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order.   
 
The factual allegations in the SOC, if true, are insufficient to constitute a basis for 
 
immediate suspension under section 44939 based on a willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause.  The SOC indicates Employee's alleged misconduct is 
not the result of a willful, volitional refusal to perform her regular assignment as a 
psychiatric social worker.  The well-pleaded facts reflect Employee performed her 
assignment but she failed on multiple occasions to perform certain tasks accurately and on 
time.  The deficiencies in Employee's job performance related to her documentation and 
billing, her discussing confidential information in public or semi-public areas, and her failure 
to assess and supervise two students who admitted suicidal ideation/behaviors.   While the 
SOC pleads with specificity the deficiencies in Employee's job performance, the SOC's 
allegations that Employee willfully refused to perform her assignment are vague, conclusory, 
and devoid of facts which, if true, would establish a willful state of mind or volitional refusal 
to perform her job as directed.  Vague and conclusory allegations are not binding on the ALJ 
and need not be accepted.   
 
 
"willful refusal" to support an immediate suspension under section 44939 is contrary to the 
statutory scheme of the Education Code, where causes for dismissal are set forth in section 
44932, but the limited grounds for immediate suspension are set forth separately in section 
44939.  Absent compliance with the requirements of section 44939, the Education Code does 
not contemplate immediate suspension based on a teacher's unsatisfactory performance or 
repeated failures to comply with directives or procedures.  For example, under section 44938, 
subdivision (b), an employing district may not take action against an employee charged with 
unsatisfactory performance without first having given at least 90 days' written notice to the 
employee of the unsatisfactory performance with such specificity and particularity so as to 
"furnish the employee an opportunity to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds 
for the charge."  (Ed. Code, § 44938, subd. (b)(1).)  There is a similar notice requirement 
when an employee is charged with unprofessional conduct.  (Ed. Code, § 44938, subd. (a).) 

The District's argument that Employee's failure to follow directives constitutes a 

 

3 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

The Motion is granted.  In accordance with Education Code section 44939, 

Based on the foregoing, and the reasons stated on the record, the ALJ finds that the 
 
facts alleged in the Accusation, if true, are not sufficient to establish a basis for Employee's 
immediate suspension under section 44939.  The Motion shall be granted. 
 
Disposition 
 
 
subdivision (c)(5), this Order shall become effective within five days of service of the Order, 
and the District shall make Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation 
within 14 days after service of this Order. 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
ERLINDA G. SHRENGER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearing 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

4 

November 17, 2018