BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In the Matter of the Motion for 
Immediate Reversal of Suspension Filed 
by: 

KEN GOLTARA,
a Permanent Certificated Employee,

OAH No.  2018031142

ORDER DENYING MOTION 
FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL 
OF SUSPENSION

 Moving Party,

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

LAKE ELSINORE UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT,

 Responding Party.

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Tiffany L. King, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, California, on 
April 20, 2018.

Gregory J. Rolen, Attorney at Law, represented Ken Goltara.

Todd M. Robbins, Attorney at Law, represented the Lake Elsinore Unified School 

District (District).

The District has suspended Mr. Goltara without pay pending the outcome of its action
to dismiss him from his employment as an elementary assistant principal.  The basis for the 
suspension under Education Code section 44939 is immoral conduct.  In his Motion, Mr. 
Goltara seeks an order for the immediate reversal of his suspension. The District opposes the 
Motion.

v. 

//

//

//

1

DISCUSSION

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the employing school district, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530. . . .” 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) 

Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), an employee who has been 
placed on such suspension may file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  “Review 
of a motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the 
facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.” (Ibid.)1

“Immoral conduct” is to be construed according to “its common and approved usage 

having regard for the context in which the legislature used” the term.  (Palo Verde Unified 
School District of Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 971.)  In Board of 
Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 
808, 811, the court held:

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that which is 
hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 
morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 
includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of 
corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to 
the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.

The Statement of Charges alleges Mr. Goltara was intoxicated at a staff holiday party 

and “engaged in multiple acts of inappropriate conduct over a period of several hours, 
including unwanted kissing and touching of several female co-workers.”  It is further alleged 
that when the principal subsequently approached Mr. Goltara to discuss his behavior at the 
party, Mr. Goltara “showed little remorse and initially complained that pictures of [him] 

 

 

1 “. . . The grant or denial of the motion shall be without prejudice to consideration by 
the Commission on Professional Competence, based upon the full evidentiary record before 
it, of the validity of the grounds for dismissal.  The ruling shall not be considered by the 
commission in determining the validity of the grounds for dismissal, and shall not have any 
bearing on the commission's determination regarding the grounds for dismissal.”  (Ed. Code, 
§ 44939, subd. (c)(4).)

2

drunk at the party made [him] ‘look fat.’”  Mr. Goltara later apologized to the principal and 
asserted he did not recall his misconduct.

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument.  It 

is determined that the District alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if 
true, would constitute a basis for immediate suspension based upon “immoral conduct” under 
Education Code section 44939, subdivisions (b) and (c).

ORDER

GOOD CAUSE HAVING NOT BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED. 

DATED:  April 27, 2018

 

_______________________
TIFFANY L. KING
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings

3

