BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 

 

 

Employee, 

    OAH No. 2018120567 

 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
MIGUEL ALVAREZ, 
 
  
versus 
 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, on January 
11, 2019. 
 
  
Assistant General Counsel, represented the Los Angeles School District (District). 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Eric Sawyer, Office of Administrative Hearings 

Tamra M. Smith, Esq., represented Miguel Alvarez (Employee).  Michael Voigt, 

               District. 

 

 

 

 
Employee timely filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (motion) with 

  
The District filed a statement of charges against Employee, and placed him on 
  
indefinite unpaid suspension.  The suspension is based on allegations that Employee willfully 
refused to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, in violation of Education 
Code section 44939. 
 
 
OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1).  The various papers 
filed by the parties in connection with the motion were described on the record during the 
hearing.  The ALJ granted Employee’s request for official notice of the pleadings, but denied 
her request as for prior orders granting similar motions and legislative materials concerning 
Assembly Bill 449 for the reasons stated on the record.  The parties also presented oral 
argument during the hearing. 
 
 
immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.  Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion for review of the 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district may 

suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the 
facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.” 
 
  
In this case, the ALJ considered the written submissions of the parties and oral 
argument made during the hearing.  Based upon a review of the statement of charges filed in 
the instant matter (the pleadings), and as set forth in detail on the record during the 
telephonic hearing, the motion is granted as follows. 

 
Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of this motion, the 

With regard to the alleged misconduct of a public employee, the term “willful” carries 

A comparison of Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, 

  
ALJ need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.”  (Blank v. 
Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)  A motion such as this is analogous to a demurrer.  A 
demurrer can be sustained when a plaintiff’s “conclusory characterization of defendant's 
conduct as intentional, willful and fraudulent” was “patently insufficient.”  (Brousseau v. 
Jarrett (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 
 
  
a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct.”  
(Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775.)  
 
  
subdivision (b), is illuminating.  Pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5) and (a)(2), 
discipline is warranted for unsatisfactory performance or unprofessional conduct, 
respectively, but not unpaid suspension.  More importantly, under section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(8), while a teacher’s persistent violation of a school district’s reasonable regulations is 
grounds for discipline, it is not an authorized basis for unpaid suspension.  Rather, unpaid 
suspension is authorized only for a willful refusal to perform regular assignments pursuant to 
section 44939, subdivision (b).   
 
  
regular assignment is more akin to the traditional labor charge of insubordination, i.e., an 
intentional, willful, volitional refusal to perform any part of a particular regular assignment.  
Examples coming to mind are refusal to have children say the pledge of allegiance, perform 
yard duty, allow children to use the restroom during instructional time, teach certain parts of 
a school district’s curriculum, turn in lesson plans, attend meetings mandated by a 
supervisor, etc.  However, a charge of willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must 
be more than unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent or even persistent failure to perform a 
regular assignment. 
 
  
alleged misconduct is not the result of a willful, volitional, refusal to perform his regular 
assignment.  The well-pleaded facts indicate that when Employee taught his classes, 
administrators found fault with his performance.  Stated another way, the pleadings indicate 
Employee was teaching his classes, but did so deficiently in the District’s opinion.  The 

In this case, a review of the statement of charges in its totality indicates Employee’s 

This comparison indicates the cause of discipline for willful refusal to perform a 

2 

The pleadings allege with factual precision and abundance that Employee’s teaching 

 
Good cause having been established, the motion is granted.  Pursuant to Education 

allegations also indicate Employee failed to improve after receiving multiple conferences 
and, perhaps, persistently, but not always, failed to comply with directives given to him. 
 
  
during the times in question was unsatisfactory, unprofessional and persistently violated 
District rules and regulations, among other theories.  But where the pleadings allege a willful 
refusal to perform a regular assignment, the allegations are vague, conclusory and devoid of 
the kind of factual content which, if true, would constitute a willful state of mind or 
volitional refusal to perform as directed.  As discussed above, vague and conclusory 
allegations are not binding on the ALJ and need not be accepted.   
  
  
Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(5), this order shall become effective within five days of 
service, and the District shall make the Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and 
compensation within 14 days after service of the order. 
 
   
 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

____________________________ 
ERIC SAWYER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

3 

January 14, 2019