BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
KRISTA OLSON, 
 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
   
v. 
 
FONTANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
 
  
   
 
 
 

    Responding party. 

Moving party, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
OAH No. 2018080347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Dena Coggins, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, California, on 
September 7, 2018. 

 
Attorney Carlos Perez represented Krista Olson. 

Attorney Margaret Chidester represented Fontana Unified School District (School 

 

District). 

 
 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On July 11, 2018, the Board of Education for the School District approved charges for 

  
 
dismissal against Ms. Olson based on causes that included, but were not limited to, immoral 
conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause under 
Education Code section 44939.  On July 12, 2018, the School District served Ms. Olson with 
a Notice of Statement of Written Charges and Intention to Dismiss and placed her on 
immediate suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939.  On July 16, 
2018, Ms. Olson requested a hearing to contest the suspension and dismissal charges.   
 
 
On August 9, 2018, Ms. Olson filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
(Motion) with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), alleging 

1 

that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for immediate suspension 
because the allegations do not establish immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform a 
regular assignment without reasonable cause. 
 

 
DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

 
 
immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the school district, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.” (Ed. Code, § 
44939, subd. (b).) 
 
 
Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a motion filed 
pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” 
 

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument.  

Based upon a review of the Statement of Written Charges, the District failed to allege facts 
which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

 
 

ORDER 

 
GOOD CAUSE HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is GRANTED. 
 
The School District shall make the employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and 
  
compensation within 14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 
 
 
 
DATED: September 13, 2018 
 
 

____________________________ 
DENA COGGINS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

2 

