 

BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINSTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

EDWARD CARTER (EN 767793), A Permanent Certificated 

Suspension of: 

Employee, 

Moving Party 

and  

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2019060321 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Thomas Heller, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California on 

Tamra M. Smith, Esq., Egality Law LLP, represented moving party Edward Carter 

July 5, 2019. 

(Carter). 

 

 

M. Cristina Cruz, Assistant General Counsel, represented responding party Los 

Angeles Unified School District (District). 

BACKGROUND 

On April 5, 2019, an Assistant Chief Human Resources Officer for the District 

filed a Statement of Charges requesting that the District’s Board of Education (Board) 

give notice to Carter of its intention to immediately suspend him without pay and 

thereafter dismiss him from employment. The Board gave the notice to Carter, who 

demanded a hearing on the dismissal and moved for immediate reversal of the 

suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). The District filed 

an opposition to the motion to which Carter replied, and counsel for both parties 

presented oral argument at the motion hearing. 

Carter asserts that the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges, even if true, 

are insufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay. The 

Statement of Charges describes two incidents of alleged misconduct nearly three years 

apart that occurred while Carter was working as a physical education teacher for the 

District. In the first incident on or about October 20, 2015, Carter allegedly violated 

District policy by video recording two seventh-grade students without permission 

when the students failed to hand him two basketballs during a physical education 

class. Carter also allegedly used “inappropriate physical force including pushing, 

pulling, and punching” one of the students after the student threw a ball at him, and 

told students in the class that they “‘are not going to be something in life,’ or words to 

that effect.” (Statement of Charges, p. 3.) The Statement of Charges alleges Carter’s 

conduct violated directives given to him in 2005 not to put hands on students, always 

treat students with respect, and never publicly humiliate any student. 

2 

 

In the second incident on or about October 5, 2018, Carter allegedly directed 

four ninth-grade students to do “bear crawls” on a hot blacktop during a physical 

education class, despite the students’ complaints that their hands were burning and in 

pain. Carter also allegedly told the students to put Vaseline on their hands and keep 

going, and failed to send the students to the school nurse. The Statement of Charges 

alleges Carter’s conduct failed to comply with District policies and administrative 

directives previously given to him to always take students seriously if they have any 

health complaints, always treat students with respect, and practice respectful 

treatment toward all staff and students. 

The District asserts that these factual allegations are sufficient to support 

Carter’s immediate suspension without pay for “immoral conduct” and “willful refusal 

to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause” under Education Code 

section 44939. Carter asserts that the allegations at most amount to unprofessional 

conduct, unsatisfactory performance, negligence, and/or poor judgment, none of 

which are authorized bases for immediate suspension under Education Code section 

44939. 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

The governing board of a school district may immediately suspend a permanent 

certificated employee who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a 

felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental 

disability, with willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, 

as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or 

advocating communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may 

serve and file with the Office of Administrative Hearings a motion for immediate 

3 

 

reversal of suspension. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge 

reviews the motion, and the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether 

the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 

basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) Although material facts 

properly pleaded must be accepted as true, the administrative law judge need not 

accept contentions, deductions, or conclusions of fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 

39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Education 

of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, 

quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 

Although there are no cases interpreting the term “willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause” under Education Code section 44939, 

case law from related settings reflects that the term “willful” “carries a volitional 

coloration which excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct.” 

(Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775; see also Peters v. 

Mitchell (1963) 222 Cal.App.2d 852, 862 [“Wilful disobedience connotes a specific 

violation of command or prohibition.”].) Declining to obey an employer's directions, 

without reason, is sufficient to establish willful refusal. (See, e.g., Wilbur v. Office of City 

Clerk of City of Los Angeles (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 636, 642 [observing an employee 

who “did not attribute his refusals to illness” and made “no showing before the 

4 

 

hearing examiner of willingness to comply with the reasonable orders of his superiors,” 

demonstrated “wilful refusal to obey the reasonable orders of an employer”].) 

DISCUSSION 

Accepting all material facts properly pleaded as true, the Statement of Charges 

does not allege facts sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under 

section 44939. The facts alleged about the two incidents are sparse and not necessarily 

indicative of immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause. As to the first incident in October 2015, the facts as alleged reflect 

an improper and unprofessional reaction to student defiance and aggression, but 

determining whether that reaction was immoral requires a fuller description of the 

incident than what the Statement of Charges supplies. Furthermore, Carter’s continued 

employment with the District for years after the incident calls into question the 

seriousness of the incident and whether it justifies Carter’s immediate suspension now. 

As to the second incident in October 2018, the facts as alleged reflect at least 

negligence and poor judgment, but not necessarily intentional or reckless harm to 

students that could amount to immoral conduct. As to both incidents, the pleaded 

facts are also too limited to determine whether Carter’s behavior had a “volitional 

coloration” consistent with a willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause. (Coomes v. State Personnel Bd., supra, 215 Cal.App.2d at p. 775.) 

Therefore, Carter is entitled to immediate reversal of his suspension. 

5 

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is granted. The District shall 

make Carter whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days after 

service of this order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

DATE: 

 

THOMAS HELLER 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

 

 

6 

July 19, 2019