BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINSTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

BRAD SAUNDERS, A Permanent Certificated Employee 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party 

and 

Responding Party 

OAH No. 2019090176 

SAN MATEO FOSTER CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Laurie R. Pearlman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on September 27, 2019. 

(Saunders). 

Tony Rice, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Brad Saunders 

Christian M. Keiner, Attorney at Law, represented responding party San Mateo 

Foster City School District (District). 

BACKGROUND 

On August 8, 2019, Sue Wieser, the District’s Compliance Officer, caused to be 

served on Saunders a Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Statement of Charges, 

recommending his dismissal from employment with the District on grounds including 

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, and persistent 

violation of or willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

The Statement of Charges contains allegations describing incidents of aggressive and 

antagonistic conduct by Saunders towards his principal, fellow certificated employees, 

and students. 

On August 8, 2019, the District served Saunders with a Notice of Immediate 

Unpaid Suspension, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, for immoral conduct. 

Saunders demanded a hearing on the dismissal and moved for immediate reversal of 

the suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). The District 

filed opposition to the motion, and counsel for both parties presented oral argument 

at the motion hearing. 

Saunders asserts that the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges, even if 

true, are insufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay. He 

first asserts that the allegations do not establish willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments. However, the District concedes that willful refusal was not the basis for 

its suspension of Saunders without pay. 

2 

Saunders next argues that the only acts which constitute immoral conduct by a 

teacher are sexual harassment or public sexual activity; drug use or possession; or theft 

of property or compensation. Even accepting as true the allegation that he engaged in 

conduct towards another staff member which created a discriminatory, threatening, 

and hostile work environment, Saunders asserts that while such conduct may be 

unprofessional and unacceptable, it does not constitute immoral conduct. 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee 

who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or advocating 

communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion 

for immediate reversal of the suspension with the Office of Administrative Hearings. 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge reviews the motion, and 

the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted 

as true, the administrative law judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or 

conclusions of fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

3 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Education 

v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club 

(1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 

Immoral conduct can be construed according to common usage. “The term 

‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of the 

general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to 

sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of 

corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless 

conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare.” (Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 

967, 972.) 

The conduct alleged is immoral conduct as it is willful, flagrant, or shameless 

conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community and constitutes an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the 

public welfare. Accordingly, Saunders failed to establish good cause to reverse the 

immediate suspension. 

 

 

4 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

LAURIE R. PEARLMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearing

DATE: 

 

ORDER 

 

 

5 

October 14, 2019