 BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
OAH No. 2019040021 
 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION (Ed. Code, § 44939, 
subd. (c)(4)) 

 

 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
JARED BELL, a Permanent Certificated 
Employee, 
 
   
 
v. 
 
MONTEREY PENINSULA UNIFIED 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
  
   
 

 

 

 

    Responding Party. 

Moving Party, 

 

 

 
Administrative Law Judge Diane Schneider, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

of California, heard this matter telephonically from Oakland, California, on April 19, 2019. 

 
Lawrence E. Biegel and Joseph Cisneros, Attorneys at Law, The Biegel Law Firm, 

represented respondent Jared Bell. 
 

Sarah Kaatz, Steve Ngo, and Michele R. Lyons, Attorneys at Law, Lozano Smith, 

represented Monterey Peninsula Unified School District. 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
A statement of charges and notice of recommendation for immediate suspension 

 
without pay and dismissal, was served on respondent on March 4, 2019.  The statement of 
charges alleges the following grounds in support of respondent’s dismissal and immediate 
suspension without pay under Education Code section 449391: immoral conduct, evident 
unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state 
                                                 

1 The District contends that the statement of issues also charges respondent with a 

“willful refusal to perform regular assignments without cause” as a basis for his immediate 
suspension without pay under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b).  This is 
incorrect.  The statement of charges does not so allege.  

or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of public schools.  The District 
placed respondent on immediate suspension without pay under Education Code section 
44939.    
 
 
On April 1, 2019, respondent timely filed a motion with the Office of Administrative 
Hearings for immediate reversal of his suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code 
section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), arguing that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis 
to put him on immediate unpaid status because the allegations in the accusation do not rise to 
the level of immoral conduct.  Respondent also requests that the District reimburse him for 
all accrued and unpaid pay and benefits.  On April 9, 2019, the District filed an opposition to 
respondent’s motion, and on April 12, 2019, respondent filed a reply to the District’s 
opposition. 
 
 

DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

 
 
immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.” (Ed. Code,  
§ 44939, subd. (b).) 
 
 
pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” 
 

Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a motion filed 

The written submissions of the parties and oral argument have been fully considered.  
Based upon a review of the statement of charges, the District has alleged facts which, if true, 
are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension, pursuant to Education Code 
section 44939, subdivision (b), for immoral conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

2 

ORDER 
 
Respondent’s motion for immediate reversal of suspension and his request for 

 
reinstatement to paid status are DENIED.  The District’s immediate suspension of 
respondent Jared Bell is upheld.   
 
 
 
DATED: April 22, 2019 
 
 

____________________________ 
DIANE SCHNEIDER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 

 

3 

