BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2019040627 
 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)) 

 
 
 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension of: 
 
CARLOS POLANCO, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee,  
 
 
                                              Moving Party, 
 
and 
 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
 
                                         Responding Party. 
 

 

On May 10, 2019, a telephonic hearing on the motion filed by Carlos Polanco for 

Richard J. Schwab, Attorney at Law, with Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, represented 

 
 
 
immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) was held by Julie Cabos-Owen, Administrative 
Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), in Los Angeles. 
 
 
moving party Carlos Polanco (Employee). 
 
 
represented responding party Los Angeles Unified School District (District). 
 
The District filed a Statement of Charges (SOC) against Employee, and placed him on 
 
unpaid suspension pending the outcome of its action to dismiss Employee.  The bases for the 
suspension under Education Code section 44939 are:  willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the employing school district; and immoral conduct.1  In the Motion, Employee seeks an 
order for the immediate reversal of his suspension.  The District opposes the Motion. 

Lynn I. Ibara, Associate General Counsel I, with the Office of the General Counsel, 

                                                 
1 The SOC also alleges the following grounds for dismissal under Education Code 
 
section 44931:  unprofessional conduct; unsatisfactory performance; evident unfitness for 

Employee timely filed his Motion with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district may 

The ALJ reviewed and considered the SOC, the written submissions of the parties, 

A motion made pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), like the 

 
44939, subdivision (c)(1).  The District filed an opposition, and Employee filed a reply. 
 
 
and oral argument made during the hearing.  Based upon the foregoing, the Motion is granted 
as set forth below. 
 
Education Code Section 44939 and Motions for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
 
 
immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged with, among 
other things, immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the State Board of 
Education or the employing school district. 
 
 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to 
file a motion for review of the suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited to a 
determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are 
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 
 
 
current Motion, is analogous to a demurrer because the properly-pleaded facts must be 
accepted as true for purposes of resolving the motion.  However, the ALJ need not accept 
“contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.”  (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 
311, 318.)  Additionally, as with a demurrer, the Motion can be granted if the District’s 
“conclusory characterization of [Employee’s] conduct as intentional, willful and fraudulent” 
is “patently insufficient.”  (See, e.g., Brousseau v. Jarrett (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 
 
Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignments without Reasonable Cause 
 
 
In analyzing whether cause exists for Employee’s immediate suspension under 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), for “willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause,” a comparison to Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a), is informative.  Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(2) (for 
unprofessional conduct), (a)(5) (for unsatisfactory performance), and (a)(8) (for persistent 
violation of the school district’s reasonable regulations) authorize a teacher’s dismissal, but 
not immediate unpaid suspension.  The threshold for immediate suspension, as authorized in 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), is higher than the threshold for dismissal set 
forth in Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a).  Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (b), allows immediate suspension only if the refusal to perform regular 
assignments was “willful.” Notably, a teacher cannot be immediately suspended for 
persistent violation of school laws and district regulations.  The use of the words “willful 
                                                                                                                                                             
service; and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 
reasonable regulations prescribed by the State Board of Education or the school district. 

2 

In order to establish grounds for immediate suspension under Education Code section 

refusal” rather than “persistent violation” indicates that, although repeated performance 
failures may establish grounds for dismissing a teacher under Education Code section 44932, 
such continuing failures are not grounds for immediate suspension under Education Code 
section 44939. 
 
 
44939, the employee’s refusal to perform his regular assignment must have been “willful.”  
In the context of a public employee’s engaging in “willful” misconduct, the term “willful” 
“carries a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent 
conduct.”  (Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal. App. 2d 770, 775.)  
Consequently, a willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must be more than an 
unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent or even persistent failure to perform a regular 
assignment; instead, it must be an intentional, volitional refusal to perform any part of a 
regular assignment. 
 
 
The SOC alleges with specificity numerous instances of Employee’s deficient 
performance and continued failure to improve after multiple directives and guidance 
sessions, which illustrated Employee’s “failure to perform” regular assignments in 
compliance with directives and guidance (see e.g., SOC, p. 15, lines 17-18, p. 19, lines 4-5).  
The factual allegations demonstrate that Employee did perform his duties, but 
unsatisfactorily.  However, where the SOC alleges Employee “willfully refused to comply 
with the verbal and written directives provided him” (e.g., p. 18, lines 26-27), these 
assertions are conclusory, without specifically indicating how Employee’s “failure” to 
perform as directed constituted an intentional and deliberate refusal, rather than negligent 
conduct.  As noted above, conclusory characterizations of conduct as intentional or willful 
are not binding on the ALJ and need not be accepted.  Consequently, the SOC does not 
sufficiently plead Employee’s “willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause.” 
 
 
Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are not sufficient to 
establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (b), for willful refusal to perform regular assignments. 
 
Immoral Conduct 
 
“Immoral conduct” has been defined as conduct “which is hostile to the welfare of the 
 
general public and contrary to good morals.  [It] has not been confined to sexual matters, but 
includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 
depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (Board of Education of San 
Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 [Weiland]; Palo 
Verde etc. Sch. Dist. v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal. App.3d 967, 972 [Hensey].) 
 

3 

The Supreme Court in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 

The SOC alleges that Employee used inappropriate, disrespectful, demeaning, and 

 
223-224 (Morrison), further defined immoral conduct, quoting from Jarvella v. Willoughby-
Eastlake City School Dist. (1967) 12 Ohio Misc. 288: “[Immoral conduct] must be 
considered in the context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile 
to the welfare of the general public; more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to 
the welfare of the school community. . . .  In providing standards to guide school boards in 
placing restraints on conduct of teachers, the Legislature is concerned with the welfare of the 
school community.  Its objective is the protection of students from corruption.” 
 
 
derogatory language.  However, while Employee’s alleged comments to students may 
demonstrate poor judgment and unprofessional conduct, they do not rise to the level of 
immoral conduct as defined by Weiland, Hensey, and Morrison.  Accordingly,  
the SOC contains no allegations that rise to the level of immoral conduct for purposes of 
resolving this Motion. 
 
 
Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are not sufficient to 
establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (b), for immoral conduct. 
 
Disposition 
 
 
Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(5), this order shall become effective within five days of 
service, and the District shall make Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and 
compensation within 14 days after service of the order. 
 

Good cause having been established, the Motion is granted.  Pursuant to Education 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
JULIE CABOS-OWEN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

4 

May 15, 2019