BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension of: 
 
JENNIFER GARCIA, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee,  
 
                                              Moving Party. 
. 
 

 
OAH No. 2019110611 
 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)) 

Abraham M. Levy, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
 
State of California, heard this matter telephonically on December 13, 2019, from San Diego, 
California. 
 
 
party Jennifer Garcia. 
 
 
the (District). 
 

Matthew C. Vance, Attorney at Law, Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP represented 

Hannah Weinstein, Attorneys at Law, Rothner Segall Greenstone, represented moving 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On November 15, 2019, moving party timely filed a motion seeking immediate 

 
 
The District served moving party with a Statement of Charges on October 4, 2019, 
and placed her on unpaid suspension pending the outcome of its action to dismiss her.  The 
basis for the suspension under Education Code section 44939 is immoral conduct.   
 
 
reversal of her suspension and reinstating her salary and benefits pending resolution of the 
charges against her.   
 
 
teachers found in a box of items, placing it in the teacher’s lounge, and sharing photos of 
teachers with the noose was meant as an effort at grim humor they wanted to share with other 
teachers.  The conduct had no racial aspect.  The District’s September 6, 2019, investigation 
report attached to the Statement of Charges confirms that moving party did not have a racial 
animus in her conduct.  The District argues that the allegation of immoral conduct is 
adequately pled in the Statement of Charges to warrant respondent’s suspension from 
employment without pay under Education Code section 44939.     

Moving party argues that her conduct of posing with a noose she and other first grade 

 

APPLICABLE STATUTES 

Education Code section 44939 permits the District to suspend immediately, without 

 
 
pay, a permanent employee who the District alleges committed “immoral conduct”. (Ed. 
Code, § 44939, subd. (b).)  Administrative review of an order for immediate suspension is 
“limited to a determination whether the facts alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are 
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.”  (Ibid., subd. 
(c)(1).) 
 

CONCLUSION 

The parties’ submissions and arguments have been fully considered.  The District has 

 
 
not alleged facts which, if true, would establish that moving party engaged in immoral 
conduct.  These allegations, as pled, are insufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 
 
 

ORDER 

The motion by moving party Jennifer Garcia for immediate reversal of suspension 

 
 
and for reimbursement of pay and benefits during the period of suspension is granted.  
Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(5), this order shall become 
effective within five days of service, and the District shall make respondent whole for any 
lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of the order. 
 
 
 
DATED:  December 17, 2019 
 
 
 

___________________ 
ABRAHAM M. LEVY 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

2 

