BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

CARLOS MEDINA, 

Moving Party, 

and  

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2019100235 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,  

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Laurie R. Pearlman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on October 25, 2019. 

Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Carlos 

Medina (Medina). 

Kelly Kim, Assistant General Counsel II, represented responding party Los 

Angeles Unified School District (District). 

BACKGROUND 

Medina was a certificated, permanent employee of the District, assigned as a 

fourth grade elementary school teacher at Castelar Elementary School. 

In its 61-page Statement of Charges, the District seeks to dismiss Medina from 

employment based upon allegations that he engaged in immoral conduct (Ed. Code, 

§§ 44932, subd. (a)(1), 44939); unprofessional conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2)); 

dishonesty (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(4)) unsatisfactory performance (Ed. Code, § 

44932, subd. (a)(5)); evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6)); 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(8)); 

and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause (Ed. Code, 

§ 44939). 

On September 3, 2019, during a closed session, the District's Board of Education 

immediately suspended Medina without pay, pending a hearing before the 

Commission on Professional Competence (CPC). The District provided Medina with 

notice and a Statement of Charges on September 4, 2019. Thereafter Medina 

submitted a timely request for hearing, pursuant to Education Code (Code) sections 

44934, subdivision (a), and 44941. 

2 

The District’s Contentions  

The District contends that it has properly pleaded charges that contain factual 

allegations sufficient to support causes of immoral conduct, and willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, pursuant to Code section 

44939. 

The District alleges in the Statement of Charges that Medina committed 

immoral conduct by instituting various forms of corporal punishment and engaging   

in retaliatory behavior. Specifically, he prohibited students, including a disabled 

student, from eating breakfast in the classroom, as punishment for not finishing their 

school work; he interfered with an administrative investigation by lecturing his 

students to not be "tattletales,”; and he intimidated Cristina Solis, a Behavior 

Intervention Paraprofessional, by staring at her while lecturing the class to not be 

"tattletales."   

The District also alleges in the Statement of Charges that Medina committed 

fraud by signing and submitting three separate Certifications of Absence stating that 

he had to attend to his daughter’s illness on five separate days when Medina’s 

daughter was present at her school on those specific five days. 

In addition to the charges alleging immoral conduct, the Statement of Charges 

alleges that Medina willfully refused to perform his regular assignments in four broad 

categories. Specifically, the District alleges that Medina failed in: (1) preparing and 

executing an adequate lesson plan; (2) practicing effective classroom management; (3) 

communicating the objectives of the lesson; and (4) utilizing effective pedagogy.  

The District further alleges in the Statement of Charges that Medina willfully 

refused to perform his regular assignments by refusing to follow directives from his 

3 

administrators. Specifically, the District alleges that Medina continued to use his 

personal cell phone and desktop computer for personal reasons during class times 

after being directed not to on three specific occasions. It also alleges that Medina 

failed to provide a safe and respectful environment in his class as directed on five 

separate occasions, in that he failed to monitor his students while on the bus and left 

his students unattended in the bus. 

Medina’s Contentions 

 

  Medina asserts that the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges, even if 

true, are insufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay. He 

first asserts that the allegations address absences, some isolated incidents in the 2018-

2019 school year, and 13 days of deficient instruction from 2017 to 2019. Medina 

contends that these allegations do not establish willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments. 

Medina asserts that the charges pertaining to teaching deficiencies amount to 

unsatisfactory performance or unprofessional conduct, at most, rather than willful 

refusal, and as such do not constitute a basis for unpaid suspension. 

As for the immoral conduct charges, Medina argues that the District has failed 

to allege sufficient facts to support the charges and that therefore, the allegations do 

not constitute immoral conduct. 

4 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

Applicable Law 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee 

who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or advocating 

communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion 

for immediate reversal of the suspension with the Office of Administrative Hearings. 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge reviews the motion, and 

the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted 

as true, the administrative law judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or 

conclusions of fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

 

  Although there are no cases interpreting the term “willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause” under Code section 44939, case law 

from related settings reflects that the term “willful” “carries a volitional coloration 

which excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct.” (Coomes v. State 

Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775; see also Peters v. Mitchell (1963) 222 

Cal.App.2d 852, 862 [“Wilful disobedience connotes a specific violation of command or 

prohibition.”].) Declining to obey an employer's directions, without reason, is sufficient 

to establish willful refusal. (See, e.g., Wilbur v. Office of City Clerk of City of Los 

Angeles (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 636, 642 [observing an employee who “did not 

5 

attribute his refusals to illness” and made “no showing before the hearing examiner of 

willingness to comply with the reasonable orders of his superiors,” demonstrated 

“wilful refusal to obey the reasonable orders of an employer”].) 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Ed. of San 

Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting 

Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 

Analysis 

WILLFUL REFUSAL 

 

  A comparison of Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, subdivision 

(b), is illuminating. Pursuant to Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2) and (a)(5), 

unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance warrants discipline, but not 

unpaid suspension. More importantly, under Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), 

while a teacher's persistent violation of a school district's reasonable regulations is 

grounds for discipline, it is not an authorized basis for unpaid suspension. Rather, 

unpaid suspension is authorized only for a willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments pursuant to Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

This comparison indicates the cause of discipline for willful refusal to perform a 

regular assignment is more akin to the traditional labor charge of insubordination, i.e., 

an intentional, willful, volitional refusal to perform any part of a particular regular 

6 

assignment. A charge of willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must be more 

than unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent or even persistent failure to perform a 

regular assignment. 

In this case, a review of the Statement of Charges pertaining to teaching 

deficiencies indicates that Medina’s alleged misconduct is not the result of a willful, 

volitional refusal to perform his regular assignment. The well-pleaded facts indicate 

that when Medina taught his classes, administrators found fault with his performance. 

Stated another way, the pleadings indicate Medina was teaching his class, but did so 

deficiently in the District's opinion. The allegations also indicate Medina failed to 

comply with directives given to him. 

The pleadings allege that Medina’s teaching during the times in question was 

unsatisfactory and unprofessional, among other theories. But where the pleadings 

allege a willful refusal to perform a regular assignment, the allegations are vague, 

conclusory and devoid of the kind of factual content which, if true, would constitute a 

willful state of mind or volitional refusal to perform as directed. Vague and conclusory 

allegations are not binding on the ALJ and need not be accepted. Accordingly, the 

District has not properly pleaded charges that contain factual allegations sufficient to 

state a basis for an immediate unpaid suspension based upon willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments. 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

The District has properly pleaded charges that contain factual allegations 

sufficient to support a charge of immoral conduct. The Statement of Charges contains 

allegations that Medina committed fraud by in connection with Certifications of 

Absence, instituted various forms of corporal punishment, and engaged in retaliatory 

7 

behavior, including prohibiting students from eating their breakfast and intimidating 

his students and a colleague. Such conduct is immoral, in that the conduct alleged is 

willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 

respectable members of the community, and constitutes an inconsiderate attitude 

toward good order and the public welfare.  

Accordingly, Medina has failed to establish good cause to reverse the 

immediate suspension. 

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

 

DATE: 

 

 

LAURIE R. PEARLMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

8 

November 8, 2019