BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

ROOSEVELT MOORE, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party 

and 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2019081109 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Dena Coggins, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, California 

on September 20, 2019. 

Estephanie Villalpando, Attorney at Law, represented Roosevelt Moore.  

Kelly Kim, Assistant General Counsel, represented Los Angeles Unified School 

District (School District). 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On July 30, 2019, the School District served Mr. Moore with a written Statement 

of Charges based on causes including, but not limited to, willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the School District.  

Based upon the foregoing charge, the School District governing board 

immediately suspended Mr. Moore from his duties and gave notice to him of the 

suspension. He was placed on suspension without pay under Education Code section 

44939.  

On August 28, 2019, Mr. Moore filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), 

alleging that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for 

immediate suspension because: (1) the School District failed to allege any facts that 

could support a finding that he acted willfully in failing to comply with oral and written 

directives; (2) the School District failed to plead sufficient facts to withstand Education 

Code section 44939’s willful intent requirement; (3) the School District did not allege in  

the “Charges” section of the Statement of Charges that Mr. Moore acted without 

reasonable cause; and (4) the School District did not set forth any facts to show that 

Mr. Moore’s purported failures were not caused by legitimate factors outside of his 

control or for other reasonable causes. 

 

2 

Discussion 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of [Education Code] 

section 51530.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) 

Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a motion 

filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the 

facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 

for immediate suspension under this section.” 

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral 

argument. Based upon a review of the Statement of Charges, the School District failed 

to allege facts, which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

GOOD CAUSE HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate Reversal 

of Suspension is GRANTED. The School District shall make Mr. Moore whole for any  

// 

// 

// 

 

3 

lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. 

Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5). 

 

DATE: September 27, 2019

DENA COGGINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

 

4 

