BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 

 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
JESSE WATKINS, 
 
  
versus 
 
GROSSMONT UNION HIGH SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
  
 

               District. 

Employee, 

 

 

 

 

 
OAH No. 2019010427 
 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)) 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Eric Sawyer, Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, on February 
8, 2019. 
 
  
represented the Grossmont Union High School District (District). 

Jon Cadieux, Esq., represented Jesse Watkins (Employee).  Ellen C. Wu, Esq., 

  
The District filed a statement of charges (Charges) against Employee, which seeks his 
  
termination, and places him on immediate unpaid suspension, as of December 14, 2018.  The 
suspension in the Charges is based on allegations that Employee engaged in immoral conduct 
in violation of Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939.  On December 
28, 2018, the District filed an amended statement of charges (Amended Charges), which 
allege the immediate unpaid suspension is based on immoral conduct, as well as respondent’s 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, in violation of 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 
 
 
OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1).  The various papers 
filed by the parties in connection with the motion were described on the record during the 
hearing.  The parties also presented oral argument during the hearing. 
 
The ALJ considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument made 
  
during the hearing.  Based upon a review of the papers filed in the instant matter, and as set 
forth in detail on the record during the telephonic hearing, the motion is denied as follows. 

 
Employee timely filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (motion) with 

 

The new allegations contained in the Amended Charges should not be considered because 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district may 

Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of this motion, the 

  
immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged with immoral 
conduct and/or willful refusal to perform their regular assignments.  Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion for review of the 
suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the 
facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.” 
 
  
ALJ need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.”  (Blank v. 
Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)  A motion such as this is analogous to a demurrer.  A 
demurrer can be sustained when a plaintiff’s “conclusory characterization of defendant’s 
conduct as intentional, willful and fraudulent” was “patently insufficient.”  (Brousseau v. 
Jarrett (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 
 
Which Pleading is to be Considered? 
 
  
the District’s suspension order was based on the allegations in the Charges.  Nothing in 
Education Code section 44939 permits the retroactive application of new allegations made 
after the initial statement of charges to support the original suspension order.  (Board of 
Trustees of Placerville Union School Dist. v. Porini (1968) 263 Cal.App.2d 784, 789 
[statutes pertaining to teacher discipline should be “strictly construed”].)  The appeal 
procedures set forth in section 44939, subdivision (c), are predicated on service of the “initial 
pleading” in the matter.  (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(2) [“The motion shall be served upon 
the governing board of the school district and filed with the Office of Administrative 
Hearings within 30 days after service upon the employee of the initial pleading of the 
matter.” (Emphasis added).])  Any other result would allow a school district to continually 
amend its charges to address any pleading deficiencies pointed out by Employee and 
maintain a teacher’s suspension indefinitely.  Such action would contravene the seeming 
intent behind section 44939 to provide an efficient, cost-effective, and quick procedure to 
litigate unpaid suspensions. 
 
Immoral Conduct 
 
“Immoral conduct,” pursuant to Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), 
  
and 44939, has been defined to mean conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  It is sometimes used as 
synonymous with dishonesty or a high degree of unfairness.  (Board of Ed. of San Francisco 
Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 [Weiland].)  
 
  
‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of the general 
public and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

Immoral conduct also can be construed according to common usage.  “The term 

2 

In this case, the Charges accuse Employee with falsifying Individualized Education 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 
depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.”  (Palo Verde etc. Sch. Dist. 
v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.)   
 
  
In Weiland, the teacher was charged with falsifying attendance records of her adult-
typing classes by signing the names of students to such records when the students were in 
fact absent in order to secure her continued employment and defraud the State and the school 
district.  The court upheld the teacher’s dismissal, finding that her conduct constituted 
immoral conduct as a basis for her dismissal.  (Weiland, supra, 179 Cal.App.2d at pp. 810-
812.) 
 
  
Program (IEP) documents by deliberately and intentionally copying old, outdated and 
inaccurate IEP document information and using it to falsely “complete” and/or “update” 
newer IEP documents to feign compliance with his regular assignments and obligations.  It is 
also alleged that Employee’s alleged misconduct was designed to serve only himself, by 
essentially cutting corners in his work for his own purposes and to the detriment of the 
students he served.  It is further alleged that Employee’s actions disserved and misled 
students, parents/guardians, and the District and its staff, and created potential liability 
exposure for the District and jeopardized the District’s ability to ensure and establish 
students were provided free and appropriate public education (FAPE), as required by law. 
 
Accordingly, Employee’s alleged misconduct was hostile to the welfare of the 
  
students and public, contrary to good morals, evidences a moral indifference to the opinions 
of others, shows a disregard for how his conduct impacts students and the District, and 
demonstrates an inconsiderate attitude towards good order and the public welfare.  (Weiland, 
supra, 179 Cal.App.2d at p. 811.)  Similar to the teacher in Weiland, Employee has been 
charged with essentially falsifying legally required documents, the IEPs, to falsely represent 
that he engaged in the effort required to complete them according to state and federal law, 
and also falsely represented the involved students’ academic abilities and deficits.  In this 
regard, the District has pleaded a sufficient claim of immoral conduct against Employee in 
the Charges. 
 
Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignment 
 
  
The District, through the Amended Charges, attempted to interject into this case 
additional charges supporting an immediate unpaid suspension, i.e., that respondent willfully 
refused to perform his regular assignment without reasonable cause.  The fact that the 
Amended Charges are not considered in this motion is of no consequence, because, as 
discussed above, the allegations of immoral conduct set forth in the Charges support an 
immediate unpaid suspension.  Therefore, it is unnecessary to consider whether the new 
allegations of willful refusal to perform also support an immediate unpaid suspension. 
 

3 

Since the District has pleaded facts which, if true, support a cause for immediate 

 
 
IT IS SO ORDERED. 

Conclusion 
 
  
unpaid suspension for immoral conduct, the motion is denied. 
  
  
   
 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
ERIC SAWYER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

4 

February 8, 2019