BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
ABRAHAM WOLFINGER, a Permanent 
Certificated Employee, 
 
   
 
v. 
 
MONTEREY PENINSULA UNIFIED 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
  
   
 

 

 

 

Moving Party, 

      Responding Party. 

 

 

 
OAH No. 2019120269 
 

 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)) 

 
Administrative Law Judge Michael C. Starkey, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter telephonically from Oakland, California, on 
January 3, 2020. 
 
Joseph Cisneros, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Abraham Wolfinger 

Louis T. Lozano, Attorney at Law, represented Monterey Peninsula Unified School 

(Wolfinger). 
 

District (District). 

 
 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
On November 25, 2019, the District filed and served a statement of charges against 

 
moving party Wolfinger, alleging multiple causes for dismissal, including immoral conduct, 
pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1).  The District placed 
respondent on immediate suspension without pay pending hearing, pursuant to Education 
Code section 44939, based upon the charge of immoral conduct.    
 
On December 6, 2019, Wolfinger timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of his 
 
suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), arguing 
that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to put him on immediate unpaid status 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

because the allegations in the statement of charges do not state sufficient facts to constitute 
immoral conduct.  In his motion, Wolfinger requests an order reversing his suspension 
without pay. 
 

DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 

 
 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who 
has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving 
moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of Section 51530 . . . .”  
 
 
employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 
Administrative Hearings.  This section limits the review of a motion to immediately reverse a 
suspension to “a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, 
if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 
 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 

The Administrative Law Judge has considered the written submissions of the parties 
and their oral argument.  Based upon a review of the charges, the District has alleged facts 
which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct. 
 
 

 
The motion for immediate reversal of the suspension of Abraham Wolfinger by 

ORDER 

 
Monterey Peninsula Unified School District is denied.  
 
 
 
DATED: January 6, 2020 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
MICHAEL C. STARKEY 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

2 

