BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2019050189 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
BRETT LEWIS, 
 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
   
 
WESTERN PLACER UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
  
   
 
 
 

    School District. 

Employee, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Placer Unified School District. 

 
Matthew Chevedden, Langenkamp, Curtis, & Price, LLP, represents Brett Lewis. 

Lindsay K. Moore and Ethan T. Retan, Kingsley Bogard LLP, represent Western 

On April 8, 2019, the district provided Mr. Lewis notice that it was immediately 

  
On March 22, 2019, the district served Mr. Lewis with a Statement of Charges 
 
alleging the following causes for dismissal: immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, 
dishonesty, unsatisfactory performance, evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation 
of or refusal to obey the rules governing his employment. 
 
 
suspending Mr. Lewis without pay and dismissing him from employment. 
 
 
with the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), pursuant to Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1), alleging that the Statement of Charges does not set forth facts 
sufficient to support an allegation that he engaged in immoral conduct, which is necessary in 
this case to sustain the suspension.  OAH set the matter for oral argument and established a 
briefing schedule.  The district’s opposition to the motion, and rebuttal brief by Mr. Lewis, 
were timely received.  On May 24, 2019, a telephonic conference was held, during which the 
parties were invited to present any additional oral arguments. 
 

On May 3, 2019, Mr. Lewis filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

 

 

1 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), permits an employee who has been 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), states that a school district, upon the 

 
filing of written charges, may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school 
district who has been charged with among other things, immoral conduct. 
 
 
placed on suspension to file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension with OAH.  
“Review of a motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to 
whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 
basis for immediate suspension under this section.”  (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) 
 

Based on a review of the Statement of Charges, and the arguments presented by both 

parties, it is determined that the district has alleged facts that, if true, are sufficient to 
constitute immoral conduct, which is a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b).  In addition, the district provided Mr. Lewis with 
sufficient notice that it was seeking to place Mr. Lewis on unpaid leave. 

 
GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED. 
 
 
 
DATED: May 28, 2019 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
ADAM L. BERG 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

2 

