BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

LARRY CUNHA, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party 

and 

Responding Party 

OAH No. 2019090070 

ROSEVILLE JOINT UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION  

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Dena Coggins, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, California 

on September 20, 2019. 

Matthew Chevedden, Attorney at Law, represented Larry Cunha.  

Michelle Cannon and Carolyn Gemma, Attorneys at Law, represented Roseville 

Joint Union High School District (School District). 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On August 5, 2019, the School District served Mr. Cunha with a written 

Statement of Charges based on causes, including, but not limited to, immoral conduct.  

Based upon the foregoing charge, the School District governing board 

immediately suspended Mr. Cunha from his duties and gave notice to him of the 

suspension. He was placed on suspension without pay under Education Code section 

44939.  

On September 4, 2019, Mr. Cunha filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), 

alleging that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for 

immediate suspension because: (1) even if the allegations in the Statement of Charges 

were true, they do not constitute immoral conduct; and (2) the School District has not 

alleged Mr. Cunha willfully refused to perform regular assignment without reasonable 

cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the School District. 

Discussion 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.” 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) 

 

2 

Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a motion 

filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the 

facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 

for immediate suspension under this section.” 

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral 

argument. Based upon a review of the Statement of Charges, the School District has 

alleged facts, which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED.  

 
DATE: September 27, 2019

 

 

DENA COGGINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

3 

