 

BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

CAMILLE PIPER, A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party, 

v. 

ELK GROVE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2019080592 

(Related to OAH No. 2019080824) 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION 

FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Administrative Law Judge Juliet E. Cox, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter telephonically on September 6, 2019, from 

Attorney Michael N. McCallum represented respondent and moving party 

Oakland, California. 

Camille Piper. 

 

 

Attorney Steve Ngo represented the Elk Grove Unified School District. 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On July 25, 2019, a representative of the Elk Grove Unified School District 

(District) served a statement of charges alleging cause to dismiss Camille Piper from 

employment with the District as a teacher. The charges include immoral conduct and 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. In reliance on 

these charges, the District has suspended respondent from employment without pay. 

On August 16, 2019, respondent timely filed a motion seeking immediate 

reversal of her suspension and reinstating her salary and benefits pending resolution 

of the charges against her. Respondent argues that the District has not alleged an 

adequate basis to suspend her from employment without pay before resolution of 

these charges, because the allegations describe neither immoral conduct nor willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. The District opposes 

respondent’s motion. 

APPLICABLE STATUTES 

Education Code section 44939 permits the District to suspend immediately, 

without pay, a permanent employee who the District alleges to have committed 

“immoral conduct” or “willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) Administrative review of an order for 

immediate suspension is available, “limited to a determination as to whether the facts 

alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension under this section.” (Id., subd. (c)(1).) 

2 

 

DISCUSSION 

The statement of charges has been considered in light of the parties’ written 

and oral arguments. The District has not alleged facts which, even if true, would 

establish either immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause. The District’s allegations do not constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

ORDER 

The motion by respondent and moving party Camille Piper for immediate 

reversal of suspension and for reimbursement of pay and benefits during the period of 

suspension is granted. The District’s immediate suspension of respondent is reversed. 

The District immediately shall return respondent to paid status, and shall make her 

whole for any lost wages, benefits, and other compensation within 14 days after 

service of this order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

DATE: 

 

 

 

JULIET E. COX 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

3 

September 12, 2019