BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

MELISSA D. RIVERA, Moving Party 

A Permanent Certificated Employee 

and 

COMPTON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2019121094 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Laurie R. Pearlman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on January 24, 2020. 

represented herself. 

Melissa D. Rivera (Respondent or Rivera), the moving party, appeared and 

Barrett K. Green, Attorney at Law, represented responding party Compton 

Unified School District (District). 

BACKGROUND 

Rivera was a permanent certificated employee of the District, assigned as a 

teacher at Cesar Chavez and Dominguez High Schools. On December 11, 2019, the 

District’s Board of Trustees voted to immediately suspend Rivera without pay and 

dismiss her from her employment as a result of her social media posts and 

inappropriate attire in the classroom. On November 19, 2019, the District served Rivera 

with a Notice of Recommendation of Dismissal and Statement of Charges (SOC). The 

District subsequently notified Rivera of its formal adoption of the SOC on December 

12, 2019. On December 12, 2019, Rivera submitted a timely request for hearing 

pursuant to Education Code sections 44934, subdivision (a) and 44941. 

The District’s SOC against Respondent alleges that Rivera engaged in immoral 

conduct by posting numerous lewd and lascivious messages on social media which her 

students accessed, and by repeatedly dressing provocatively and inappropriately for 

class. 

Rivera asserts that the District exceeded its authority in placing her on unpaid 

leave because these allegations, are, at best, examples of unprofessional conduct (e.g., 

conduct which is subject to an opportunity to cure and correct). 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee 

who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

2 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or advocating 

communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion 

for immediate reversal of the suspension with the Office of Administrative Hearings. 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge reviews the motion, and 

the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted 

as true, the administrative law judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or 

conclusions of fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Education 

v. Weiland, supra, at 811, quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 

740, Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 

972.) 

The conduct alleged in the SOC is immoral conduct as it constitutes willful, 

flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 

respectable members of the community, as well as an inconsiderate attitude toward 

good order and the public welfare. 

Accordingly, Rivera failed to establish good cause to reverse the immediate 

suspension. 

3 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

DATE: 

February 10, 2020

ORDER 

 

 

LAURIE R. PEARLMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

4 

