BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension Filed by: 

ANN VASQUEZ, Respondent 

OAH No. 2019090762 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Tiffany L. King, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, California 

on October 18, 2019. 

Brett B. McMurdo, Attorney at Law, of the law firm Hathaway, Perrett, Webster, 

Powers, Chrisman & Gutierrez, represented the respondent Ann Vasquez. 

Daniel McElhinney, Attorney at Law, of the law firm Dannis Woliver Kelley, 

represented the Orcutt Union School District (District). 

Procedural Background 

On August 14, 2019, the District’s Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources 

signed the Statement of Charges and Recommendation for Dismissal and Request for 

Immediate Unpaid Suspension against Ms. Vasquez, a permanent certificated 

employee, based on charges of including, but not limited to, immoral conduct and 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed 

by reasonable rules and regulations of the District. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subd. (a) & 

44939, subd. (b).) Ms. Vasquez timely filed a Demand for Hearing and Notice of 

Defense. 

On September 19, 2019, Ms. Vasquez filed a Notice of Motion and Motion for 

Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion) pursuant to Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (c), on grounds that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a 

sufficient basis for immediate unpaid suspension. Specifically, Ms. Vasquez argues that 

intoxication while on duty does not amount to immoral conduct and that the well-

pleaded facts in the Statement of Charges do not otherwise amount to willful refusal 

to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. The District filed its 

opposition on October 8, 2019. 

Discussion 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of [Education Code] 

section 51530. . . .” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).)1 

                                              

1 In her Motion, Ms. Vasquez argues that the Statement of Charges does not 

allege a violation of section 44939, subdivision (b), and therefore her immediate 

2 

Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), an employee who has 

been placed on such suspension may file a motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension. “Review of a motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a 

determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 

are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) 

“Immoral conduct” is to be construed according to “its common and approved 

usage having regard for the context in which the legislature used” the term. (Palo 

Verde Unified School District of Riverside County v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 

971.) In Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland 

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, the court held: 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

                                              
unpaid suspension was improper. However, section 44932 lists the exclusive grounds 

for dismissal or suspension of a permanent certificated employee. Section 44939 

authorizes placing such an employee on immediate unpaid suspension if certain 

causes are alleged, but does not serve as an independent ground for discipline. 

Accordingly, Ms. Vasquez’s argument is rejected. 

3 

Although not defined by the statute, “willful refusal” connotes an intentional 

failure to perform a certain act. Case law has held that declining an employer’s lawful 

directions, without reason, is sufficient to establish “willful refusal.” (See, e.g., Wilbur v. 

Office of City Clerk (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 636, 642 [employee who did not attribute 

his refusals to illness and made no showing of willingness to comply with the 

reasonable orders of his superiors demonstrated “willful refusal to obey the reasonable 

orders of an employer”]; Flowers v. State Personnel Board, 174 Cal.App.3d 753, 760 

[employee’s repeated refusal to undergo a medical examination or sobriety test, as 

directed by his employer, supported a charge of insubordination].) 

The Statement of Charges alleges Ms. Vasquez was intoxicated when she 

reported to her third grade classroom and began teaching. She then left the 

classroom, leaving the students with an un-credentialed assistant, and subsequently 

informed the school she was under the influence of alcohol and needed to go home. 

On a separate occasion, Ms. Vasquez reported to her classroom and began teaching. 

After returning from lunch, other staff observed Ms. Vasquez exhibit signs of 

intoxication. When confronted, Ms. Vasquez twice denied she had been drinking 

before she admitted to consuming alcohol in the school parking lot before school and 

during the lunch break. Subsequently, Ms. Vasquez’s blood alcohol content was 

measured at 0.19 percent and 0.177 percent, respectively. 

Ms. Vasquez argued that being intoxicated at work is not immoral conduct, that 

she has a history of alcoholism, and that she sought treatment immediately following 

her suspension. However, Ms. Vasquez’s history and rehabilitative efforts are not 

alleged in the pleading, and therefore, cannot be considered in determining whether 

the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under Education Code section 44939. 

4 

The parties’ written submissions and oral argument have been considered. The 

District alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, would 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension based upon “immoral conduct” under 

Education Code section 44939, subdivisions (b) and (c). Accordingly, the motion must 

be denied. 

ORDER 

GOOD CAUSE HAVING NOT BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED. 

DATE: October 31, 2019

 

TIFFANY L. KING 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

5 

