BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINSTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

SUSAN KASZYCKI, 

Moving Party, 

and  

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2019091016 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,  

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Laurie R. Pearlman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on October 25, 2019. 

Richard J. Schwab, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Susan Kaszycki 

(Kaszycki or Respondent). 

Lynn I. Ibara, Assistant General Counsel, represented responding party Los 

Angeles Unified School District (District). 

BACKGROUND 

Kaszycki is a certificated, permanent employee of the District, who was assigned 

as an elementary school teacher at Sunrise Elementary School. 

In its Statement of Charges, the District seeks to dismiss Kaszycki from 

employment with the District based upon allegations that she willfully refused to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause (Ed. Code, § 44939).  

On September 4, 2019, the District issued a Notice of lntent to Dismiss and 

Statement of Charges against Kaszycki, and placed her on an indefinite unpaid 

suspension, pending a hearing before the Commission on Professional Competence 

(CPC). Thereafter, Kaszycki submitted a timely request for hearing. 

The District’s Contentions  

The District contends that its Statement of Charges contains sufficient facts 

showing that Kaszycki willfully refused to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause, pursuant to Education Code (Code) section 44939, thereby justifying 

her immediate suspension without pay. 

The District asserts that the allegations in the Statement of Charges establish an 

on-going refusal by Kaszycki to perform regular assignments without reasonable 

2 

cause, despite oral and written assistance, guidance, and directives provided to help 

her perform these assignments. The allegations in the Statement of Charges involve 

Kaszycki’s failure to: provide differentiated instruction for students in her classroom of 

different learning levels; have clear behavior expectations in place; monitor students; 

and re-direct students engaged in off-task behavior. 

The District argues that Kaszycki had assistance and repeated notices and 

opportunities to perform her assignments, each of which involved regular assignments 

of elementary school teachers. The District further notes that the assignments alleged 

are not based on school laws of the State, or on regulations prescribed for the 

government of public schools, but on reasonable rules and regulations of the District. 

It contends that Respondent had knowledge of her regular assignment, and was 

provided with guidance and resources. Accordingly, the District asserts that Kaszycki’s 

failure to act constitutes a willful refusal in that it was voluntary and intentional, 

justifying her immediate suspension under Code section 44939.  

Kaszycki’s Contentions 

Kaszycki asserts that the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges, even if 

accepted as true, are insufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension 

without pay under Code section 44939. She contends that the Statement of Charges 

alleges various purported deficiencies and failures in her teaching abilities and 

performance. Kaszycki argues that these charges involve unsatisfactory performance or 

unprofessional conduct, at most, rather than willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments. She asserts that allegations of unsatisfactory performance or 

unprofessional conduct do not constitute a basis for unpaid suspension under Code 

section 44939.  

3 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

Applicable Law 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee 

who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or advocating 

communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion 

for immediate reversal of the suspension with the Office of Administrative Hearings. 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge reviews the motion, and 

the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted 

as true, the administrative law judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or 

conclusions of fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

 

  Although there are no cases interpreting the term “willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause” under Code section 44939, case law 

from related settings reflects that the term “willful” “carries a volitional coloration 

which excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct.” (Coomes v. State 

Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775; see also Peters v. Mitchell (1963) 222 

Cal.App.2d 852, 862 [“Willful disobedience connotes a specific violation of command 

or prohibition.”].) Declining to obey an employer's directions, without reason, is 

sufficient to establish willful refusal. (See, e.g., Wilbur v. Office of City Clerk of City of 

Los Angeles (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 636, 642 [observing an employee who “did not 

attribute his refusals to illness” and made “no showing before the hearing examiner of 

4 

willingness to comply with the reasonable orders of his superiors,” demonstrated 

“willful refusal to obey the reasonable orders of an employer”].) 

Analysis 

 

  A comparison of Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, subdivision 

(b), is illuminating. Pursuant to Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2) and (a)(5), 

unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance warrants discipline, but not 

unpaid suspension. More importantly, under Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), 

while a teacher's persistent violation of a school district's reasonable regulations is 

grounds for discipline, it is not an authorized basis for unpaid suspension. Rather, 

unpaid suspension is authorized only for a willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments pursuant to Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

This comparison indicates the cause of discipline for willful refusal to perform a 

regular assignment is more akin to the traditional labor charge of insubordination, i.e., 

an intentional, willful, volitional refusal to perform any part of a particular regular 

assignment. A charge of willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must be more 

than unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent or even persistent failure to perform a 

regular assignment. 

In this case, the Statement of Charges does not contain sufficient facts to 

establish that Kaszycki’s alleged teaching deficiencies are the result of a willful, 

volitional refusal to perform her regular assignment. Kaszycki was teaching her class, 

but did so deficiently in the District's opinion, despite the fact that she was provided 

with guidance and resources. The well-pleaded facts indicate that when Kaszycki 

taught her classes, administrators found fault with her performance.  

5 

The allegations, if true, may establish that Kaszycki’s teaching during the dates 

in question was unsatisfactory and unprofessional. But the allegations are devoid of 

the kind of factual content which, if true, would constitute a willful state of mind or 

volitional refusal to perform as directed. Therefore, Kaszycki is entitled to immediate 

reversal of her suspension. 

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is granted. The District shall 

make Kaszycki whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days 

after service of this order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

DATE: 

 

LAURIE R. PEARLMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

 

6 

