BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
LOURDES PRIETO, a Permanent 
Certificated Employee, 
 
   
 
v. 
 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
  
   
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

    Responding Party. 

Moving Party, 

 

 
OAH No. 2019030319 
Related to OAH No. 2019020481 

 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Danette C. Brown, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, 
California, on April 5, 2019. 

 
Attorney Arthur Four, with the law firm Reich, Adell, and Cvitan, represented 

Attorney M. Cristina Cruz, with the Office of the General Counsel, Los Angeles 

Unified School District (District), represented the District. 

Lourdes Prieto. 
 

  
 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
On or about February 5, 2019, the Governing Board of the District (Governing Board) 

 
approved the Statement of Charges and Recommendation for Dismissal and Immediate 
Unpaid Suspension of Ms. Prieto, based on causes including, but not limited to:  (1) 
unprofessional conduct; (2) unsatisfactory performance; (3) persistent violation of or refusal 
to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government 
of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school 
district employing her; and (4) willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by the reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 
district.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subd. (a)(2), (5) & (8); 44939, subd. (b).)  On February 6, 

2019, the Governing Board gave notice to Ms. Prieto of its decision and placed her on 
immediate suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939.  Thereafter, 
the Governing Board received Ms. Prieto’s demand for a hearing.   
 
 
 
On March 8, 2019, Ms. Prieto filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
(Motion), pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), contending that the 
Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for immediate suspension because 
the allegations therein do not rise to the level of willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause.  
 

 
DISCUSSION 

The term “willful” carries a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of 

Under section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a motion filed pursuant to this 

 
Education Code1 section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 
 
immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the School District, or with violation of section 51530.”  (§ 44939, subd. (b).) 
 
 
section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement 
of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this 
section.” 
 
Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignments 
 
 
accidental or even negligent conduct.  (Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 
Cal.App.2d 770, 775.)  A refusal needs to be “conscious, intentional and deliberate to be 
willful.”  (Goodhew v. Industrial Acc. Commission (1958) 157 Cal.App.2d 252, 257.)  
“Willful” is “voluntary and intentional, but not necessarily malicious.”  (Black’s Law Dict. 
(9th ed. 2009) p. 1737, col. 2.)  To immediately suspend Ms. Prieto without pay for willful 
refusal, the District was required to satisfy the following elements: (1) Ms. Prieto willfully 
refused to perform regular assignments; (2) the willful refusal to perform was without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by the reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 
school district; and (3) the District deemed it necessary to immediately suspend Ms. Prieto 
without pay.   
 
 
A comparison of sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, subdivision (b), is 
illuminating.  Pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5) and (a)(2), dismissal is provided 
for unsatisfactory performance or unprofessional conduct, respectively, but not unpaid 
suspension pending the hearing.  More importantly, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), 
                                                 

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise stated. 

2 

In this case, a review of the charges, individually, and in their totality, indicates 

while a teacher’s persistent violation of a school district’s reasonable regulations is grounds 
for discipline, it is also not an authorized basis for unpaid suspension.  Rather, for the 
purposes for this case where no immoral conduct is alleged, unpaid suspension is authorized 
only for a willful refusal to perform regular assignments pursuant to section 44939, 
subdivision (b).   
 
 
This comparison indicates the cause for discipline for willful refusal to perform a 
regular assignment is more akin to the traditional labor charge of insubordination, i.e., an 
intentional, willful, volitional refusal to perform any part of a particular regular assignment. 
Thus, a charge of willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must be more than 
unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent or even persistent failure to perform a regular 
assignment.   
 
 
respondent’s alleged misconduct is not the result of a willful, volitional, refusal to perform 
her regular assignment.  The well-pleaded facts indicate that when respondent taught her 
classes, administrators found fault with her performance.  Stated another way, the pleadings 
indicate respondent was teaching her required classes, but did so deficiently in the District 
administrator’s opinion.   
 
 
conferences and perhaps, persistently, but not always, failed to comply with directives given 
to her.  The pleadings allege in some detail that respondent’s teaching during the times 
observed was unsatisfactory, unprofessional and/or even violated District rules and 
regulations, among other theories.  But where the pleadings allege a willful refusal to 
perform a regular assignment, the allegations are vague, conclusory and devoid of the kind of 
factual content which, if true, would constitute a willful state of mind or volitional refusal to 
perform as directed.  As discussed above, the vague and conclusory allegations are not 
binding on the ALJ and need not be accepted.   
 
Conclusion 
 

The allegations also indicate respondent failed to improve after receiving multiple 

The written submissions of the parties and oral argument have been considered.  
Based upon a review of the Statement of Charges, the District has not alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code 
section 44939, subdivision (b). 

 
Good cause having been established, the Motion is GRANTED.  Pursuant to 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(5), this order shall become effective within  

 
 

 
 
ORDER 

3 

five days of service, and the District shall make the employee whole for any lost wages, 
benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of the Order.   

 
IT IS SO ORDERED.    

 
 
 
DATED:   April 19, 2019 
 
 

____________________________ 
DANETTE C. BROWN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

4 

