BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

ARSENE HERNANDEZ, Moving Party 

A Permanent Certificated Employee 

and 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2019110089 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR REVERSAL OF IMMEDIATE 

SUSPENSION 

Jennifer M. Russell, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter telephonically on November 22, 2019. Jason 

Wojciechowski, Attorney at Law, represented Arsene Hernandez (Hernandez), the 

moving party. Susan Hyman, Assistant General Counsel, represented the Los Angeles 

Unified School District (District), the responding party. 

 

 

 

Pursuant to Education Code1 section 44939, subsection (b), the District 

immediately suspended Hernandez from his duties upon its filing of a Statement of 

Charges containing allegations charging him with immoral conduct in violation of 

section 44939, unprofessional conduct in violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(2), 

dishonesty in violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(4), unsatisfactory performance 

in violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), evident unfitness for service in 

violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), persistent violation of or refusal to obey 

the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the governance of 

the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the 

District in violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), and willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the District in violation of section 44939. 

Pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), Hernandez served and filed with 

the Office of Administrative Hearings a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension. 

Pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (c)(2), the District filed an opposition. 

Having considered the parties’ written submissions and oral arguments, 

pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (4), the Administrative Law Judge issues the 

following Order granting the Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension. 

                                             

Code. 

1 Unless otherwise stated, all further statutory references are to the Education 

2 

 

Standard for Conducting Review of Section 44939 Motion for 

Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

1. 

The governing board of a school district has the authority to suspend 

immediately a permanent employee without pay upon its filing of written charges for 

dismissal on grounds of immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, incompetency due to mental disability, willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable 

rules and regulations, or violation of section 51530.2 (§ 44939, subd. (b).) Reviewing the 

statutory scheme for tenured teacher dismissal, the California Supreme Court, in 

Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 207, 215-216, has affirmed 

if one of the grounds for dismissal pursuant to section 44932 is also one of those 

specified in section 44939, the school district may immediately suspend the employee 

without pay pending disposition of the dismissal proceeding. 

2. 

Review of a motion for immediate reversal of suspension is “limited to a 

determination whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are 

sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (§ 44939, 

subd. (c)(1).) 

3. 

Thus, review of a motion for immediate reversal of suspension is 

analogous to a demurrer, which tests the sufficiency of the allegations in a complaint. 

(Pacifica Homeowners’ Ass’n v. Wesley Palms Retirement. Community (1986) 178 

Cal.App.3d 1147, 1151.) Facts properly pleaded are accepted as true, but contentions, 

deductions, or conclusions of fact or law should be disregarded. (Blank v. Kirwan 

                                             

2 Section 51530 prohibits advocacy of communism with intent to indoctrinate. 

3 

 

(1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Conclusory characterizations of conduct as intentional, 

willful, or fraudulent are “patently insufficient.” (Brousseau v. Jarrett (1997) 73 

Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) Where reading the allegations reveals the existence of an 

affirmative defense, the complaining party must plead around the defense by alleging 

specific facts that would avoid the apparent defense. (Kirwan, supra, 39 Cal.3d at 318.) 

Immediate Suspension Based on Allegation of Immoral Conduct 

4. 

As acknowledged in Board of Education of the City of Los Angeles v. 

Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552, “A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded 

by the public and pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely 

to be followed by the children coming under . . . [the teacher’s] care and protection. 

[Citation.] In this connection the following language used in Johnson v. Taft School 

Dist. [1937] 19 Cal.App.2d 405, at page 408[,] is pertinent: ‘A board of education is 

entrusted with the conduct of the schools under its jurisdiction, their standards of 

education, and the moral, mental and physical welfare of the pupils during school 

hours. An important part of the education of any child is the instilling of a proper 

respect for authority and obedience to necessary discipline. Lessons are learned from 

example as well as from precept. The example of a teacher who is continually 

insubordinate and who refuses to recognize constituted authority may seriously affect 

the discipline in a school, impair its efficiency, and teach children lessons they should 

not learn. Such conduct may unfit a teacher for service in a school even though . . . 

[the teacher’s] other qualifications may be sufficient. ‘Book learning’ is only a phase of 

the important lessons a child should learn in a school.’” 

5. 

With that understanding of the regard for teachers in the public school 

system, “immoral conduct” in teacher dismissal cases has been defined generally as 

“that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. 

4 

 

Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent 

with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or a 

willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 

respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.” (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School 

District v. Weiland (1960), 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

6. 

In this matter, the Statement of Charges alleges, during the five-month 

period between January 11 and May 26, 2016, Hernandez engaged in immoral conduct 

when he “failed to provide for the health and safety of student V

 B. when he 

failed to intervene when students J

 H. and M

 called her a ‘bitch,’ punched 

her, and pulled her by the hair.” The circumstances surrounding the alleged altercation, 

including, for example, the notoriety and frequency of occurrence, are not specified in 

the Statement of Charges. As such, the Statement of Charges fails to state specific 

facts that would avoid apparent affirmative defenses, including Hernandez’s ignorance 

of any threat or risk of harm to the student, Hernandez’s inability to intervene, or 

Hernandez’s unsuccessful attempted intervention. 

7. 

The Statement of Charge alleges, on or about May 26, 2016, Hernandez 

“made two phone calls to V

 B., on her personal cell phone.” The allegation does 

not specify the purpose for the call, whether the student answered the call, or the 

substance of the matter(s) discussed during the call. Without such specificity, even 

accepting the allegation as true, Hernandez’s conduct does not amount to immoral 

conduct as defined in Weiland, supra. 

8. 

The Statement of Charge further alleges, between May 26 and 28, 2016, 

Hernandez “failed to provide health and safety to V

 B. when, despite being told 

by Principal Cameron to keep the information confidential, he disclosed confidential 

5 

 

V

information to at least one student, J

 H., resulting in J

 H. sending 

 . . . [text messages stating] “That’s fucked up,” “Why you snitch on J

,” 

“Now you made us come out later, that’s shade,” and “And stop ratting the whole class 

out.” While noncompliance with a directive to keep information confidential may 

amount to disobedience, it is not per se immoral conduct. The allegation does not 

specify the substance of the confidential information, how the alleged confidential 

disclosure occurred, or the circumstances surrounding its occurrence. Absent pleaded 

facts about the substance of the confidential information and the circumstances 

surrounding its disclosure, the Statement of Charges invites deduction, if not 

speculation, about events precipitating transmittal of the text messages. As set forth in 

Kirwan, supra, 39 Cal.3d at 318, when testing the sufficiency of allegations in a 

pleading, such as the Statement of Charges in this matter, deductions should be 

disregarded. 

Assignments 

9. 

The pleaded facts in the Statement of Charges, if true, are insufficient to 

sustain Hernandez’s immediate suspension on the basis of immoral conduct. 

Suspension Based on Allegation of Willful Refusal to Perform Regular 

10. 

The willful refusal of a teacher to obey the reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing board of education is insubordination. (Swan, supra, 41 

Cal.2d at 552, citing Harrison v. State Board of Education (1946) 134 N.L.J. 502 and 

State ex rel. Steele v. Board of Education of Fairfield (1949) 252 Ala. 254.) The term 

“willful” carries a volitional determination that excludes the notion of accidental or 

even negligent conduct. (Coomes v. State Personnel Board (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 

775.) 

6 

 

11. 

In this matter, the Statement of Charges alleges the District’s reasonable 

rules and regulations are codified in, but not limited to, the LAUSD Code of Conduct 

with Students, LAUSD Employee Code of Ethics, LAUSD Attendance Policy, LAUSD 

Respectful Treatment of all Persons Policy, LAUSD Teaching and Learning Framework, 

California Standards for the Teaching Professions, LAUSD/UTLA Collective Bargaining 

Agreement, Central High School Assignment Policy, and Class Description for 

Secondary Teachers. 

12. 

The Statement of Charges alleges Hernandez failed to adhere to District 

rules and regulations on specific enumerated dates, days, and length of time when he 

was absent from duty or tardy reporting to duty and as a consequence failed to 

provide instruction to his students. The Statement of Charges further alleges 

Hernandez failed to provide prior notification to the District when he did not report to 

duty, failed to submit lesson plans for his substitute during his absence, dismissed 

students from his class early, and failed to enter grades or earned points. 

13. 

A reading of these allegations in the Statement of Charges suggests 

affirmative defenses, including but not limited to, justification or excuse, may be 

available to Hernandez. As previously discussed, the complaining party must plead 

around an affirmative defense by alleging specific facts that would avoid the apparent 

defense. (Kirwan, supra, 39 Cal.3d at 318.) As pleaded, the allegations in the Statement 

of Charges do not avoid apparent defenses available to Hernandez. 

14.  Without the specific context of the circumstances surrounding his 

absence and tardiness, his noncompliance with the District’s policies, and his 

nonperformance of his duties, the allegations, even if true, are insufficient to support 

Hernandez’s immediate suspension on the basis of willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments. 

7 

 

15. 

Based on the foregoing, good cause exists to grant the Motion for 

Immediate Reversal of Suspension. 

16. 

Pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (c)(5), the Order below shall 

become effective within five (5) days of service, and the District shall make Arsene 

Hernandez, a permanent certificated employee of the District, whole for any lost 

wages, benefits, and compensation within fourteen (14) days after service of the Order. 

ORDER 

The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension in OAH case number 

2019110089 is granted. 

 

DATE: 

December 6, 2019

JENNIFER M. RUSSELL 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

8 

