BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

 

 

 

Employee, 

OAH No. 2019010397 
 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
HAKIM MENDEZ, 
 
  
versus 
 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, on February 
8, 2017.   
 
  
Rosty G. Gore, Esq., represented Hakim Mendez (Employee).  Christina Cruz, 
Assistant General Counsel, represented the Los Angeles Unified School District (District). 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Eric Sawyer, Office of Administrative Hearings 

    School District. 

 

 

 

  
The District filed a statement of charges (Charges) against Employee, and placed him 

 
Employee timely filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (motion) with 

  
on indefinite unpaid suspension.  The suspension is based on allegations that Employee 
engaged in immoral conduct in violation of Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), 
and 44939, and willfully refused to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause in 
violation of Education Code section 44939. 
 
 
OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1).  The various papers 
filed by the parties in connection with the motion were described on the record during the 
hearing.  The parties also presented oral argument during the hearing. 
 
 
immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee without pay.  In turn, Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion for 
review of the suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited to a determination as to 
whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 
basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 

The aforementioned provisions of the Education Code allow a school district to 

“Immoral conduct,” pursuant to Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 

Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of this motion, the 

With regard to the alleged misconduct of a public employee, the term “willful” carries 

In this case, the ALJ considered the written submissions of the parties and oral 
  
argument made during the hearing.  Based upon a review of the Charges filed in the instant 
matter (or pleadings), and as set forth in detail on the record during the telephonic hearing, 
the motion is granted. 
 
  
ALJ need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.”  (Blank v. 
Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)  A motion such as this is analogous to a demurrer.  A 
demurrer can be sustained when a plaintiff’s “conclusory characterization of defendant's 
conduct as intentional, willful and fraudulent” was “patently insufficient.”  (Brousseau v. 
Jarrett (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 
 
  
a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct.”  
(Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775.) 
 
Immoral Conduct 
 
  
44939, has been defined to mean conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  It is sometimes used as 
synonymous with dishonesty or a high degree of unfairness.  (Board of Ed. of San Francisco 
Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 [Weiland].)   
 
  
‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of the general 
public and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 
includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 
depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.”  (Palo Verde etc. Sch. Dist. 
v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972 [Hensey].) 
 
  
In Hensey, a junior college teacher’s removal of the fire alarm and bell system, 
statement to the president of the college that he would remove it again if it were replaced, his 
references to “whore” and “whorehouses” throughout the year, his discussion of super-
syphilis in reference to Mexican-American students, and his references to “pee” and “baby 
crap,” taken together, still did not constitute immoral conduct.  On the other hand, the court 
did deem as immoral conduct the teacher’s gesture of licking a classroom wall with his 
tongue in an up-and-down manner specifically directing his gesture to the County 
Superintendent of Schools.  (Hensey, supra, 9 Cal.App.3d at p. 974.)  The court stated “here, 
we have passed the limits of bad taste and vulgarity . . . this obscene incident indicates both 
‘immorality’ and ‘evident unfitness.’”  (Id. at pp. 974-975.) 
 

Immoral conduct also can be construed according to common usage.  “The term 

2 

A comparison of Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, 

In Weiland, the court held that falsifying attendance records for the purpose of 

In this case, the Charges allege that Employee engaged in disrespectful conduct, for 

  
securing continued employment and defrauding the state and school district constituted 
immoral conduct on the part of the teacher.  (Weiland, supra, 179 Cal.App.2d at p. 812.) 
 
  
example, yelling at or directly in the faces of students, yelling at parents, being mean and 
rude to students or co-workers, using his hands to move, grab, push and pull students or 
forcibly push them into their seats, and like conduct.  In a handful of incidents, he uttered 
words to one student, which at face value appeared to challenge him to a fight, but which 
read in context of the other allegations appeared simply to be a disciplinary tactic gone 
terribly wrong.  Yet, none of the allegations rise to the level of “immorality” discussed in the 
cases cited above.  For example, the allegations do not involve dishonest conduct such as 
found in Weiland; prurient comments or actions done in bad taste as found in Hensey; or 
otherwise equate to the kind of shocking, corrupt, indecent, depraved, dissolute, flagrant, or 
shameless conduct generally outlined in both cases.  The District has failed to sufficiently 
plead cause for suspension for immoral conduct.  
   
Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignment 
 
  
subdivision (b), is illuminating.  Pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5) and (a)(2), 
discipline is warranted for unsatisfactory performance or unprofessional conduct, 
respectively, but not unpaid suspension.  More importantly, under section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(8), while a teacher’s persistent violation of a school district’s reasonable regulations is 
grounds for discipline, it is not an authorized basis for unpaid suspension.  Rather, unpaid 
suspension is authorized only for a willful refusal to perform regular assignments pursuant to 
section 44939, subdivision (b).   
 
  
regular assignment is more akin to the traditional labor charge of insubordination, i.e., an 
intentional, willful, volitional refusal to perform any part of a particular regular assignment.  
Examples coming to mind are refusal to have children say the pledge of allegiance, perform 
yard duty, allow children to use the restroom during instructional time, teach certain parts of 
a school district’s curriculum, turn in lesson plans, attend meetings mandated by a 
supervisor, etc.  However, a charge of willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must 
be more than unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent or even persistent failure to perform a 
regular assignment. 
 
  
misconduct is not the result of a willful, volitional, refusal to perform his regular assignment.  
The well-pleaded facts indicate that when Employee taught his classes, administrators found 
fault with his performance.  Stated another way, the pleadings indicate Employee was 
teaching his classes, but did so deficiently in the District’s opinion.  The allegations also 
indicate Employee failed to improve after receiving multiple conferences and, perhaps, 
persistently, but not always, failed to comply with directives given to him. 

This comparison indicates the cause of discipline for willful refusal to perform a 

In this case, a review of the Charges in totality indicates Employee’s alleged 

3 

Good cause having been established, the motion is granted.  Pursuant to Education 

The pleadings allege with factual precision and abundance that Employee’s teaching 

  
during the times in question was unsatisfactory, unprofessional and persistently violated 
District rules and regulations, among other theories.  But where the pleadings allege a willful 
refusal to perform a regular assignment, the allegations are vague, conclusory and devoid of 
the kind of factual content which, if true, would constitute a willful state of mind or 
volitional refusal to perform as directed.  As discussed above, vague and conclusory 
allegations are not binding on the ALJ and need not be accepted.   
 
Conclusion 
 
  
Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(5), this order shall become effective within five days of 
service, and the District shall make the Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and 
compensation within 14 days after service of the order. 
 
   
 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

____________________________ 
ERIC SAWYER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

4 

February 11, 2019