BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
JEFFREY MARTINEZ, a Permanent 
Certificated Employee, 
 
   
 
v. 
 
BANNING UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
  
   
 

    Responding Party. 

Moving Party, 

 

 

 

 

 

 
OAH No. 2019020456 
 
 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 

 

 
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Ed Washington, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, California, on 
March 8, 2019. 
 
Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented Jeffrey Martinez. 

Michael E. Wolfsohn, Attorney at Law, represented Banning Unified School District 

(District). 

  
 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
On January 14, 2019, the District’s Superintendent signed the Notice of 

 
Unsatisfactory Performance and/or Unprofessional Conduct, Recommendation of 
Disciplinary Action, Cause(s) for Discipline; Statement of Charges (Statement of Charges) 
against Mr. Martinez, a permanent certificated employee.  The Statement of Charges 
recommended Mr. Martinez’s dismissal, based on charges that included, but were not limited 
to, immoral conduct, pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). 
 
 
dismissal against Mr. Martinez.  On that same date, the District gave notice to Mr. Martinez 
of the Board’s decision and placed him on immediate suspension without pay pursuant to 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

On January 17, 2019, the Board of Education for the District approved the charges for 

On February 12, 2019, Mr. Martinez filed with OAH a Notice of Motion and Motion 
 
for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion) pursuant to Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (c)(1).  The Motion contends that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a 
sufficient basis for immediate unpaid suspension because the allegations specified therein do 
not constitute immoral conduct.  The District filed its opposition on February 25, 2019.  Mr. 
Martinez filed his reply on February 26, 2019.  Oral argument was heard on March 8, 2019. 
 

 
DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939 states, in pertinent part, that a school district may, if it 

 
 
deems that action necessary, immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school 
district who has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 
involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.” (Ed. 
Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) 
 
 
employee who has been placed on suspension pursuant Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (b), may move for immediate reversal of suspension and that the review of the 
motion shall be limited to a determination of whether the facts as alleged in the statement of 
charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under that 
section.1 
 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), provides, in pertinent part, that an 

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral argument.  It 

is determined that the District alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if 
true, would constitute a basis for immediate suspension based upon “immoral conduct” 
pursuant to Education Code section 44939. 
 
 
 
/ / / 
 
 
 
/ / / 
 
                                                 
1 “…The grant or denial of the motion shall be without prejudice to consideration by 
 
the Commission on Professional Competence, based upon the full evidentiary record before 
it, of the validity of the grounds for dismissal. The ruling shall not be considered by the 
commission in determining the validity of the grounds for dismissal, and shall not have any 
bearing on the commission's determination regarding the grounds for dismissal.”  (Ed. Code, 
§ 44939, subd. (c)(4).) 

2 

 
GOOD CAUSE HAVING NOT BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

ORDER 

 
 
Reversal of Suspension is DENIED.  
 
 
 
DATED: March 12, 2019 
 
 

____________________________ 
ED WASHINGTON 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

3 

