BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

                   Moving Party,   

 
OAH No. 2019060957 
 
 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
PATTY LA, 
a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
   
v. 
 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
  
   
 
 
 
 
Administrative Law Judge Debra D. Nye-Perkins, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from San Diego, California, on 
July 19, 2019. 
 
Alejandra Gonzales-Bedoy, Attorney at Law, represented Patty La. 

 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1)) 

    Responding Party. 

 

 

 

Cristina Cruz, Assistant General Counsel, represented Los Angeles Unified School 

 

District. 
  
 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
On April 26, 2019, the district signed a statement of charges against Ms. La alleging 

 
several grounds as cause for dismissal: Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) 
(immoral conduct, including egregious conduct); subdivision (a)(2) (unprofessional 
conduct); subdivision (a)(5) (unsatisfactory performance); subdivision (a)(6) (evident 
unfitness for service); and persistent violation of or refusal to obey state laws or district 
regulations (subdivision (a)(8)); and Education Code section 44939 (willful failure to 
perform assignments) and (immoral conduct).  The alleged grounds for dismissal were based 
upon Ms. La’s alleged conduct between November 2017 and February 2019.  The district 
also suspended Ms. La without pay pending a hearing before a Commission on Professional 
Competence.   
 

1 

On June 21, 2019, Ms. La filed a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  OAH 

 
set the matter for oral argument and established a briefing schedule.  On July 19, 2019, the 
parties orally argued their positions.  Having read the pleadings and considered the oral 
argument, the following order is issued. 
 
 

 

DISCUSSION 
 

Ms. La asserts that the allegations, assuming them to be true, do not establish that she 

 
willfully refused to perform regular assignments, or that she engaged in immoral conduct.  
The district asserts grounds exist for the immediate suspension.  Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b), permits a school district to immediately suspend a permanent 
employee of the school district who has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of 
a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental 
disability, with willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 
prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with 
violation of [Education Code] Section 51530.”  
 
 
file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  OAH’s “[r]eview of a motion filed 
pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” 
 
 
Having considered the pleadings, written submissions of the parties, and oral 
 
argument, the district failed to allege facts which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 
for immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 
 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), provides that the employee may 

ORDER 

 
 
Good cause having been established, the Motion is GRANTED.  The district’s 
immediate suspension of Ms. La is REVERSED.  The district shall immediately return Ms. 
La to paid status.  The district shall make Ms. La whole for any lost wages, benefits, and 
compensation within 14 days after service of this Order.  (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 
 
 
DATED:  July 22, 2019 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

2 

