BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

                   Moving Party,   

 
OAH No. 2019060529 
 
 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
STEVE ANDRADE, 
a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
   
v. 
 
OAK VIEW UNION ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
  
   
 
 
 
 
Administrative Law Judge Debra D. Nye-Perkins, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from San Diego, California, on 
July 19, 2019. 
 
Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law, Gibson & Tuttle Law, represented Steve 

 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1)) 

    Responding Party. 

 

 

 

Andrade. 
 

  
 

Bryan G. Martin, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

represented Oak View Union Elementary School District. 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
On April 15, 2019, the district served Mr. Andrade with a statement of charges 

 
alleging several grounds as cause for his dismissal: Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(5) (unsatisfactory performance); subdivision (a)(6) (evident unfitness for 
service); and persistent violation of or refusal to obey state laws or district regulations 
(subdivision (a)(8)); and Education Code section 44939 (willful failure to perform 
assignments).  The alleged grounds for dismissal were based upon Mr. Andrade’s alleged 
conduct between April 2015 and March 2019.  The district also suspended Mr. Andrade 
without pay pending a hearing before a Commission on Professional Competence.   
 

1 

On June 12, 2019, Mr. Andrade filed a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  
 
OAH set the matter for oral argument and established a briefing schedule.  On July 19, 2019, 
the parties orally argued their positions.  Having read the pleadings and considered the oral 
argument, the following order is issued. 
 
 

 

DISCUSSION 
 

 
Mr. Andrade asserts that the allegations, assuming them to be true, do not establish 
that he willfully refused to perform regular assignments, which is necessary in this case to 
sustain the suspension.  The district asserts grounds exist for the immediate suspension.  
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), permits a school district to immediately 
suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged “with immoral 
conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, with 
incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular assignments 
without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 
school district, or with violation of [Education Code] Section 51530.”  
 
 
file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  OAH’s “[r]eview of a motion filed 
pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” 
 
 
Having considered the pleadings, written submissions of the parties, and oral 
 
argument, the district failed to allege facts which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 
for immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 
 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), provides that the employee may 

ORDER 

 
 
Good cause having been established, the Motion is GRANTED.  The district’s 
immediate suspension of Mr. Andrade is REVERSED.  The district shall immediately return 
Mr. Andrade to paid status.  The district shall make Mr. Andrade whole for any lost wages, 
benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of this Order.  (Ed. Code, § 44939, 
subd. (c)(5).) 
 
 
DATED:  July 22, 2019 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 

2 

