BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2019050194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
NELSON GUIRADO, 
 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
   
 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
  
   
 
 
 

    School District. 

Employee, 

 

 

 

 

 

represent Nelson Guirado. 
 

 
Carlos R. Perez and Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Law Office of Carlos R Perez, 

Kelly Kim, Assistant General Counsel, represents Los Angeles Unified School 

District. 
  
On or about March 1, 2019, the district served Mr. Guirado with a Statement of 

 
Charges alleging the following causes for dismissal: unprofessional conduct, unsatisfactory 
performance, evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the 
rules governing his employment.  The Statement of Charges also notified Mr. Guirado of the 
district’s intent to immediately suspend him without pay based on willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing district. 
 
 
immediately suspending him without pay and dismissing him from employment. 
 
 
with the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), pursuant to Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1), alleging that the Statement of Charges does not set forth facts 
sufficient to support an allegation that he willfully refused to perform regular assignments, 
which is necessary in this case to sustain the suspension.  OAH set the matter for oral 

On May 3, 2019, Mr. Guirado filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

On or about April 3, 2019, the district provided Mr. Guirado notice that it was 

 

1 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), states that a school district, upon the 

argument and established a briefing schedule.  The district’s opposition to the motion was 
timely received.  On May 24, 2019, a telephonic conference was held, during which the 
parties were invited to present any additional oral arguments. 
 
 
filing of written charges, may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school 
district who has been charged with among other things, willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause. 
 
 
placed on suspension to file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension with OAH.  
“Review of a motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to 
whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 
basis for immediate suspension under this section.”  (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) 
 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), permits an employee who has been 

 

Based on a review of the Statement of Charges, and the arguments presented by both 

parties, it is determined that the district has alleged facts that, if true, are sufficient to 
constitute willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, which is a 
basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b).  

 
GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED. 
 
 
 
DATED: May 28, 2019 
 
 

____________________________ 
ADAM L. BERG 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

2 

