BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
CAROL ARKENBERG, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
Moving Party and Respondent. 
 

 
OAH No. 2019110451 
(Related Case No. 2019110510) 
 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Abraham M. Levy, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

 
 
 
State of California, heard this matter telephonically on December 13, 2019, from San Diego, 
California. 
 
 
moving party. 
 
 
School District (District). 
 
 

M. Cristina Cruz, Assistant General Counsel, represented the Los Angeles Unified 

Tamra M. Smith, Attorney at Law, represented Carol Arkenberg, respondent and 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On October 14, 2019, a District representative served respondent and moving party 

On November 13, 2019, respondent timely filed a motion seeking immediate reversal 

 
 
with the Amended Statement of Charges alleging cause exists to dismiss her from 
employment with the District as a science teacher.  The charges include immoral conduct and 
persistent refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.  In reliance on 
these charges, the District has suspended respondent from employment without pay. 
 
 
of her suspension and reinstating her salary and benefits pending resolution of the charges 
against her.  Respondent argues that the charges, even if true, do not constitute immoral 
conduct or persistent willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable 
cause.  At most, the allegations amount to unsatisfactory performance and unprofessional 
conduct.  The District argues that the allegations of immoral conduct and willful refusal are 
adequately pled in the Amended Statement of Charges to warrant respondent’s suspension 
from employment without pay under Education Code section 44939.      
 

 

APPLICABLE STATUTES 

Education Code section 44939 permits the District to suspend immediately, without 

 
 
pay, a permanent employee who the District alleges committed “immoral conduct” or willful 
refusal to perform assignments without good cause as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing school district. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).)  Administrative 
review of an order for immediate suspension is “limited to a determination whether the facts 
alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.”  (Ibid., subd. (c)(1).) 
 
 

CONCLUSION 

The parties’ submissions and arguments have been fully considered.  The District has 

 
 
alleged facts which, if true, would establish that moving party/respondent engaged in 
immoral conduct.  These allegations, as pled, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 
 
 

ORDER 

The motion by respondent and moving party Carol Arkenberg for immediate reversal 

 
 
of suspension and for reimbursement of pay and benefits during the period of suspension is 
denied. 
 
 
DATED: December 16, 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

____________________ 
ABRAHAM M. LEVY 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

2 

