BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
DANIEL ATWELL, a Permanent 
Certificated Employee, 
 
   
 
v. 
 
MILPITAS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
  
   
 
 
 

    Responding Party. 

Moving Party, 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
OAH No. 2019040595 

 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Danette C. Brown, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, 
California, on May 3, 2019. 

 
Attorney Christopher E. Schumb represented Daniel Atwell. 

Attorney John R. Yeh, with the law firm Burke, Williams & Sorensen, LLP, 

represented the Milpitas Unified School District (District). 

 

  

 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

 
On or about March 12, 2019, the Governing Board of the District (Governing Board) 

 
approved the Statement of Charges and Recommendation for Dismissal and Immediate 
Unpaid Suspension of Mr. Atwell, based on causes including, but not limited to:  (1) immoral 
conduct; (2) unprofessional conduct; (3) evident unfitness for service; and/or (3) persistent 
violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 
prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by 
the governing board of the school district employing him.  (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subds. 
(a)(1), (2), (6) and (8); 44939, subd. (b).)  On March 12, 2019, the Governing Board gave 
notice to Mr. Atwell of its decision and placed him on immediate suspension without pay 
pursuant to Education Code section 44939.  Thereafter, the Governing Board received Mr. 
Atwell’s demand for a hearing.     

On April 15, 2019, Mr. Atwell filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
 
(Motion), pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), contending that the 
Statement of Charges is defective in that it fails to specify what facts constitute immoral 
conduct, and that alone should be sufficient to set aside the immediate suspension.  Mr. 
Atwell also contends that the “majority of the allegations in the Statement of Charges are 
inadmissible,” and “objects to the Court considering any of them except for the allegations in 
paragraphs A, B, and C which come within the four-year rule.”    
 

 
DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

 
Applicable Statute 
 
 
immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.”  (Ed. Code, § 
44939, subd. (b).) 
 
Standard of Review 
 
 
Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a motion filed 
pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 
in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” 
 
Statement of Charges 
 

The Statement of Charges is based upon three incidents: (1) on October 25, 2018, 

respondent wiped his finger on the bare knee of an eighth grade female student; his contact 
was unwelcome by the student; (2) on May 22, 2017, respondent engaged in unprofessional 
conduct by angrily asking a student to leave the classroom immediately and calling the 
student a “dumbass” in front of other students; and (3) on September 27, 2016, respondent 
engaged in inappropriate contact with a student by chasing after a student who ignored his 
directives and grabbed and pulled a lanyard around the student’s neck to get the student to 
stop, causing the student to choke.  Respondent further blocked the student from moving, and 
grabbed/touched the student’s arm.    

 
The Statement of Charges also sets forth prior discipline for similar conduct.  The 
District is not seeking to dismiss or suspend respondent for those prior incidents, as they 
occurred outside of the “four-year rule” pursuant to Education Code section 44944, 
subdivision (b((2)(B).  That section provides: “Evidence of records kept by the governing 
board of the school district concerning the employee may be introduced, but no decision 

2 

relating to the dismissal or suspension of an employee shall be made based on charges or 
evidence of any nature relating to matters occurring more than four years before the filing of 
the notice …”  Thus, the present review is limited to the three incidents cited above.   
 
Conclusion 

 
The written submissions of the parties and oral argument have been considered.  
Based upon a review of the Statement of Charges, the District has not alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code 
section 44939, subdivision (b). 

 
 
ORDER 

 
GOOD CAUSE HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion is GRANTED.      

 
 
 
DATED:  May 17, 2019 
 
 

________________________ 
DANETTE C. BROWN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

3 

