BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 
OAH No. 2019020159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

 
 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension Filed by: 
 
JASON AGAN, 
 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
 
   
 
FAIRFIELD-SUISUN UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
  
   
 
 
 

    School District. 

Employee, 

 

 

 

 

 

Jason Agan. 
 

 
Christopher Hammer, Attorney at Law with Beeson, Tayer & Bodine APC, represents 

Matthew P. Juhl-Darlington, Attorney at Law with Dannis Woliver Kelley, represents 

Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District. 

  
On or about December 27, 2018, the district served Mr. Agan with a written 

Based on the foregoing charges, the district’s governing board immediately 

On February 5, 2019, Mr. Agan filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

 
Statement of Charges, charging him with immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, and 
persistent violation of or refusal to obey the rules governing his employment. 
 
 
suspended Mr. Agan from his duties and gave notice to him of the suspension. 
 
 
with the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), pursuant to Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1), alleging that the Statement of Charges does not set forth facts 
sufficient to support an allegation that he engaged in immoral conduct, which is necessary in 
this case to sustain the suspension.  OAH set the matter for oral argument and established a 
briefing schedule.  The district’s opposition to the motion, and rebuttal brief by Mr. Agan, 
were timely received.  On February 22, 2019, a telephonic conference was held, during 
which the parties were invited to present any additional oral arguments. 
 

 

 

1 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), permits an employee who has been 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), states that a school district, upon the 

 
filing of written charges, may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school 
district who has been charged with among other things, immoral conduct. 
 
 
placed on suspension to file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension with OAH.  
“Review of a motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to 
whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 
basis for immediate suspension under this section.”  (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) 
 

Based on a review of the Statement of Charges, and the arguments presented by both 

parties, it is determined that the district has alleged facts that, if true, are sufficient to 
constitute immoral conduct, which is a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

 
GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED. 
 
 
DATED: February 25, 2019 
 
 
 

____________________________ 
ADAM L. BERG 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 

2 

