BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

CHRISTINE BALSANO, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party 

and 

ROSEVILLE JOINT UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party 

OAH Case No. 2019120878 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Heather M. Rowan, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, 

California on January 17, 2020. 

Matthew Chevedden, Attorney at Law, represented Christine Balsano.  

Carolyn Gemma, Attorney at Law, represented Roseville Joint Union High School 

District (District). 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On November 26, 2019, the District’s Assistant Superintendent of Human 

Resources signed the Statement of Charges against Ms. Balsano, a permanent 

certificated employee, based on charges of including: immoral conduct and “persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of that state or reasonable regulations . . 

. of the school district. . . .” (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subd. (a), & 44939, subd. (b).) Based 

upon the foregoing charges, the District’s governing board immediately suspended 

Ms. Balsano without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939. Ms. Balsano 

timely filed a Demand for Hearing and Notice of Defense.  

On December 23, 2019, Ms. Balsano filed a Notice of Motion and Motion for 

Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion) pursuant to Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (c), on grounds that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a 

sufficient basis for immediate unpaid suspension. Specifically, Ms. Balsano argues that 

the well-pleaded allegations demonstrate conduct that was unprofessional or 

unsatisfactory, at most, but did not rise to the level of immoral conduct and/or willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause justifying an 

immediate unpaid suspension. 

DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

 

2 

regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of [Education Code] 

section 51530.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) “Review of a motion filed pursuant to 

this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c).) 

“Immoral conduct” is to be construed according to “its common and approved 

usage having regard for the context in which the legislature used” the term. (Palo 

Verde Unified School District of Riverside County v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 

971.) In Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland 

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, the court held: 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

Although not defined by the statute, “willful refusal” connotes an intentional 

failure to perform a certain act. Caselaw has held that declining an employer’s lawful 

directions, without reason, is sufficient to establish “willful refusal.” (See, e.g., Wilbur v. 

Office of City Clerk (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 636, 642 [employee who did not attribute 

his refusals to illness and made no showing of willingness to comply with the 

reasonable orders of his superiors demonstrated “willful refusal to obey the reasonable 

 

3 

orders of an employer”]; Flowers v. State Personnel Board, 174 Cal.App.3d 753, 760 

[employee’s repeated refusal to undergo a medical examination or sobriety test, as 

directed by his employer, supported a charge of insubordination].) 

The Statement of Charges presents several allegations of Ms. Balsano’s failures 

as a teacher spanning at least two school years. Additionally, the Statement of Charges 

alleges numerous instances of deficient performance, including failure to support 

special education student A.L., passing along work to paraprofessionals, failure to 

adequately plan and implement lessons, allowing unauthorized students into the 

classroom, and engaging in unprofessional behavior.  

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral 

argument. Based upon a review of the Statement of Charges, the School District failed 

to allege facts, which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b).  

ORDER 

Good cause having been established, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension is GRANTED. The School District shall make Ms. Balsano whole for any lost 

wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. 

Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

DATE: January 22, 2020

 

HEATHER M. ROWAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

 

4 

