BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
 

 

 

      

OAH No.  2019030857 

On April 12, 2019, a telephonic hearing on the motion filed by John Hoang for 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 

 
     [Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)] 
 
    

 
 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension of: 
 
JOHN HOANG,  
A Permanent Certificated Employee,  
 
                                              Moving Party, 
 
  and 
 
COLTON JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
 
                                         Responding Party. 
 
 
 
 
immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) was held by Eileen Cohn, Administrative Law 
Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), from Los Angeles. 
 
 
 
 
represented responding party Colton Joint Unified School District (District). 
 
 
The District has suspended Employee without pay pending the outcome of its action 
to dismiss Employee.1  The basis for the suspension under Education Code section 449392 is 
employee’s immoral conduct related to his misdemeanor conviction for conspiracy to 
                                                
1 The dismissal action bears OAH case number 2019031000.  The grounds for 
 
dismissal alleged by the District against Employee are immoral conduct, dishonesty, 
conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude (Ed. Code § 44932, subd. 
(a)(1), (a)(4), (a)(9).)  In addition, the District charges immoral conduct as a basis for its 
decision to immediately suspend him.  (Ed. Code § 44939.)   
 
 
indicated. 
 

2 All further statutory references are to the Education Code (Code) unless otherwise 

John W. Dietrich, of Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Rudd and Roma, Attorneys at Law, 

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented moving party John Hoang (Employee). 

Having considered the moving and opposition papers, and oral argument, the ALJ 

An employee who is suspended pursuant to Code section 44939 may serve and file 

commit grand theft.  In the Motion, Employee seeks an order for the immediate reversal of 
his suspension.  The District opposes the Motion.  
 
 
hereby finds and orders as follows:  
 
Education Code Section 44939 
 
 
Code section 44939 authorizes the governing board of a school district, if it deems the 
action necessary, to immediately suspend a permanent employee from his or her duties, upon 
the filing of written charges with the governing board charging the employee with Code 
section 44932 violations including immoral conduct, dishonesty, or conviction of a felony or 
any crime involving moral turpitude.  The District limited its basis for suspension under 
Code section 44939 to immoral conduct.  As a consequence, the second charge for 
dishonesty toward the District is not directly relevant to his suspension, and at a minimum, 
requires more evidence to determine whether his conduct under this charge was also 
immoral.   
 
 
with OAH a motion for immediate reversal of suspension.  The motion shall include “a 
memorandum of points and authorities setting forth law and argument supporting the 
employee's contention that the statement of charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for 
immediate suspension.”  (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  Review of the motion “shall be limited to a 
determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are 
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.”  (Id.) 
Respondent timely moved for an immediate reversal of suspension and provided the required 
support under the Education Code.   
 
 
for review of the suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited to a determination 
as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to 
constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.”   
 
 
ALJ need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.”  (Blank v. 
Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)  A motion such as this is analogous to a demurrer.  A 
demurrer can be sustained when, e.g., a plaintiff’s “conclusory characterization of 
defendant's conduct as intentional, willful and fraudulent” was “patently insufficient.” 
(Brousseau v. Jarrett (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.)   
 
 
support his immediate suspension because it failed to provide any allegations that the 
conduct satisfied the factors set forth in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 
Cal.3d 214 (1969), referred to as the “Morrison Factors.”  In its opposition papers, the 

Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion 

Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of the Motion, the 

In the Motion, Employee argued that the pleading, on its face, was insufficient to 

 

2

Code section 44939 provides the District may, upon the filing of written charges, 

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare 

District added an analysis of the Morrison Factors, which was conclusory, and as such, was 
disregarded.   
 
Discussion  
 
 
The issue presented is whether the Statement of Charges, on its face, supports 
respondent’s immediate suspension based upon a conviction for conduct it alleges constitutes 
a conviction for a crime involving moral turpitude, that occurred outside of the classroom, 
school premises or the District.   
 
 
charging a permanent employee with, among other things, immoral conduct or conviction of 
a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, suspend without pay any employee, “if it 
deems the action necessary.”  Moral turpitude is solely determined by the elements of the 
crime, not by extrinsic evidence.  (People v Castro (1985) 38 Cal.3d 301, 316-317).  A 
conviction for moral turpitude may be established where there is no dishonesty, but an intent 
to do evil or an intent to corrupt.  In People v. Castro, supra, 38 Cal.3d at pp. 314-315, 317-
318, the court distinguished a felony for simple possession of heroin from possession of 
heroin for sale, the latter demonstrating an intent to corrupt and appropriate for impeachment 
despite not involving dishonesty.   
 
 
of the general public and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing 
moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.”  (Board of Ed. of San 
Francisco Unified Sch. Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App. 2d 808, 811, citing Orloff v. 
Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.  The Supreme Court in Morrison v. State 
Board of Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d at pp. 223-224, further defined immoral conduct as 
follows, quoting from Jarvella v. Willoughby-Eastlake City School Dist. (1967) 12 Ohio 
Misc. 288: “[Immoral conduct] must be considered in the context in which the Legislature 
considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general public; more 
specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the school community. . . . 
In providing standards to guide school boards in placing restraints on the conduct of teachers, 
the Legislature is concerned with the welfare of the school community.  Its objective is the 
protection of students from corruption.”   
 
The District alleged a cause for immediate suspension under Code section 44939 for 
 
immoral conduct, based on count one of the Statement of Charges:  “On or about November 
2, 2018, you pled guilty in Riverside Superior Court to a misdemeanor violation of Penal 
Code section 182(a)(1), conspiracy to commit grand theft.  Your conviction of this offense 
constitutes conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.”  In support of this count, the 
District referred to the attached arrest warrant, felony complaint and sentencing 
memorandum. 

 

3

Employee pleaded to a misdemeanor criminal count of conspiracy to commit grand 
 
theft.  Under Penal Code section 182, subdivision (a)(1), a conspiracy occurs when two or 
more persons conspire to commit any crime.  Conspiracy generally requires one or more 
overt acts to commit the underlying crime.  (Pen. Code § 182, subd. (b).)  As such, 
Employee, in his plea, did not admit to grand theft but admitted to participating in one or 
more overt acts to commit grand theft, the unlawful taking of someone else’s property valued 
over $950.  (Pen. Code § 487.)  The attachments referenced on the face of the pleading 
provide that the criminal conspiracy involved defrauding the Pechanga Resort and Player’s 
Club system for the purpose of receiving casino credits in the amount of $3,600.   
 
From the face of the pleading, we know that Employee was convicted of a criminal 
 
act which, by way of the elements of the crime of conspiracy, demonstrated, at a minimum, 
an intent to corrupt or an act of moral turpitude, but also from the facts pleaded with the 
attachments incorporated by reference, the conviction was also an immoral act.   
 
 
 
As a matter of law, Employee’s misdemeanor plea and conviction is not considered as 
serious as a felony conviction.  Employee persuasively and convincingly argued that, without 
any allegations that the misdemeanor conviction had some relation to his fitness to teach as 
required by the Morrison Factors, the Statement of Charges is insufficient to support an 
immediate suspension.  The Statement of Charges does not provide sufficient facts to satisfy 
the Morrison Factors such that from the face of the pleading, if the facts are assumed to be 
true, there is a sufficient basis to determine Employee is unfit to teach; e.g., the likelihood the 
conduct adversely affected the students or the education community, the degree of the 
adversity, the type of credential held, extenuating or aggravating circumstances, the 
likelihood of reoccurrence, and the notoriety of the conviction.  The District offers that its 
second charge for dishonesty about the conviction in Employee’s communications with the 
District “compounds” his misconduct by showing an “ongoing scheme of deceit.”  (District’s 
Opposition, p. 2.)  During oral argument, the District conceded that the second charge for 
dishonesty to the District about Employee’s crime supplements its charge for immoral 
conduct under the Education Code for the purpose of the interim suspension, but does not 
independently support its reasons for the suspension.  At a minimum, the second count for 
dishonesty requires an evidentiary hearing to determine whether Employee’s conduct was 
dishonest and also immoral.   
 
 
Based on the foregoing, and the reasons stated on the record, the ALJ finds that the 
facts alleged in the Statement of Charges, if true, are not sufficient to establish a basis for 
Employee's immediate suspension under section 44939.  The Motion shall be granted. 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 

 

4

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

The Motion is granted.  In accordance with Education Code section 44939, 

Disposition 
 
 
subdivision (c)(5), this Order shall become effective within five days of service of the Order, 
and the District shall make Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation 
within 14 days after service of this Order. 
 
 
 
 
 
DATED: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
EILEEN COHN 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearing 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

5

April 24, 2019