BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

CARRIE MAXWELL, Moving Party 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

and  

BAKERSFIELD CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT,  

Responding Party 

OAH No. 2020070538 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Glynda B. Gomez, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on August 14, 2020. 

Craig Meredith, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Carrie Maxwell 

(Respondent or Carrie Maxwell). 

Bryan J. Park, Attorney at Law, represented responding party Bakersfield City 

School District (District). 

BACKGROUND 

1. 

On June 16, 2020, the District Board of Education (Board) determined 

that Respondent had engaged in (1) immoral conduct, (2) evident unfitness for service, 

and (3) persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 

reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 

State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district employing 

her dismissal based upon conduct that occurred on June 5, 2020. A Statement of 

Charges (SOC) and notice of immediate suspension was approved on June 16, 2012 

and served on Respondent on June 17, 2020. 

Allegations 

2. 

The SOC contains several grounds for dismissal, as follows: (1) immoral 

conduct, (2) evident unfitness for service, and (3) persistent violation of or refusal to 

obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing 

board of the school district employing her. (Ed. Code §§ 44932, 44939.) 

3. 

The District served Respondent with a Notice of Immediate Unpaid 

Suspension, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, for immoral conduct and 

persistent violation or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of 

Education. Respondent demanded a hearing on the dismissal and filed a motion for 

immediate reversal of the suspension (MIRS) under Education Code section 44939, 

2 

subdivision (c)(1). The District filed opposition to the motion, and counsel for both 

parties presented oral argument at the motion hearing. 

4. 

The SOC against Respondent alleges that Respondent is a permanent 

certificated employee of the District most recently assigned as a second grade 

classroom teacher. (SOC ¶1.) As a classroom teacher of elementary-aged pupils, 

Respondent is required to, among other duties, serve as a positive role model for 

students and the community, maintain positive relationships with parents, and uphold 

and enforce school rules, administrative regulations, and board policies. (SOC ¶2.) 

More specifically, the SOC alleges: 

A. 

On or about June 5, 2020, Respondent engaged in 

inappropriate, harassing, violent and/or threatening behavior towards 

students, parents, and the community; Respondents conduct was 

recorded by video, and the video recordings went “viral” (i.e. spread 

quickly on the internet, social media, and news media) via social media 

platforms, news reports, and other online resources; and Respondent’s 

conduct gained such notoriety within and outside of Kern County so as 

to impair her current and future relationships with the District, students, 

staff, parents, and the community. (SOC ¶3.) 

B. 

 Respondent threatened to kill the mother of an eight (8) 

year old child, in the child’s immediate presence, making the child fearful, 

and the child is a District student in the second grade. (SOC ¶3.) The 

mother and child were peaceful protestors leaving a Black Lives Matter 

(BLM) protest in Bakersfield and were walking on the public sidewalk 

near Respondent’s home when Respondent confronted them. (SOC ¶¶ 4 

&5.) Respondent stated to the mother: “Get off the street. I’ll fucking kill 

3 

you!” and “I don’t give a fuck if your daughter is here” or words to that 

effect. (SOC ¶5). Respondent resisted attempts by a member of her own 

household to intercede and diffuse the situation. (SOC ¶5.) 

C. 

Also on June 5, 2020, while the BLM protest was ongoing, 

Respondent stood in her backyard, peering over the wall separating her 

property from the public sidewalk and yelled at others to “leave the 

country,” “Live somewhere else,” and “My son is on the way and is going 

to shoot you in the head,” or words to that effect. 

D. 

Respondent, through her attorney, has admitted her 

conduct. 

Respondent’s Contentions 

5. 

Respondent asserts that the facts as alleged in the SOC, even if true, are 

insufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay. Respondent 

argues that the context of the statements and threats, in a pandemic, during civil 

unrest, with extenuating familial disabilities and stress, are also relevant to the 

determination of whether Respondent’s immediate suspension without pay should be 

lifted.   

The District’s Contentions 

6. 

The District asserts that its SOC alleges sufficient facts constituting 

immoral conduct as cause for dismissal and immediate suspension, pursuant to 

Education Code section 44939. The District contends that it pled sufficient facts and 

nexus of Respondent’s conduct to the field of teaching and the facts, as alleged, 

4 

constitute immoral conduct sufficient to establish a basis for her immediate 

suspension without pay. 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

1. 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent certificated 

employee who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of 

any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed 

by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or advocating 

communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion 

for immediate reversal of the suspension with the Office of Administrative Hearings. 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge reviews the motion, and 

the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted 

as true, the administrative law judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or 

conclusions of fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

2. 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Education 

v. Weiland at 811, quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740 

5 

and Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 

972.) 

3. 

The conduct alleged is immoral conduct as it is willful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community and constitutes an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.  

4. 

Accordingly, Respondent Carrie Maxwell failed to establish good cause to 

reverse the immediate suspension.  

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

DATE: 

August 18, 2020

GLYNDA B. GOMEZ 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

ORDER 

 

 

6 

