BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

VERNE SCATLIFFE, 

Moving Party 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

and 

MORENO VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party 

OAH No. 2020070674 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Glynda B. Gomez, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on August 14, 2020. 

Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Verne 

Scatliffe (Respondent or Respondent Scatliffe). 

Laurie Kamerrer, Attorney at Law, represented responding party Moreno Valley 

School District (District). 

BACKGROUND 

1. 

On June 16, 2020, the District Board of Education (Board) determined 

that Respondent had engaged in (1) immoral conduct, (2) evident unfitness for service, 

and (3) persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 

reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 

State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district employing 

him, based upon conduct that occurred between October 9, 2019 and February 12, 

2020. A Statement of Charges (SOC) and notice of immediate suspension was signed 

on April 24, 2020, approved on June 16, 2020 and served on Respondent on June 22, 

2020. 

Allegations 

2. 

The SOC contains several grounds for dismissal, as follows: (1) immoral 

conduct, (2) evident unfitness for service, and (3) persistent violation of or refusal to 

obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing 

board of the school district employing her. (Ed. Code §§ 44932, 44939.) 

3. 

The District served Respondent with a Notice of Immediate Unpaid 

Suspension, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, for immoral conduct and 

2 

persistent violation or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of 

Education. Respondent demanded a hearing on the dismissal and filed a motion for 

immediate reversal of the suspension (MIRS) under Education Code section 44939, 

subdivision (c)(1). The District filed an opposition to the motion, and counsel for both 

parties presented oral argument at the motion hearing. 

4. 

The SOC against Respondent alleges that Respondent is a permanent 

certificated employee of the District most recently assigned as a Head Start/State Pre-

School classroom teacher. (SOC ¶1.) As a teacher of Head Start/State Pre-School pupils 

ages three to five years old. Respondent is required, among other duties, to provide 

care and supervision to the students. (. (SOC ¶1.) Board policies prohibit corporal 

punishment and require professional adult/student boundaries (SOC ¶¶14, 15.) More 

specifically, the SOC alleges: 

A. 

On October 9, 2019, Respondent acted in a rude and hostile manner 

toward a Professional Development Specialist who visited his classroom to provide 

support. 

missing.  

B. 

On October 17, 2019, Respondent told a student “Crazy [name], get your 

gun and rifle and start shooting.” 

C. 

On January 13, 2020, one of Respondent’s students, a four-year-old boy, 

eloped, wandered into a school parking lot, and was nearly struck by a car. 

Respondent had already counted his students and did not notice the student was 

D. 

On February 12, 2020, during an unannounced visit to Respondent’s 

classroom, an administrator from the county office of education, made an 

3 

unannounced visit to Respondent’s classroom and found that he was in his office with 

the door closed and one instructional aide had been left with 16 napping children 

when two adults were required. 

E. 

On February 12, 2020, Respondent held a 4-year-old student by both ear 

lobes and said words to the effect of “I don’t like it when you don’t listen to me.” 

F. 

On February 12, 2020, Respondent held student A.W. upside down by her 

ankles, swung her around, and tickled her back at the end of nap time. 

G. 

During the 2018-2019 and 2019-2020 school years, Respondent 

frequently pulled on multiple students’ ears when they failed to listen to him and 

repeatedly picked students A.W. and J.P. up by their ankles, held them upside down, 

and swung them.  

Respondent’s Contentions 

5. 

Respondent asserts that the facts as alleged in the SOC, even if true, are 

insufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay and merely 

establish unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance, which are not 

grounds for immediate suspension without pay.  

The District’s Contentions 

6. 

The District asserts that its SOC alleges sufficient facts constituting 

immoral conduct as cause for dismissal and immediate suspension, pursuant to 

Education Code section 44939. The District contends that it pled sufficient facts and 

nexus of Respondent’s conduct to the field of teaching and the facts, as alleged, 

constitute immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

4 

reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 

school district sufficient to establish a basis for his immediate suspension without pay. 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

1. 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent certificated 

employee who has been charged with” immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of 

any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed 

by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district.” (Ed. Code, § 

44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion for immediate reversal of 

the suspension with the Office of Administrative Hearings. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. 

(c)(1).) An administrative law judge reviews the motion, and the review “shall be limited 

to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if 

true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 

(Ibid.) Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true, the administrative law 

judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or conclusions of fact or law. (Blank v. 

Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

2. 

Immoral conduct is conduct hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness, or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (Board of Education 

v. Weiland 179 Cal. App. 2d, 808, at 811, quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 

5 

36 Cal.2d 734, 740 and Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 

9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.) 

3. 

The allegations that Respondent engaged in corporal punishment by 

pulling the earlobes of young children and holding them upside down by their ankles 

and swinging them around state facts sufficient to establish immoral conduct as it is 

willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 

respectable members of the community and constitutes an inconsiderate attitude 

toward good order and the public welfare. Additionally, those allegations set forth 

sufficient facts to establish persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of 

the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public 

schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school 

district employing him as the conduct violates Board policies and state law prohibiting 

corporal punishment.  

4. 

Accordingly, Respondent Verne Scatliffe failed to establish good cause to 

reverse the immediate suspension. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

/// 

6 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

DATE: 

August 21, 2020

ORDER 

 

 

GLYNDA B. GOMEZ 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

7 

