BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

HOPE JOHNSTON, Moving Party 

And 

MENIFEE UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2020100779 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Alan R. Alvord, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by telephone on 

November 20, 2020.

Johnston (Johnston). 

Jon Cadieux, Smith Steiner Vanderpool, APC, represented moving party Hope 

Todd M. Robbins, Atkinson, Adelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, a Professional Law 

Corporation, represented responding party Menifee Union School District (district).

The matter was submitted for decision on November 20, 2020. 

Background 

On September 8, 2020, the Menifee Union School District Governing Board 

(board) suspended Johnston without pay and gave notice of the board’s intent to 

dismiss Johnston from her position as a permanent certificated teacher. The board 

served Johnston with notice of the suspension and intent to dismiss and the statement 

of charges by regular and certified mail on September 11, 2020. 

Johnston, through counsel, requested a hearing on the dismissal on September 

21, 2020. 

Johnston, through counsel, filed the present motion to immediately reverse her 

suspension without pay with OAH on October 26, 2020. 

On October 27, 2020, the district filed a request to set the dismissal case for 

hearing. The hearing is set for March 2021. 

Timeliness of This Motion 

The district contends that this motion was untimely under Education Code 

section 44939, subdivision (c)(2). Johnston contends the motion was timely. All 

references to statutes are to the Education Code, unless indicated.

Section 44939, subdivision (c)(2) requires this motion to be “served upon the 

governing board . . . and filed with [OAH] within 30 days after service upon the 

employee of the initial pleading in the matter.” The question is what the legislature 

meant by “initial pleading in the matter.” There does not appear to be any controlling 

authority interpreting the legislature’s meaning. The district contends the 30 days 

starts when it served Johnston with the notice of intention to dismiss and the written 

2

statement of charges. Johnston contends the 30 days started on October 27, 2020,

when the district filed the request to set the dismissal case for hearing with OAH. 

Section 44934 states that the notice of intention to dismiss and the written 

charges are sufficient to initiate a hearing under Government Code section 11503. The 

district is not required to file or serve a separate accusation. The Education Code does 

not state a time limit within which the district must initiate a hearing, but it states that 

the hearing must be commenced within six months from the date of the employee’s 

demand for a hearing (Educ. Code § 44944, subd. (b)(1)(A).) 

In addition to filing the motion within 30 days after the “initial pleading,” 

section 44939, subdivision (c)(3), requires a hearing on the motion no later than 30 

days after it is filed with OAH. Section 44939, subdivision (c)(4), requires a decision on 

the motion to be issued within 15 days after the hearing. Read together, these 

provisions demonstrate the legislature’s intent to provide a quick resolution of the 

motion where a teacher has been suspended without pay. 

Under Johnston’s reading of the law, the time to file the motion would not start 

to run until the school district filed a disciplinary case with OAH – an action that has no 

specific deadline in the Education Code. Under this reading, a district could delay a 

teacher’s right to request reversal of a suspension without pay by simply delaying 

filing a dismissal case with OAH. Likewise, if a teacher filed a motion for reversal of 

suspension before the disciplinary case was filed with OAH, the district could argue the 

motion should be dismissed because the 30 days had not started yet. In fact, 

Johnston’s own motion could be premature because it was filed the day before the 

district filed its disciplinary case at OAH. One day before is not “within 30 days after” 

the filing. The legislature could not have intended such absurd outcomes. When a 

statute is susceptible of different constructions, one leading to mischief or absurdity 

3

and the other consistent with justice and common sense, the latter will be adopted. 

(

 (1977) 66 Cal.App.3d 440, 446.)

The motion for relief from suspension was required to be filed with OAH within

30 days after September 11, 2020, the date the district served Johnston with the notice 

of suspension and intent to dismiss. The motion filed with OAH on October 26, 2020, 

was untimely. Even assuming the motion was timely, it fails on the merits, as discussed 

below. 

Allegations in the Statement of Charges 

The district alleges that Johnston hosted a birthday party at her house for a 16-

year-old former student. Other district students were present at the party. During the 

“happy birthday song,” a video shows the student smoking something while Johnston 

stands by. The video was posted on social media with a caption stating that the 

student would be “high asf.” The statement of charges says that this means “high as 

fuck.” There is a factual dispute about what the student was smoking. The statement of 

charges referred to it as a CBD (cannabidiol) cigarette based on the student’s answers 

to an investigator, but also stated that the investigator concluded “none of the 

individuals were credible.” There is also a dispute about whether it was illegal for 

Johnston to allow a 16-year-old to smoke anything at her home. 

The statement of charges also alleges that Johnston exchanged text messages 

with two students “as far back as 2014” that had inappropriate sexual content and 

referenced instances when Johnston touched the students in an improper way. The 

statement of charges says these incidents came to the district’s attention in December 

2016. The statement of charges states that the previous sexually charged text 

4

messages, together with the permissive conduct allowing the student to smoke the 

cigarette, are warning signs of grooming behavior, which is immoral conduct. 

The statement of charges also alleges Johnston was dishonest during the 

investigation, that she induced others to be dishonest, and that this conduct is 

immoral. 

Johnston’s Arguments 

Johnston asserts that the smoking incident is not on its face immoral conduct 

sufficient to sustain a suspension without pay. The district does not allege that she 

provided the student with the cigarette, consented to his smoking it, or knew he had it 

in his possession. Johnston contends she waited until after “happy birthday” was 

finished to address the smoking issue. She contends she was helping to raise the 

student as a co-parent and her parenting decisions are beyond the scope of district 

discipline. 

As to the allegations of inappropriate text messages and grooming behavior, 

Johnston argues that the messages were falsified and, even if they weren’t, they are 

evidence that falls outside of the four-year evidentiary limitation set forth in section 

44944, subdivision (b)(2)(A). 

Applicable Law 

Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes the district to suspend an employee 

without pay pending the outcome of the hearing if the district charges immoral 

conduct. Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows the employee to file a motion for 

relief from the suspension and requires review of this motion to be “limited to a 

5

determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 

are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 

Immoral conduct is conduct hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness, or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (

179 Cal. App. 2d, 808, at 811, quoting 

 (1951) 

(1970) 

36 Cal.2d 734, 740 and 

9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.) 

Evaluation 

The allegations that Johnston exchanged sexually inappropriate text messages 

with students and touched them improperly, if proved at hearing, could support a 

finding of immoral conduct. The statement of charges on its face alleges the district 

discovered this conduct in December 2016. Section 44944, subdivision (b)(2)(A)(i), 

provides an exception to the four-year evidence exclusion rule for behavior or 

communication of a sexual nature. Whether this exception, or any other, applies is a 

matter to be determined by the commission after the parties present evidence at the 

hearing.

The allegations that Johnston stood by while a 16-year-old smoked a CBD 

cigarette in her home in front of a group of people including district students, if 

proved at hearing, could support a finding of immoral conduct.

6

The allegation that the CBD smoking incident, when considered together with 

the inappropriate text messages and improper touching of a minor student, is 

grooming behavior, if proved at hearing, could support a finding of immoral conduct. 

The allegation that Johnston was dishonest with the district during the 

investigation and induced others to be dishonest, if proved at hearing, could support a 

finding of immoral conduct. 

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

DATE: December 2, 2020

ALAN R. ALVORD

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings 

7

