BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

LEISA VALLO, a Permanent Certificated Employee, Moving 

Party 

and 

MORONGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH Case No. 2020060515 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Ed Washington, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, 

California on July 10, 2020. 

Jon Cadieux, Attorney at Law, represented Leisa Vallo.  

Brian D. Bock, Attorney at Law, represented the Morongo Unified School District 

(District). 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On April 1, 2020, the District served Ms. Vallo, a permanent certificated 

employee, with a Notice of Proposed Intent to Immediately Suspend Without Pay and 

Dismiss (Notice), which included a Statement of Charges, signed by the District’s 

Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources. The Notice was based on charges 

including, but not limited to, immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subd. (a), & 44939, 

subd. (b).) The District governing board immediately suspended Ms. Vallo without pay 

pursuant to Education Code section 44939. Ms. Vallo timely filed a Demand for 

Hearing and Notice of Defense.  

On June 15, 2020, Ms. Vallo filed a Notice of Motion and Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension (Motion) pursuant to Education Code section 44939, 

subdivision (c), on grounds that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a 

sufficient basis for immediate unpaid suspension. Specifically, Ms. Vallo argues that the 

well-pleaded allegations demonstrate conduct that was unprofessional, at best, but 

did not rise to the level of immoral conduct. 

ANALYSIS 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district charged “with 

immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, with 

incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of [Education Code] 

section 51530.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) “Review of a motion filed pursuant to 

 

2 

this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c).) 

“Immoral conduct” is to be construed according to “its common and approved 

usage having regard for the context in which the legislature used” the term. (Palo 

Verde Unified School District of Riverside County v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 

971.)  In Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland 

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, the court held: 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b)(2), provides the following 

regarding dismissal or suspension proceedings initiated pursuant to Section 44934: 

(A) A witness shall not be permitted to testify at the hearing 

except upon oath or affirmation. Testimony shall not be 

given or evidence shall not be introduced relating to 

matters that occurred more than four years before the date 

 

3 

of the filing of the notice, except in one of the following 

circumstances: 

(i) Testimony or evidence regarding allegations of behavior 

or communication of a sexual nature with a pupil that is 

beyond the scope or requirements of the educational 

program… 

(ii) Testimony or evidence regarding allegations of an act 

described in Section 288 of the Penal Code (lewd and 

lascivious acts with a minor) with respect to a pupil of any 

age, Section 288.3 of the Penal Code (contacting a minor to 

commit a felony), Section 44010 of the Education Code 

(certain sex offenses, including rape, sodomy, oral 

copulation, unlawful sexual intercourse, making a child 

under the age of 16 available for any lewd or lascivious act, 

or aiding or abetting in the commission of these or similar 

offenses). 

(B) Evidence of records regularly kept by the governing 

board of the school district concerning the employee may 

be introduced, but no decision relating to the dismissal or 

suspension of an employee shall be made based on charges 

or evidence of any nature relating to matters occurring 

more than four years before the filing of the notice, except 

as allowed pursuant to subparagraph (A). 

 

4 

The Statement of Charges alleges that, from 2002 through 2006, while working 

as a counselor for the Yucca Valley High School (YVHS), Ms. Vallo engaged in an 

extremely close and inappropriate relationship with student D.L., which involved 

sharing personal information and engaging in extensive “sexualized” communications. 

The Statement of Charges alleges that Ms. Vallo engaged in a sexual relationship with 

D.L. in or around 2008 and 2009, when D.L. was 20 or 21 years old and two to three 

years after D.L. graduated from YVHS. 

The Statement of Charges alleges that Ms. Vallo had sexual intercourse with 

B.L., a former YVHS student, three times, in approximately July 2004, when B.L. was 18 

years old and weeks after B.L. graduated from high school.  

The Statement of Charges also alleges that Ms. Vallo was dishonest during the 

investigation of these and other related events. 

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral 

argument. Based upon a review of the Statement of Charges, the District failed to 

allege facts, which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension 

under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). Specifically, the well-pled factual 

allegations establish that between 10 to 15 years ago, Ms. Vallo engaged in sexual 

intercourse with two adult former students of YVHS, whom she came to know through 

her employment with YVHS as a school counselor. The District failed to establish that 

such factual allegations constituted immoral conduct. The District also failed to 

establish that those alleged facts occurred less than four years before the date of the 

filing of the Notice, as required by Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b)(2)(B), 

or fell within either exception delineated in Education Code section 44944, subdivision 

(b)(2)(A). 

 

5 

ORDER 

Good cause having been established, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension is GRANTED. The School District shall make Ms. Vallo whole for any lost 

wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. 

Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

DATE: July 24 , 2020 

ED WASHINGTON 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

   

 

 

6 

