BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

VICTORIA NESHEVA (EN 788436), 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Moving Party, 

and 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2020030255 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Cindy F. Forman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on March 27, 2020. 

Daniel J. Kolodziej, Esq., Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad LLP, represented moving 

party Victoria Nesheva (Teacher). 

M. Cristina Cruz, Assistant General Counsel, represented responding party Los 

Angeles Unified School District (District). 

On January 10, 2020, District’s Chief Human Resources Officer signed a 

Statement of Charges (Statement) notifying Teacher of District’s intention to 

immediately suspend her without pay and thereafter dismiss her from employment 

pursuant to Education Code1 section 44932. Teacher moved for immediate reversal of 

the suspension pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). In support of her motion, 

Teacher also filed a Request for Judicial Notice of four decisions issued by OAH 

administrative law judges on motions filed by other teachers seeking immediate 

reversal of their own suspensions. District filed an opposition to Teacher’s motion as 

well as to Teacher’s Request for Judicial Notice. Teacher filed a reply memorandum, 

and counsel for both parties presented oral argument at the motion hearing. At 

hearing, the administrative law judge denied Teacher’s Request for Judicial Notice on 

the ground of relevance because the decisions concerned different teachers as well as 

different facts and circumstances. (San Franciso Baykeeper, Inc. v. State Lands Com. 

(2015) 242 Cal.App.4th 202, 231 [only relevant evidence is admissible by judicial 

notice.].) 

Code. 

                                              

1 Unless otherwise stated, all further statutory references are to the Education 

2 

BACKGROUND 

During the relevant period, Teacher was employed as a middle school physical 

education teacher. Pursuant to section 44939, subsection (b), District immediately 

suspended Teacher from her duties upon its filing of the Statement, which charged her 

with immoral conduct, including but not limited to, egregious conduct, in violation of 

sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939; unprofessional conduct in violation of 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(2); evident unfitness for service in violation of section 

44932, subdivision (a)(6); persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of 

the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the governance of the public 

schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of District in 

violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(8); and willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of District, in violation of section 44939. 

In support of its charges, District alleges, between December 2, 2015, and 

October 25, 2019, Teacher engaged in the following acts: Teacher inappropriately 

touched her students, i.e., pulled a student’s hair, touched a student’s leg and arm, 

pulled a student’s hoodie, pushed a student’s buttock, marked students’ arms with 

permanent marker to count laps, attempted to choke a student, hit a student with her 

elbow, and shoved a student; Teacher closed a door on a student’s foot; Teacher 

moved a physical education equipment cart over a student’s foot on two separate 

occasions without reporting or apologizing for the incidents; Teacher opened the door 

when a student was changing into his gym shorts although the student indicated he 

was not ready; Teacher used her personal cellphone to take pictures or video record 

female students while they were changing clothes in the locker room; Teacher refused 

to help Spanish-speaking students; Teacher directed students to pick up trash and sit 

3 

on the floor as forms of discipline; Teacher forced students to sit on hot pavement; 

Teacher refused to assist a student whose locker would not open; and Teacher opened 

a student’s locker and threw the student’s clothes on the floor. District further alleges 

Teacher willfully committed these acts in violation of District policies and directives 

addressed to correct Teacher’s behavior. 

District contends that the foregoing alleged actions warrant Teacher’s 

immediate suspension without pay because they constitute immoral conduct and a 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. Teacher 

contends District failed to plead sufficient facts to establish either immoral conduct or 

willful refusal. Teacher further contends the actions complained of reflect at most 

impropriety, negligence, inadvertence, or an inconsistent failure to comply with District 

rules, none of which warrant immediate suspension. 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

A school district may immediately suspend without pay a permanent certificated 

employee charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or a violation of 

section 51530 (advocating communism with intent to indoctrinate). (Ed. Code, § 44939, 

subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion for immediate reversal of the 

suspension with OAH. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  

An administrative law judge’s review of the motion is “limited to a 

determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 

4 

are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (Ed. 

Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true, the 

administrative law judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or conclusions of 

fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318 (Blank).) Conclusory 

characterizations of conduct as intentional, willful, or fraudulent are “patently 

insufficient.” (Brousseau v. Jarrett (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872 (Brousseau).) Where 

reading the allegations reveals the existence of an affirmative defense, the 

complaining party must plead around the defense by alleging specific facts that would 

avoid the apparent defense. (Blank, supra, 39 Cal.3d at p. 318.) 

DISCUSSION 

Immediate Suspension Based on Immoral Conduct 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Ed. of San 

Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (Weiland) (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, 

quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 

In its opposition brief, District describes the following actions allegedly taken by 

Teacher as immoral: attempting to choke a student; forcing students to sit on hot 

pavement; not helping a student open her locker and directing the student to say Ms. 

ten times; taking pictures or video recordings of female students while changing; 

5 

refusing to help non-English speaking students; running over students’ feet with an 

equipment cart; throwing a student’s clothes on the floor; and making inappropriate 

physical contact (pulling on a hoodie, elbowing a student, tapping a student’s 

buttocks, arms, legs, etc.). (District Brief at pp. 2, 6–7.) District also asserts in its 

opposition brief (but not in the Statement) that the amalgamation of these alleged 

acts constitutes immoral conduct because they reflect a pattern of knowing bullying 

and abuse, which Teacher refused to ameliorate despite repeated warnings and 

directives. 

Resolution of the motion is determined not by the arguments or assertions in a 

party’s brief, but by the sufficiency of the facts pleaded in the Statement. The 

Statement does not contain sufficient allegations to support a reasonable inference of 

immoral conduct. There are no allegations that Teacher faced criminal charges for her 

actions. The Statement also does not contain any allegations that Teacher’s actions, 

whether the impermissible physical contact or the photographing or recording of 

female students, were sexual in nature or that Teacher’s actions caused any student 

physical or psychological injury. There are no allegations that Teacher’s actions, 

particularly the inappropriate touching, caused “unjustifiable mental suffering, child 

neglect, and child health endangerment” as District argues. (See District Brief, p. 6.) In 

addition, while taking pictures or video of female students changing their clothes is 

against District policy, such conduct does not rise to the level of immoral conduct 

without allegations regarding the content of the pictures and the video or what 

Teacher did with any alleged pictures or video. The other claimed immoral acts, such 

as Teacher’s refusal to help students in need or her embarrassing or shaming of 

students, may reflect poor judgment and self-regulation, unfitness for service, or 

unprofessional conduct, but, without additional facts, those acts are not inherently 

“indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, [or] dissoluteness” or reflect Teacher’s 

6 

“moral indifference” to community standards. (See Weiland, supra,179 Cal.App.2d at p. 

811.) 

District’s claim that the Statement alleges a pattern of bullying, which 

constitutes immoral conduct, also lacks merit. The alleged incidents are generally 

unrelated and occurred over the course of four years, thereby not necessarily 

indicative of a pattern of bullying. In addition, the Statement contains no allegation 

that these incidents constitute a pattern of bullying or that such bullying amounted to 

immoral conduct. (See Blank, supra, 39 Cal.3d at p. 318 [when testing the sufficiency of 

allegations in a pleading, deductions should be disregarded].) 

Accordingly, the pleaded facts in the Statement, if true, are insufficient to sustain 

Teacher’s immediate suspension because of immoral conduct. 

Immediate Suspension Based on Willful Refusal 

According to District, Teacher received, but willfully refused to obey directives 

instructing her to do the following: use good judgment; treat students with respect, 

courtesy, and sensitivity; create safe, respectful classroom environment; never grab a 

student unless for his or her own safety; never touch, grab or pull a child to redirect 

them; and treat students better. District contends that Teacher’s conduct must be 

construed as willful because she was aware of these directives and refused to perform 

them. (District Brief, p. 10.) District contends that compliance with these directives fall 

within Teacher’s regular assignments. (Id. at p. 7.) According to District, Teacher’s 

“actions and behavior demonstrate that she made a decision to commit to her own 

methods and preferences and ignore the notice and directives given to her” and thus, 

her actions constitute willful refusal to comply with regular assignments. (Id. at p. 3.)  

7 

District’s argument fails on several grounds. First, simply alleging Teacher’s 

conduct was willful without more is insufficient to establish willful refusal. (See Blank, 

supra, 39 Cal.3d at p. 318; Brousseau, supra, 73 Cal.App.3d at p. 872.) Facts reflecting 

the absence of reasonable cause to perform the regular assignments must also be 

alleged to meet the statutory requirements for immediate dismissal without pay. 

Second, the Statement does not allege Teacher willfully refused to comply with 

a specific rule, unlike the employees in Swan, Wilbur, or Peters, supra. Contrary to the 

rules and regulations set forth in those cases, the directives Teacher is alleged to have 

violated are general in scope and incorporate a wide range of unpermitted activities. 

For instance, although failing to exercise good judgment violates a District directive to 

do so, it does not necessarily indicate a willful refusal to obey reasonable rules and 

regulations. Thus, the facts plead in the Statement are insufficient to support an 

inference that Teacher intentionally and deliberately refused to comply with the 

identified directives by committing a particular act. Although District contends it can 

be reasonably inferred Teacher received more specific guidance in conference 

memoranda and Notices of Unsatisfactory Acts (District Brief, p. 8), the Statement 

alleges no such guidance. Given these circumstances, the inference is not warranted. 

(See Blank, supra, 39 Cal.3d at p. 318.) 

Third, District conflates the different basis for termination and suspension under 

sections 44932 and 44939 and by doing so disregards the element of willfulness 

required by section 44939, subdivision (b). Pursuant to section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(8), a teacher may be dismissed for “[p]ersistent violation of or refusal to obey the 

school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of 

the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the school district 

employing him or her.” The threshold for immediate suspension as set forth in section 

8 

44939, subdivision (b), however, is higher than the threshold for dismissal set forth in 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). A teacher cannot be immediately suspended for 

persistent violation of school regulations and laws or for the mere refusal to comply 

with those regulations and laws. Rather, section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a 

teacher can be immediately suspended only when the refusal to obey reasonable 

regulations is “willful.” The use of the word “willful” rather than “persistent” indicates 

that while repeated misconduct may establish grounds for teacher dismissal under 

section 44932, it is insufficient for immediate suspension under section 44939. 

Thus, it cannot be reasonably inferred from the Statement that Teacher’s 

misconduct was willful simply because she failed on a “significant number of 

occasions” to follow District directives. (District Brief, p. 9.) District argues that 

Teacher’s alleged repeated disregard and ignorance of its directives is sufficient to 

establish her “willful refusal” pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (b). (Ibid.) 

However, while Teacher’s alleged continued failure to comply with District directives 

may be described as persistent or reflect a refusal to comply, her conduct cannot 

necessarily be deemed willful. Her failure to comply with directives could be 

attributable to negligence or accident, not necessarily intentionality. (See Carter v. 

Prime Healthcare Paradise Valley LLC (2011) 198 Cal.App.4th 396, 412 [sustaining 

demurrer to willful misconduct cause of action because “[w]illful misconduct involves 

more than a failure to use ordinary care; it “ ‘ “ ‘involves a more positive intent actually 

to harm another or to do an act with a positive, active, and absolute disregard of its 

consequences.” (Citations omitted.)].) In addition, the alleged incidents of misconduct 

were unrelated, and District did not allege that Teacher engaged in such incidents 

despite of and in response to any particular directive. The Statement, therefore, does 

not by itself provide a sufficient factual basis to infer a “volitional coloration” to 

9 

Teacher’s behavior consistent with a willful refusal to perform her regular assignments 

without reasonable cause. (Coomes, supra, 215 Cal.App.2d at p. 775.)  

A refusal needs to be “conscious, intentional and deliberate” to be willful. 

(Goodhew, supra, 157 Cal.App.2d at p. 257.) While the Statement alleges several 

instances of Teacher’s failure to comply with directives and other regulations, the 

allegations do not reflect that Teacher’s failure to do so was conscious, intentional, or 

deliberate. Accordingly, the pleaded facts in the Statement, if true, are insufficient to 

sustain Teacher’s immediate suspension because of a willful refusal to comply with 

District’s rules and regulations. 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is granted. The Los Angeles 

Unified School District shall make Victoria Nesheva whole for any lost wages, benefits, 

and compensation within 14 days after service of this order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. 

DATE: 

April 9, 2020

 

CINDY F. FORMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

(c)(5).) 

 

 

ORDER 

10 

