BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

HALI ROSEN, a Permanent Certificated Employee, Moving 

Party 

and 

MANTECA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2020020831 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Dena Coggins, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, California 

on March 20, 2020. 

(School District). 

Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, represented Hali Rosen.  

Roman J. Munoz, Attorney at Law, represented Manteca Unified School District 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On January 20, 2020, the School District served Ms. Rosen with a written 

Statement of Charges based on allegations of immoral conduct, unprofessional 

conduct, persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 

reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 

state board or by the governing board of the school district employing her, and 

evident unfitness for service. 

Based upon the statement of charges, the School District governing board 

immediately suspended Ms. Rosen from her duties and gave her notice of the 

suspension. She was placed on suspension without pay under Education Code section 

44939.  

On February 21, 2020, Ms. Rosen filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), 

alleging that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for 

immediate suspension because: (1) the allegations, even if true, do not constitute 

immoral conduct as a matter of law; (2) violations of district policies by Ms. Rosen, 

even if true, do not constitute immoral conduct; and (3) the School District has not 

alleged Ms. Rosen’s conduct constitutes willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause.  

Discussion 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

 

2

charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of [Education Code] 

section 51530.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) 

Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a motion 

filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the 

facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 

for immediate suspension under this section.” 

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral 

argument. Based upon a review of the Statement of Charges, the School District failed 

to allege facts, which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). More specifically, the 

facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges, if true, do not constitute immoral 

conduct as a matter of law. Additionally, the allegations in the Statement of Charges, 

when read as a whole, do not charge respondent with conduct constituting willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.  

GOOD CAUSE HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate Reversal 

of Suspension is GRANTED. The School District shall make Ms. Rosen whole for any 

lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. 

Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5). 

DATE: March 26, 2020

 

 

DENA COGGINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearing

3

