BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

TUSHANA HOWARD, Moving Party 

A Permanent Certificated Employee 

and 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2020010149 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Laurie R. Pearlman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on January 24, 2020. 

(Respondent or Howard). 

Tamra Smith, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Tushana Howard 

Susan Hyman, Assistant General Counsel II, represented responding party Los 

Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD or District). 

BACKGROUND 

The District’s Statement of Charges (SOC) against Respondent alleges that: 

during the 2018-19 school year, while employed as a Counselor at Narbonne High 

School (Narbonne), Howard changed a student’s class schedule and grades without 

the knowledge of administrators or the student’s teachers. The SOC alleges that 

Respondent abused her position to benefit student John Doe, a Narbonne football 

player. Respondent’s intervention substantially raised the student’s grade point 

average so that he was academically eligible to play in Narbonne’s varsity football 

program. Respondent’s actions in changing two of John Doe’s classes well into the 

term without authorization also resulted in a substantial improvement in his grades. 

Respondent’s intent was to elevate the student’s academic standing so that he could 

play football at Narbonne. Respondent’s conduct tainted Narbonne’s football program 

by ensuring the participation of a student athlete who, but for her intervention, was 

academically ineligible, and it violated numerous District policies. 

The District issued discipline, including a Notice of Unsatisfactory Act and a 

Notice of Suspension. On December 3, 2019, the District’s Board of Education (Board) 

determined that Howard had committed immoral conduct, justifying her immediate 

suspension and dismissal. 

The SOC contains several grounds for dismissal, as follows: (1) immoral conduct, 

(2) dishonesty, (3) evident unfitness for service, and (4) persistent violation of or refusal 

to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing 

board of the school district employing her. (Ed. Code §§ 44932, 44939.) 

2 

The District served Howard with a Notice of Immediate Unpaid Suspension, 

pursuant to Education Code section 44939, for immoral conduct. Howard demanded a 

hearing on the dismissal and filed a motion for immediate reversal of the suspension 

(MIRS) under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). The District filed 

opposition to the motion, and counsel for both parties presented oral argument at the 

motion hearing. 

Respondent’s Contentions 

Howard asserts that the facts as alleged in the SOC, even if true, are insufficient 

to constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay. Howard argues that there 

are no facts in the SOC which, if true, demonstrate that she acted fraudulently or 

immorally, rather than negligently or by mistake. She asserts that allegations that she 

changed a student’s class schedule do not, standing alone, raise an inference of fraud 

or immoral conduct, even if the alleged changes were not conducted strictly according 

to policy. Howard contends that there might be various explanations other than fraud 

and immoral conduct for a counselor to change a student’s grades, suggesting that 

the counselor might be attempting to correct a mistake, or might mistakenly believe 

she had authority or permission to make the changes. 

Howard asserts that there are no factual allegations indicating that she knew 

the schedule and grade changes were unauthorized and/or against policy. Further, 

Howard argues that there are no facts suggesting that she acted with a motive to 

deceive or defraud, or reaped any personal benefit from the alleged schedule and 

grade changes. Howard contends that equally plausible inferences from the well-

pleaded facts are that she negligently failed to follow proper protocol and/or was 

mistaken about whether she had permission to make the alleged changes. 

3 

The District’s Contentions 

The District asserts that its SOC alleges sufficient facts constituting immoral 

conduct as cause for dismissal and immediate suspension, pursuant to Education Code 

section 44939. The District contends that the SOC is not required to specify all of the 

details surrounding, and evidence supporting, the charges asserted therein. As 

supported by case law and statutory authority, the SOC need only provide the 

employee with sufficient notice to the end that the Respondent will be able to prepare 

a defense. (Gov. Code, § 11503, subd. (a); Ed. Code, § 44934; Wright v. Munro (1956) 

144 Cal. App. 2d 843, 848.) 

The District contends that it need not plead Howard’s intent to establish that 

she acted deliberately or willfully. It argues that this notion not only contradicts the 

MIRS standard by requiring the District to present evidence outside of the pleadings to 

establish intent, but also contradicts established precedent regarding pleading 

requirements. The District contends that a detailed showing of affirmative intent is not 

required in any pleading, even at the highest level of our judicial system. 

The United States Supreme Court has articulated the pleading standard in a 

demurrer, even when the allegations include discrimination. In Ashcroft v. Iqbal (2009) 

556 U.S. 662, 697 [129 S.Ct. 1937], the U.S. Supreme Court upheld its previous ruling 

that a plaintiff alleging discrimination must plead “enough facts to state a claim for 

relief that is plausible on its face.” It must only provide allegations describing a 

reasonable inference of discriminatory motivation, or intent. 

The District argues that immoral conduct has been sufficiently plead in the SOC. 

The actions alleged offend community notions of fair play in both academics and 

sports. The SOC alleges facts which would establish that Respondent engaged in 

4 

willful, flagrant and shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 

respectable members of the community. Additionally, in Board of Education v. Weiland 

(1960) 179 Cal. App. 2d 808, 809, the seminal case that defines immoral conduct in a 

teacher dismissal case, the court drew a parallel from the definition of “moral 

turpitude” to state that immoral conduct in the teacher dismissal process could be 

synonymous with “dishonesty.” Stripped to its essence, the SOC alleges that 

Respondent was dishonest. Respondent’s argument that the District should be 

required to plead and prove “fraud” is not well-taken. There is no cause for dismissal 

for “fraud” under the Education Code; rather, there is cause for “immoral conduct.” 

Respondent’s argument that her actions (changing a student’s class schedule 

and grades without the knowledge of administrators or the student’s teachers) may 

have been based on mistake or miscommunication are not persuasive. The charges 

allege that the grade changes violated numerous District policies. As a veteran 

counselor with the District, Respondent is imputed to have knowledge of District 

policies regarding changing a student’s grades or class schedule. 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee 

who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or advocating 

communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion 

for immediate reversal of the suspension with the Office of Administrative Hearings. 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge reviews the motion, and 

5 

the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted 

as true, the administrative law judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or 

conclusions of fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Education 

v. Weiland at 811, quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740 

and Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 

972.) 

The conduct alleged is immoral conduct as it is willful, flagrant, or shameless 

conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community and constitutes an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the 

Accordingly, Howard failed to establish good cause to reverse the immediate 

public welfare. 

suspension. 

 

 

6 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

DATE: 

February 10, 2020

ORDER 

 

 

LAURIE R. PEARLMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

7 

