BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for 

Immediate Reversal of Suspension of: 

a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

DAVID CARTER, 

Moving Party, 

and 

MILPITAS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2020040444 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 

IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Administrative Law Judge Michael C. Starkey, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter telephonically on May 1, 2020. 

Christopher E. Schumb, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Christopher Schumb, 

and Steven Clark, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Steven Clark, represented moving 

party David Carter (Carter). 

John R. Yeh, Attorney at Law, Burke, Williams & Sorensen, LLP, represented 

responding party Milpitas Unified School District (District). 

Procedural History 

On April 3, 2020, the District filed and served a statement of charges against 

moving party Carter, alleging multiple causes for dismissal, including immoral conduct, 

pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). The District placed 

Carter on immediate suspension without pay pending hearing, pursuant to Education 

Code section 44939, based upon the charge of immoral conduct. 

On April 13, 2020, Carter timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of his 

suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), 

arguing that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to put him on immediate 

unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not state 

sufficient facts to constitute immoral conduct. In his motion, Carter requests an order 

reversing his suspension without pay. 

Discussion 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 

school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 

who has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

2 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 

Section 51530 . . . .” 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 

employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 

Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 

reverse a suspension to “a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” 

The Administrative Law Judge has considered the written submissions of the 

parties and their oral argument. Based upon a review of the charges, the District has 

alleged facts which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of 

immoral conduct. 

The motion for immediate reversal of the suspension of David Carter by Milpitas 

Unified School District is denied.

(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)

DATE: 

 

MICHAEL C. STARKEY 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearing

 

ORDER 

3 

