BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

MINNIE JOHNSON, Moving Party 

And 

INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2020120858 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Erin R. Koch-Goodman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by telephone 

on January 29, 2021. 

Carlos Perez and Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Attorneys at Law, Law Offices of 

Carlos Perez, represented moving party Minnie Johnson (Johnson). 

Jeff C. Marderosian, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Jeff C. Marderosian, 

represented responding party Inglewood Unified School District (District). 

The matter was submitted for decision on January 29, 2021. 

Procedural History 

On November 23, 2020, the District served Johnson with a Statement of 

Charges, immediately suspending her without pay and providing her notice of its 

intent to dismiss her as a permanent certificated teacher. (Ed. Code1, ยง 44932.) Johnson 

timely filed a Demand for Hearing and Notice of Defense. The hearing is set in May 

and June 2021.  

On December 23, 2020, Johnson filed a Notice of Motion and Motion for 

Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion) to challenge her immediate suspension 

without pay. (ยง 44939, subd. (c).) Johnson contends the Statement of Charges does not 

set forth a sufficient basis for immediate unpaid suspension. Johnson concedes the 

allegations may demonstrate conduct that was unprofessional or insubordinate but 

argues the same conduct does not rise to the level of immoral conduct justifying an 

immediate unpaid suspension. The District filed an Opposition to the Motion on 

January 5, 2021. Johnson filed a Reply on January 12, 2021. Oral argument was 

scheduled for January 15, 2021, but was continued to January 29, 2021, to allow the 

parties to further discuss settlement. With no settlement, oral arguments on the 

Motion were heard on January 29, 2021. 

Motion For Immediate Reversal Of Suspension 

Section 44939 allows a school district to immediately suspend a permanent 

employee without pay who has been charged with, among other things, immoral 

                                              

specified. 

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise 

2 

conduct. (subd. (b).) However, an employee who has been placed on such suspension 

may file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension. (ยง 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  Review 

of a motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to 

whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.

.)  

STATEMENT OF CHARGES 

The District alleges 89 incidents of misconduct by Johnson, occurring from 2016 

to 2020. The allegations can be divided into two broad categories: misconduct in her 

words and actions toward District and school site administration, including refusals to 

attend required meetings and/or perform job duties as requested; and misconduct in 

her words and actions toward students, colleagues, and parents. Examples of the first 

include Johnson: (1) writing emails to Principal Cain referring to her as a  bully and 

incompetent  (Para. 92), alleging  you have a mental health issue, and you are 

displacing it on me Para. 70), stating  it is difficult to work with someone who does 

not understand how to be a teacher Para. 46), and  you are not qualified Para. 45); 

(2) telling students she hates Principal Cain (Para. 61); and (3) failing to participate at 

Back to School Night (Para. 88) or attend a full day staff development training, stating 

I don t give a damn about the folks at the District. You better go ahead and write me 

up Para. 16). Examples of the second category include Johnson: targeting student 

M  A., calling her a  loser Para. 34) and a  stupid bitch and repeatedly telling her 

to  shut up Para. 47), calling her grandmother  an old ass bitch and saying 

I] would 

wipe you off the floor Para. 50); targeting student J

 H., calling him a  big boy,

complimenting his voice, telling him he  would make pretty babies and moaning his 

name when he turned in an assignment (Para. 35); and targeting student E

 L., 

3 

ORDER 

The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is DENIED. 

 

 

DATE: February 4, 2021

 

ERIN R. KOCH-GOODMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

6 

