BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

PATRICIA WALLACE, 

Moving Party, 

and 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2020030306 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Cindy F. Forman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on March 27, 2020. 

Wallace (Teacher). 

Joshua Adams, Esq., Gilbert & Sackman, represented moving party Patricia 

Michael Voigt, Assistant General Counsel, represented responding party Los 

Angeles Unified School District (District). 

On February 5, 2020, District notified Teacher of its intent to suspend her 

immediately without pay and thereafter dismiss her from her assignment as a special 

education teacher pursuant to Education Code1 section 44932. Teacher moved for 

immediate reversal of the suspension pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). In 

support of her motion, Teacher also filed a Request for Judicial Notice of a decision by 

an OAH administrative law judge on a motion for immediate reversal of suspension in 

another case, a copy of Assembly Bill No. 449, and the Assembly Floor Analysis for 

Assembly Bill No. 449. District filed an opposition to Teacher’s motion as well as to 

Teacher’s Request for Judicial Notice. 

Counsel for both parties presented oral argument at the motion hearing. At 

hearing, the parties agreed that the Statement of Charges (Statement) filed in In the 

Matter of the Accusation Against Patricia Wallace, OAH No. 202030448, is the 

operative pleading for this proceeding. 

Teacher’s Request for Judicial Notice is denied. The prior decision concerns a 

different teacher and is therefore not relevant to this matter. Assembly Bill No. 449 has 

no bearing on the issues raised in this proceeding. (San Franciso Baykeeper, Inc. v. 

State Lands Com. (2015) 242 Cal.App.4th 202, 231 [only relevant evidence is admissible 

by judicial notice.].) 

 

                                              

Code. 

1 Unless otherwise stated, all further statutory references are to the Education 

2 

BACKGROUND 

During the relevant period, Teacher was employed as a special education 

teacher instructing middle school students. Pursuant to section 44939, subsection (b), 

District immediately suspended Teacher from her duties upon its filing of the 

Statement, charging Teacher with immoral conduct, including but not limited to, 

egregious conduct, in violation of sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939; 

unprofessional conduct in violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(2); unsatisfactory 

performance in violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(5); evident unfitness for 

service in violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(6); persistent violation of or refusal 

to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

governance of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing 

board of the District in violation of section 44932, subdivision (a)(8); and willful refusal 

to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by District’s 

reasonable rules and regulations, in violation of section 44939. 

In support of its charges, District alleges in the Statement Teacher engaged in 

the following misconduct between October 19, 2016, and March 15, 2019: failing to 

supervise her students appropriately; failing to provide her students with appropriate 

instruction, implement classroom procedures and routines to support student learning, 

and design purposeful instructional groups; using profane and inappropriate language 

toward and in the presence of her students, including calling them “cunts,” “retarded,” 

“idiots,” “fat ass,” “dumb ass,” and other vulgar and derogatory terms; frequently 

yelling at her students; prohibiting her students from leaving their seats to get a facial 

tissue; making a student stand in the hall for almost an entire class period and then 

preventing him from getting to his next class; lacking lesson plans and standards for 

two of her class periods; failing to turn in lesson plans on at least eight occasions; 

3 

striking two students on the arm or hand and grabbing, pushing and poking other 

students when physically maneuvering them around the room; throwing her phone at 

a student; throwing a rubber stamp at a student; and engaging in retaliatory behavior 

against a student who had reported Teacher’s misconduct. District further alleges 

Teacher willfully committed these acts in violation of District regulations, policies, and 

directives. 

District contends that the foregoing alleged actions warrant Teacher’s 

immediate suspension without pay because they constitute immoral conduct and a 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. Teacher 

contends District failed to plead sufficient facts to establish either immoral conduct or 

willful refusal. Teacher further contends the actions complained of reflect at most 

unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance, neither of which warrant 

immediate suspension. 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

A school district may immediately suspend without pay a permanent certificated 

employee charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or a violation of 

section 51530 (advocating communism with intent to indoctrinate). (Ed. Code, § 44939, 

subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion for immediate reversal of the 

suspension with OAH. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) 

4 

An administrative law judge’s review of the suspended employee’s motion is 

“limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of 

charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this 

section.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) Although well-pleaded facts must be 

accepted as true, the administrative law judge need not accept contentions, 

deductions, or conclusions of fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318 

(Blank).) Conclusory characterizations of conduct as intentional, willful, or fraudulent 

are “patently insufficient.” (Brousseau v. Jarrett (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) Where 

reading the allegations reveals the existence of an affirmative defense, the 

complaining party must plead around the defense by alleging specific facts that would 

avoid the apparent defense. (Blank, supra, 39 Cal.3d at p. 318.) 

DISCUSSION 

Immediate Suspension Based on Immoral Conduct 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as wil[l]ful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Ed. of San 

Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (Weiland) (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, 

quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.)  

According to Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224 

(Morrison), immoral conduct “must be considered in the context in which the 

5 

Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general 

public; more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the 

school community. [] In providing standards to guide school boards in placing 

restraints on conduct of teachers, the Legislature is concerned with the welfare of the 

school community. Its objective is the protection of students from corruption.” In 

School Dist. of Ft. Smith v. Maury (1890) 53 Ark. 471, quoted in Morrison, the court 

cautioned, ‘We do not mean to say that every act of immorality would be a breach of 

the contract to justify its termination, but it would be such whenever, from the 

character or notoriety of the act, it impaired the services of the teacher in properly 

instructing or advancing the pupils.” (Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 224, fn. 14.) 

A teacher calling a middle school student “cunt,” “fat ass,” “stupid,” “retarded” 

or “dumbass” is a serious breach of and disrespect for the norms mediating a teacher’s 

interaction with students entrusted in her care. (Statement, ¶¶ 9, 12, 68, 70, 76) 

Teacher’s use of such epithets and insults is not only demeaning and insensitive, it also 

poses a risk of harm to her students’ moral and mental welfare. (See Palo Verde etc. 

Sch. Dist. v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 973 (Hensey) [deeming use of vulgar 

language in junior college classroom did not constitute immoral conduct while 

recognizing that use of same language in an elementary school classroom warrants 

“more careful” scrutiny].) Likewise, Teacher’s conduct laughing at students who are 

struggling, calling a student a “snitch” for reporting Teacher’s misconduct, and 

refusing to allow a child to use a restroom (Statement, ¶¶ 52, 79-81) are indicative of 

her hostile attitude to and flagrant disrespect for the school community. 

Contrary to Teacher’s claim, the absence of any allegations regarding criminal 

charges or prurient behavior is not dispositive of any determination of whether the 

facts as alleged in the Statement, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 

6 

immediate suspension. (See Hensey, supra, 9 Cal.App.3d at p. 974 [finding that licking 

the wall in a vulgar manner constitutes immoral conduct].) What is important is the 

nature of Teacher‘s conduct towards her students and the effect of such conduct on 

her students and the educational community. Here, Teacher’s conduct is 

demonstrative of an unacceptable contempt for and animus toward students’ 

wellbeing. As noted in Board of Education of City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 

Cal.2d 546, 552–554 (Swan): 

A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the 

public and pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words 

and actions are likely to be followed by the children coming 

under . . . [the teacher’s] care and protection. (Citation.) In 

this connection the following language used in Johnson v. 

Taft School Dist. [1937] 19 Cal.App.2d 405, at page 408[,] is 

pertinent: ‘A board of education is entrusted with the 

conduct of the schools under its jurisdiction, their standards 

of education, and the moral, mental and physical welfare of 

the pupils during school hours. An important part of the 

education of any child is the instilling of a proper respect 

for authority and obedience to necessary discipline. Lessons 

are learned from example as well as from precept. . . .’” 

In this matter, Teacher repeatedly directed derogatory and profane language 

toward her students and engaged in offensive conduct with the intent of embarrassing 

and shaming her students. This conduct is contrary to any lesson or societal norm the 

public expects a school district to impart to its students. Teacher’s alleged acts are 

inherently “indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, [or] dissoluteness” and 

7 

reflect Teacher’s “moral indifference” to community standards. (See Weiland, supra, 

179 Cal.App.2d at p. 811.) Accordingly, the pleaded facts in the Statement, if true, are 

sufficient to sustain Teacher’s immediate suspension based on immoral conduct. 

Immediate Suspension Based on Willful Misconduct 

“The wilful refusal of a teacher to obey the reasonable rules and regulations of 

the employing board of education is insubordination.” (Swan, supra, 41 Cal.2d at p. 

551 [teacher refused to report for teaching assignments when directed to do so]; see 

also Wilbur v. Office of City Clerk of City of Los Angeles (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 636, 642 

(Wilbur) [employee’s refusal to perform specific assignment and work for assigned 

supervisor despite orders to do so demonstrated a “wil[l]ful refusal to obey the 

reasonable orders of an employer”].)) The term “willful” carries a volitional 

determination that excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct. 

(Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775 (Coomes).) “Wil[l]ful 

disobedience connotes a specific violation of command or prohibition.” (Peters v. 

Mitchell (1963) 222 Cal.App.2d 852, 862 [no finding of willful disobedience in the 

absence of a specific order].) Willfulness requires that “one intentionally fails or refuses 

to perform an act which is required to be done.” (Goodhew v. Industrial Acc. 

Commission (1958) 157 Cal.App.2d 252, 257 [finding employer’s unlawful refusal to 

pay employee taxes willful despite absence of an evil intent because employer 

intentionally did not pay its employees’ taxes].) 

District alleges that Teacher violated directives regarding supervision of her 

classroom, instructional assignments, discipline strategies, the use of appropriate 

language, treating students with respect, and maintaining professionalism. District 

further alleges that Teacher failed to comply with oral directives provided at various 

conferences with her school principal directing her to post an Agenda regarding daily 

8 

lesson objectives, submit complete weekly standards-based lesson plans, adhere to 

certain instructional procedures, and comply with District administrative directives. 

However, Teacher’s alleged repeated failure to comply with District’s directives 

and instructions from her principal does not necessarily constitute a willful refusal to 

do so without reasonable cause. While Teacher’s alleged continued failure to comply 

with District regulations and directives may be characterized as a persistent violation 

or reflect a refusal to comply under section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), her conduct 

cannot automatically be inferred as willful as required under section 44939, subdivision 

(b). The threshold for immediate suspension as set forth in section 44939, subdivision 

(b), is higher than the threshold for dismissal set forth in section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(8). Thus, a teacher cannot be immediately suspended for persistent violation of 

school regulations and laws or for the mere refusal to comply with those regulations 

and laws. 

Teacher’s failure to comply with District regulations could be attributable to 

negligence, inability to perform, or accident, not necessarily intentionality. The 

Statement, therefore, does not by itself provide enough facts to demonstrate a 

“volitional coloration” to Teacher’s behavior consistent with a willful refusal to perform 

her regular assignments. (Coomes, supra, 215 Cal.App.2d at p. 775.) Accordingly, the 

pleaded facts in the Statement, if true, are not sufficient to sustain Teacher’s 

immediate suspension based on a willful refusal to comply with her regular 

assignments without reasonable cause. 

Disposition  

All arguments made by counsel in their briefs and at oral argument have been 

considered. The facts as alleged in the Statement, if true, are sufficient to support a 

9 

claim against Teacher for immoral conduct and therefore constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension without pay under section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). 

ORDER 

The motion by Patricia Wallace for immediate reversal of her suspension 

without pay is denied.  

DATE: 

April 10, 2020

 

CINDY F. FORMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

 

10 

