BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

REBECCA LYNN-YEE, 

Moving Party, 

and 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2020120090 

SAN JOSE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR REVERSAL OF IMMEDIATE 

SUSPENSION (Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Administrative Law Judge Regina Brown, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter telephonically, on December 18, 2020. 

Joseph Cisneros, Attorney, represented the moving party Rebecca Lynn-Yee. 

Ingrid A. Meyers, Attorney, represented the San Jose Unified School District 

(District). 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On November 6, 2020, a statement of charges and recommendation for 

dismissal and immediate unpaid suspension was filed and served against Rebecca 

Lynn-Yee (the moving party), pursuant to Education Code section 44932, alleging six 

causes for dismissal: 1) immoral conduct; 2) unprofessional conduct; 3) dishonesty; 4) 

evident unfitness for service; 5) persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws; 

and 6) willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. The 

District placed her on immediate suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code 

section 44939, based upon the allegations of immoral conduct and willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

The moving party filed a timely motion for immediate reversal of her 

suspension without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). 

She argues that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place her on 

immediate unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not 

establish that she engaged in immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause. 

DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 

may immediately suspend a permanent employee who has been charged  with 

immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, with 

 
 

2 

incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 

 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1),  review of a 

motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 

the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 

basis for immediate suspension under this section.  

The written submissions and oral argument of the parties have been considered. 

Based upon a review of the statement of charges, the District has failed to allege facts 

which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct or 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

ORDER 

Good cause having been established, the motion for immediate reversal of suspension 

is GRANTED. The District s immediate suspension of Rebecca Lynn-Yee is reversed and 

the District shall make her whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 

14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

 

 
 

DATE:   December 22, 2020

REGINA BROWN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearing 

 

3 

