BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension Filed by: 

MARY JO CORMIER, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

v. 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

OAH No. 2020100775 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION  

(Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Administrative Law Judge Karen Reichmann, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter telephonically, on November 13, 2020. 

Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Attorney at Law, represented Mary Jo Cormier, the 

moving party. 

School District (District). 

M. Cristina Cruz, Assistant General Counsel, represented the Los Angeles Unified 

Prior to the hearing, the moving party submitted a Request for Judicial Notice 

of two items. The District opposed the request. Oral argument was heard and the 

matter was taken under submission. The moving party s request is denied.  

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

A statement of charges was filed and served against Mary Jo Cormier, pursuant 

to Education Code section 44932, alleging five causes for dismissal: 1) unprofessional 

conduct; 2) unsatisfactory performance; 3) evident unfitness for service; 4) persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey school laws; and 5) willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause. The District placed her on immediate 

suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based upon the 

allegations of willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

 

The moving party filed a timely motion for immediate reversal of her 

suspension without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). 

She argues that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place her on 

immediate unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not 

establish that she engaged in willful refusal. 

DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 

may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged  with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 

 

 

2 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1),  review of a 

motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 

the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 

basis for immediate suspension under this section.  

The written submissions and oral argument of the parties have been considered. 

Based upon a review of the statement of charges, the District has failed to allege facts 

which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. The facts alleged in the 

statement of charges may constitute grounds for discipline pursuant to Education 

Code section 44932, but do not reflect willful refusal.  

Good cause having been established, the motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension is GRANTED. The District s immediate suspension of Mary Jo Cormier is 

REVERSED. The District shall make her whole for any lost wages, benefits, and 

compensation within 14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. 

(c)(5).) 

DATE: 

 

KAREN REICHMANN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

ORDER 

 

3 

