BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

JULIE HARGROVE, 

and 

a Permanent Certificated Employee, Moving Party, 

BAKERSFIELD CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2020060870 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 

IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Administrative Law Judge Holly M. Baldwin, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter telephonically on July 24, 2020. 

Ernest H. Tuttle III, Tuttle & McCloskey, represented moving party Julie 

Hargrove. 

Ellen C. Wu, Dannis Woliver Kelley, represented responding party Bakersfield 

City School District (District). 

Procedural History 

On May 26, 2020, the District filed a statement of charges against moving party 

Julie Hargrove,1 alleging multiple causes for dismissal, including immoral conduct and 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed 

by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district (willful refusal). 

The District placed Hargrove on immediate suspension without pay pending hearing, 

pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based upon the charges of immoral 

conduct and willful refusal. 

On June 24, 2020, Hargrove timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of her 

suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), 

arguing that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to put her on immediate 

unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not state 

sufficient facts to constitute immoral conduct or willful refusal. In her motion, 

Hargrove requests an order reversing her suspension without pay. 

Discussion 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 

school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 

who has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

                                              

1 The statement of charges was served on Hargrove on May 27, 2020. 

2 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 

[Education Code] Section 51530. . . .” 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 

employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 

Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 

reverse a suspension to “a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” 

The written submissions of the parties and their oral argument have been 

considered. Based upon a review of the charges, the District has alleged facts which, if 

true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 

Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct and willful 

refusal. 

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of the suspension of Julie Hargrove by 

Bakersfield City School District is denied. 

DATE: 

July 27, 2020

 

HOLLY M. BALDWIN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

3 

