BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

JORGE ALMADA, 

Moving Party, 

and 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2020060097 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Carla L. Garrett, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on June 19, 2020. 

Garrett McCoy, Attorney at Law, represented the moving party, Jorge Almada 

(Almada). 

Michael Voight, Assistant General Counsel, represented the responding party, 

Los Angeles Unified School District (District). 

BACKGROUND 

Respondent is a certificated, permanent employee of the District who is 

assigned as a secondary teacher at Avalon Continuation High School. 

 

In its 50-page Statement of Charges, the District seeks to dismiss Almada from 

employment with the District for alleged immoral conduct and willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, among other charges. 

On May 8, 2020, the District issued a notice of intention to dismiss Almada and 

placed him on an indefinite unpaid suspension, pending a hearing on the Statement of 

Charges before a Commission on Professional Competence (CPC). Thereafter, Almada 

submitted a timely request for hearing and a motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension. 

Statement of Charges / District’s Allegations and Contentions 

The District contends that it has properly pleaded charges of immoral conduct 

and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, pursuant 

2 

to Education Code section 44939,1 thereby justifying his immediate suspension 

without pay. 

The District contends that the allegations in the Statement of Charges establish 

Almada engaged in immoral conduct by creating a hostile and threatening classroom 

environment when he stated, in the presence of his students and of a Peer Assistance 

and Review (PAR) consulting support teacher, “I want to kill Mr. Bonneau!” Mr. 

Bonneau is the principal. District alleges Almada appeared upset and began sobbing, 

prompting the PAR consulting support teacher to report the incident to the principal. 

Almada was removed from the classroom and the District’s school police responded to 

the school site and conducted a threat assessment. District contends that Almada’s 

actions demonstrated his corrupt, indecent, depraved attitude toward the school’s 

principal and his moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community. 

District also alleges Almada willfully refused to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause, despite oral and written assistance, guidance, and directives 

provided by District to help him perform these assignments. The District alleges in the 

Statement of Charges that Almada failed to do the following: (1) write lesson plans 

covering the entire instructional day, (2) submit weekly lesson plans to the school 

principal, (3) post daily agendas and standards, (4) follow school policies, (5) review 

students’ work and provide grades, (6) provide challenging work, (7) adhere to the 

District’s Employee Attendance Policy, (8) place students in subject-alike groups, (9) 

actively monitor and redirect students’ behavior, (10) deliver teacher-directed lessons 

that follow a logical progression, (11) circulate the classroom to check for student 

                                              

1 Undersignated statutory references are to the Education Code. 

3 

understanding, (12) prepare instructional materials in advance of class periods, and 

(13) design and ask critical thinking questions.  

The District asserts that Almada had assistance and repeated notices and 

opportunities to perform his assignments, each of which involved regular assignments 

of high school teachers. The District further notes that the assignments alleged were 

based on reasonable rules and regulations of the District. It contends that Respondent 

had knowledge of his regular assignments, and was provided with guidance and 

resources. Accordingly, the District asserts that Almada’s failure to act constitutes a 

willful refusal in that it was voluntary and intentional, justifying his immediate 

suspension under section 44939.  

Almada’s Contentions 

Almada asserts that the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges, even if 

true, are insufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay. 

Specifically, he contends the District has failed to allege sufficient facts constituting 

immoral conduct, particularly given the lack of contextual details as to the 

circumstances that preceded the utterance or the tone of Almada’s voice when he 

made the statement. Almada contends that while his alleged statement may have been 

inappropriate or unprofessional, it was not immoral. 

Also, in regard to allegations of Almada’s purported deficiencies and failures in 

his teaching abilities and performance, Almada argues that the charges pertaining to 

teaching deficiencies amount to unsatisfactory performance or unprofessional 

conduct, at most, rather than willful refusal to perform regular assignments, and do 

not constitute a basis for unpaid suspension.  

4 

LEGAL STANDARDS 

Applicable Law 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee 

who has been charged with “immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or advocating 

communism. (§ 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion for 

immediate reversal of the suspension with the Office of Administrative Hearings. (§ 

44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge reviews the motion, and the review 

“shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement 

of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under 

this section.” (Ibid.) Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true, the 

administrative law judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or conclusions of 

fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Education 

v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club 

(1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 

5 

 

Although there are no cases interpreting the term “willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause” under section 44939, case law from 

related settings reflects that the term “willful” “carries a volitional coloration which 

excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct.” (Coomes v. State 

Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775; see also Peters v. Mitchell (1963) 222 

Cal.App.2d 852, 862 [“Wilful disobedience connotes a specific violation of command or 

prohibition.”].) Declining to obey an employer's directions, without reason, is sufficient 

to establish willful refusal. (See, e.g., Wilbur v. Office of City Clerk of City of Los 

Angeles (1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 636, 642 [observing an employee who “did not 

attribute his refusals to illness” and made “no showing before the hearing examiner of 

willingness to comply with the reasonable orders of his superiors,” demonstrated 

“wilful refusal to obey the reasonable orders of an employer”].) 

Analysis 

 

A comparison of sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, subdivision (b), is 

illuminating. Pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(2) and (a)(5), unprofessional 

conduct or unsatisfactory performance warrants discipline, but not unpaid suspension. 

More importantly, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), while a teacher's persistent 

violation of a school district's reasonable regulations is grounds for discipline, it is not 

an authorized basis for unpaid suspension. Rather, unpaid suspension is authorized 

only for a willful refusal to perform regular assignments pursuant to section 44939, 

subdivision (b). 

This comparison indicates the cause of discipline for willful refusal to perform a 

regular assignment is more akin to the traditional labor charge of insubordination, i.e., 

an intentional, willful, volitional refusal to perform any part of a particular regular 

assignment. A charge of willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must be more 

6 

than unsatisfactory, unprofessional, or negligent, and more than even a persistent 

failure to perform a regular assignment. 

In this case, the Statement of Charges does not allege sufficient facts to 

establish that Almada’s alleged teaching deficiencies are the result of a willful, 

volitional refusal to perform his regular assignment, or that the alleged teaching 

deficiencies are more than unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent, or a persistent 

refusal to perform a regular assignment. Almada was teaching his class, but did so 

deficiently in the District's opinion, despite the fact that he was provided with 

guidance and resources. The well-pleaded facts indicate that when Almada taught his 

classes, administrators found fault with his performance.  

The allegations, if true, may establish that Almada’s teaching during the times in 

question was unsatisfactory and unprofessional. But the allegations are conclusory and 

devoid of the kind of factual content that would constitute a willful state of mind or 

volitional refusal to perform as directed. Similarly, the Statement of Charges does not 

contain sufficient facts to establish that Almada’s exclamation regarding his principal 

constituted immoral conduct, especially given the absence of allegations setting forth 

the details of the facts and circumstances underlying the utterance.  

Given the above factors, Almada is entitled to immediate reversal of his 

suspension. 

/// 

7 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is granted. The District shall 

make Almada whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days 

after service of this order. (§ 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

DATE: 

June 22, 2020

CARLA L. GARRETT 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

ORDER 

 

 

8 

