BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

EMILIO SOLTERO, A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party, 

and 

TWIN RIVERS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2020120089 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR REVERSAL OF IMMEDIATE 

SUSPENSION (Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Administrative Law Judge Regina Brown, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter telephonically, on December 18, 2020. 

Andrea Price, Attorney, represented the moving party Emilio Soltero. 

R. Peter Rittling, Attorney, represented the Twin Rivers Unified School District 

(District). 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On November 2, 2020, a statement of charges and recommendation for 

dismissal and immediate unpaid suspension was filed and served against Emilio 

Soltero (moving party), pursuant to Education Code section 44932, alleging five causes 

for dismissal: 1) immoral conduct; 2) dishonesty; 3) unprofessional conduct; 4) evident 

unfitness for service; and 5) persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws. The 

District placed him on immediate suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code 

section 44939, based upon the allegation of immoral conduct. 

The moving party filed a timely motion for immediate reversal of his suspension 

without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). He argues 

that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place him on immediate unpaid 

status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not establish that he 

engaged in immoral conduct. 

DISCUSSION 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 

may immediately suspend a permanent employee who has been charged  with 

immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, with 

incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 

 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1),  review of a 

motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 

 
 

2 

the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 

basis for immediate suspension under this section.  

The written submissions and oral argument of the parties have been considered. 

Based upon a review of the statement of charges, the District has failed to allege facts 

which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct. 

ORDER 

Good cause having been established, the motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension is GRANTED. The District s immediate suspension of Emilio Soltero is 

reversed and the District shall make him whole for any lost wages, benefits, and 

compensation within 14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. 

DATE:   December 22, 2020

REGINA BROWN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearing 

(c)(5).) 

 

 
 

 

3 

