BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINSTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

KEN KIESSLING, a permanent certificated employee, 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party 

and  

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party 

OAH NO. 2020090633 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Laurie R. Pearlman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically on October 9, 2020.

Jason Wojciechowski, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Ken Kiessling

(Respondent).

Lynn I. Ibara, Assistant General Counsel, represented responding party Los 

Angeles Unified School District (District).

BACKGROUND

Respondent is a certificated, permanent employee of the District, who was 

assigned as an elementary school teacher at Dr. Theodore T. Anderson, Jr., Science 

Center School. 

 

On August 26, 2020, the District served a notice of immediate suspension and 

intent to terminate Respondent. The suspension and intent to terminate are premised 

on a 72-page Statement of Charges, dated August 3, 2020, alleging that Respondent 

engaged in substandard education of students at certain times between October 29, 

2010 and December 12, 2019, and failed to model appropriate and professional 

conduct in disciplining students in 2017. The District placed Respondent on an 

indefinite unpaid suspension, pending a hearing before the Commission on 

Professional Competence (CPC). Thereafter, Respondent submitted a timely request for 

hearing. 

The District’s Contentions 

The District contends that its Statement of Charges contains sufficient facts 

showing that Respondent willfully refused to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause, pursuant to Education Code (Code) section 44939, thereby justifying 

his immediate suspension without pay. The District does not assert that immoral 

conduct is a basis for respondent’s immediate suspension without pay. 

The District argues that allegations in the Statement of Charges establish that 

Respondent refused to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause despite 

repeated oral and written assistance, guidance, and directives. It contends that 

2

Respondent was on notice that he was failing to perform these assignments, rendering 

his conduct willful, rather than accidental or negligent. 

The allegations in the Statement of Charges involve Respondent’s failure to:

model appropriate and professional conduct in disciplining students; submit adequate 

lesson plans; adequately prepare whiteboard; adequately prepare for lessons or 

activities; adequately implement lesson plans; deliver effective instruction; 

demonstrate evidence of standards-based planning and instruction; monitor or 

redirect student behavior; provide students with structure or clear directions; provide 

constructive feedback; use strategies to ensure he had students’ undivided attention; 

have a classroom management plan that included rules, consequences, and rewards; 

post adequate class rules; ensure equitable student participation; create a safe and 

supportive classroom environment conducive to learning; establish rigorous learning 

goals; design instructional groups to support student understanding; align activities 

with the lesson objective; plan for the school assembly; maximize instructional time; 

establish, teach, and reinforce routines and procedures for dismissing students to 

lunch; use one consistent method for calling on students; ensure students’ safety when 

he attempted to have the entire class sit on a small rug; have an established routine 

for providing pencils to students; provide adequate instruction before sending books 

home with students; follow the directed sequence of activities; model academic 

vocabulary; provide students with alternate activities; permit a student to attend a field 

trip; and provide a student with equal access to a public education. 

The District also asserts in its Statement of Charges that at certain times 

between August 15, 2017 and December 12, 2019, Respondent willfully refused to 

meet written or oral directives to: establish a safe and supportive classroom 

environment where teacher/student interactions are respectful and polite; provide 

3

clear behavior expectations for students and monitor student behavior; create and 

maintain an effective environment for learning; design activities to engage students in 

cognitively challenging work aligned to Standards; use resources that will promote 

high levels of learning and student engagement in the classroom; closely monitor 

student learning to understand how students are progressing toward the learning 

objectives and provide students with instructive and timely feedback to move their 

learning forward; understand and organize subject matter for student learning; plan 

instruction and design learning experiences for all students; assess students for 

learning; engage and support all students in learning; reflect on his practice and 

student work and use reflection to inform future instruction; develop as a professional 

educator; submit weekly lesson plan; and establish a classroom environment that is 

safe and supportive, risk-taking is encouraged, students feel free to contribute their 

ideas, and teacher and student interactions are respectful and polite to promote a 

positive learning environment for all students. 

The District also alleges in the Statement of Charges that between August 15, 

2017 and December 5, 2017, Respondent failed to model appropriate and professional 

conduct when he allegedly had students sit on the floor facing the corner, pushed a 

student with his knee, and grabbed a student by the shoulders to have him face the 

wall. 

The District argues that Respondent had assistance and repeated notices and 

opportunities to perform his assignments, each of which involved regular assignments 

of teachers. The District further notes that the assignments alleged are not based on 

school laws of the State, or on regulations prescribed for the government of public 

schools, but on reasonable rules and regulations of the District. It contends that 

Respondent had knowledge of his regular assignment, and was provided with 

4

guidance and resources. Accordingly, the District asserts that Respondent’s failure to 

act constitutes a willful refusal in that it was voluntary and intentional, justifying his 

immediate suspension under Code section 44939.

(1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770 involved 

disciplinary action against a state employee accused of using improper force while 

physically restraining a mental patient in a state hospital. The District notes that in 

, the court identified “knowledge and prior course of conduct as evidence of a 

person’s intent.” (Opp. at 4:15–16.)

Respondent’s Contentions 

Respondent asserts that the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges, even 

if accepted as true as they must be for purposes of this motion, are insufficient to 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay under Code section 44939. 

The District alleges a variety of failures to perform and lists directives that Respondent 

allegedly violated. However, Respondent asserts that the allegations contained in the 

Statement of Charges fail to establish the necessary element of volition or willfulness. 

Respondent argues that the concept of willful refusal is distinct from the concept of 

unsatisfactory performance and that Code section 44939 does not authorize a school 

district to suspend a teacher without pay based on allegations of persistent violations, 

unsatisfactory performance, or unprofessional conduct.

Respondent notes that in 

 the court found no willful conduct by the 

state employee because there was no evidence that he had engaged in “any habitual 

or expected course of improper controls [of patients].” 

, 

, 215 Cal.App.2d 

at 777. Respondent asserts that the Statement of Charges alleges that Respondent met 

performance standards on some occasions, but failed to do so at other times. 

5

Accordingly, Respondent contends that the allegations do not establish willfulness, as 

Respondent’s alleged failure to meet standards was neither habitual nor expected.

LEGAL STANDARDS 

Applicable Law 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent, certificated employee 

who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or advocating 

communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may file a motion 

for immediate reversal of the suspension with the Office of Administrative Hearings. 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge reviews the motion, and 

the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (

) Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted 

as true, the administrative law judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or 

conclusions of fact or law. (

(1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

 

Although there are no cases interpreting the term “willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause” under Code section 44939, case law 

from related settings reflects that the term “willful” “carries a volitional coloration 

which excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct.” (

215 Cal.App.2d at 775; see also 

(1963) 222 Cal.App.2d 852, 862 

[“Willful disobedience connotes a specific violation of command or prohibition.”].) 

Declining to obey an employer's directions, without reason, is sufficient to establish 

6

willful refusal. (See, e.g., 

(1956) 143 

Cal.App.2d 636, 642 [observing that an employee who “did not attribute his refusals to 

illness” and made “no showing before the hearing examiner of willingness to comply 

with the reasonable orders of his superiors,” demonstrated “willful refusal to obey the 

reasonable orders of an employer”].) 

Analysis 

A comparison of Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, subdivision 

(b), is illuminating. Pursuant to Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2) and (a)(5), 

unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance warrants discipline, but not 

unpaid suspension. More importantly, under Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), 

while a teacher's persistent violation of a school district's reasonable regulations is 

grounds for discipline, it is not an authorized basis for unpaid suspension. Rather, 

unpaid suspension is authorized only for a willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments pursuant to Code section 44939, subdivision (b).

This comparison indicates the cause of discipline for willful refusal to perform a 

regular assignment is more akin to the traditional labor charge of insubordination, i.e., 

an intentional, willful, volitional refusal to perform any part of a particular regular 

assignment. A charge of willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must be more 

than unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent, or even persistent failure to perform a 

regular assignment.

In this case, the Statement of Charges does not contain sufficient facts to 

establish that Respondent’s alleged teaching deficiencies are the result of a willful, 

volitional refusal to perform his regular assignment. Respondent was teaching his

class, but did so deficiently in the District's opinion, despite the fact that he was 

7

provided with guidance and resources. The well-pleaded facts indicate that when 

Respondent taught his classes, administrators found fault with his performance at 

times. 

The allegations, if true, may establish that Respondent’s teaching during the 

dates in question was unsatisfactory. But the allegations are devoid of the kind of 

factual content which, if true, would constitute a willful state of mind or volitional 

refusal to perform as directed. Therefore, Respondent is entitled to immediate reversal 

of his suspension.

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is granted. The District shall 

make Respondent whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 

days after service of this order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

 

DATE: 

LAURIE R. PEARLMAN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearing

ORDER 

 

8

