BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

SHANNON SCOTT, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party 

and 

ONTARIO-MONTCLAIR SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party 

OAH Case No. 2020110247 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Wim van Rooyen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, 

California, on December 4, 2020. 

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, Law Office of Carlos R. Perez, represented 

Shannon Scott (Scott). 

Mark W. Thompson, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo,

represented Ontario-Montclair School District (District). 

Procedural Background 

On September 29, 2020, Hector Macias, Assistant Superintendent of Human 

Resources for the District, signed the Statement of Charges against Scott, a permanent 

certificated employee, based on charges of immoral conduct; unprofessional conduct; 

dishonesty; evident unfitness for service; persistent violation of or refusal to obey the 

reasonable regulations prescribed by the governing board of the school district; 

alcoholism or other drug abuse that makes the employee unfit to instruct or associate 

with children; and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable 

cause, as prescribed by the reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school 

district. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subd. (a), & 44939, subd. (b).)1 On October 7, 2020, Scott 

was served with a Notice and Statement of Charges seeking Scott’s dismissal and 

notifying Scott of her immediate suspension without pay. Scott timely filed a Request 

for Hearing. 

On November 5, 2020, Scott also filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension (Motion) pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (c), on grounds that the 

Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for an immediate unpaid

suspension. On November 24, 2020, the District filed its opposition to the Motion, and 

on December 1, 2020, Scott filed a reply. 

 

specified.  

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise 

2 

Discussion 

Section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may immediately 

suspend without pay a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of section 51530. . . .” (§ 

44939, subd. (b).) 

An employee who has been placed on such suspension may file a motion for 

immediate reversal of suspension. (§ 4339, subd. (c)(1).) “Review of a motion filed 

pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as 

alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension under this section.” (

.) 

Here, the District relies on only two specific charges to support the immediate 

suspension without pay: (1) immoral conduct; and (2) willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the District.

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

Applicable Law 

“Immoral conduct” is to be construed according to “its common and approved 

usage having regard for the context in which the legislature used” the term. (

(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 

3 

971.) In 

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, the court held: 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  

Statement of Charges’ Allegations 

The Statement of Charges alleges that, on February 13, 2019, Scott was found in 

possession of alcohol (a box of wine) on campus in violation of district policy and state 

law. On August 29, 2019, Scott smelled of alcohol and was suspected of having 

consumed the alcohol-based hand sanitizer in her classroom. More specifically, the 

two-liter bottle of hand sanitizer, which had been purchased the day prior, had been 

depleted by approximately half. On October 3, 2019, Scott was observed:

behaving erratically in front of students in a manner 

indicative of alcohol intoxication, along with having the 

odor of alcohol on [her] breath which was observed by 

multiple staff members. Two large containers of hand 

sanitizer were found in [her] classroom . . . .

4 

On February 20 and 21, 2020, Scott was again observed “behaving erratically at 

work in a manner indicative of alcohol intoxication, and presenting a disheveled 

appearance, along with giving off the odor of alcohol.” On February 21, 2020, she also 

abruptly left one teaching assignment and failed to report for a subsequent teaching 

assignment. Finally, on August 31, 2020, Scott was observed: 

Behaving erratically at work in a manner indicative of 

alcohol intoxication. [She was] incoherent during online 

instruction with [her] students, as observed by [her] 

classroom aide and [her] Principal, including uncoordinated 

body movements, incoherent speech and periods of near 

unconsciousness. [She was] escorted by the Assistant 

Principal to the Principal’s office, during which time [she] 

displayed incoherent speech and an unsteady gait, along 

with great difficulty putting [her] shoes on. In the Principal’s 

office [she] became emotional, remained incoherent, and 

couldn’t remember what had happened in the classroom. 

Sufficiency of Pleading 

The parties’ written submissions and oral argument have been considered. The 

District alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, would 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension based upon “immoral conduct” under 

section 44939, subdivisions (b) and (c). At a minimum, the District alleged facts 

indicating that Scott was intoxicated while teaching students on at least two occasions, 

displaying erratic behavior, having incoherent speech, and/or exhibiting an odor of 

alcohol. Such conduct in front of vulnerable and impressionable school-aged children, 

5 

if proven, is plainly hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 

morals, and thus constitutes immoral conduct. 

Scott counters that the District’s allegations of Scott’s intoxication in the 

classroom instead fall under section 44932, subdivision (a)(11) (“[a]lcoholism or other 

drug abuse that makes the employee unfit to instruct or associate with children”), 

which is not a basis for immediate suspension without pay under section 44939.

Because the Legislature created a specific cause for dismissal based on alcoholism 

under section 44932, subdivision (a)(11), Scott argues, the alcohol-related misconduct 

can only be analyzed under that provision and cannot constitute immoral conduct.

That argument is unpersuasive. 

First, Scott provides no case law or other authority supporting her 

interpretation. Second, Scott’s argument incorrectly assumes that alcohol-related 

immoral conduct is always associated with alcoholism. If a teacher teaches students 

while intoxicated, but that intoxication results from a single instance of consumption 

prior to class, an additional charge of alcoholism under section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(11), may well be unsupported. By contrast, if the intoxication during class results 

from habitual drinking and addiction, a charge of alcoholism under section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(11), may be appropriate. Additionally, a teacher who meets the criteria 

for alcoholism under section 44932, subdivision (a)(11), has not necessarily engaged in 

any immoral conduct within the meaning of section 44939. Thus, although the charges 

of immoral conduct and alcoholism may overlap in some cases and factual scenarios 

involving alcohol, they are not duplicative. 

In sum, the District has pled sufficient facts to support a charge of immoral 

conduct under section 44939. Accordingly, the Motion must be denied.  

6 

WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS WITHOUT 

REASONABLE CAUSE

Given that conclusion, it is unnecessary to consider whether any willful refusal 

to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause by Scott alternatively 

supports a suspension without pay. 

ORDER 

The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is DENIED. 

DATE: December 14, 2020  

WIM VAN ROOYEN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

7 

