BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMEPTENCE 
FOR THE SONOMA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

GARY GISSELL  

OAH No. 2020020458 

ORDER DENYING RESPONDENT’S MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE 

REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Kimberly J. Belvedere, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically on March 13, 

2020. 

Sarah Sandford-Smith, Attorney at Law, Beeson, Tayor & Bodine, APC, 

represented respondent Gary Gissell. 

Roman Muñoz, Attorney at Law, Dannis, Wolliver, Kelly, APC, represented the 

Sonoma Valley Unified School District (District). 

On January 7, 2020, the Board of Trustees for the District approved a resolution 

affirming a Statement of Charges against respondent and placing respondent on 

immediate unpaid suspension, effective January 13, 2020. The suspension is based on: 

immoral conduct; persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state 

or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 

state board or by the governing board of the school district employing him or her; and 

evident unfitness for service, in violation of Education Code sections 44932, 

subdivisions (a)(1), (a)(6), and (a)(8), and 44939. 

Respondent timely filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

(motion) with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). The 

District opposed the motion. The parties each filed pleadings in support of their 

position, which were read and considered, along with points raised in oral argument. 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 

may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 

with immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause. Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a 

suspended employee to file a motion for review of the suspension, and review of that 

motion “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true 

for purposes of this motion, the ALJ need not accept “contentions, deductions or 

conclusions of fact or law.” (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)   

FACTS ALLEGED IN STATEMENT OF CHARGES 

The allegations in the Statement of Charges are based on the following: In 

February 2019, while respondent was working at Sonoma Valley High School, another 

teacher, Bernadette Weissmann, filed a “complaint” against respondent. Following an 

independent investigation, it was determined that respondent “subjected Ms. 

 

2

Weissmann to unwanted physical contact and threats of unwanted physical contact 

with the intention of physically intimidating and/or threatening her while on school 

grounds.” Respondent’s conduct included verbal abuse, moving into her line of travel, 

forcing her into walls and door jambs, and attempting to hit Ms. Weismann with the 

door to the staff room. Respondent transferred out of the school.  

The Statement of Charges further states: On August 16, 2019, respondent sent 

an e-mail to his former coworkers at Sonoma Valley High School that “harassed and 

defamed” Ms. Weissmann, as follows: 1) respondent wrote that he asked the District to 

either move or fire Ms. Weissmann because of her harassment towards him; 2) the 

district refused to do what respondent wanted so he requested a transfer to his 

current assignment at another school; 3) the district still has the problem but he has 

“washed his hands” of it; and 4) it would not be right for him to be angry at someone 

with “such a condition” so he was back to his “happy self” now. The District alleged 

that the fourth point respondent made in his e-mail constituted an improper 

statement implying that Ms. Weissmann suffers from a mental or physical condition 

and such a statement is intended to defame Ms. Weissmann in the eyes of other staff 

members. Because of those statements, the District alleged that the independent 

investigator hired to investigate respondent’s e-mail concluded that respondent’s e-

mail defaming Ms. Weissmann violated the District’s retaliation policies. 

Finally, the district alleged a December 6, 2018, incident involving a student 

where the student claimed to have been bullied, harassed, and intimidated, but did 

not specify how the student was bullied, harassed and intimidated. 

 

3

DISCUSSION 

To support the allegations for “persistent refusal to obey” in violation of 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), the Statement of Charges contains 

only a paragraph incorporating the conduct specified above. The Statement of 

Charges then lists various board policy sections respondent is alleged to have violated 

by engaging in that conduct.  

Under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), while a teacher’s 

persistent violation of a school district’s reasonable regulations is grounds for 

discipline, it is not an authorized basis for unpaid suspension. Rather, unpaid 

suspension is authorized only for a willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (b). The facts, on their face when taken as true, 

do not establish that respondent willfully refused to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause. Indeed, the term “willful” is not even mentioned anywhere 

in the Statement of Charges. Accordingly, the motion would be granted if the violation 

of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), were the only charge at issue. 

However, there is also the other charge of immoral conduct, under Education 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). There is broad discretion in determining what 

constitutes immoral conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (California 

Teachers Association v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has 

been defined by the courts as follows: 

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

 

4

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 

opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (Palo Verde etc. School Dist. v. Hensey (1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing Bd. of Education of San 

Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland, 179 Cal. App 2d 

808, 811.) 

Although the District did not plead sufficient facts to establish immoral conduct 

with respect to August 26, 2019, e-mail and December 6, 2019, incident involving a 

student, the District did plead sufficient facts with respect to the alleged unwanted 

physical contact and threats of unwanted physical contact towards Ms. Weissman 

“with the intention of physically intimidating and/or threatening her while on school 

grounds.” The District further specified how that conduct occurred by pleading that 

respondent’s conduct included “verbal abuse, moving into her line of travel, forcing 

her into walls and door jambs, and attempting to hit Ms. Weismann with the door to 

the staff room.” These facts plead in the Statement of Charges, when taken as true, 

establish immoral conduct and provide a basis for denial of respondent’s motion. 

Respondent finally argued in his motion that he was not afforded due process 

rights pursuant to Skelly v. State Personnel Board (1975) 15 Cal.3d 194 prior to being 

placed on unpaid leave. Respondent urged that the undersigned find that respondent 

should have been afforded his Skelly rights and grant the motion on that basis. 

Respondent’s request to address this contention is denied. A motion for immediate 

reversal of suspension is limited to the issues specified in Education Code section 

44939. Thus, there is no jurisdiction to make the requested finding. 

 

5

ORDER 

Good cause not having been established, respondent’s motion for immediate 

reversal of suspension is denied. 

 
DATE: March 18, 2020

 

KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

 

 

 

6

