BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

ZOE TARARACHE, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party, 

and 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2020070604 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Howard W. Cohen, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension (MIRS), filed by Zoe Tararache (Employee or Moving Party) in this matter 

on August 14, 2020, by telephonic conference. 

Joshua Adams, Attorney at Law, represented the Moving Party.  

Lynn I. Ibara, Associate General Counsel I, Office of General Counsel, 

represented responding party, the Los Angeles Unified School District (District). 

On June 22, 2020, District served Employee with a written Statement of Charges, 

charging Employee with immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, unsatisfactory 

performance, evident unfitness for service, persistent violation of or refusal to obey the 

school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of 

the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the 

school district employing her, and willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the 

employing district, based upon Employee’s alleged conduct between January 2018 and 

May 2019. 

The District governing board immediately suspended Employee from her duties 

and gave her notice of the suspension. 

On July 22, 2020, Employee filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension (Motion) with OAH, under Education Code section 44939, subdivision 

(c)(1), arguing that the Statement of Charges does not allege facts sufficient to support 

a charge that Employee acted immorally, or a charge that she willfully refused to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee 

who has been charged with immoral conduct or with willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A teacher may 

be discharged, but not immediately suspended without pay, for unprofessional 

conduct or unsatisfactory performance (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2), (5)), or for 

2 

persistent violation of a school district’s reasonable regulations (Ed. Code, § 44932, 

subd. (a)(8)).  

A suspended employee may file a motion for review of the suspension; review 

of that motion “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged 

in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  

Complainant claims to have suspended Employee solely based on Employee’s 

willful refusal to perform her job duties without reasonable cause. Complainant does 

not claim to have suspended Employee based on immoral acts. “[T]he District did not 

allege immoral conduct under Ed. Code section 44939 (b), making any discussion of 

immorality for MIRS irrelevant. [¶] . . . [¶] Even if [Employee’s] disrespectful treatment 

towards students doesn’t rise to the level of immoral conduct for purposes of Ed. Code 

section 44939 (b), her conduct did constitute a willful refusal to perform a regular 

assignment without reasonable cause” in that it “violated the District’s governing 

Board Resolution regarding the Respectful Treatment of All Persons, compliance with 

which is alleged to be one of [Employee’s] regular assignments.” (District’s Opposition 

to MIRS, p. 6.) Alleging in the Statement of Charges that the District issued directives 

to Employee to comply with the Resolution seven times between February and 

December 2018, the District argues that her repeated violations of the Resolution 

“expressed her willful intent not to do so.” (Ibid.) “It strains credulity that [Employee] 

was accidentally or negligently harsh, rude, and demeaning towards her students.” 

(Ibid.) 

Similarly, the District argues that the Statement of Charges alleges Employee 

received guidance and directives on nine occasions but continued to fail to comply 

with them. Employee “was not doing what she was supposed to do and she refused to 

3 

make changes to her performance. [¶] . . . [¶] [Employee’s] refusal to perform regular 

assignments was not merely persistent or accidental or negligent; it became willful.” 

(District’s Opposition to MIRS, p. 4.) 

Based on a review of the Statement of Charges, the parties’ briefs, and 

argument of counsel, District does not allege facts sufficient to support a finding, 

based solely on the pleadings, that Employee engaged in immoral conduct or willfully 

refused to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

District urges the ALJ to make certain deductions and conclusions from the facts 

pled in the Statement of Charges. Without an evidentiary hearing in this particular 

matter, however, various deductions and conclusions, all equally plausible in the 

absence of evidence, could explain those factual allegations. Whether, for example, in 

any given instance, Employee (a) willfully refused to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause, (b) had reasonable cause and was justified in her actions, or 

(c) was incompetent and incapable of performing, cannot be determined based on 

District’s pleadings alone. The question of Employee’s willfulness depends not only on 

establishing the District’s alleged facts, but on evidence of the context in which those 

facts occurred. Absent that context, District’s Statement of Charges requires too many 

unwarranted deductions and conclusions in order to attribute to Employee a willful 

refusal. District has not met the requirements for immediate suspension under 

Education Code section 44939, subdivisions (b) and (c)(1).  

Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of this 

Motion, the ALJ need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or 

law.” (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Thus, for example, the District’s 

allegations that Employee told Assistant Principal Segura on December 6, 2018, that 

she would not observe a colleague teaching, that Segura was repeating something the 

4 

principal had told Employee earlier, that the conference memos issue to Employee 

were absurd, and that Segura should be “afraid of God” for what he was doing, are 

well-pleaded facts. (Statement of Charges, ¶ 69). The allegations in the same 

paragraph, however, that these facts show Employee was “signaling her disdain for 

assistance and guidance, and her refusal to perform regular assignments, but 

providing no reasonable cause for her refusal,” (ibid.), are mere contentions, 

deductions, and conclusions, and must be established in the course of an evidentiary 

Good cause having been established, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

This Order shall become effective within five days of service, and the District 

shall make the employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 

14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

hearing. 

Suspension is granted. 

It is so ordered. 

DATE: 

August 31, 2020

 

HOWARD W. COHEN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

5 

