BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension Filed by: 

CRAIG BRENNAN, Respondent 

OAH No. 2020050378 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Administrative Law Judge Ed Washington, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Sacramento, California 

on June 12, 2020. 

Attorney Ernest H. Tuttle, III, represented Craig Brennan (respondent). 

Attorney Marlene L. Sacks represented the Antioch Unified School District 

(District). 

Procedural Background 

On March 2, 2020, the District’s Superintendent signed a Statement of Charges, 

recommending to the District’s Board of Education that respondent, a permanent 

certificated employee, be immediately suspended without pay and dismissed from 

employment. The Statement of Charges is based on allegations that respondent 

engaged in: 1) immoral conduct; 2) evident unfitness for service; 3) dishonesty; and 4) 

persistent violation of, or refusal to obey the District’s policies and regulations, and 

other rules governing employment. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subds. (a)(1), (4), (6), and (8); 

44939, subd. (b).) Respondent timely filed a Demand for Hearing and Notice of 

Defense.  

On May 14, 2020, respondent filed a Notice of Motion and Motion for 

Immediate Reversal of Suspension (motion) pursuant to Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (c). Respondent contends that the Statement of Charges does not 

set forth a sufficient basis for immediate unpaid suspension, because the allegations 

do not rise to the level of immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause. Specifically, respondent argues that the 

Statement of Charges fails to allege that he willfully refused to perform regular 

assignments, and that conduct alleged in the Statement of Charges does not 

constitute immoral conduct, primarily because his alleged touching of students was 

incidental and not sexual in nature.  

The District filed its opposition on June 2, 2020. The District argues that 

respondent’s repeated touching of his students in a manner that made them feel 

uncomfortable constitutes immoral conduct. And, that respondent’s continued 

touching of students, after being specifically directed to stop, and his failure to comply 

with mandated reporting requirements, constitutes persistent violation of or refusal to 

obey the District’s policies, regulations, or other rules governing his employment. 

Respondent filed a reply on June 9, 2020. Oral argument was heard on June 12, 

2020. 

2 

Discussion 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee charged “with immoral conduct, 

conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency 

due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 

school district, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530. . . .” (Ed. Code, § 

44939, subd. (b).)  

Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), an employee who 

has been placed on such suspension may file a motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension. “Review of a motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a 

determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 

are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (Ibid.)  

“Immoral conduct” is to be construed according to “its common and approved 

usage having regard for the context in which the legislature used” the term. (Palo 

Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 971.)  In 

Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 

Cal.App.2d 808, 811, the court held: 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

3 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

Respondent has worked as a physical education teacher at Antioch Middle 

School since August 28, 2014. The Statement of Charges alleges in part, that prior to 

May 2, 2017, one of respondent’s students asked to be removed from his class 

because she felt uncomfortable around respondent after he touched her on two 

occasions; once on her shoulder and once on her leg. During an investigation, other 

students confirmed that respondent regularly touched his students on the shoulders 

to console them. On May 2, 2017, Principal Lindsay Wisely issued respondent a 

documented verbal warning directing him to “never make physical contact with 

students [and] [n]ever touch students on the shoulder or leg.” 

The Statement of Charges alleges that on September 13, 2019, respondent 

touched a sixth-grade student around her waist in a manner that made her feel 

uncomfortable, resulting in that student and two other students leaving class and not 

returning. During the investigation of this incident, a seventh-grade student reported 

that respondent touched her hips on September 13, 2019, and made her “feel weird.” 

Another sixth-grade student reported that on that same date, while walking behind 

her outside of class, respondent touched her from behind in a manner that made her 

feel uncomfortable. On September 20, 2019, a seventh-grade student reported that, 

on multiple unspecified dates, she felt uncomfortable due to respondent’s actions. The 

student reported that respondent “touches [her]” and “rubs [her] back so his hand 

touches [her] butt a little,” and also stands uncomfortably close to her when speaking. 

The Statement of Charges also alleges that respondent failed to satisfy his 

mandatory reporting requirements when he obtained information indicating one of his 

4 

students was being abused at home, but failed report it to Child Protective Services, 

and that respondent was dishonest during the District’s investigation of the allegations 

against him. 

The parties’ written submissions and oral argument have been considered. 

Respondent’s arguments were not persuasive and do not support the immediate 

reversal of his unpaid suspension. The District alleged sufficient facts in the Statement 

of Charges that, if true, would constitute a basis for immediate suspension based upon 

“immoral conduct” pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivisions (b) and (c). 

Accordingly, respondent’s motion must be denied. 

Good cause having not been established, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension is DENIED.  

DATE: June 24 , 2020

 

ED WASHINGTON 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

ORDER 

 

5 

