BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

FELIPE VELASQUEZ, Moving Party 

v. 

TRACY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2021060998 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Adam L. Berg, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by telephone on July 23, 

2021. 

Felipe Velasquez. 

Eric Lindstrom, Langenkamp, Curtis & Price, LLP, represented moving party, 

Ingrid A. Meyers, Dannis Woliver Kelley, represented responding party, Tracy 

Unified School District (district). 

The matter was submitted for decision on July 23, 2021. 

Background 

On June 21, 2021, the district s Associate Superintendent of Human Resources 

signed a Statement of Charges and Recommendation to Dismissal and for Immediate 

Unpaid Suspension (Statement of Charges) seeking the immediate suspension without 

pay and dismissal of Mr. Velasquez, a permanent certificated employee. On June 24, 

2021, the district served Mr. Velasquez with the Statement of Charges and notice that 

its governing board had approved his dismissal and immediate suspension. The 

Statement of Charges alleges the following causes for dismissal: immoral conduct, 

evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey state school 

laws or regulations prescribed by the district s governing board. (Ed. Code, § 44932, 

subd. (a)(1), (a)(6) & (a)(8).)1 The Statement of Charges also notified Mr. Velasquez of 

the district s intent to immediately suspend him without pay based on immoral 

conduct. (§ 44939, subd. (b).) 

On June 28, 2021, Mr. Velasquez filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension (motion) with OAH, pursuant to Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), alleging 

that the Statement of Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support an 

allegation of immoral conduct, which is necessary in this case to sustain the 

suspension. The district filed an opposition to the motion on July 13, 2021. Mr. 

Velasquez filed a reply brief on July 20, 2021. On July 23, 2021, a telephonic 

conference was held, during which the parties were invited to present any additional 

oral arguments. 

                                              

1 All future statutory references are to the Education Code. 

2 

Allegations in the Statement of Charges 

The allegations in the Statement of Charges relate solely to Mr. Velasquez s 

conduct as the Kimball High School (KHS) wresting head coach. The following is a 

summary of the relevant factual allegations cited in the Statement of Charges as 

evidence of immoral conduct:  

Mr. Velasquez began employment with the district as a social science teacher in 

July 2019. In November 2020, he applied for the KHS wrestling head coach position. 

On January 12, 2021, the district approved hiring Mr. Velasquez as the KHS wrestling 

head coach, and he signed a temporary employment agreement on January 27. 

On January 5, 2021, KHS Athletic Director Joseph Graham sent an email to all of 

the KHS athletic coaches (including Mr. Velasquez) providing an update on the status 

of athletics due to the pandemic and stating that  Students should also be cleared by 

the bookkeeper before participating, this will insure [sic] all school paperwork 

including physicals are complete  

On January 27, 2021, in conjunction with being hired as the head wrestling 

coach, a district employee, Ms. Martinez, emailed Mr. Velasquez with a list of 

certifications that needed to be completed, such as coaching coursework and 

CPR/First Aid. Mr. Velasquez responded that he would be completing the CPR/First Aid 

course this weekend and inquired about the required coaching paperwork. Ms. 

Martinez responded and attached a form with websites to where he could get his 

certifications. 

On March 9, 2021, Mr. Graham emailed the KHS athletic coaches, including Mr. 

Velasquez, regarding team rosters. Specifically, Mr. Graham wrote, "With grades 

coming out next week for our student athletics it is important that we know who is 

3 

eligible to continue to play sports. Please email both Mr. Doyle and myself of your 

team rosters for every level as soon as possible.  

On March 22, 2021, Mr. Graham emailed the KHS athletic coaches, including Mr. 

Velasquez directing them to inform all players and parents that the district will 

continue to follow current grade policies and eligibility for sports at this time. 

On March 26, 2021, Mr. Graham again emailed the KHS athletic coaches, 

including Mr. Velasquez, explaining that he just received an update from student 

services that, "All eligible players can practice but not in any type of game/scrimmage 

and no riding a bus" and to "Please adhere to this policy and make sure you are 

checking your eligibility list." 

On April 13, 2021, Mr. Graham sent Mr. Velasquez an email attaching Mr. 

Velasquez's list of eligible and ineligible wrestlers. On the same day, Mr. Graham sent 

the KHS athletic coaches, including Mr. Velasquez, an email addressing student injury 

reports and attaching a copy of the District's 20-21 Student Injury Report Form. 

On April 16, 2021, Mr. Graham emailed Mr. Velasquez explaining that he 

needed to get his outstanding certifications and trainings done "asap." According to 

Ms. Martinez, Mr. Velasquez still needed to complete his coaching certifications, as 

noted in an email to Mr. Graham. In response, Mr. Velasquez later emailed Ms. 

Martinez, on April 16, 2021, with a copy of his "Adult, Child and Baby First 

Aid/CPR/AED Online Only" Certificate of Completion indicating he completed the 

training on March 22, 2021. Mr. Velasquez also represented to Ms. Martinez that he 

was "currently in the process of completing the coaching certification. I will have that 

done this weekend and get it to you by Monday." As of April 21, 2021, the District did 

4 

not have record of Mr. Velasquez completing his coaching certification or Sudden 

Cardiac Arrest or Concussion certifications as required. 

Despite not completing all of the requisite certifications, and being informed on 

multiple occasions of the grade and physical exam requirements for KHS students to 

be eligible to participate in wrestling, Mr. Velasquez permitted 13 students to board a 

bus and travel to another school to participate in a wrestling scrimmage on April 21, 

2021. Of the 13 students on the bus,  a number of them  were ineligible to participate 

in the scrimmage, including Student D, because they lacked the requisite grades, 

parent permission, and/or physical clearance to participate in wrestling and/or to even 

ride the bus to the scrimmage. 

Mr. Velasquez permitted Student D to participate in the scrimmage even 

though he did not appear on the April 13, 2021, list of eligible wrestlers Mr. Graham 

provided to Mr. Velasquez. Student D participated in a scrimmage where he was 

pinned down. Shortly thereafter, he started not to feel well, and expressed to Carlos 

Salazar, a parent volunteer, that his breathing was heavy. After being assisted to move 

outside, his breathing became heavier, prompting Mr. Salazar to call 911. Student D 

further expressed that he felt cold and after being escorted back inside, he began 

vomiting. After paramedics arrived, they went to speak with Mr. Velasquez who was on 

the mat coaching another wrestler and not paying attention to the incident with 

Student D. Student D was transported to the hospital by the paramedics, where he 

remains. 

On April 23, 2021, two days after the incident with Student D, Mr. Velasquez 

submitted a Student Injury Report Form, which was required to be submitted within 24 

hours after the incident. 

5 

Once informed of the April 21, 2021, incident with Student D, the District 

conducted an investigation into the incident. The District concluded that Mr. 

Velasquez was aware of Student D not being eligible to ride the bus or participate in 

wrestling, including a scrimmage. The district also concluded that: 

  There is an electronic system for athletic coaches, including Mr. Velasquez, 

through which they can check which players have clearance to participate in 

athletics and that this information includes emergency contact information, 

physicals by a doctor, and medical insurance for the players. Despite having  

this system available, Mr. Velasquez did not utilize the system and, in fact, 

asked the school bookkeeper for access to the system on April 23, 2021 

after, the April 21 incident. 

  A couple of days prior to the April 21 incident, Mr. Velasquez permitted 

Student D to participate in wrestling practice, again, without proper 

clearance or eligibility. 

  On April 28, 2021, KHS s Principal confirmed that Student D was left off the 

eligible roster for the scrimmage on April 21, because he had no physical on 

file and had failing grades. The Principal confirmed that Student D was not 

on the wrestling roster submitted on or about April 12th or 13th by Mr. 

Velasquez. Also, without a physical exam on file, students cannot participate 

in sports. 

to April 21, 2021. 

  Student D never completed a packet to participate in wrestling/sports prior 

When interviewed on June 8, 2021, by Associate Superintendent Tammy Jalique, 

and with his legal counsel present, Mr. Velasquez confirmed that, prior to April 21, 

6 

2021, he was not aware of any grade requirement for students to participate in KHS 

sports. Mr. Velasquez also failed to recall receiving various emails from Mr. Graham 

and administration including, but not limited to, that ineligible players can practice but 

not play in any game or scrimmage and no riding a bus, and about grade policies 

eligibility for students to participate in sports. Mr. Velasquez did, however, claim that 

Student D was on the bus April 21 because he was tested and cleared for COVID. 

When asked what steps he took to ensure all wrestlers had been cleared to participate 

by the bookkeeper, Mr. Velasquez stated,  I didn't do anything." Mr. Velasquez also 

claimed that he did not receive his coach's packet until April 28 outlining all required 

training he was to complete to be the KHS head wrestling coach and that he was not 

aware of what trainings he needed to complete, despite various emails from district 

administration on this issue and his representations he completed or was completing 

the various required trainings. 

The Parties  Arguments 

Mr. Velasquez argues that the Statement of Charges does not directly allege or 

plead facts that would support a reasonable inference that he was in fact aware that 

Student D was ineligible to participate; instead, the Statement of Charges allege that 

that [Mr. Velasquez] was aware of Student D not being 

eligible.

[emphasis in original]. He also contends that under state law and the district s 

own policies, the district was required to ensure he had already received all required 

coaching training and competencies (citing Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 5593; Board Policy 

4127). As for the charge of immoral conduct, Mr. Velasquez argues there are no 

reported cases upholding a charge of immoral conduct for anything close to what he 

is accused of. He notes that cases sustaining immoral conduct fall within four 

categories: sexual misconduct or harassment, drugs, intentional fraud or other willful 

7 

conduct amounting to a crime, and  racist statements about students on social media 

that gained notoriety.  He notes that no reported cases have sustained immoral 

conduct outside of these extremes, and he cites two cases where the courts upheld a 

Commission on Professional Competence (CPC) conclusion that the conduct did not 

constitute immoral conduct. 

The district contends that it pled sufficient facts that would support a 

reasonable inference, that Mr. Velasquez was in fact aware that Student D was 

ineligible to participate. It argues that Mr. Velasquez  engaged in behavior that 

crossed the bounds of decency, rendering him unfit to teach and justifying his 

immediate suspension on grounds of immoral conduct. The district cites the recent 

Court of Appeal decision in 

(2020) 53 

Cal.App.5th 339, in which the court rejected the notion that  immoral conduct

pursuant to section 

should be given a colloquial interpretation that includes 

only conduct that would be deemed  immoral  in an everyday sense.

(

at p. 338.) 

The district argues that Mr. Velasquez persistently and knowingly failed to comply with 

directives, resulting in Mr. Velasquez allowing an ineligible student, with no physical 

on file, no parent permission slip, and not the appropriate grades, to ride the bus, 

participate in a wrestling scrimmage, and end up in the hospital where he remains. The 

district argues that this is not  merely negligent procedural violations as Mr. 

Velasquez contends. 

In reply and during oral argument, Mr. Velasquez argues that allegations of 

unintentional rule violations, even when persistent, do not constitute immoral conduct. 

Mr. Velasquez argues that he was unaware that eligibility requirements applied to 

scrimmages, he did not have access to the electronic system to check eligibility and 

was never told it was his responsibility, and Mr. Velasquez believed the administration 

8 

was aware Student D was participating in wrestling because the student had been 

tested and cleared for COVID. 

Applicable Law 

Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes the district to suspend an employee 

without pay pending the outcome of the hearing if the district charges immoral 

conduct. Subdivision (c)(1), allows the employee to file a motion for relief from the 

suspension and requires review of this motion to be  limited to a determination as to 

whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.  

Evaluation 

Mr. Velasquez argues that that the Statement of Charges does not directly 

allege or plead facts that would support a reasonable inference that he was aware that 

Student D was ineligible to participate in the scrimmage. However, a review of a 

motion to reverse immediate suspension is limited to whether the facts as alleged in 

the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute immoral conduct. The 

Paragraph 18 of the Statement of Charges alleges that Mr. Graham sent Mr. Velasquez 

an email attaching a list of eligible and non-eligible wrestlers. Paragraph 23, states that 

through its investigation, the district concluded that Mr. Velasquez  was aware of 

Student D not being eligible to ride the bus or participate in wrestling, including a 

scrimmage  Paragraph 24c states that the Principal confirmed Student D was left off 

the roster for the April 21 scrimmage because he had no physical on file and had 

failing grades, and he was not on the wrestling roster submitted on April 12 or 13 by 

Mr. Velasquez. If true, these facts could establish that Mr. Velasquez s conduct in 

allowing Student D to participate was willful or intentional such as to establish the 

9 

volitional requirement of immoral conduct. Even if his action 

more fittingly be 

explained by negligence or mistake, so long as a factfinder could conclude that he 

knowingly permitted an ineligible student to participate in the scrimmage (as alleged 

in paragraph 23), the volitional requirement for immoral conduct is sufficiently pled. 

The Statement of Charges is sufficiently pled to specify  instances of behavior and the 

acts or omissions constituting the charge such that Mr. Velasquez was placed on 

sufficient notice such that he can prepare a defense. (§ 44934, subd. (c); 

(1966) 247 Cal.App.2d 239, 242.) Mr. 

Velasquez cites no caselaw requiring the pleadings to establish that the 

 

reasonable inference from the alleged facts is that his actions were willful or 

intentional, as opposed to negligent or unintentional. 

As for Mr. Velasquez s argument that under law and district policy it was the 

district s responsibility, not Mr. Velasquez s, to ensure he met all requirements required 

for coaching before employment, this argument has no bearing on whether the facts, 

as pled, could establish immoral conduct. 

Finally, regarding Mr. Velasquez s argument that there are no reported cases 

upholding a charge of immoral conduct for anything close to what he is accused of, 

Mr. Velasquez raises a fair point. There is broad discretion in determining what 

constitutes immoral conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (

 (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has 

been defined by the courts as follows:

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

10 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 

opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (

 (1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 

, 179 Cal. App 2d 

808, 811.) 

Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 

conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach. (

 at p. 972.) The 

definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction 

with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to 

other callings.

16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.) 

In 

, at p. 337, the court rejected Ms. Crawford s contention that 

there are three fixed categories of conduct that constitute  immoral conduct as a 

matter of law. Instead the court held the term  immoral conduct

in Section 44932, 

stretch[es] over so wide a range of conduct that it  embrace[s] an unlimited area of 

conduct.

(

, citing 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-

225.) Citing 

at p. 224, the court added, the term must be  considered 

in the context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the 

welfare of the general public . . . more specifically in this case, 

[citations] (

 at p. 337 [italics in 

original].)  A teacher's conduct is therefore  immoral under section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(1), when it negatively affects the school community in a way that demonstrates the 

11 

teacher is  unfit to teach.

 [footnote omitted].) The court then addressed Ms. 

Crawford s argument that the term should be given a colloquial interpretation that 

includes only conduct that would be deemed  immoral

in an everyday sense, such as 

criminal activity and using profanity or racial epithets. (

at p. 338.) The court wrote,  

We disagree. Immoral conduct  stretch[es] over so wide a 

range that [it] embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.  

([

, at pp. 224-225].) Thus,  the proper criteria 

is fitness to teach  because the term  immoral conduct  is 

so broad and vague  that it is  constitutionally infirm.  

([citation].) (

)  

Accordingly, under the rationale of 

, because immoral conduct could 

embrace an unlimited area of conduct

the fact that there are no reported cases 

upholding immoral conduct similar to the factual situation of this case, does not, as a 

matter of law, preclude the CPC from finding immoral conduct in this case. So long as 

the CPC could, after application of the 

factors, find that Mr. Velasquez s 

conduct  negatively affected the school community in a way that demonstrates he is 

unfit to teach  Mr. Velasquez s motion must be denied. The facts as alleged in the 

Statement of Issues are sufficient to establish that the CPC 

, albeit improbably, 

reach such a finding. (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  

 

 

 

// 

12 

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

 

 

DATE: July 28, 2021

 

ADAM L. BERG 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

13 

