BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

NICOLE BURKETT, Moving Party 

v. 

TWIN RIVERS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2021060102 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Adam L. Berg, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by telephone on June 

25, 2021. 

Nicole Burkett. 

Andrea Price, Langenkamp, Curtis & Price, LLP, represented moving party, 

R. Peter Rittling and Juliane S. Rossiter, Dannis Woliver Kelley, represented 

responding party, Twin Rivers Unified School District (district). 

The matter was submitted for decision on June 25, 2021. 

Background 

On May 4, 2021, the district s chief human resources official signed the 

Statement of Charges and Recommendation for Dismissal and for Immediate Unpaid 

Suspension (Statement of Charges) seeking the immediate suspension without pay 

and dismissal of Ms. Burkett, a permanent certificated employee. On May 5, 2021, the 

district s governing board passed a resolution approving the dismissal and immediate 

suspension. The Statement of Charges was served on Ms. Burkett the same day. The 

Statement of Charges alleges the following causes for dismissal: immoral conduct, 

unprofessional conduct, persistent violation of or refusal to obey state school laws or 

regulations prescribed by the district s governing board, and evident unfitness. (Ed. 

Code, ยง 44932, subd. (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(8), & (a)(6).)1 The Statement of Charges also 

notified Ms. Burkett of the district s intent to immediately suspend her without pay 

based on immoral conduct. (ยง 44939.) 

On June 1, 2021, Ms. Burkett filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension (motion) with OAH, pursuant to Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), alleging 

that the Statement of Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support an 

allegation that she engaged in immoral conduct, which is necessary in this case to 

sustain the suspension. The district filed an opposition to the motion on June 15, 2021. 

On June 25, 2021, a telephonic conference was held, during which the parties were 

invited to present any additional oral arguments. 

                                              

1 All future statutory references are to the Education Code. 

2 

Allegations in the Statement of Charges 

The Statement of Charges alleges that on February 25, 2021, while conducting 

her third period Spanish class via Zoom, Ms. Burkett pulled on the corners of her eyes 

to turn them into different shapes. As she did so, she stated,  If your eyes went up, 

they re Chinese. If they go down, they re Japanese. If they re just straight, you don t 

know. The district alleges Ms. Burkett made these comments to her classroom of 

students, including students of Asian descent. Video of her comments were posted on 

social media and picked up by local, national, and international media outlets. 

The Parties  Arguments 

Ms. Burkett contends the district failed to plead facts sufficient to establish 

immoral conduct, and because there is no context provided about her actions, there 

are no facts to establish her motives. Ms. Burkett also argues the allegations, even if 

true, do not constitute immoral conduct as a matter of law. Specifically, she argues this 

case is distinguishable from 

 

(2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327, in which the court upheld a finding of immoral conduct 

where a school counselor posted comments on a public Facebook page criticizing and 

insulting students who took part in  A Day Without Immigrants protest. Finally, Ms. 

Burkett contends that the district failed to afford her a 

hearing prior to 

removing her from her job without pay. 

The district contends it pled sufficient facts to establish immoral conduct and to 

provide Ms. Burkett fair notice so that she can prepare a defense. The district contends 

that immoral conduct under the Education Code covers a wide range of conduct, and 

Ms. Burkett s actions were inimical to the welfare of the general public and school 

community. The district also argues that Ms. Burkett was not entitled to a 

 

3 

hearing for immediate suspension, as her instant motion is the exclusive means of 

obtaining interlocutory review of her suspension pending dismissal. 

Applicable Law 

Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes the district to suspend an employee 

without pay pending the outcome of the hearing if the district charges immoral 

conduct. Subdivision (c)(1), allows the employee to file a motion for relief from the 

suspension and requires review of this motion to be  limited to a determination as to 

whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.  

Evaluation 

The Statement of Charges specifies  instances of behavior and the acts or 

omissions constituting the charge such that Ms. Burkett was placed on sufficient 

notice such that she can prepare a defense. (ยง 44934, subd. (c); 

(1966) 247 Cal.App.2d 239, 242.) While there might be 

explanations for her conduct such that a factfinder could conclude that her actions did 

not constitute immoral conduct, such is the purpose of an evidentiary hearing before a 

Commission on Professional Competence. Ms. Burkett cites no caselaw requiring the 

pleadings to establish that the 

 reasonable inference from the alleged facts is that 

her conduct was immoral. Put another way, because the facts as alleged, if true, 

 

result in a finding of immoral conduct, Ms. Burkett s motion must be denied. All other 

arguments by Ms. Burkett have been considered and are rejected. 

4 

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

 

 

DATE: June 25, 2021

 

ADAM L. BERG 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

5 

