BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

CYNTHIA WAGGONER WORMHOUDT, Moving Party 

Suspension of: 

v. 

MAMMOTH UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2021090419 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Adam L. Berg, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by telephone on 

October 21, 2021. 

Carlos M. Coye and Daniel B. Rojas, Rothner Segall & Greenstone, represented 

moving party, Cynthia Waggoner Wormhoudt. 

Matthew C. Vance and James B. Fernow, Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost LLP, 

represented responding party, Mammoth Unified School District (district). 

The matter was submitted for decision on October 21, 2021. 

Background 

On June 24, 2021, the district s Superintendent signed a Notice of Intent to 

Immediately Suspend and Dismiss; Statement of Charges (Statement of Charges) 

seeking the immediate suspension without pay and dismissal of Ms. Wormhoudt, a 

permanent certificated employee. On July 1, 2021, the district served Ms. Wormhoudt 

with the Statement of Charges and notice that its governing board had approved her 

dismissal and immediate suspension. The Statement of Charges alleges the following 

causes for dismissal: immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, and persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey state school laws or regulations prescribed by the 

district s governing board. (Ed. Code, ยง 44932, subd. (a)(1), (a)(6) & (a)(8).)1 The 

Statement of Charges also notified Ms. Wormhoudt of the district s intent to 

immediately suspend her, although no specific grounds under Section 44939 were 

specified. As such, only immoral conduct under Section 44932, subdivision (a), serves 

as a basis for immediate suspension under Section 44939. 

On September 15, 2021, Ms. Wormhoudt filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal 

of Suspension (motion) with OAH, pursuant to Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), 

alleging that the Statement of Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support an 

allegation of immoral conduct, which is necessary in this case to sustain the 

suspension. The motion also contends that the district did not plead facts sufficient to 

show that the board deemed the suspension  necessary, as required under Section 

44939, subdivision (b). The district filed an opposition to the motion on October 12, 

2021. Ms. Wormhoudt filed a reply brief on October 19, 2021. On October 22, 2021, a 

                                              

1 All future statutory references are to the Education Code. 

2 

telephonic conference was held, during which the parties were invited to present any 

additional oral arguments. 

Allegations in the Statement of Charges 

The following is a summary of the relevant factual allegations cited in the 

Statement of Charges as evidence of immoral conduct: 

The allegations in the Statement of Charges relate solely to Ms. Wormhoudt s 

conduct as a special day class teacher at Mammoth Elementary School (MES). Ms. 

Wormhoudt taught students who have various physical or mental disabilities, including 

disabilities that place her students health at higher risk for serious disease such as 

COVID-19. Prior to the school reopening following the COVID-19 pandemic, district 

officials provided trainings to staff regarding protocols pertaining to COVID-19. This 

training included identifying symptoms of COVID-19 and protocols for reporting 

students to the site office when they exhibited symptoms. The district s student health 

coordinator provided staff with trainings and flowcharts about these items. On 

February 8, 2021, the Superintendent sent a message to all staff containing school 

reopening guidance. Staff were directed to report any student exhibiting COVID-19 

symptoms to the site office. On March 1, 2021, the first day that MES re-opened for in-

person instruction, the district s health coordinator met with Ms. Wormhoudt 

individually to provide COVID-19 training specific to her special day class. 

On April 6, 2021, Ms. Wormhoudt failed to follow district protocols and public 

health laws when she failed to report students to the MES office who she knew to have 

COVID-19 symptoms of coughing and runny/congested nose. A classroom aide later 

reported these students to the office, and the students were isolated and sent home. 

One of the students had COVID-19, and contact tracing indicated that a MES staff 

3 

member most likely contracted COVID-19 from this student. Ms. Wormhoudt knew the 

student had COVID-19 symptoms, but she believed the student had a common cold so 

did not contact the office, despite having received training on the proper protocols. Six 

other students and six staff members were in close contact with the student for two 

full days in the classroom. At least one other student has Down Syndrome that made 

the student vulnerable to complications from COVID-19. The six students were 

required to quarantine and could not return to the classroom until April 20, 2021. 

On April 7, 2021, Ms. Wormhoudt retaliated against the aide who reported the 

sick students by yelling at her in front of students and other staff without justification. 

On April 8, 2021, Ms. Wormhoudt violated district policy and public health 

orders by failing to wear a mask inside her classroom while others were present. Ms. 

Wormhoudt also violated district policy by not implementing a daily health check of 

her students. 

On April 20, 2021, Ms. Wormhoudt failed to immediately send two students 

who displayed COVID-19 symptoms to the office. Another staff member stepped in 

and reported the students, both of whom had Down Syndrome. The same day, Ms. 

Wormhoudt took a student s dirty face mask out of a trash can and made the student 

put on the mask. A classroom aide had previously thrown the mask in the trash 

because it was dirty, and then had given the student a clean mask.2 

                                              

2 The gravamen of the immoral conduct charge relates to Ms. Wormhouldt s 

disregard of COVID-19 precautions. However, the Statement of Charges also alleges 

two other incidents: On August 21, 2017, Ms. Wormhouldt injured an autistic student s 

finger after shutting the door on the student s finger in an attempt to get him to leave 

4 

The Parties  Arguments 

Ms. Wormhoudt argues that the allegations of accidentally trapping a student s 

finger in the door, misjudging a student s need to use the bathroom, failing to comply 

with the district s COVID-19 protocols, retrieving a dirty mask from the trash, or having 

poor communication skills is not indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, or 

dissoluteness required of immoral conduct. Instead, the alleged misconduct 

constitutes  well-intended, though perhaps clumsy, attempts  by Ms. Wormhoudt to 

effectuate her most important job duty - supervising and educating students.  She 

argues that the allegations, as pled, do not establish the volitional component 

required for a finding of immoral conduct. 

The district contends that it pled sufficient facts that would support a 

reasonable inference that Ms. Wormhoudt engaged in immoral conduct. Specifically, 

the district contends that Ms. Wormhoudt willfully disregarded the district s directives 

by failing to report students who exhibited COVID-19 symptoms, thus placing other 

students (some of whom were medically susceptible for severe complications) and 

staff in danger of illness or death. This conduct is  hostile to the welfare of the general 

public and contrary to good morals.  

Applicable Law 

Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes the district to suspend an employee 

without pay pending the outcome of the hearing if the district charges immoral 

conduct. Subdivision (c)(1), allows the employee to file a motion for relief from the 

                                              
the classroom, and in March 2021, a student wet himself after she refused his request 

to use the restroom. 

5 

suspension and requires review of this motion to be  limited to a determination as to 

whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.  

Evaluation 

First, Ms. Wormhoudt argues that that the Statement of Charges does not 

directly allege or plead facts that would support a reasonable inference that she 

willfully or intentionally disregarded the district s COVID-19 directives, which serves as 

the underlying basis for the district s allegation of immoral conduct. A review of a 

motion to reverse immediate suspension is limited to whether the facts as alleged in 

the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute immoral conduct. The 

Statement of Charges alleges Ms. Wormhoudt received multiple instructions on 

protocols related to COVID-19, including an in-person meeting with the district s 

student health coordinator, because some of her special day students had medical 

conditions making them more vulnerable to COVID-19. A little more than a month 

later, Ms. Wormhoudt failed to notify her site office when she observed students with 

COVID-19 symptoms. A day later, it is alleged Ms. Wormhoudt again violated district 

policy and public health orders by failing to wear a mask inside of the classroom and 

conduct daily health checks. Approximately three weeks later, Ms. Wormhoudt again 

failed to follow district policy when she failed to report two other students who had 

COVID-19 symptoms. The same day, it is alleged she took a dirty face mask out of the 

trash and forced a student to wear it. The combination of these facts, if true, could 

establish that Ms. Wormhoudt s conduct in failing to follow the district s COVID-19 

policies was willful, flagrant, or intentional such as to establish the volitional 

requirement of immoral conduct. Even if her actions could more fittingly be explained 

by negligence or mistake, so long as a factfinder could conclude that she knowingly 

6 

violated the policies, the volitional requirement for immoral conduct is sufficiently 

pled. The Statement of Charges is sufficiently pled to specify  instances of behavior 

and the acts or omissions constituting the charge such that Ms. Wormhoudt was 

placed on sufficient notice such that she can prepare a defense. (ยง 44934, subd. (c); 

(1966) 247 Cal.App.2d 239, 242.) Ms. 

Wormhoudt cites no caselaw requiring the pleadings to establish that the 

 

reasonable inference from the alleged facts is that her actions were willful or 

intentional, as opposed to negligent or unintentional. 

Ms. Wormhoudt also argues that simply failing to abide by the district s 

directives cannot constitute immoral conduct. However, there is broad discretion in 

determining what constitutes immoral conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary 

matters. (

 (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) 

Immoral conduct has been defined by the courts as follows:

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 

opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (

 (1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 

, 179 Cal. App 2d 

808, 811.) 

7 

Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 

conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach. (

 at p. 972.) The 

definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction 

with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to 

other callings.

(1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.) 

In 

(2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 339, 

337, the court rejected Ms. Crawford s contention that there are three fixed categories 

of conduct that constitute  immoral conduct as a matter of law. Instead the court 

held the term  immoral conduct

in Section 44932,  stretch[es] over so wide a range

of conduct that it  embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.

(

, citing 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.) Citing 

at p. 

224, the court added, the term must be  considered in the context in which the 

Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general 

public . . . more specifically in this case, 

[citations] (

 at p. 337 [italics in original].)  A teacher's 

conduct is therefore  immoral under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), when it 

negatively affects the school community in a way that demonstrates the teacher is 

unfit to teach.

 [footnote omitted].) The court then addressed Ms. Crawford s 

argument that the term should be given a colloquial interpretation that includes only 

conduct that would be deemed  immoral

in an everyday sense, such as criminal 

activity and using profanity or racial epithets. (

at p. 338.) The court wrote,  

We disagree. Immoral conduct  stretch[es] over so wide a 

range that [it] embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.  

([

, at pp. 224-225].) Thus,  the proper criteria 

8 

is fitness to teach  because the term  immoral conduct  is 

so broad and vague  that it is  constitutionally infirm.  

([citation].) (

) 

Accordingly, under the rationale of 

, because immoral conduct could 

embrace an unlimited area of conduct

the fact that there are no reported cases 

upholding immoral conduct similar to the factual situation of this case, does not, as a 

matter of law, preclude the Commission on Professional Competence (CPC) from 

finding immoral conduct in this case. In this case, district policies that Ms. Wormhoudt 

failed to comply with were directly related to the health, safety, and general welfare of 

the district s students, including those who were more vulnerable to suffering 

complications. So long as the CPC could, after application of the 

factors, find 

that Ms. Wormhoudt s conduct  negatively affected the school community in a way 

that demonstrates she is  unfit to teach  her motion must be denied. The facts as 

alleged in the Statement of Issues are sufficient to establish that the CPC could reach 

such a finding. (ยง 44939, subd. (c)(1).) 

Finally, Ms. Wormhoudt argues that the district failed to plead facts showing 

that it deemed it necessary to place her on unpaid suspension. While Education Code 

section 44939, subdivision (a), authorizes a district to immediately suspend a teacher 

without pay, if  it deems that action necessary a motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension is limited to  a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension

., subd. (b).) Thus, any argument relating to the deficiency in the 

pleadings beyond whether the facts are sufficient to support a charge of immoral 

conduct are outside the scope of these proceedings. 

9 

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

 

 

DATE: October 26, 2021

 

ADAM L. BERG 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

10 

