BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINSTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

SHAWN MOEN, a permanent certificated employee, 

Moving Party 

and 

FULLERTON SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party 

OAH No. 2021120927 

ORDER GRANTING MOTIONS FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION AND FOR TAKING JUDICIAL NOTICE OF OAH ORDERS 

GRANTING MOTIONS FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSIONS 

Administrative Law Judge Deena R. Ghaly, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard these motions telephonically on January 28, 2022. 

Attorney Ilissa B. Gold, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, PLC, represented moving party 

Shawn Moen (Respondent). Attorney Joseph Sanchez, Best, Best, and Krieger, PLC, 

represented responding party Fullerton School District (District). 

BACKGROUND 

Respondent is a certificated, permanent employee of the District. For twenty 

years, she taught physical education at Nicolas Junior High School in the Fullerton 

School District (District). During the 2020-2021 school year, Respondent also served as 

a “master teacher” or mentor to a student teacher.

On December 14, 2021, the District suspended Respondent without pay, 

pending a termination hearing before a Commission on Professional Competence 

(CPC). The suspension and intent to terminate are premised on a Statement of Charges 

(Charges) adopted by the District Board. 

In the Charges, the District alleged that during the 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 

school years, Respondent repeatedly made unauthorized departures from school 

during the instructional hours to work for the food delivery platform, Door Dash and 

to drop off and retrieve her minor daughter who attends another school. According to 

the Charges, Respondent’s absences left her students and the student teacher without 

supervision, including during an emergency in April 2021 when the school was under 

lockdown. Additionally, the District alleged Respondent was untruthful when 

questioned by a District investigator about the absences.

The District further alleged Respondent’s conduct constitutes grounds for her 

termination under the Education Code, namely dishonesty and persistent violation or 

refusal to obey, the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for 

the government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of 

the school district employing her (persistent violation/refusal to obey). 

Respondent timely contested the Charges and brought a Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension (MIRS). Respondent also filed an additional motion requesting

2

the ALJ take judicial notice of three prior OAH orders granting MIRS’s. The District 

filled its opposition to the MIRS. It also initially opposed the judicial notice motion 

though, at the January 28, 2022 hearing, through counsel, represented it did not 

oppose it. 

Unpaid Suspension Pursuant to Education Code section 44939

Under Education Code section 44939 (further statutory references are to the 

Education Code unless otherwise designated), upon filing disciplinary charges alleging 

certain enumerated grounds, a district may immediately suspend a teacher, pending a 

hearing on the charges. In the instant case, the grounds for discipline set out in the 

Charges are not among the ones enumerated in section 44939. 

On January 18, 2022, the District amended the Charges to add an additional 

ground for discipline, “willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause” (willful refusal), which is one of the enumerated grounds allowing 

for immediate suspension under section 44939. The amended charges are otherwise 

the same as the original version; no additional facts were alleged. 

Respondent’s Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

The same provision allowing districts to suspend teachers pending hearings 

allow suspended teachers to bring a motion to seek reversal of their suspension and, if 

successful, payment of any accrued backpay. (§§ 44939, subds. (c)(1) & (5).) In her 

motion, Respondent argued that the suspension is improper because she was not 

charged with one of the enumerated grounds permitting immediate suspension and 

the charges that were brought, dishonesty and persistent violation/refusal to obey, 

cannot be conflated with similar but not identical charges, moral turpitude and willful 

refusal, which do permit suspension. Respondent further argued the underlying facts 

3

cannot be read to establish the more serious charges permitting suspension. Thus, 

Respondent requests a reversal of her suspension and an award of backpay. 

In addition to backpay, Respondent’s motion seeks interest on the backpay. 

Respondent cited California Civil Code section 3287 and

 (2001) 24 Cal.4th 1109, 1115, which states “once the obligation to pay 

retroactive wages is established, interest under Civil Code section 3287 properly 

accompanies reinstatement and a back pay award in order to make the employee 

whole”  in support of her request. 

The District’s Contentions 

The District contends that the Charges contain sufficient facts under section 

44939 to justify Respondent’s immediate suspension without pay, arguing that, while 

the Charges did not allege willful refusal, the underlying facts support such grounds. 

“Therefore, Respondent was given sufficient and reasonable notice that the facts 

alleged supported not only the enumerated charges of dishonesty and [persistent 

violation/refusal to obey] but also that of [willful refusal].” (Response to Respondent’s 

MIRS.) 

In its written response, the District further argued that the matter was now 

moot as the Charges had been amended to add willful refusal as an additional ground

for discipline in its Amended Charges. At the January 28, 2022 hearing, the District 

withdrew that argument and conceded the amendment to the Charges cannot be the 

basis of suspending Respondent.

The District did not address Respondent’s request for backpay and interest in 

the event she prevailed on the MIRS.

4

Analysis 

REVERSING ORDER OF SUSPENSION

Section 44939, subdivision (b) states:

Upon the filing of written charges, duly signed and verified 

by the person filing them with the governing board of a 

school district, or upon a written statement of charges 

formulated by the governing board of a school district 

charging a permanent employee of the school district 

with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any 

crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due 

to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 

prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the 

employing school district, or with violation of [s]ection 

51530 [prohibiting teachers from advocating or teaching 

the tenets of communism with the intent to indoctrinate 

students], the governing board of the school district may, 

if it deems that action necessary, immediately suspend 

the employee from his or her duties and give notice to 

him or her of his or her suspension, and that 30 days 

after service of the notice of dismissal, he or she will be 

dismissed, unless he or she demands a hearing. 

Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1) provides that, in reviewing a motion to reverse 

a suspension, the ALJ “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as 

5

 
alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension under this section.” 

The District’s interpretation of section 44939, that, if the facts alleged, if true, 

 constitute violation of one of the enumerated grounds, even if not charged, 

would render the language of subdivision (b) superfluous, a result inconsistent with 

standard principles of statutory interpretation. (See Cal. Jur. Statutes, § 92, May 2021 

[“Courts do not presume that the legislature performs idle acts, nor do they construe 

statutory provisions so as to render them superfluous.”]  Nothing supports the 

District’s approach to interpreting 44939 in this manner and, applying standard 

statutory interpretation principles, its argument is not credited. Because the District 

did not charge Respondent with one of the grounds enumerated in section 44939, 

subdivision (b), she should not have been suspended and her motion to reverse the 

suspension is granted, as set out in the Order below. 

BACKPAY AND INTEREST

Section 44939, subdivision (b)(5) provides: “An order granting a motion for 

immediate reversal of suspension shall become effective within five days of service of 

the order. The school district shall make the employee whole for any lost wages, 

benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of an order granting the 

motion.”

The Education Code does not provide further guidance about how a teacher 

granted a reversal of suspension is “made whole” beyond repayment of wages, 

benefits, and “compensation.” Respondent points to Civil Code section 3287 as 

support for her contention that making her whole would include backpay. Civil Code 

section 3287, subdivision (a) provides:

6

A person who is entitled to recover damages certain, or 

capable of being made certain by calculation, and the right 

to recover which is vested in the person upon a particular 

day, is entitled also to recover interest thereon from that 

day, except when the debtor is prevented by law, or by the 

act of the creditor from paying the debt. This section is 

applicable to recovery of damages and interest from any 

debtor, including the state or any county, city, city and 

county, municipal corporation, public district, public agency, 

or any political subdivision of the state. 

Respondent’s damages can clearly be calculated to a mathematical certainty 

based on her rate of pay multiplied by the time since she was placed on suspension. 

Nothing has been raised by the District supporting a finding that such recovery is 

“prevented by law.” Also, the provision expressly notes that it applies to governmental 

entities, as is the District. Thus, statutory interest pursuant to Civil Code section 3287 is 

recoverable by Respondent. 

JUDICIAL NOTICE OF PREVIOUS OAH MIRS ORDERS 

Respondent’s motion to have judicial notice taken of earlier OAH orders 

granting MIRS was unopposed and therefore there is no basis to deny it; however, as 

these earlier decisions were not sufficiently similar to the instant matter to provide 

much guidance, they are accorded little weight.

7

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is granted. The District shall 

make Respondent whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 

days after service of this order, including interest payments pursuant to Civil Code 

section 3287. 

DATE: 

DEENA R. GHALY 

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearing

8

