BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

JENNIFER HUMPHREYS, A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party, 

v. 

FALLBROOK UNION ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2021110460 

(Related to OAH No. 2021110369) 

ORDER DENYING MOTION 

FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 

(Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Administrative Law Judge Juliet E. Cox, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter telephonically on December 10, 2021, from 

Oakland, California. 

Attorney Jon Y. Vanderpool represented respondent and moving party Jennifer 

Attorney Jonathan Pearl represented the Fallbrook Union Elementary School 

Humphreys. 

District. 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On October 11, 2021, a representative of the Fallbrook Union Elementary School 

District (District) served a statement of charges alleging cause to dismiss Jennifer 

Humphreys from employment with the District as a teacher. The charges include willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. In reliance on these 

charges, the District has suspended respondent from employment without pay. 

On November 10, 2021, respondent timely filed a motion seeking immediate 

reversal of her suspension and reinstating her salary and benefits pending resolution 

of the charges against her. Respondent argues that the District has not alleged an 

adequate basis to suspend her from employment without pay before resolution of 

these charges, because the allegations do not describe her willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause. The District opposes respondent s 

motion. 

APPLICABLE STATUTES 

Education Code section 44939 permits the District to suspend immediately, 

without pay, a permanent employee who the District alleges to have committed 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.

(Ed. Code, 

2 

ยง 44939, subd. (b).) Administrative review of an order for immediate suspension is 

available,  limited to a determination as to whether the facts alleged in the statement 

of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under 

this section.

(

, subd. (c)(1).)

DISCUSSION

The statement of charges has been considered in light of the parties written 

and oral arguments. The District has alleged facts which, if true, would establish willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. The District s

allegations justify respondent s immediate suspension under Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (b).

The motion by respondent and moving party Jennifer Humphreys for immediate 

reversal of suspension and for reimbursement of pay and benefits during the period of 

suspension is denied.

DATE:

JULIET E. COX

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

ORDER

3

