BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension Filed By: 

SARA THORN, Moving Party 

vs. 

OAH No. 2021090127 

NATOMAS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter by telephone on September 24, 2021, from 

Sacramento, California.

School District (District).

Thorn.

Roman J. Munoz of the law firm Lozano Smith represented the Natomas Unified 

Eric Lindstrom of the law firm Langenkamp, Curtis & Price, LLP, represented Sara 

Procedural Background

Angela Herrera, the District’s Chief Academic Officer, signed the Statement of 

Charges for Dismissal and Immediate Suspension Without Pay against Ms. Thorn 

seeking her immediate suspension without pay and dismissal pursuant to Education 

Code sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939. Specifically, the Statement of 

Charges alleged that cause exists to immediately suspend without pay and dismiss Ms. 

Thorn based on her immoral conduct.1 Ms. Thorn filed a notice of defense and 

requested a hearing on the allegations.

Ms. Thorn filed a motion for immediate reversal of her suspension without pay. 

The District filed an opposition, and Ms. Thorn filed a reply to the opposition. The 

parties presented oral argument.

Applicable Law 

AUTHORITY FOR IMMEDIATE SUSPENSION AND MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE 

REVERSAL 

The District’s Board of Trustees may immediately suspend without pay a 

permanent certificated employee charged with immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44939, 

subd. (b).) An employee who has been suspended may file a motion for immediate 

reversal of suspension. (

., subd. (c).) “Review of a motion filed pursuant to this 

section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

1 The Statement of Charges alleges additional grounds for dismissal that do not 

constitute grounds for immediate suspension. 

 

2

suspension under this section.” (

) In other words, the standard for reviewing a 

motion for immediate reversal of suspension is the same as that which is applicable to 

ruling on a demurrer in a civil action. 

Only the legal sufficiency of the complaint is tested on demurrer, and the truth 

of the allegations is irrelevant. (

 (2009) 178 

Cal.App.4th 1020, 1034.) Potential problems with proof are also irrelevant. (

(1983) 35 Cal.3d 197, 213-

214, superseded by statute on different grounds as stated in 

 (2006) 39 Cal.4th 235, 242.) “The reviewing court gives 

the complaint a reasonable interpretation, and treats the demurrer as admitting all 

material facts properly pleaded.” (

 (1992) 2 Cal.4th 

962, 967-968.) 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

In describing what constitutes “immoral conduct” within the context of the 

Education Code, the court in 

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, said:

In 

, 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 

740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 

approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 

permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 

‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 

morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 

but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

3

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.”

, 

,

at p. 811.)

The court in 

(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, said that the meaning of immoral conduct 

“must be considered in conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, 

upon whom are imposed ‘responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.’ [Citation.]” (

at p. 1466.) The role teachers 

play in students’ lives must be considered: 

[T]he teacher is entrusted with the custody of children and 

their high preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, 

his good name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of 

his unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. 

His ability to inspire children and to govern them, his power 

as a teacher, and the character for which he stands are 

matters of major concern in a teacher's selection and 

retention. 

Cal.App.3d 157, 168.) 

(1924) 66 

4

(

(

Analysis

The Statement of Charges alleged that Ms. Thorn’s most recent teaching 

assignment was teaching English and social science at Natomas High School during 

the 2019-2020 school year. The alleged misconduct included: (1) several instances of 

inappropriate interactions with students in the classroom, including using 

inappropriate language and profanity, disclosing confidential information about a 

student, and using derogatory and demeaning terms to refer to students; and (2) her 

decision to self-revoke her Introductory to English Supplemental Credential to avoid 

teaching Introductory English and bypass the District’s transfer and reassignment 

procedures for certificated employees. 

Analyzing the allegations in the Statement of Charges in accordance with the 

rules discussed above, “the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are 

sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension” of Ms. Thorn pursuant to 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). Therefore, her motion for immediate 

reversal of suspension is DENIED, and the District’s immediate suspension of Ms. Thorn 

is AFFIRMED.

DATE: September 28, 2021

 
COREN D. WONG 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings

5

