BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

CHRISTI TUCCINARDI, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Suspension of: 

Moving Party 

and 

TORRANCE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH Case No. 2021060563 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

On July 2, 2021, Wim van Rooyen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 

Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard telephonic argument on the 

instant motion for immediate reversal of suspension from Sacramento, California. 

Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Attorney at Law, Law Office of Carlos R. Perez, 

represented movant Christi Tuccinardi (Tuccinardi). 

Michael T. Travis, Attorney at Law, Parker & Covert LLP, represented the 

Torrance Unified School District (District). 

On July 2, 2021, the motion was submitted for decision. 

Procedural Background 

On May 17, 2021, Tim Stowe, Ed.D, Secretary to the District s Board of 

Education, signed and served the Statement of Written Charges on Tuccinardi, a 

permanent certificated employee, based on charges of immoral conduct (Ed. Code, ยง 

44932, subd. (a)(1))1; evident unfitness for service (

, subd. (a)(6)); willful refusal to 

obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the 

school district employing her (

, subd. (a)(8)), and alcoholism or other drug abuse 

that makes the employee unfit to interact or associate with children (

, subd. (a)(11)). 

On May 17, 2021, Stowe also signed and served a Notice of Unpaid Suspension and 

Intention to Dismiss on Tuccinardi, seeking her dismissal and notifying her of her 

immediate suspension without pay under section 44939. Tuccinardi timely filed a 

Request for Hearing. 

On June 11, 2021, Tuccinardi also filed a motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (c), on grounds that the Statement 

of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for an immediate unpaid suspension. 

On June 22, 2021, the District filed its opposition to the motion, along with a 

Declaration of Tim Stowe with several attachments. On June 29, 2021, Tuccinardi filed 

a reply brief, objections to the Declaration of Tim Stowe, and a request for judicial 

notice of three case decisions: (1) 

, OAH Case No. 

                                              

specified.  

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise 

2 

2017051349; (2) 

, OAH Case No. 2017061109; and (3) 

, Case No. 

D076213, decided January 21, 2020 (unpublished). 

Analysis 

Section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may immediately 

suspend without pay a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged  with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of section 51530. . . 

ยง 

44939, subd. (b).) 

An employee who has been placed on such suspension may file a motion for 

immediate reversal of suspension. (ยง 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  Review of a motion filed 

pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as 

alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension under this section.

.) 

THE RECORD 

Before turning to the specific charges at issue, the court addresses Tuccinardi s 

objections to the Declaration of Tim Stowe and her request for judicial notice. 

Tuccinardi s objections to the Declaration of Tim Stowe, including all 

attachments, are sustained. Under section 44939, subdivision (c), the court may only 

consider the factual allegations within the four corners of the Statement of Charges; 

extraneous exhibits and evidence cannot be considered. 

3 

Tuccinardi s request for judicial notice of the above-mentioned decisions is 

granted. The District did not object to taking judicial notice, and the parties were given 

an adequate opportunity to argue the decisions  potential relevance. 

THE CHARGES AT ISSUE 

Here, the District relies on only two specific charges to support the immediate 

suspension without pay: (1) immoral conduct; and (2) willful refusal to obey the school 

laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the 

public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the school district 

employing the teacher. 

Immoral Conduct 

Immoral conduct

is to be construed according to  its common and approved 

usage having regard for the context in which the legislature used the term. (

(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 

971.) In 

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, the court held: 

The term  immoral has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  

4 

Here, the Statement of Charges alleges that, on January 22, 2021, Tuccinardi 

was under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while hosting her fourth-grade 

distance learning class at Seaside Elementary School via Zoom. Tuccinardi was 

observed speaking in slurred and incoherent sentences, repeating the same thing ad 

nauseum, having trouble keeping her eyes open, and being unable to focus on a 

specific topic. She dramatically swayed in her chair and appeared to lack control of her 

bodily movements. Tuccinardi s behavior was observed by her students, some parents, 

the principal, the health clerk, and the District nurse. Based on the advice of the health 

clerk and District nurse, the principal removed Tuccinardi from the class. Tuccinardi 

later informed the District that she had been hospitalized at a rehabilitation center that 

same day and released on January 30, 2021. 

The parties written briefs and oral argument have been considered. The District 

alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, would constitute a 

basis for immediate suspension based upon  immoral conduct under section 44939. 

At a minimum, the District alleged sufficient supporting facts to reasonably infer that 

Tuccinardi was intoxicated while teaching students over Zoom. Such conduct in front 

of vulnerable and impressionable school-aged children, if proven, is plainly hostile to 

the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals, and thus constitutes 

immoral conduct. 

Tuccinardi s argument that there could be alternative explanations for her 

conduct on January 22, 2021, such as mental health problems or adverse reactions to 

prescribed medication, is unavailing. Although Tuccinardi may raise such matters as 

potential defenses at an evidentiary hearing before the Commission on Professional 

Competence, they do not defeat the adequacy of the District s allegations in the 

Statement of Charges for purposes of the instant motion. 

5 

Tuccinardi also counters that the District s allegations of her intoxication in the 

Zoom classroom instead fall under section 44932, subdivision (a)(11) 

a]lcoholism or 

other drug abuse that makes the employee unfit to instruct or associate with 

children , which is not a basis for immediate suspension without pay under section 

44939. Because the Legislature created a specific cause for dismissal based on 

alcoholism/drug abuse under section 44932, subdivision (a)(11), Tuccinardi argues, the 

alcohol/drug-related misconduct can only be analyzed under that provision and 

cannot constitute immoral conduct. That argument is unpersuasive. 

First, Tuccinardi provides no case law or other authority supporting her 

interpretation. Second, Tuccinardi s argument incorrectly assumes that alcohol/drug-

related immoral conduct is always associated with a diagnosis of alcoholism or drug 

addiction. If a teacher teaches students while intoxicated, but that intoxication results 

from a single instance of alcohol consumption prior to class, an additional charge of 

alcoholism under section 44932, subdivision (a)(11), may well be unsupported. By 

contrast, if the intoxication during class results from habitual drinking and alcohol 

addiction, a charge of alcoholism under section 44932, subdivision (a)(11), may be 

appropriate. Additionally, a teacher who meets the criteria for alcoholism under 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(11), has not necessarily engaged in any immoral conduct 

within the meaning of section 44939. Thus, although the charges of immoral conduct 

and alcoholism/drug abuse may overlap in some cases and factual scenarios involving 

alcohol or drugs, they are not duplicative. 

In sum, the District has pled sufficient facts to support a charge of immoral 

conduct under section 44939. Accordingly, the motion must be denied. 

6 

Willful Refusal to Obey Laws and Regulations 

Given that conclusion, it is unnecessary to consider whether any willful refusal 

to obey laws and regulations by Tuccinardi alternatively supports a suspension without 

pay. 

 

ORDER 

The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is DENIED. 

DATE: July 6, 2021

 

WIM VAN ROOYEN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

7 

