BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

JERRED LAWSON, Moving Party 

v. 

BUTTE COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2021120054 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Adam L. Berg, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by telephone on 

December 17, 2021. 

moving party, Jerred Lawson. 

Lesley Beth Curtis, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp, Curtis & Rice, LLP, represented 

Christian M. Keiner, Attorney at Law, Dennis Woliver Kelley, represented 

responding party, Butte County Office of Education (BCOE). 

The matter was submitted for decision on December 17, 2021. 

Background 

On October 27, 2021, BCOE s Associate Superintendent signed a Statement of 

Charges for Dismissal and for Immediate Unpaid Suspension (Statement of Charges) 

seeking the immediate suspension without pay and dismissal of Mr. Lawson, a 

permanent certificated employee. On October 29, 2021, BCOE served Mr. Lawson with 

the Statement of Charges and notice that as of November 1, 2021, he was suspended 

without pay. The Statement of Charges alleges the following causes for dismissal: 

immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to 

obey state school laws or regulations prescribed by the State Board of Education 

and/or BCOE. (Ed. Code, ยง 44932, subd. (a)(1), (a)(6) & (a)(8).)1 The Statement of 

Charges also notified Mr. Lawson of BCOE s intent to immediately suspend him under 

Section 44939, citing immoral conduct and willful refusal to take required action 

necessary to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

On November 24, 2021, Mr. Lawson filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension (motion) with OAH, pursuant to Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). BCOE 

filed an opposition to the motion on December 7, 2021. Mr. Lawson filed a reply brief 

on December 14, 2021. On December 17, 2021, a telephonic conference was held, 

during which the parties were invited to present any additional oral arguments. 

Allegations in the Statement of Charges 

The following is a summary of the relevant factual allegations cited in the 

Statement of Charges as evidence of immoral conduct and  willful refusal to perform 

                                              

1 All future statutory references are to the Education Code. 

2 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing school district

(willful refusal): 

On August 11, 2021, the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) issued a 

Public Health Order mandating that by October 15, 2021, all school employees must 

be fully vaccinated against COVID-19 or undergo weekly testing. 

On September 4, 2021, after BCOE issued directives to its employees 

implementing the CDPH public health order, Mr. Lawson violated BCOE s Acceptable 

Use Policy by sending an email to all BCOE employees in which he stated he would not 

vaccinate or weekly test. 

By email dated October 13, 2021, BCOE directed Mr. Lawson to test on his 

weekly testing day, October 19, 2021, at his assigned school site. The email set forth 

the options available to its employees to be vaccinated, submit to weekly testing, or 

resign. The same day, Mr. Lawson responded by email requesting to be placed on 

administrative leave and that he  will not be coerced into complying with your 

changing and shifting demands.  Mr. Lawson did not appear for his first weekly testing 

on October 19, 2021. 

By letter dated October 20, 2021, BCOE again directed Mr. Lawson to attend his 

second opportunity to weekly test, on October 26, 2021. The letter stated that failure 

to appear and test would result in unpaid leave and charges for dismissal. Mr. Lawson 

did not appear for his weekly test on October 26, 2021, nor did he provide proof of 

vaccination to BCOE. 

3 

The Parties  Arguments 

Mr. Lawson argues that BCOE failed to provide him with a pre-deprivation 

hearing, also known as a 

hearing prior to his unpaid suspension; the allegations 

regarding his failure to test do not meet the standard for immoral conduct; BCOE has 

not alleged facts to show willful refusal because he believes the CDPH public health 

order is not a reasonable regulation; and the email to BCOE employees is protected 

speech under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution and does not 

meet the criteria for immoral conduct. 

BCOE argues there are sufficient facts to establish willful refusal and immoral 

conduct based on Mr. Lawson s repeated refusal to obtain vaccination or submit to 

weekly testing, which was mandated by the CDPH public health order, and there is no 

statutory requirement that Mr. Lawson have been provided a 

 hearing prior to his 

unpaid suspension. 

Applicable Law 

Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes BCOE to suspend an employee 

without pay pending the outcome of the hearing if BCOE charges immoral conduct or 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed 

by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district. Subdivision (c)(1), 

allows the employee to file a motion for relief from the suspension and requires review 

of this motion to be  limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in 

the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.  

4 

Evaluation 

A review of a motion to reverse immediate suspension is limited to whether the 

facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute immoral 

conduct or willful refusal. The Statement of Charges alleges BCOE twice directed Mr. 

Lawson to submit to COVID-19 testing in lieu of his decision not to obtain the COVID-

19 vaccine. Mr. Lawson failed to appear for testing on both dates, and in in email 

communications with BCOE indicated he would not test. These facts are the very 

essence of insubordination and serve as a basis for a finding of willful refusal. While 

respondent might believe the CDPH order and BCOE directives to be unreasonable, 

the reasonableness of BCOE s directive is a determination to be made following an 

evidentiary hearing. For the purposes of these proceedings, a state-mandated public 

health requirement, implemented by BCOE, requiring weekly testing for COVID-19 in 

lieu of vaccination is a reasonable regulation, regardless of Mr. Lawson s opinion to the 

contrary. Accordingly, BCOE has alleged sufficient facts to constitute willful refusal 

under Section 44939, subdivision (b). 

As cause exists to deny Mr. Lawson s motion based on a finding of willful 

refusal, the issue of whether there are sufficient facts to establish immoral conduct is 

moot. 

Finally, as to the issue of whether BCOE deprived Mr. Lawson of a pre-

deprivation hearing, a motion for immediate reversal of suspension is limited to  a 

determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 

are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension  (

., subd. (b).) Thus, any 

argument relating to procedural defects of the suspension are outside the scope of 

these proceedings. 

5 

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

 

 

DATE: December 21, 2021

 

ADAM L. BERG 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

6 

