BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

GABRIEL GIPE, 

Moving Party, 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, and 

NATOMAS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2021110341 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Laurie R. Pearlman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically on December 3, 

2021. 

Costa Kerestenzis and Ruby Acevedo, Attorneys at Law, represented moving 

party Gabriel Gipe (Respondent). 

Gabriela D. Flowers and Andrew W. Blan, Attorneys at Law, represented 

responding party Natomas Unified School District (District).

BACKGROUND 

Respondent is a certificated, permanent employee of the District. During the 

relevant time period, Respondent taught Advanced Placement (A.P.) United States 

Government and Politics A.P. Economics, and U.S. History to high school students.

In October 2021, the District suspended Respondent without pay, pending a 

termination hearing before a Commission on Professional Competence (CPC). The 

suspension and intent to terminate are premised on a Statement of Charges (Charges), 

exceeding 400 pages, which was adopted on August 14, 2021. 

In the Charges, the District alleges that Respondent engaged in behavior 

constituting immoral conduct; dishonesty; evident unfitness for service; persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or by the 

governing board of the school district employing him; violation of Education Code 

(Code) section 51530 or conduct specified in Government Code section 1028; and 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. [Only 

the bolded charges constitute the District’s basis for placing Respondent on

immediate suspension without pay.] 

On October 15, 2021, Respondent was notified of his placement on unpaid 

suspension and was served with the Board-approved Charges. Respondent timely filed 

a request for hearing on October 21, 2021, contesting his recommended termination. 

He timely filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion) on November 

2

12, 2021. The District filed its opposition to the Motion, and Respondent filed a reply 

in support of the Motion. Both parties filed declarations. 

The District’s Contentions 

The District contends that the Charges contain sufficient facts under Education 

Code (Code) section 44939 to justify Respondent’s immediate suspension without pay. 

In the Charges, the District alleges that Respondent engaged in “immoral conduct” 

under Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1); “dishonesty” under Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(4); “evident unfitness for service” under Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(6); “persistent violation or refusal to obey” under Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(8); violation of Code section 51530 or conduct specified in Government 

Code section 1028, under Code section 44923, subdivision (a)(10); and “willful refusal 

to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause,” under Code section 44939. 

However, as noted above, only three of these charges permit a school district to place 

a teacher on unpaid leave. 

The District asserts that it sufficiently pled charges of Respondent’s immoral 

conduct, willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, and 

violation of Education Code section 51530, thus authorizing Respondent’s immediate 

unpaid suspension under Education Code section 44939. Accordingly, the District 

contends that the Motion should be denied. 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

With respect to the District’s claim of immoral conduct, the District alleges that

Respondent posted images in his classroom of dictators, the swastika (as part of a 

“political compass” showing the extremes of various political ideologies), communist

symbols and leaders, antifa symbols, and brass knuckles. Additionally, Respondent 

3

allegedly displayed a magnet denigrating former president Trump, and allegedly called 

the Democratic party a “massive toilet.” He also allegedly refused to use the textbook 

chosen for the course. 

The District alleges that Respondent used rubber stamps on student work that 

contained an image of Joseph Stalin pointing his finger and a quote stating: “Go to the 

Gulag;” an image of Kim Jong-un with the letters “KJU” and the quote “Bomb!”; and 

the heads of a group of famous Marxist leaders clustered together: Karl Marx, Vladimir 

Lenin, Joseph Stalin, Fidel Castro, and Mao Zedong. (Charges, ¶ II (17.) 

The District further alleges that Respondent exhibited in his classroom a large 

antifa flag, mug, and magnet, along with Russian leader nesting dolls, the Worker’s 

Party of Korea flag, a Mao Zedong poster, an EZLN Sub comandante Marcos banner, a 

Zapatista pamphlet, and a “Reds in ED” bookmark. Respondent allegedly also 

displayed a poster entitled, “Pyramid America Fascism Check List Warning Sign,” on his 

classroom wall. 

The District alleges that Respondent asked students to bring in a photo of 

themselves and take an “ideology quiz” for a large “political compass” on his wall. The 

online quiz was meant to reveal the students’ political leanings/ideologies, which 

made some students uncomfortable. The District further alleges that instead of using 

the District-approved course textbook, Respondent used books and content he had 

purchased and that he did not teach his AP U.S. Government students with the intent 

of preparing students for the AP exam. As a result, the District alleges that 

Respondent’s students failed the AP U.S. Government exam at a much higher rate than 

the District average. 

4

The District asserts the foregoing conduct was immoral and grounds for 

suspension without pay. 

ADVOCATING OR TEACHING COMMUNISM WITH INTENT TO INDOCTRINATE 

The District alleges that Respondent violated Code section 51530, which 

prohibits teachers from “advocate[ing] or teach[ing] communism with the intent to 

indoctrinate or to inculcate in the mind of any pupil a preference for communism.” The 

District also cites Government Code section 1028, which permits dismissal of a public 

employee who advocates the overthrow of the government “by force or violence.” 

In addition to the allegations set forth above regarding Communist leaders and 

symbols, the District alleges that Respondent referred to writings by Lenin and other 

publications that referenced Marxism. The District further alleges that Respondent has 

a large red hammer and sickle tattoo on his chest, a symbol of Communism. However, 

it was not alleged that Respondent removed his shirt in class, or otherwise revealed his 

tattoo to students. 

WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS 

The District alleges that Respondent refused to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause, relying on many of the allegations set forth above. The 

District also alleges that Respondent refused to use the approved textbook in his AP 

United States Government and Politics Course, substituted his own choice of reading 

materials, and rather than preparing students for the AP Government exam, 

Respondent taught students what he thought they should know, such as the influence 

of the media. 

5

The District further alleges that Respondent had the stated goal of turning his 

students into revolutionaries by scaring them; made comments in class that his hobby 

is beating up the mentally ill; told students that the government is terrible; and 

referred to the Democratic party as a massive toilet, among other inappropriate 

The Charges do not include any indication that the District brought the alleged 

failure to perform regular assignments to Respondent’s attention prior to suspending 

comments. 

him. 

Respondent’s Contentions 

Respondent asserts that the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges, even 

if accepted as true as they must be for purposes of this motion, do not allege any 

behavior that could be construed as immoral, establish that Respondent intended to 

indoctrinate his students in communism, or willfully refused to perform regular 

assignments.

Respondent contends that the allegations against Respondent amount to a 

dispute with his political views. While disagreement with a teacher’s political ideology 

may or may not constitute grounds for dismissal, Respondent asserts that it clearly is 

insufficient to constitute a basis upon which to deprive that teacher of pay pending 

adjudication of those charges. 

Respondent requests that the Administrative Law Judge issue an Order to 

immediately reverse the District’s unpaid suspension and make him whole for any lost 

wages, benefits, and compensation pursuant to Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(5). 

6

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

Respondent asserts that the Charges underlying the claim of immoral conduct, 

if true, may support a claim of unsatisfactory performance or unprofessional conduct, 

but they do not support a claim of immoral conduct. 

ADVOCATING OR TEACHING COMMUNISM WITH INTENT TO INDOCTRINATE

Respondent asserts that in order to teach his students about U.S. government 

and politics, he must expose them to other political and economic systems and world 

history. Respondent asserts that the College Board’s AP Sample Syllabus for U.S. 

Government and Politics, attached to the Statement of Charges as Exhibit 27, includes 

discussions regarding ideology, political socialization, changes in ideology, and 

ideology and social policy. 

Respondent argues that while the District contends that Respondent was 

engaged in advocating Communism, it alleges no specific facts to support this 

conclusion. Respondent asserts that none of the excerpted student statements 

presented in the Charges suggests that Respondent encouraged his students to prefer 

communism. At most, the students’ statements reflect that Respondent’s classroom 

suggested his political views were ideologically left-wing. 

Respondent asserts that he posted a great variety of political images and 

symbols in his classroom, including the American flag, a poster featuring the three 

branches of the United States government, and a World War II memento. (Charges, 

Exhibit 20.) Moreover, Communism is a topic covered in A.P. U.S. Government and 

Politics, U.S. History, and Economics classes.

7

Respondent maintains that the allegations are devoid of any evidence 

demonstrating that he advocated or taught communism with the intent to indoctrinate 

his students. 

WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS 

Respondent asserts that the Charges fail to establish that Respondent refused 

to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. Respondent contends that 

the District alleges no facts demonstrating that Respondent acted with a willful or 

insubordinate state of mind or that any alleged failure to perform regular assignments 

was brought to Respondent’s attention before he was suspended. Respondent 

contends that the District relies upon conclusory and unsupported characterizations of 

Respondent’s conduct.

In the Charges, the District alleges that Respondent refused to use a 2018 

textbook in his AP United States Government and Politics course. However, the 

approved syllabus, attached to the Charges as Exhibit 23, shows that the approved 

course textbook for the class was the 2011 edition of., 

, by James Q. Wilson, et al. Respondent asserts that the 2018 

edition textbook, identified in the Charges as the text Respondent refused to use, was 

not part of the approved course syllabus.

The District alleges that rather than preparing students for the AP Government 

exam, Respondent taught students about topics such as the influence of the media. 

However, Respondent asserts that topic is part of the approved course syllabus (Ex. 23, 

Charges) and is specifically delineated in the College Board’s sample syllabus. (Exhibit 

27, pp. 15-17, Unit 5: Political Participation.) Respondent notes that the College 

8

Board’s sample syllabus, copyrighted in 2020, suggests the topic of Media Bias as a 

sample assignment. 

Respondent contends that the District should not be permitted to remove 

Respondent from paid status for teaching students about the influence of the media in 

his AP U.S. Government and Politics class when the topic is included in the course 

syllabus, as well as the College Board’s sample syllabus. 

Respondent asserts that the rest of the allegations in the Charges consist of 

conclusory statements. For instance, Respondent asserts that the statement regarding 

turning students into revolutionaries is taken from a heavily edited and rearranged 

video which lacks context and is unreliable. Additionally, Respondent notes that the 

District fails to cite to any specific document or student statement to support its claim 

that Respondent made the alleged comments in class. He asserts that the District does 

not establish that such comments demonstrate Respondent was willfully refusing to 

perform assignments. 

Respondent suggests that while the District may have a claim that Respondent 

engaged in unprofessional conduct or that his performance was unsatisfactory, it does 

not allege facts warranting suspension without pay under Code sections 44939.

Respondent argues that the concept of willful refusal is distinct from the concept of 

unsatisfactory performance and that Code section 44939 does not authorize a school 

district to suspend a teacher without pay based on allegations of unsatisfactory 

performance, or unprofessional conduct.

9

LEGAL STANDARDS 

Applicable Law 

A school district may immediately suspend a permanent, certificated employee 

who has been charged with: immoral conduct; conviction of a felony or of any crime 

involving moral turpitude; incompetency due to mental disability; willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable 

rules and regulations of the employing school district; or advocating communism. 

(Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) 

A suspended employee may file a motion for immediate reversal of the 

suspension with the Office of Administrative Hearings. (Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An 

administrative law judge reviews the motion, and the review “shall be limited to a 

determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 

are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (

) 

Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true, the administrative law judge 

need not accept contentions, deductions, or conclusions of fact or law. (

 

(1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.)

Analysis 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

For purposes of certificated employee discipline proceedings, the term 

“immoral conduct” means conduct that is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant or shameless conduct showing moral 

10 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and public welfare. (

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) Courts have found immoral conduct by a 

teacher to include, among other things, sexual harassment or public sexual activity, 

drug use or possession, and theft. 

The District has failed to allege sufficient facts to establish that Respondent’s 

exercise of judgment rose to the level of being immoral, corrupt, depraved, morally 

repugnant, or that he acted with a reckless disregard for the public welfare. Instead, 

the allegations suggest that Respondent taught in an overly political manner and 

posted certain ideologically-related items in his classroom. 

The Education Code sets forth limited circumstances in which an employee may

be placed on unpaid leave. While disagreement with a teacher’s political ideology may 

or may not constitute grounds for dismissal, it is insufficient to constitute grounds to 

deprive a teacher of pay pending adjudication of those charges. 

Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), mandates that the ALJ look to the 

alleged conduct to determine whether, on its face, it is immoral. As demonstrated 

herein, the Charges do not set forth sufficient facts to demonstrate that Respondent

engaged in immoral conduct.

VIOLATION OF CODE SECTION 51530 

Code section 51530 prohibits teachers from advocating or teaching communism 

with the intent to indoctrinate or inculcate in the mind of students a preference for 

communism. Respondent’s assertion that this provision is likely unconstitutional 

cannot be adjudicated at the administrative hearing level and will not be addressed in 

this Order. 

11 

The Charges do not contain sufficient facts to establish a violation of Code 

section 51530. The allegations, if taken as true, establish that Respondent made 

references to certain leaders of communist countries and to certain publications that 

referenced ideas such as Marxism while teaching A.P. U.S. Government and Politics to 

high school students. While the District contends that Respondent was engaged in 

advocacy to indoctrinate his students with a preference for Communism, it fails to 

allege sufficient facts to support this contention. Accordingly, such allegations do not 

support Respondent’s suspension without pay. 

WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS 

Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged with 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

Although no cases interpret the term “willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause” under Code section 44939, case law from 

related settings reflects that the term “willful” “carries a volitional coloration which 

excludes the notion of accidental or even negligent conduct.” (

. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775; see also 

(1963) 222 

Cal.App.2d 852, 862 [“Willful disobedience connotes a specific violation of command 

or prohibition.”].) 

A comparison of Code sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, subdivision 

(b), is illuminating. Pursuant to Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(2) and (a)(5), 

unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance warrants discipline, but not 

unpaid suspension. More importantly, under Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), 

while a teacher's persistent violation of a school district's reasonable regulations is 

12 

grounds for discipline, it is not an authorized basis for unpaid suspension. Rather, 

unpaid suspension is authorized only for a willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments pursuant to Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

This comparison indicates the cause of discipline for willful refusal to perform a 

regular assignment is more akin to the traditional labor charge of insubordination, i.e., 

an intentional, willful, volitional refusal to perform any part of a particular regular 

assignment. A charge of willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must be more 

than unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent, or even persistent failure to perform a 

regular assignment. 

In this case, the Statement of Charges does not contain sufficient facts to 

establish that Respondent’s alleged teaching deficiencies are the result of a willful, 

volitional refusal to perform his regular assignment. The Charges, taken as true, 

establish that Respondent was teaching his A.P. U.S. History and Politics class but did 

so deficiently in the District's opinion. Such allegations may establish that 

Respondent’s teaching during the relevant time period was unsatisfactory.

The Charges contain no allegation whatsoever that, prior to his suspension,

Respondent was warned or counseled about any refusal to perform his regular 

assignment. The allegations are devoid of the kind of factual content which would 

establish a willful state of mind or volitional refusal to perform as directed. The 

Charges are not sufficient to support Respondent’s suspension. 

13 

ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is granted. The District shall 

make Respondent Gabriel Gipe whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation 

within 14 days after service of this order. (Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

DATE: 

LAURIE R. PEARLMAN 

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearing

14 

