BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

CHRIS HOLVERSON, Moving Party 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

and 

COMPTON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Respondent Party 

OAH No. 2021060493 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Nana Chin, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 

State of California, heard this matter telephonically on July 9, 2021, in Los Angeles, 

Daniel J. Kolodziej, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Chris Holverson 

California. 

(Holverson). 

Michelle M. Holmes, Attorney at Law, represented responding party Compton 

Unified School District (District). 

Background 

Holverson is a permanent certificated employee of the District assigned to Frank 

L. Walton Middle School as physical education (PE) teacher. 

On May 5, 2021, the District s Executive Director of Human Resources served 

Holverson with a Notice of Recommendation of Dismissal/Immediate Suspension 

Without Pay, and Statement of Charges (Statement of Charges), advising Holverson of 

her determination to recommend to the District s Board of Trustees (Board) that he be 

dismissed as a District employee and suspended immediately without pay. 

The Statement of Charges alleged multiple incidents between 2017 and 2020, 

which the District asserted constituted immoral conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. 

(a)(1)); unprofessional conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2)); unsatisfactory 

performance (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(5)); evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code, § 

44932, subd. (a)(6)); persistent violation or refusal to obey school laws or reasonable 

regulations (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(8)). 

On May 12, 2021, Holverson was advised that the Board took action to 

immediately suspend him without pay based his  willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the District and provided him with notice of its intention to dismiss him 

for the reasons set forth in the [Statement of Charges].

(Exh. 2.) 

Holverson requested a hearing on the dismissal and also filed a Notice of 

Motion and Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion) to challenge his 

2 

immediate suspension without pay. The District filed an Opposition to the Motion 

(Opposition) on June 30, 2021. Holverson filed a Reply to the Opposition on July 6, 

2021. 

Applicable Law 

Oral arguments on the Motion were heard on July 9, 2021. 

Education Code section 44939 provides the governing board of a school district 

the authority to immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 

who has been charged  with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of an y crime 

involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the School District, or with violation of [Education 

Code] section 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) An employee who has been 

placed on such suspension, however, may file a motion with OAH for immediate 

reversal of suspension. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) Review of a motion is limited 

to a  determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if 

true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.

(

.) 

Evaluation 

Though parties presented oral and written argument at hearing on whether the 

incidents described in the Statement of Charges could be characterized as  immoral 

conduct,

that issue will not be addressed in the present Order. As set forth in the 

District s May 12, 2021 notice to Holverson, the Board s immediate suspension was 

solely based on Holverson s willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause. 

3 

Although there are no cases interpreting the term "willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause" under Education Code section 44939, 

case law involving the alleged misconduct of public employees in other settings 

reflects that the term "willful" carries a volitional coloration which excludes the notion 

of accidental or even negligent conduct." (

. (1963) 215 

Cal.App.2d 770, 775; see also 

 (1963) 222 Cal.App.2d 852, 862 ["Wilful 

disobedience connotes a specific violation of command or prohibition."].) Declining to 

obey an employer's directions, without reason, is sufficient to establish willful refusal. 

(See, 

., 

(1956) 143 Cal.App.2d 

636, 642 [observing an employee who "did not attribute his refusals to illness" and 

made "no showing before the hearing examiner of willingness to comply with the 

reasonable orders of his superiors," demonstrated "willful refusal to obey the 

reasonable orders of an employer"].) 

If proven at hearing, Holverson s alleged misconduct, which included his 

repeated failure to submit lesson plans and incorporate agreed upon learning activities 

into his lessons, failure to attend training, and subsequent insubordinate remarks and 

conduct towards the school administration when those issues were raised, could 

support a finding that Holverson willfully refused to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause. 

As the District alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, 

would constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education section 44939, 

subdivision (b), the Motion is denied. 

4 

ORDER 

The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is denied. 

 

NANA CHIN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

DATE: 

 

 

5 

