BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

LUCIA VELLEMA, Moving Party 

A Permanent Certificated Employee and  

Newport-Mesa Unified School District, Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2022090443 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

On October 14, 2022, Carmen D. Snuggs-Spraggins, Administrative Law Judge

(ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, held a telephonic 

hearing on the motion filed by Lucia Vellema for immediate reversal of suspension 

(Motion). 

Tamra M. Smith, Attorney at Law, with Egality Law LLP, represented moving 

party Lucia Vellema (Employee or Respondent). 

Anthony P. De Marco, Attorney at Law with Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & 

Romo represented responding party the Newport-Mesa Unified School District 

(District). 

District Charges 

On August 18, 2022, the District filed a Statement of Charges (SOC) against 

Employee and thereafter placed her on unpaid leave pending the outcome of its 

action to dismiss her. The basis for the suspension under Education Code section 

44939 is immoral conduct. (The SOC also alleges the following grounds for dismissal 

under Education Code section 44932: dishonesty; evident unfitness for service; and 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws of the state or reasonable 

regulations prescribed by the State Board of Education or the school district.)

The SOC alleges Employee mocked a student’s speech impediment by 

responding “’ba, ba, ba’ or ‘da, da, da’” in response to the student’s stuttering. (SOC, ¶ 

8.) The SOC also alleges Employee admitted saying “uh, uh, uh. Use your words” 

during an investigation of her conduct and asserted the District’s speech pathologist 

had suggested using that technique when dealing with the student. (

The SOC 

alleges the speech pathologist denied making the recommendation. 

Paragraph 16 of the SOC states: 

16.

From June 2021 to November 2021, you exhibited 

immoral conduct and displayed an evident unfitness for 

service by explicitly discussing your private dating life with 

instructional aides on a regular basis. You used the dating 

application Tinder during work hours, showed your aides 

male dating profiles, and shared when you were texting a 

potential date. You made statements with sexual innuendos 

and showed your instructional assistants pictures of yourself 

in lingerie, pictures of men on Tinder, and a picture of a 

2

nude male taking a shower. You made inappropriate sexual 

comments after hearing non-sexual statements, such as 

laughing and emphasizing the word "balls" after an 

individual stated, "Get your balls." Moreover, after someone 

made a statement about a cucumber, you inappropriately 

stated, "That's a big one," with sexual undertones. During 

the course of the investigation of your conduct, you 

admitted to engaging in conversations about your dating 

life. You further acknowledged discussing lingerie with an 

instructional aide and explained that you bought it at T.J. 

Maxx. You also shared improper details about your dating 

life and engaged in other inappropriate and immoral 

conduct, including but not limited to the following: 

A. 

In or about June 2021, you asked an instructional 

aide to take a picture of you in the classroom because a 

man you were speaking to on Tinder did not believe you 

were a teacher. 

B.

In or about September 2021, you described a sexual 

experience to your instructional aides, which involved a 

shower curtain and coconut oil. 

C. 

ln or about September to October 2021, you showed 

an instructional aide a male's dating profile, used Google to 

search where he worked, and called him at his place of 

business. You became upset when the man told you, "I 

don't know who you are. Don't call me." 

3

D. 

In or about October or November 2021, you showed 

your instructional aides a picture of you wearing a black 

negligee with silver sparkles and another picture of you 

wearing a pink negligee. 

E. 

In or about October or November 2021, you shared a 

picture of a fully nude male in the shower and told an 

instructional aide, "This is what he sent me." 

F. 

In or about November 2021, you shared that you 

went to a house where the women lined up and the men 

picked who they would have sex with. The men then 

selected the next woman they would have sex with.

Although you denied showing instructional assistants 

pictures of yourself in lingerie and denied calling a potential 

date at his place of business among other reports of 

misconduct, your denials were deemed not credible. 

The District alleges Employee engaged in immoral conduct by allowing students 

to use her personal iPad, which was linked to her iCloud account. A picture of 

Employee wearing lingerie appeared when an instructional aide was preparing the 

iPad for student use. The SOC alleges that three pictures of Employee wearing lingerie, 

including one where Employee’s nipples can be seen, were maintained in the iPad’s 

photo app and could be accessed by students. (SOC, ¶ 24.)

4

The Motion and the Opposition 

On September 15, 2022, Employee filed the Motion, seeking immediate reversal 

of District’s unpaid suspension order. Employee contends the charges in the SOC do 

not constitute immoral conduct and her suspension should be immediately reversed. 

On about October 4, 2022, after receipt of the Motion, District served an 

Amended Statement of Charges (ASOC) on Employee. The ASOC includes the same 

bases of dismissal and factual allegations in the SOC with added factual allegations. 

Specifically, the ASOC alleges Employee prepared a letter of recommendation for 

herself, forged the signature of a District employee, and sent the letter to two school 

districts. (ASOC, ¶ 25.) The District learned of the letter of recommendation after the 

SOC was filed. 

On October 11, 2022, the District filed its opposition to the Motion, citing both 

the new allegations of the ASOC and the original allegations of the SOC (as re-alleged 

in the ASOC) in support of its suspension order. In addition, the District argued 

Employee’s conduct alleged in paragraph 19 of the SOC constitutes immoral conduct. 

Paragraph 19 alleges on November 26, 2021, Employee purchased an iPad for $538 for 

use in the classroom and submitted a receipt for reimbursement from grant funds;

however, Employee left the new iPad at home and brought her older personal iPad to 

her classroom for student use. In her reply filed on October 13, 2022, Employee argued 

the District lacks authority to base Employee’s unpaid suspension on the ASOC, 

dishonesty is not a grounds for unpaid suspension under the Education Code, and 

Employee’s conduct regarding the iPad and her response to the stuttering student do 

not constitute immoral conduct, thus failing to satisfy Education Code section 44939, 

subdivision (b), requirements for immediate suspension.

5

The ALJ reviewed and considered the SOC, the written submissions of the 

parties, and oral argument made during the hearing. The Motion is denied as set forth 

below.

Applicable Statutes 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 

may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 

with immoral conduct. Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a 

suspended employee to file a motion for review of the suspension, and review of that 

motion “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.”

A motion made pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), 

like the current Motion, is analogous to a demurrer because the properly-pleaded 

facts must be accepted as true for purposes of resolving the motion. However, the ALJ 

need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.” (

 (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Additionally, as with a demurrer, the Motion can be 

granted if the District’s “conclusory characterization of [Employee’s] conduct as 

intentional, willful and fraudulent” is “patently insufficient.” (See e.g., 

 (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 

New Allegations Brought after SOC and Motion 

The new allegations contained in the ASOC should not be considered in 

determining whether District’s suspension of Employee met the statutory requirements 

of Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), because the District’s suspension 

order was based on the allegations in the SOC, not the new allegations contained in 

6

the ASOC. Nothing in Education Code section 44939 permits the retroactive 

application of new allegations made after the initial statement of charges to support 

the original suspension order. (

 (1968) 263 Cal.App.2d 784, 789 [statutes pertaining to teacher discipline should 

be “strictly construed”].) The appeal procedures set forth in Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (c), are predicated on service of the “initial pleading” in the matter. 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(2) [“The motion shall be served upon the governing board 

of the school district and filed with the Office of Administrative Hearings within 30 

days after service upon the employee of the 

of the matter.” (Emphasis 

added).]) Any other result would allow a school district to continually amend its 

charges to address any pleading deficiencies pointed out by Employee and maintain a 

teacher’s suspension indefinitely. Such action would contravene the apparent intent 

behind Education Code section 44939 to provide an efficient, cost-effective, and quick 

procedure to litigate unpaid suspensions. 

Immoral Conduct 

“Immoral conduct” has been defined as conduct “which is hostile to the welfare 

of the general public and contrary to good morals. [It] has not been confined to sexual 

matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 

and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 

811 [

]; 

 (1970) 9 Cal. App.3d 967, 972 

[

].) The term “immoral conduct” has been used interchangeably with the term 

7

“moral turpitude” which in turn is sometimes used as synonymous with dishonesty or a 

high degree of unfairness. (

) 

Since the conduct attributed to Employee in paragraph 19 of the SOC was 

alleged as dishonest conduct, which is a separate ground for dismissal under 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), the allegations contained in 

paragraph 19 are not analyzed here as to whether they satisfy Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (b), requirements for immediate suspension for immoral conduct. 

The facts alleged in paragraphs 8, 16, and 24 of the SOC, if true, are sufficient to 

justify Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code 44939 for immoral 

conduct. In May 2019, Employee assigned harsher consequences to a student and 

made fun of his speech impediment. The allegation the speech pathologist never 

recommended that Employee respond to the student by repeating the stuttered words 

must be accepted as true for purposes of this motion. Between June 2021 and 

November 2021, Employee showed a picture of a naked man in the shower and 

pictures of herself in lingerie to her instructional aides, and she made statements with 

sexual undertones and inuendoes to instructional aides and described to them a 

sexual experience she had. In the fall of 2021, Employee brought her iPad, which 

contained pictures of herself in lingerie, including one where her nipples were 

exposed, to the classroom for student use. The photo app where the pictures were 

stored was easily accessible to students. The totality of the allegations in the SOC, 

which must be accepted as true, establish grounds for Employee’s immediate 

suspension for immoral conduct.

In the Motion, Employee contends that allegations of the SOC are insufficient to 

establish “immoral conduct” because Employees discussions with the instructional 

aides were “private, consensual conversations” that had no adverse impact on students 

8

or colleagues (Motion, p. 7). In addition, Employee argues there was no “quid pro quo” 

harassment of the aides and the SOC fails to allege Employee’s comments were 

unwelcome, intimidating or coercive (Reply, p. 10.) Employee also argues Employee’s 

act of allowing student access to her personal iPad containing the photos did not 

constitute immoral conduct because the District did not allege Employee did so 

intentionally or assert any student saw them. (Motion, p. 7.) 

Employee’s contentions are without merit. Neither the Motion nor the Reply 

cites any legal authority for the proposition that conduct must be intentional in order 

to constitute immoral conduct. Further, Employee’s conversations about her dating 

and sex life as well as showing racy photographs of herself and a picture of a naked 

man would undoubtedly constitute immoral conduct had she engaged in this same 

conduct with students. That Employee engaged in the alleged conduct with 

instructional aides does not erase the fact that the conduct demonstrates an 

inconsiderate attitude towards good order and the public welfare. The allegations as 

to the repeated and pervasive nature of Employee’s conduct, taken as a whole, 

support the charge of immorality. Teacher immorality is a broad, factually dependent 

concept because the calling of a teacher “is so intimate, its duties so delicate, the 

things in which a teacher might prove unworthy or would fail are so numerous, that 

they are incapable of enumeration in any legislative enactment.” (See 

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 812.)

However, the determination of what constitutes immoral conduct must be 

contextual. As noted in 

(1969) 1 Cal. 3d 214, 224 

(

), “immoral conduct” is not “considered in the abstract. It must be considered 

in the context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile . . . to 

the welfare of the school community.” The 

 court determined a teacher’s 

9

actions cannot constitute immoral conduct or conduct involving moral turpitude 

unless those actions indicate unfitness to teach. Given the Education Code’s additional 

due process protections and higher threshold to justify immediate suspension, the 

SOC should be required to sufficiently allege facts demonstrating a nexus to teaching, 

just as would be required for dismissal.

In conducting this analysis, it is important to note that teachers act as role 

models for students. As noted in 

, 41 Cal.2d 546, at 552, “A 

teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils in the light 

of an examplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the (students) 

coming under her care and protection . . . . Lessons are learned from example as well 

as from precept.” 

The SOC’s allegations sufficiently demonstrate an unfitness to teach. Employee’s 

conduct was antithetical to her role as an example for students, was hostile to the 

welfare of the school community, and shows a disregard for the impact of her conduct 

on students and the District. 

The 

 Court provided a list of possible factors to aid in the analysis as 

follows:

In determining whether the teacher's conduct thus indicates 

unfitness to teach the board may consider such matters as 

the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected 

students or fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity 

anticipated, the proximity or remoteness in time of the 

conduct, the type of teaching certificate held by the party 

involved, the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if 

10 

any, surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, 

the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, 

and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. These 

factors are relevant to the extent that they assist the board 

in determining a teacher's fitness to teach. 

(1 Cal. 3d 214, 229-230. Emphasis added.) 

The allegations in the SOC satisfy enough of the 

factors to further 

demonstrate an unfitness to teach. The SOC alleges activity occurring on a District 

campus, involving Employee’s inappropriate interaction with a student who stutters 

and Employee’s repeated conduct and use of language with instructional aides that is 

sexual in nature and indecent, which may have adversely impacted students and 

instructional aides. In addition, her alleged conduct is likely to recur and proximate in 

time. Moreover, there is nothing praiseworthy, instead only blameworthy, about 

Employee’s alleged conduct. 

Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are sufficient to 

establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (b), for immoral conduct. 

///

11 

 
 
Disposition

Since the District has pleaded facts which, if true, support a cause for immediate 

unpaid suspension for immoral conduct, the motion is denied.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

DATE:

CARMEN D. SNUGGS-SPRAGGINS

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

12

